S/PV.9036

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-seventh year

9036th meeting

Thursday, 19 May 2022, 11 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Blinken/Mrs. Thomas-Greenfield/Mr. DeLaurentis. . .

(United States of America)

Members:

Albania . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Brazil. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Gabon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ghana . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
India . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ireland. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kenya. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Mexico. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Norway . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Arab Emirates . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 

Ms. Xhaçka
Mr. Costa Filho
Mr. Zhang Jun
Mr. De Rivière
Mr. Adamo
Ms. Botchwey
Mr. Muraleedharan
Mr. Brophy
Ms. Omamo
Mr. Villalobos Arámbula
Ms. Tvinnereim
Mr. Nebenzia
Mrs. Nusseibeh
Dame Barbara Woodward

Agenda
Maintenance of international peace and security
Conflict and food security
Letter dated 12 May 2022 from the Permanent Representative of the United
States of America to the United Nations addressed to the Secretary-General
(S/2022/391)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

22-35447 (E)
*2235447*

S/PV.9036

Maintenance of international peace and security

Food Programme and its partners distributed food and
cash to more than 3 million Ukrainians. Until March,
their country was feeding the world with abundant
supplies of food.

The meeting was called to order at 11.05 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.

I thank the United States Government for focusing
on this crucial issue during its presidency of the
Security Council.

Maintenance of international peace and security
Conflict and food security
Letter dated 12 May 2022 from the Permanent
Representative of the United States of America
to the United Nations addressed to the
Secretary-General (S/2022/391)
The President: Let me start by very warmly
welcoming the Secretary-General and the distinguished
ministers and other high-level representatives here with
us today. Their presence underscores the importance of
the subject matter that is under consideration.
Before each participant is a list of speakers who
have requested to participate in today’s open debate
in accordance with rules 37 and 39 of the Security
Council’s provisional rules of procedure, as well as
the previous practice of the Council in that regard.
We propose that they be invited to participate in this
meeting
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the following
briefers to participate in this meeting: Mr. Qu
Dongyu, Director-General of the Food and Agriculture
Organization of the United Nations; Mr. David Beasley,
Executive Director of the World Food Programme; and
Ms. Sara Menker, Founder and Chief Executive Officer
of Gro Intelligence.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I wish to draw the attention of Council members to
document S/2022/391, which contains the text of a letter
dated 12 May 2022 from the Permanent Representative
of the United States of America to the United Nations
addressed to the Secretary-General, transmitting a
concept note on the item under consideration.
I now give the floor to His Excellency SecretaryGeneral António Guterres.
The Secretary-General: When war is waged,
people go hungry. Some 60 per cent of the world’s
undernourished people live in areas affected by
conflict. No country is immune. In April, the World
2/32

19/05/2022

Last year, most of the 140 million people suffering
from acute hunger around the world lived in just 10
countries: Afghanistan, the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, Ethiopia, Haiti, Nigeria, Pakistan, South Sudan,
the Sudan, Syria and Yemen. Eight of those countries
are on the agenda of the Council.
Let there be no doubt: when the Council debates
conflict, it debates hunger. When it makes decisions
about peacekeeping and political missions, it makes
decisions about hunger. And when its members fail to
reach consensus, hungry people pay a high price.
(spoke in French)
At the most basic level, armed conflict creates
hunger, as fighting destroys farms and factories,
drives people away from harvesting their crops, causes
shortages and drives up prices. Today the impact
of conflicts is magnified by the climate crisis and
economic insecurity, which has been compounded by
the pandemic. Consequently, decades of progress in
combating hunger are being undone. I saw that with my
own eyes when I visited the Sahel two weeks ago.
The Niger, for example, faces armed extremist
groups and cross-border incursions extending from
Mali to Nigeria. Only 6 per cent of its population is
fully vaccinated against coronavirus disease. While the
Niger is ranked at the bottom of the Human Development
Index, it is also among the 10 countries most vulnerable
to the climate crisis. The number of people who face
acute food insecurity in the Niger has more than
doubled over the past two years and, unless there is an
immediate response, that number could reach 4 million
this year. The Niger and its neighbours are in urgent
need of a coordinated large-scale international effort
to strengthen the links among peace, humanitarian
action, adaptation to the impacts of climate change and
sustainable development.
(spoke in English)
To help respond to this growing crisis, I am pleased
to announce today that we are releasing $30 million
22-35447

19/05/2022

Maintenance of international peace and security

from the Central Emergency Response Fund to meet
the urgent food security and nutrition needs in the
Niger, Mali, Chad and Burkina Faso. But it is a drop in
the ocean. It brings the funding channelled through the
Central Emergency Response Fund to the Sahel since
the start of the year to almost $95 million.
I am also deeply concerned about the food security
situation in the Horn of Africa, which is suffering its
longest drought in four decades. More than 18 million
people are affected, and the World Food Programme
(WFP) has warned that millions in Somalia will be
facing famine within months. The perilous state of
food security in Ethiopia and Somalia is compounded
by continued conflict and deep insecurity. Around
the world, 49 million people in 43 countries are at
emergency levels of hunger, known as Integrated Phase
Classification (IPC) 4 — just one step away from
famine. In other words, they are facing starvation and
doing anything they can to survive. As always, women
and girls are the worst affected, which is reflected in
rising rates of trafficking, forced marriage and other
abuses. More than half a million people in Ethiopia,
South Sudan, Yemen and Madagascar are already at IPC
level 5, meaning in catastrophic or famine conditions.
The war in Ukraine is now adding a frightening
new dimension to that picture of global hunger. Russia’s
invasion of its neighbour has effectively ended its food
exports. Price increases as high as 30 per cent for staple
foods are threatening people in countries across Africa
and the Middle East, including Cameroon, Libya,
Somalia, the Sudan and Yemen. I discussed the deeply
troubling situation with the leaders of Senegal, the
Niger and Nigeria during my most recent visit. They
confirmed that we are on the brink of a perfect storm
that threatens to devastate people and economies.
Our humanitarian operations are gearing up to help,
backed by a proven record of success. Humanitarian
agencies and their partners helped to bring six counties
in South Sudan back from the brink of famine last year.
Over the past six years of conflict in Yemen they also
ensured that the worst outcomes did not materialize,
with food aid reaching more than 10 million people per
month in 2021. But humanitarians too are suffering
from the impact of rising prices. In East Africa, the cost
of food assistance increased by 65 per cent on average
in the past year. The WFP has already been forced to
reduce its support to 8 million hungry people in Yemen.

S/PV.9036

I believe there are four actions that countries can
take now in order to break the deadly dynamic of
conflict and hunger. First, they should invest in political
solutions to end conflicts, prevent new ones and build
sustainable peace. Most important of all, we need to
end the war in Ukraine. I call on all Council members
to do everything in their power to silence the guns and
promote peace in Ukraine and everywhere else.
Secondly, international humanitarian law, as
reflected in resolution 2417 (2018), specifies that
goods and supplies that are essential to civilians’
survival — including food, crops and livestock — must
be protected. It also states that humanitarians must have
unimpeded access to civilians in need. The Council
has a critical role to play in demanding adherence
to international humanitarian law and pursuing
accountability when the law is breached. I urge it to
take maximum action to fulfil that role.
Thirdly, the interconnected risks of food insecurity,
energy and financing require far greater coordination
and leadership. There is enough food for everyone in
the world. The issue is distribution, and it is deeply
linked to the war in Ukraine. I established the Global
Crisis Response Group on Food, Energy and Finance
in March to provide data and analysis and to propose
solutions. The Group immediately recommended lifting
all food export restrictions, releasing strategic reserves
and allocating surpluses to countries in need.
As I said at yesterday’s Global Food Security Call
to Action ministerial meeting, any meaningful solution
to global food insecurity requires the reintegration
of Ukraine’s agricultural production and Russia and
Belarus’s food and fertilizer production into world
markets, despite the war. We are working to find a
package deal that will enable Ukraine to export food
not only by train but also through the Black Sea, while
bringing Russian food and fertilizer production to
world markets without restrictions. That will require
the goodwill of all the countries concerned.
Fourthly, donors must fund humanitarian
appeals in full. Almost halfway into 2022, our global
humanitarian response plans are just 8 per cent funded.
In global terms, those are minuscule amounts. I urge
everyone to demonstrate the same generosity that has
been shown to Ukraine to all other countries in need.
Official development assistance is more necessary than
ever. Diverting it to other priorities is not an option
when the world is on the brink of mass hunger. Indeed,

22-354473/32

S/PV.9036

Maintenance of international peace and security

the deep connections between conflict and hunger mean
that generosity is not just an act of altruism. Feeding the
hungry is an investment in global peace and security.
In our world of plenty, I will never accept the death
from hunger of a single child, woman or man. Neither
should the members of the Council.
The President: I thank the Secretary-General for
his briefing.
I now give the floor to Mr. Beasley.
Mr. Beasley: I would like to thank the SecretaryGeneral for his comments.
When the Nobel Committee awarded the World
Food Programme the 2020 Peace Prize, it was clearly
a message to the world that food security is critical
to peace and stability all over the world. What we are
seeing now is an extraordinary destruction of the values
that we hold so dear — feeding the poor and helping
those in need around the world.
Before the Ukraine crisis struck, I had been
saying to leaders around the world that we were facing
an unprecedented storm, a perfect storm caused by
conflict, climate change and the coronavirus disease
(COVID-19) pandemic. Just when we thought it could
not get any worse, the situation in Ethiopia worsened.
Once again, we thought it could not get any worse, but
then the situation in Afghanistan worsened. Then, when
we really did think things could not get any worse, we
had Ukraine. And as the Secretary-General alluded to,
that comes in addition to areas that are struggling with
droughts and famine knocking on the door, such as the
Sahel, the Horn of Africa and more — I could go in a
ring of fire around the world. In terms of those marching
towards starvation, the numbers have escalated, from
80 million to 135 million before COVID-19 and then,
because of COVID-19, 135 million became 276 million.
Because of the Ukrainian crisis, that number will rise
to 323 million at least.
What is extremely troubling is that of those
276 million people marching towards starvation,
struggling to find food on a daily basis and living from
hand to mouth every day, there are 49 million in 43
countries, as the Secretary-General very clearly stated,
who are knocking on famine’s door. If we overlay those
49 million people in those 43 countries along with
economic indices because of economic deterioration
over time, including the droughts, we begin to see the
43 countries that could very well be destabilized and
4/32

19/05/2022

face famine that would result not just in deaths, but in
unrest and mass migration.
We are truly facing an unprecedented crisis. Food
prices are our number-one problem right now, as a result
of the perfect storm in 2022, but in 2023 the problem
is very likely to be food availability. When a country
like Ukraine, which grows enough food for 400 million
people, is out of the market, it creates market volatility,
which we are now seeing. In 2007 and 2008, we all
witnessed what happens when pricing gets out of
control. More than 40 nations had to deal with political
unrest, riots and protests. We are already seeing riots
and protests taking place as we speak in Sri Lanka,
Indonesia, Pakistan and Peru. We have already seen
destabilizing dynamics in the Sahel, in Burkina Faso,
Mali and Chad. Those are only signs of things to come.
We have enough historical experience to understand
the consequences when we fail to act. When a nation
that is the breadbasket of the world becomes a nation
with the longest breadlines in the world, we know that
we have a problem.
As the Secretary-General clearly stated, we
are now reaching approximately 4 million people
inside Ukraine. In fact, we are scaling up to 900,000
people on cash-based transfers as we speak, which will
put liquidity back into the marketplace, but that does
not solve the problem outside Ukraine. That is why
we must get those ports running. We must empty the
silos so that we can help stabilize the food crisis we are
facing around the world.
More than 36 nations receive 50 per cent or more
of their grain from that region. When we consider those
nations, in addition to the 43 nations I mentioned,
coupled with other economic indices and debt because
of the coronavirus disease, we begin to see why the
world is very fragile. We must therefore respond. Truly,
failure to open the ports in the Odesa region will be
a declaration of war on global food security and will
result in famine, destabilization and mass migration
around the world.
Many here today have been out in the field and
have talked to the poorest of the poor. I have had
more mothers tell me “Mr. Beasley, my children have
not been fed in two weeks”, “My husband had to join
an extremist group just to stay alive”, “We have to
migrate” or “We have to choose between heating oil and
cooking oil”. When a mother has to choose between her
child freezing to death or starving her child to death,
22-35447

19/05/2022

Maintenance of international peace and security

something is wrong, especially when there is so much
wealth on the planet today — more than $430 trillion
worth of wealth.
The problem will only get worse because
production around the world will decrease. We have all
been talking to ministers of agriculture and leaders to
maximize production as fast as we can. How do we get
fertilizers back out into the marketplace? The African
Development Bank provided some statistics the other
day that were frightening. Africa alone would need more
than $2 billion worth of new fertilizer because of the
costs, if it can get it at all, because smallholder farmers
rely on it. That would mean a loss of approximately
$11 billion worth of food production in Africa alone,
which is already struggling because of that perfect
storm we are talking about.
It is time that we and the leaders of the world do
everything that we can to bring the markets to stability,
because things will get worse. Nonetheless, I have hope.
We averted famine. We averted destabilization over the
past many years because many in the Chamber stepped
up. We delivered, and we can do that again. There are
things that have to happen, such as opening the ports,
stabilizing the markets and increasing production
around the world. We will get through this storm, but
we must act. We must act with urgency, and that must
be today.
The President: I thank Mr. Beasley for his briefing.
I now give the floor to Mr. Qu Dongyu.
Mr. Qu Dongyu: The Food and Agriculture
Organization of the United Nations (FAO) deeply
appreciates the opportunity to speak to the Security
Council on this important topic and the continued
attention placed on the issue of conflict and food security.
Two years ago, I briefed the Council on the multiple
risks facing global food security at the start of the
pandemic (see S/2020/340). Today we gather again
for people, peace, prosperity and the planet to discuss
several overlapping crises in the area of food security,
such as health security, climate change, food insecurity,
the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic
and conflict.
Worldwide, prosperity is being reversed. There is
less food security, less health security, less income and
greater inequality. My message today is more relevant
than ever before. Agriculture is one of the keys to
lasting peace and security.

S/PV.9036

Over the past five years, we have seen yet another
spike in the global level of acute hunger. According to
the Global Report on Food Crises, released on 4 May
this year, in 2021 approximately 40 million more people
experienced acute food insecurity as compared to 2020,
thereby bringing the total to 193 million people in 53
countries and territories. Worryingly, the projection
is for further deterioration through 2022, including
in places with catastrophic food insecurity. There
is a risk of famine in Yemen, Somalia, South Sudan
and Afghanistan.
FAO has stepped up its efforts to strengthen
agrifood systems, save lives and protect the agricultural
livelihoods of the world’s most vulnerable. From our
cutting-edge analysis, normative work, global and
national policy guidance and life-saving aid, FAO
helps people, communities and Governments cope
with growing uncertainty. Yet more needs to be
done together.
Conflict remains the single-greatest driver of
hunger. Between 2018 and 2021, the number of people
in crisis situations in countries in which conflict was
the main driver of acute food insecurity increased by a
staggering 88 per cent, to just over 139 million people.
As the world began to recover from COVID-19,
another conflict with far-reaching effects broke out.
The war in Ukraine revived concerns about historically
high food and energy prices and their impact across
the world. The war has disrupted exports and logistics
and seriously affected food availability. Ukraine and
the Russian Federation together export 30 per cent of
the cereals and 67 per cent of the sunflower seeds in
the world. The increase in energy and fertilizer prices
is putting the next global harvest at risk. According to
our most recent scenarios, it could increase chronic
undernourishment by an additional 18.8 million people
by 2023.
We are neighbours on this small planet-village.
What happens to one affects us all. FAO will continue to
fully align with the Secretary-General’s call to end the
war, restore peace and save lives. We must strengthen
the humanitarian-development-peace nexus. We must
analyse the root causes of acute food insecurity,
including conflict and climate change, and apply
those lessons to our actions. FAO does that through
our Integrated Phase Classification analysis, which
is widely accepted, our co-leadership of the Global

22-354475/32

S/PV.9036

Maintenance of international peace and security

Network Against Food Crises and our co-leadership of
the Global Food Security Cluster.
We must prevent the acceleration of acute food
insecurity trends in the coming months and years.
Food production at the country level must be expanded.
We need to provide cash and critical inputs for cereal
and vegetable production and to protect livestock with
treatments, vaccinations, feed and water. Agrifood
supply chains and value chains must be strengthened
with the engagement of the public and private sector in
support of smallholder farmers and households. That
is what FAO has been doing in Ukraine, Afghanistan
and other countries. In 2021, FAO reached more
than 30 million people worldwide with emergency
agricultural
assistance
and
resilience-building
programmes. For example, in Afghanistan we reached
3 million people, including with wheat cultivation
packages, which cost just $160 each and meet the staple
cereal requirements for a family of seven for an entire
year. In local markets, the cost of the same amount of
food is six times higher. Our support helped livestock
farmers increase milk production equivalent to a level
that would enable every Afghan child to have one glass
of milk a day for at least five months. In Ethiopia,
despite access challenges, the seeds and planting
materials provided by FAO and agriculture cluster
partners enabled local farmers to produce 900,000 tons
of food — five times more than the humanitarian and
commercial food supplies that entered the region.
Yet despite the critical importance of agriculture to
food availability and access in crisis contexts, only 8 per
cent of total funding for the humanitarian food security
sector goes to agriculture. We must protect people,
agrifood systems and economies against future shocks.
To prevent conflicts from worsening food insecurity,
we must increase sustainable productivity, strengthen
capacities to deliver relevant services and commodities
and provide access to innovative financial tools and
digital services. Members urgently need to transform
their agrifood systems so that they are more efficient,
inclusive, resilient and sustainable, in order to achieve
better production and nutrition, a better environment
and a better life, leaving no one behind.
In the past three months I have been to Bangladesh,
where farmers are using innovation to improve their
rice yields. Earlier this month, I travelled to Azerbaijan
to see young farmers, who are producing seven tons per
hectare of winter wheat, using a new variety of wheat and
irrigation systems and appropriate fertilizer. The yield
6/32

19/05/2022

this year has doubled. Yesterday I met Mr. Villalobos
Arámbula, the Minister of Agriculture and Rural
Development of Mexico, where the corn yields in some
provinces have doubled through the use of new corn
varieties, new fertilizer and irrigation. So there is great
potential. I sincerely hope that States will continue to
provide the necessary aid to mitigate food insecurity
globally, allocate new resources to sustain agricultural
production in challenging contexts and recognize and
support the role of agriculture in food security and peace
and the contributions of international organizations
such as FAO, the International Fund for Agricultural
Development and the World Food Programme. Based
on my professional knowledge and experience, I believe
we can feed the world sufficiently and sustainably with
our existing tools if we all play our part.
In this great country of America, irrigated land can
produce two times more than land that is unirrigated
and naturally rain-fed. Only 18 of per cent of arable land
in this country is irrigated. In Asia, it is 48 to 60 per
cent; in Europe, it is 12 per cent; in Africa, it is only
3 per cent; and in Latin America, it is about 20 per cent.
I therefore strongly encourage all States and partners
represented here to improve their water management
and irrigation systems. Yields depend not on God
alone but rather on our technology and investment
in infrastructure. That is why we need to unleash
the potential of innovation, science and responsible
investment. For so many years, in both developed and
developing countries, investment in agriculture in rural
areas has been left behind. I strongly recommend that
Mr. Blinken and others look at those issues, such as
soy and other bigger issues. We need at least 10 to 20
years of looking at soy science. With quality soy seeds,
the seed yield can improve by 20 to 30 per cent. That is
similar to the yields with hybrid rice, where we see 30 to
50 per cent increases, and hybrid corn, which can have
increases between 30 and 40 per cent. Mr. Villalobos
is an expert breeder. The technology is there. The
tools are there. We need a strong political commitment
and responsible investment. We must work together
with the private sector and get every key partner on
board. That is why we must stress the importance of
hand-in-hand initiatives.
States can put policies in place that both increase
productivity and protect natural resources. We always
say that we should produce more and better with
less, but less what? Is it less impact, less input or less
negative impact on the environment? The solution is
22-35447

19/05/2022

Maintenance of international peace and security

technology and good policies and management. We
can invest more in innovation and new technologies,
especially water management, irrigation systems and
high-quality agricultural inputs, including fertilizer,
and in more transparent market information systems.
Agricultural systems provide food, feed, fibre and
biofuels, including biogas. So agriculture not only
provides food, feed, fibre crops and biofuels, which are
truly renewable sources of energy, it also supports the
future of people on this small planet — the farmers.
On 19 May 1943, our predecessors convened the first
United Nations Conference on Food and Agriculture
in Hot Springs, Virginia, in the United States. Was it
destiny? Was it a coincidence? What is today’s date?
Today is 19 May. Seventy-nine years later, let us recall
that our founders saw that FAO had a vital role to play
in the quest for peace. They wrote,
“[t]he Food and Agriculture Organization is born
out of the need for peace as well as the need for
freedom from want. The two are interdependent.
Progress towards freedom from want is essential to
lasting peace.”
Much has changed since then, 79 years later, but one
thing remains a constant. The world needs enough
food, good food and better food for all. Investing in
our agrifood systems is more relevant than ever. Let us
work together effectively and coherently.
I learned from the Secretary-General when he
switched from English to French. Now I will say my
final words in Chinese. There are six official United
Nations languages, so I wrote a special poem for
the President.
(spoke in Chinese)
The mountain is high, and people depend on food
to survive. We must remain united, working together,
to serve the millions of people around the world.
The President: I thank Mr. Qu Dongyu for
his briefing.
I now give the floor to Ms. Menker.
Ms. Menker: I thank you, Mr. President, for inviting
me to address the Security Council. It is an honour to be
here today to highlight and reaffirm that food security
is in fact national security and global stability.
Before I share some data-driven insights on the
state of our global food systems, let me tell the Security

S/PV.9036

Council a little bit about Gro Intelligence. Gro is a
company founded to help tackle two of the greatest
challenges we face as humankind — food security and
climate change. We are a global company with offices
in Nairobi, Singapore and New York. Our team comes
from over 40 countries that range from Ethiopia, where
I am from, to Russia, Nigeria, India, the United States,
China and Ukraine. We are a company of domain experts
in software infrastructure, climate science, agronomy,
trading and financial markets. We combine that with
world-class engineering and artificial-intelligence
talent. We work with large and small companies,
financial institutions and Governments.
I come here today to share insights from our data,
with the underlying hope that all of us here with the
power to change the course of history will choose to
do so.
I want to start by explicitly saying that the
Russia-Ukraine conflict did not start a food security
crisis. It simply added fuel to a fire that was long
burning — a crisis whose tremors we detected long
before the coronavirus disease pandemic exposed the
fragility of our supply chains. I share that because we
believe it is important for everyone to understand that,
even if the war were to end tomorrow, our food security
problem would not go away anytime soon without
concerted action.
Now on to the statistics. Gro Intelligence estimates
show that price increases in major food crops year-todate have made an additional 400 million people food
insecure. There are few food and security statistics
shared, so I wanted to define that by saying that we
are talking here about the number of people living on
$3.59 a day. That is a broader standard, but it is a march
towards starvation. To put it into perspective, that is
equivalent to the number of people that China has taken
out of poverty over the past 20 years. In five months we
have undone 20 years of progress.
Furthermore, our economic-shock models show
that year-to-date changes in prices of agricultural
products have already affected some economies by 3
to 5 per cent of their gross domestic product. Countries
disproportionately affected are in regions such as North
Africa and the Middle East, the Horn of Africa and
West and Central Asia. And it can get much worse. Data
shows that the food security challenges we are facing
will last several years.

22-354477/32

S/PV.9036

Maintenance of international peace and security

There are five major challenges occurring
simultaneously
that
are
each,
individually,
extraordinary — lack of fertilizer, climate disruptions,
record low inventories in cooking oils, record low
inventories of grains and logistical bottlenecks that
have already started to unravel decades of global
economic progress. Without substantial, immediate
and aggressive coordinated global actions, we stand the
risk of allowing extraordinary amounts of both human
suffering and economic damage. This is not cyclical,
this is seismic. It is a once-in-a-generation occurrence
that can dramatically reshape the geopolitical era.
Now let us move to the five challenges.
The first is fertilizer. Global fertilizer prices have
nearly tripled year-on-year, and quadrupled over the
past two years, because of supply shocks driven by
logistical bottlenecks, restrictions on natural gas, which
impact the ability to produce fertilizer, sanctions and
export restrictions amid the Russia-Ukraine war. That
risks significant crop-yield reductions in key producing
regions such as Brazil, the United States and Western
Europe later this year and next year, severely impacting
global food security and inflation for the next 3 to 5
years, at a minimum.
The second challenge is climate. Global drought
conditions for wheat are the worst in over 20 years.
Major breadbaskets such as the United States and
Brazil, the world’s two largest exporters of agricultural
products, are also experiencing extreme droughts. For
example, Brazil’s cropland soil moisture is at a 20year low. Major grain importers in the Middle East
and Africa are also experiencing record droughts. In
short, both major importers and major exporters are
experiencing exceptional drought conditions.
The third challenge is cooking oils. The price
of traditionally cheap palm oil nearly tripled in the
past two years, driven by increased biofuels demand,
drought in regions that produce alternative cooking
oils, such as Brazil and Canada, record import demand
from China and the loss of nearly 75 per cent of global
sunflower oil exports due to the Russia-Ukraine war.
The recent export ban in Indonesia, the world’s largest
palm-oil producer, which is responsible for 60 per cent
of global production, has added significant upward
price pressure to vegetable oils.
The fourth challenge is grains. Official government
agency estimates from around the world put wheat
inventories at 33 per cent of annual consumption.
8/32

19/05/2022

Verifiable data from public and private sources that our
company organizes and then builds statistical models
to connect the dots between them on our platform show
that global wheat inventories are in fact closer to 20 per
cent, a level not seen since the financial and commodity
crisis of 2007 and 2008. We currently have only 10
weeks of global consumption sitting in inventory
around the world. Conditions today are worse than
those experienced in 2007 and 2008. It is important to
note that the lowest grain inventory levels the world has
ever seen are now occurring, while access to fertilizers
is highly constrained and drought in wheat-growing
regions around the world is the most extreme it has
been in over 20 years. Similar inventory concerns also
apply to corn and other grains. Government estimates
are not adding up.
The fifth and final challenge is logistics. Russia
and Ukraine used to provide nearly a third of the
world’s wheat exports and are both among the top five
exporters of corn globally. Combined, they used to
export 75 per cent of global sunflower-oil supplies. All
Ukrainian ports remain closed, making it impossible
to move any of Ukraine’s harvested grain across its
borders. Shifting to rail will move less than 10 per cent
of pre-war flow, which is not enough. Russian exports,
which also include fertilizer, are limited because of
Black Sea maritime hazards.
Any one of the five things I outlined would be
considered a major issue in commodity markets. The
five combined are truly unprecedented.
I come here today not to specifically offer or
provide solutions, as there will be other venues to do
so, but rather to X-ray and diagnose the problem for
those in this Chamber who have the power to change
the course of our history. In a world that is increasingly
isolationist, we need to come together. Food is personal,
but our agricultural systems are global. There is no
version of the world where every country has all the
natural resources it needs to survive and thrive.
One key takeaway from our data is how often we
see repeated examples of cause and effect, highlighting
surprising connections and interdependencies. For
example, in the United States, the most self-sufficient
country globally, a consumption-weighted basket
of food — a grocery basket — has doubled in price
since April 2020. Price increases were driven by
unprecedented demand around the world alongside
22-35447

19/05/2022

Maintenance of international peace and security

climate-related supply-side shocks. We cannot solve
food insecurity on a national scale anywhere.
One thing we strongly believe is that we can have
a healthy economy and a secure food system without
degrading our environment. We have the capability to
help everyone feel secure about having enough food.
Data helps us navigate because we are not blind to
risks and outcomes related to food security. We cannot
say that we did not know. There are positive solutions
and approaches that can be proffered and delivered, but
they will require coordinated global effort. We are all
dependent on one another.
In wrapping up, what does the data tell us about
risk and interdependencies? It tells us, not unlike the
global financial crisis of 2008, that there are fault
lines and tremor-like early-warning signals that seem
disconnected at a global level, but are not.
What does the data tell us about hope? It tells us
that, while the next few years will likely be difficult as
a result of the statistically unusual confluence of the
five challenges I shared, we can coordinate a global
response, eschew a “to each their own” mentality as
to food security and climate risk, be willing to have
constructive, albeit difficult, conversations and jointly
accept that what we have to address is less of a food
shortage and more of a crisis of prioritization.
The President: I thank Ms. Menker for her briefing.
I shall now make a statement in my capacity as the
Secretary of State of the United States of America.
I thank the Secretary-General, Executive Director
David Beasley, Director-General Qu Dongyu and Gro
Intelligence Chief Executive Officer Sara Menker. I
thank them for their superb briefings to the Council
today, which bring powerfully before us the facts and
the challenges that we have to meet. I thank them for
their work every day on an issue that is truly critical
to humankind.
We are meeting at a moment of unprecedented
global hunger, fuelled, as we have heard, by climate
change and the coronavirus disease, and made even
worse by conflict. Indeed, conflicts across the world
are increasingly driving this crisis. According to the
Food and Agriculture Organization of the United
Nations and the World Food Programme, the number of
people affected by food insecurity due to conflict rose
from about 100 million people in 2020, to 139 million

S/PV.9036

or so in 2021, to an estimated 161 million in 2022. The
World Bank believes that Russia’s war in Ukraine could
add another 40 million people to that total.
Yesterday ministers from more than 30 countries
came together here at the United Nations to address
the drivers of and advance solutions to global food
insecurity, including by meeting the urgent need for
food, for fertilizer and humanitarian financing, investing
more in the resilience of agriculture and vulnerable
populations. For our part, the United States announced
another $215 million in emergency food assistance to
add to our $2.3 billion in humanitarian food aid since
February. I want to thank all the countries that stepped
up, and I want to encourage others to join us.
In 2018 the Council adopted resolution 2417 (2018),
which condemned the use of starvation of civilians as
a tool of war and noted that such a use may constitute
a war crime. Yet in the years since the adoption of
that resolution, the problem has only grown worse.
The Russian Federation’s flagrant disregard of that
resolution is just the latest example of a Government
using the hunger of civilians to try to advance its
objectives. It is also another example of how Russia
is violating the rules-based international order that is
integral to the shared security and prosperity of all
States Member of the United Nations, an order that the
Council and in particular its permanent members have
a responsibility to uphold, defend and strengthen.
In the Council, a few members have repeatedly
used language lamenting the suffering caused by this
war and calling on all sides to bring it to a stop. Let us
not use diplomatic-speak to obfuscate what are simple
facts. The decision to wage this war is the Kremlin’s
and the Kremlin’s alone. If Russia stopped fighting
tomorrow, the war would end. If Ukraine stopped
fighting, there would be no more Ukraine. Russia’s
unprovoked war of aggression has halted maritime trade
in large swaths of the Black Sea; it has made the region
unsafe for navigation, trapping Ukrainian agricultural
exports, as we have heard, and jeopardizing global food
supplies. Since 24 February, Russian naval operations
have demonstrated the intent to control access to the
north-western Black Sea and the Sea of Azov, to block
Ukrainian ports.
Our assessment is that this is a deliberate effort
evidenced through a series of actions taken by the
Russian Government. On the first day of the invasion,
Russia issued an official warning to all members

22-354479/32

S/PV.9036

Maintenance of international peace and security

19/05/2022

that significant areas of the Black Sea were closed to
commercial traffic, essentially shutting them down
to shipping. Since then, the Russian military has
repeatedly blocked safe passage to and from Ukraine
by closing the Kerch Strait, tightening its control over
the sea of Azov and stationing warships off Ukrainian
ports. Russia has struck Ukrainian ports multiple times.

insecurity. That includes countries already under
enormous duress. The Secretary-General alluded to
a number of them, including Lebanon, which usually
gets 80 per cent of its wheat imports from Ukraine, and
Somalia, already on the brink of famine even before
Russian tanks rolled into Ukraine, and which must now
deal with rising wheat and flour costs.

Those and other actions have effectively cut off
all commercial naval traffic in and around the port
of Odesa. The Russian Federation has mirrored these
attacks on land, repeatedly attacking Ukrainian
civilian infrastructure that is critical to the production
and transport of food, such as water, power and rail
lines, destroying Ukrainian grain-storing facilities and
stealing stocks of food in the parts of Ukraine that it
illegally occupies.

The Russian Federation claims falsely that the
international community’s sanctions are to blame for
worsening the global food crisis. Sanctions are not
blocking Black Sea ports, trapping ships filled with
food and destroying Ukrainian roads and railways.
Russia is. Sanctions are not emptying Ukrainian grain
silos and stealing Ukrainian farm equipment; Russia
is. Sanctions are not preventing Russia from exporting
food and fertilizer. The sanctions imposed by the United
States and many other countries deliberately include
carve-outs for food, fertilizer and seeds from Russia,
and we are working with countries every day to ensure
that they understand that sanctions do not prevent the
flow of those items. No, the decision to weaponize food
is Moscow’s and Moscow’s alone.

The consequences of those actions have been
devastating. The food supply for millions of Ukrainians
and millions more around the world has quite literally
been held hostage by the Russian military. the World
Food Programme recently estimated that a third of all
Ukrainians are facing food insecurity, with children,
pregnant women and the elderly at heightened risk
of malnutrition. In besieged cities such as Mariupol,
Russian forces have repeatedly blocked the delivery of
food and other life-saving aid to tens of thousands of
trapped civilians. A mother who recently escaped from
the city talked about the agony of watching her 6-yearold daughter suffer the daily pangs of hunger and being
powerless to do anything about it. “I just sobbed”, she
said, “screaming into a pillow when no one could see”.
She and her children eventually escaped; countless
thousands of others are still trapped.
The Russian Government seems to believe that
using food as a weapon will help accomplish what its
invasion has not: to break the spirit of the Ukrainian
people. Still, Ukrainians are going to great lengths to
feed their own people and to feed the world. Farmers in
Ukraine continue to risk their lives to produce wheat
and other crops. Many have returned to fields that are
filled with mines. They wear bulletproof vests and
helmets as they harvest.
And, as we have heard already powerfully this
morning, it is not only Ukrainians who are suffering
as a result of the Russian Government’s actions; some
20 million tons of grain sit unused in Ukrainian silos
as global food supplies dwindle and prices skyrocket,
causing more around the world to experience food
10/32

Do not take my word for it. Even Dmitry Medvedev,
Deputy Chairman of the Security Council of the Russian
Federation and former Russian President, recently
said that Russia’s agricultural products were its “quiet
weapon”. He then added, “Quiet, but ominous”.
The Council has a unique responsibility to address
the current crisis, which constitutes a serious threat to
international peace and security. That starts by strongly
and unequivocally calling the Kremlin out for its
atrocities in Ukraine and for worsening the global food
crisis through an unprovoked war of aggression. More
concretely, members of the Council and, for that matter,
every State Member of the United Nations should press
Russia to stop actions that are making the food crisis in
Ukraine and around the globe worse than it already was.
Stop blockading the ports in the Black Sea and the
Sea of Azov. Allow for the free flow of ships, trains and
trucks carrying food out of Ukraine. Stop preventing
food and other life-saving supplies from reaching
civilians in besieged Ukrainian towns and cities. Stop
threatening to withhold foods and fertilizer exports
from countries that criticize Russia’s war of aggression.
All of this is essential to save lives in Ukraine and to
save lives around the world.
The Russian Federation is not the only government
or organization to exploit food insecurity for its own
22-35447

19/05/2022

Maintenance of international peace and security

cynical ends. South Sudan, armed groups and warring
parties have for years blocked humanitarian assistance
to civilians. Experts estimate that up to 7 million people
will face crisis-levels of food insecurity in their countries
this year. In Syria, with the Kremlin’s ongoing support,
the Al-Assad regime has besieged such communities as
eastern Ghouta and caused the widespread starvation
of its own people. It also routinely obstructs the
cross-border delivery of life-saving humanitarian aid,
robbing and even attacking United Nations convoys, as
we have discussed repeatedly in the Security Council.
The Council must consistently call out governments
and armed groups when they use similar tactics,
such as attacking the means of food production and
distribution, blocking humanitarian aid from reaching
those in need and besieging civilian populations.
The United Nations was created with the aim of
advancing human rights and preventing atrocities,
including the atrocity of using starvation as a weapon
against civilians, such as during the siege of Leningrad
by the Nazis, during which an estimated 1 million
Russians lost their lives, including many who starved
to death — among the victims was the one-year-old
brother of President Putin — or during the Holodomor,
during which millions of Ukrainians died of hunger
owing to a Soviet campaign of forced collectivization
and terror.
It is on us to prevent this history from repeating
itself, to make sure that the past is not prologue. It is
simple. The lives of millions of people depend upon it.
I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.
I now call on the Minister for Foreign Affairs
of Ghana.
Ms. Botchwey (Ghana): I would like to thank you
and the United States delegation for highlighting the
very important subject of armed conflict and food
insecurity during your presidency of the Security
Council this month. I would also like to thank
Secretary-General António Guterres, the World Food
Programme Executive Director, the Director-General
of the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United
Nations, and the founder and Chief Executive Officer
of Gro Intelligence for their briefings. We appreciate
their useful perspectives on armed conflict and
food insecurity.

S/PV.9036

The Security Council is no stranger to the harrowing
reports of starvation and other forms of food insecurity
caused by conflict in various parts of the world.
Millions of people, especially children, have suffered
or perished from food insecurity in the challenging
periods of conflict that my own continent has had to
endure, especially over the past three decades. The food
systems of those countries in conflict usually collapse,
with huge consequences for the economy, livelihoods
and living standards.
Those impacts were localized, and those of us
who lived outside the theatre of war were involved
only inasmuch as our conscience compelled us to
act, including taking in refugees or by intervention,
through peace support operations. Today, however,
perhaps the first time since the Second World War, we
see the impact of one conflict on food security in every
country, every home and on everyone. We experience
together the profound anxiety of a global economy in
uncharted waters, buffeted by uncertain headwinds.
It is in this context that Ghana welcomes the
important contribution that resolution 2417 (2018)
makes in acknowledging the interlinkages between
conflict and hunger. There is still much to be done to
build resilience in food systems and enhance global
respect for norms relating to populations’ right to
food regardless of the state of conflict and to integrate
peacebuilding objectives into the creation of resilient
food systems, with a backward interlock of food
security objectives into peacebuilding programmes
and activities.
As we mark the fourth anniversary of the Council’s
adoption of resolution 2417 (2018) this month,
unfolding global events continue to be a rude and
painful reminder of the debilitating linkages between
armed conflict, hunger and food security. Although the
current global food insecurity crisis predates Russia’s
invasion of Ukraine, the war has clearly exposed the
interconnected nature and fragility of global food
systems, with serious consequences for global food and
nutrition security, particularly for vulnerable countries
and populations.
The food crisis that millions of the world’s citizens
are confronting now, especially in Africa, which is the
hardest hit, cannot wait until we have a perfect outcome
among all States. What is needed are purposeful
actions that support the efforts of developing countries,
such as the African Common Position for sustainable

22-3544711/32

S/PV.9036

Maintenance of international peace and security

food systems. Those actions must focus on building
resilience in economies and food systems.
The scale and effectiveness of the efforts of the
International Monetary Fund (IMF) and the World
Bank in filling the financing gap in Africa in response
to the coronavirus disease pandemic through, inter alia,
fast-track facilities, contingency emergency financing
as well as the IMF’s issue of special drawing rights
provide a model for addressing short-term shortages
and building resilience. It also requires action by the
parties to the conflict to facilitate the movement of
food and fertilizers through the Black Sea ports and
other transportation lanes, and we call on those in a
position to do so to act in the interest of international
cooperation and the values of our United Nations.
We are encouraged by the role that global
humanitarian hubs such as the International
Humanitarian City in Dubai and regional humanitarian
hubs such as the one in Accra can play in interconnecting
humanitarian needs with food availability. The
international humanitarian community must deepen
their national and regional coordination mechanisms
for programming and responding to humanitarian
crises and align their interventions with national and
regional response plans. Additionally, major donors
must cooperate to shift funds out of separate silos to
enable integrative work — and also in a manner that
does not prioritize food distribution to vulnerable
communities over the sustainable approach of helping
them to reconstruct their food systems.
In concluding, I would like to stress Ghana’s
readiness to join any effort aimed at removing export
restrictions on excess grains; bringing grains on stream
in parts of Eastern Europe, where the present conflict
is raging; reactivating global maritime transport, with
a priority on food supply; and ensuring that those
countries that are experiencing the perfect storm of
pandemic and war have the required credit to purchase
grains and food supplies. We must do everything in our
power to prevent starvation and death anywhere and to
restore economic and financial stability for the sake of
all our peoples.
The President: I now call on the Cabinet Secretary
for Foreign Affairs of Kenya.
Ms. Omamo (Kenya): I congratulate you,
Mr. President, on the able stewardship the United States
has shown in leading the Security Council this month.
I thank you, Sir, for the invitation to today’s important
12/32

19/05/2022

open debate. I also express the gratitude of my delegation
for leading insightful conversations on the important
subject of food security over the past two days. It
takes courage to lead, and we thank you. I also thank
the Secretary-General and the other briefers for their
insightful remarks. I particularly applaud Sara Menker,
whom I know from Kenya. I say, asante shukran.
Throughout history, sharp and rapid rises in food
prices have often been a root cause of social unrest,
political instability and violent conflict. Even today, the
price of bread in many countries is a reliable indicator
of rising political tensions. The fact that we are having
this discussion in the Security Council is proof that the
recent rise in food insecurity may lead to heightened
threats to international peace and security.
The facts, to say the least, are alarming. In the
Horn of Africa, an extreme drought could cause up to
20 million people to go hungry this year, many of whom
will be women and children. That emergency is making
it more difficult to pursue and sustain peace. It is
making entire populations dependent on food aid, and it
is becoming part of the conflict dynamics in our region
as militants and belligerents exploit the emergency to
entrench their control and access to financing.
There is a strong connection between the food
shortages in Yemen, Afghanistan, the Sahel and parts of
the Horn of Africa and conflict-related instabilities. In
Somalia, Al-Shabaab, an Al-Qaida-affiliated terrorist
group, last year alone displaced nearly 30,000 people
from 42 villages. It imposed blockades in various
towns in the Bakool region, leading to shortages of
food and essential commodities since early 2021. That
weaponization of food is a matter that should be of
concern to all of us in the Security Council.
More recently, the war in Ukraine is causing
unprecedented global food and energy supply
disruptions. With Ukraine and Russia as major global
suppliers of wheat, sunflower oil and barley, as well as
fertilizer, the conflict-induced disruptions have driven
food prices sharply higher.
We commiserate with the people of Ukraine, and
we understand their suffering, which is real and deeply
regrettable. But we also wish to note that that war is
leading to many more victims around the world.
Against that background, Kenya appreciates the
Secretary-General’s initiative in establishing the Global
Crisis Response Group on Food, Energy and Finance.
22-35447

19/05/2022

Maintenance of international peace and security

Its recommendations offer us a useful starting point in
the immediate actions we need to take in response to
the immediate pressures that we are facing, particularly
in Africa and developing countries. However, we must
do more than take short-term actions in the hope of a
return to the status quo. That status quo, even before
the outbreak of war in Ukraine, was filled with
expanding and protracted famines. The status quo must
be unacceptable to all of us. We must address it with
alacrity through cooperation and through a new kind of
multilateralism that uplifts and focuses on the weakest
of our peoples.
We need to learn from the coronavirus disease and
from the pandemic that it has spawned throughout the
world that we need to be taught, and we need to learn
that manufacturing capability and production must
spread into different regions of the world.
In the same way that the pandemic invites us
to seek fundamental change, this food crisis calls
for us to reach for bolder solutions. One of the least
appreciated and most consequential changes under way
should inform this conversation, that is, the impact
of population growth in Africa and in the developed
world. There is an increasing certainty in the projection
that Africa’s population may reach 2.5 billion people
by 2050. That population will move from rural areas
to urban settings, leaving Africa with fewer farmers
and fewer hands to produce food. The ability to provide
that enormous population with affordable food, decent
jobs, security and other public goods means that Africa
must have competent States, able to deliver value for
their people. Therefore, as we tackle food security, let
us tackle the capacity challenges in Africa. Let us build
strong States with strong capabilities.
Recognizing that, His Excellency President
Uhuru Kenyatta made food security one of his Big
Four Agenda items in his second term. That has
led to higher investment in the agricultural sector,
subsidies for fertilizer for small-scale farmers and a
focus on increasing the incomes of farmers through
improved market linkages, based on information and
communications technology platforms.
There is a great deal more that we need to do in
Kenya and to do worldwide, including in Africa, to
ensure that food security does not become an existential
threat for all of us. The lack of ambition, of innovation
and of courage will be the only impediment to finding

S/PV.9036

solutions for the multiple crises that are beginning to
grow throughout the world.
It is for that reason that we look forward to
welcoming all those present to the second United
Nations Ocean Conference, which Kenya will co-host
with Portugal in June this year. That conference will
give us an opportunity to harness and integrate the
dividends of the oceans into a sustainable and equitable
food future. We must use all the food available to
humankind. We must use our oceans and our land to
increase productivity for our people.
As I conclude, allow me therefore to make some
proposals on how we can act together, as I said, in a
spirit of change, multilateralism and cooperation so
that we can be that generation that answered the historic
call to action at a time such as this.
First, let us shift Africa’s place in the global trading
system. We can no longer solely be the source of raw
minerals and cash crops, while importing food to
feed the fastest-growing population in the world. We
need to modernize our agricultural systems, not only
for large-scale famers but also for small, poor rural
farmers. Africa must move beyond rain-fed agriculture.
We need to build fertilizer factories, seed factories and
pesticide factories. We need research institutions. We
need to be able to provide our farmers with the knowhow, the data and the will to invest in agriculture.
A large part of that is ensuring that, in addition
to feeding domestic demand, agricultural markets in
Europe and other wealthier regions must also open their
doors to African food products. There must be an end to
unnecessary tariffs.
The countries with the largest shareholdings in
international financial institutions need to insist on a
fundamental shift in financing, enabling agricultural
and food systems transformation. That must include
climate change financing, with an emphasis on
adaptation, to assist those that perpetually suffer from
climate shocks.
Secondly, it is essential to build a bridge
between humanitarian assistance, development and
peacebuilding. Long-term food assistance should
actively integrate peacebuilding approaches by
prioritizing the humanitarian, development and
peace nexus. If we are to improve food security needs,
greater cooperation and coordination among actors
in humanitarian assistance, development cooperation

22-3544713/32

S/PV.9036

Maintenance of international peace and security

and peacebuilding are fundamental. Added to that,
the Security Council must demand that all parties to
armed conflict comply with their obligations under
international humanitarian law by taking constant care
to spare civilian objects, including objects necessary
for food production and distribution, as well as lifting
embargoes and blockades that prevent the movement
of food.
Thirdly, local response mechanisms and capacities
relating to food crises and conflict need to be better
understood and integrated into relief operations, as
well as national response strategies.
Fourthly, the international community must
unite in upholding the values of market openness,
with the understanding that food security is a
transnational problem.
Fifthly, it is even more crucial to establish and
build on existing global emergency mechanisms that
include debt restructuring, debt delay and food aid,
given that traditional approaches must not only respond
adequately to extreme global food shocks but also build
and strengthen nations.
Breaking the link between conflict and hunger
and harnessing the potential of food security to
contribute to peace demand our collective action and
objective collaboration. We must therefore strive to
uphold resolution 2417 (2018), because our aspirations
for development, security and human progress rest on
achieving food security for all.
The President: I now call on the Minister for
Foreign Affairs of Gabon.
Mr. Adamo (Gabon) (spoke in French): I commend
you, Sir, on taking the initiative to hold this important
debate on the close link between conflict and food
security, which is an urgent issue with regard to the
many countries that are overwhelmed by armed
conflicts. I thank the Secretary-General for his
informative briefing, and I welcome his commitment
to combating hunger and insecurity throughout the
world. I also thank Mr. Beasley, Mr. Qu Dongyu and
Ms. Menker for their respective briefings.
In unanimously adopting resolution 2417 (2018)
on 24 May 2018, the Security Council acknowledged
the closely linked relationships of armed conflicts in
their role as aggravating factors of food insecurity in
the world. Millions of people struggle for access to
basic food products, and more than half of them live in
14/32

19/05/2022

countries at war. Access to food is hampered by fighting,
which leads to hunger and malnutrition-related diseases.
According to the Food and Agriculture Organization
of the United Nations, countries in conflict are six
times more likely to suffer from famine, and 23 famine
hotspots have been listed worldwide. Whether as a
direct result of fighting or its consequent destruction,
the massive displacement of people is a major factor in
generating food insecurity.
Moreover, in times of armed conflict, civilian
infrastructure is often targeted, and the major
repercussions concerning the provision of public
services, agricultural capacities and production and
transport capacities exacerbate food crises. In some
cases, hunger is also used as a weapon of war. It is not
uncommon for parties to conflict to deliberately destroy
food stores, burn fields, destroy food production and
distribution infrastructure, block trade routes, impede
port activities, poison wells and destroy fields and seed
reserves. As a result, displaced persons fleeing combat
zones are generally faced with the inability to access
sources of subsistence.
In recent years, climate change and, more recently,
the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic have
exacerbated the situation for many people in conflict
situations, thereby making the challenges on the
ground even more complex. Those two factors have
exposed the need for greater international cooperation
in responding to global challenges. World hunger is one
such challenge, as it exacerbates States’ vulnerability.
If the link between conflict and hunger is at the
heart of the international agenda and is garnering the
attention of the international community as a result of
the war in Ukraine today, it is because its ramifications
pose a threat to global food security and are aggravating
the situations in regions, such as the Sahel, that face
recurrent food challenges.
The dynamics surrounding the efforts taken
in response to the war in Ukraine and the resultant
solidarity can be a catalyst for planning ways to prevent,
address and attenuate the effects of armed conflict on
global food security. The international community must
be more resolutely involved in ending the vicious circle
and preventing the emergence of new famine hotspots.
Beyond the current dynamics, it is imperative to
address the root causes of conflicts and strengthen
existing post-conflict prevention and peacebuilding
22-35447

19/05/2022

Maintenance of international peace and security

mechanisms. Similarly, conflict prevention and
resolution must be fully able to integrate the management
of food crises into their deployment in accordance with
the provisions of resolution 2217 (2015), on hunger and
security; resolution 2573 (2021), on the protection of
objects indispensable to the survival of the civilian
population in times of conflict; and resolution 2417
(2018), which calls on the parties to conflict to allow
for the proper functioning of food systems and markets
in conflict situations.
Such mechanisms undoubtedly provide an ideal
framework for safeguarding food security stocks,
including by providing technical support for countries
that are considered vulnerable in the areas of reserve
storages and the corresponding technologies. It goes
without saying that compliance with international
humanitarian law and the resolutions I just mentioned,
in particular resolution 2417 (2018), on the protection
of objects indispensable to the survival of the civilian
population in times of conflict, is imperative.
It should be emphasized that States are obliged
to allow humanitarian personnel free and unhindered
access in delivering humanitarian aid whenever
it is necessary to meet urgent food needs, without
restrictions or politicization.
My country welcomes the establishment of the
Global Crisis Response Group on Food, Energy and
Finance to support vulnerable countries that face the
potential scope and magnitude of the consequences
of war and the ongoing impacts of the COVID-19
pandemic. In order to build on that momentum, specific
social actions must be considered within the framework
of multilateral responses, in cooperation with United
Nations bodies and specialized agencies, financial
institutions and regional organizations. They can be an
effective response to combat the effects of conflict on
food security.
We support the Secretary-General’s call for a
global ceasefire and his condemnation of actions that
target food production infrastructure and restrict
humanitarian access.
In conclusion, we call on the international
community to further reflect on accountability for the
crime of starvation. It is self-evident that starvation and
its devastation within the health and social spheres are
as destructive as they are dehumanizing.

S/PV.9036

The President: I now call on the Minister for
Europe and Foreign Affairs of the Republic of Albania.
Ms. Xhaçka (Albania): Let me start by thanking
you, Secretary Blinken, for your presence in the
Security Council today and your leadership in our work
on this crucially important issue. I especially thank the
briefers for their insightful presentations.
Yesterday we had an important discussion with the
launch of the Roadmap for Global Food Security — Call
to Action, which Albania was pleased to join. We highly
appreciate your personal contribution, Mr. Blinken, and
the United States leadership in focusing the attention
of the Security Council on the factors driving food
insecurity worldwide. Today’s conflicts, long-term
crisis and the recurrence of chronic food insecurity are
more complex and are lasting longer. It is undeniable
that conflict is now the main driver of hunger and
food insecurity. As we heard during yesterday’s
discussion, as well as this morning, the number of
people experiencing hunger globally and suffering from
food insecurity has been rising since 2014. In countries
affected by conflict, civilians continue to be attacked,
killed and forcibly displaced. The destruction of
civilian infrastructure and other aspects indispensable
to the civilian population’s survival drastically reduces
the ability to produce food and earn income. Conflicts
contribute to the deepening of existing inequalities,
while two years of the coronavirus disease pandemic,
on top of climate change, have made a difficult
situation worse. Close to 193 million people are acutely
food insecure and in need of urgent assistance across
53 countries. In Yemen, Syria, Afghanistan, the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, South Sudan, Haiti
and elsewhere, millions of people need food. Millions
do not know when they will get their next meal.
Russia’s aggression against Ukraine is further
exacerbating an already acute global food insecurity
situation around the world. The blockade and destruction
of critical Black Sea ports and other infrastructure are
disrupting the vital supply of food commodities and
key agricultural inputs that are critical to global food
security. There is food in Ukraine, but it cannot get
out of the country. That is unacceptable and must stop.
The severe disruption of production and trade, and the
rising prices globally of food, fuel, fertilizer and energy
as a consequence of the war, are aggravating existing
inequalities in the regions affected, endangering food
security, worsening existing humanitarian crises and
pushing more people into poverty. The war in Ukraine

22-3544715/32

S/PV.9036

Maintenance of international peace and security

could drive as many as 40 million more people into
poverty and hunger, and is threatening future global
food security. That is a sad reality and the truth.
In its adoption of resolution 2417 (2018), the
Security Council recognized that hunger and conflict
fuel each other in a vicious cycle and declared that
using the starvation of civilians as a method of warfare
could constitute a war crime. The resolution is a call to
action based on humanitarian principles. It demands the
effective implementation of international humanitarian
law and accountability for those who violate it. It also
emphasizes the importance of humanitarian access as
imperative. We have the tools, and we must use them.
We advocate for the Security Council to play a more
active role in considering and addressing conflictinduced hunger. Early warning and early action lead to
prevention. Preventing conflict-induced hunger requires
ensuring respect for international humanitarian law on
the part of all parties to the conflict. Humanitarian
action and respect for international humanitarian
law can only mitigate the effects of a conflict on
food systems, which is why political solutions to end
conflicts are urgently needed.
Tackling food insecurity worldwide requires urgent
multilateral action on several key aspects. First, we
need to address the causes of food and nutrition crises,
as well as the humanitarian, development and longstanding structural problems that make food systems
vulnerable. We then need to enhance the sustainability
of those systems.
Secondly, there must be a coordinated, multisectoral
response through development, humanitarian and peace
initiatives in order to reduce the risk of future conflict.
Thirdly, actions through the United Nations
system and international financial institutions should
lead to investments in sustainable food systems and
gender equality. Funding for food security is an
important component.
Fourthly, we need better and more timely reporting.
The Security Council has a unique ability to demand
and secure timely reporting, data and action on
situations of food insecurity. In that context, Albania
supports establishing a position for a United Nations
Special Envoy or focal point on the implementation of
resolution 2417 (2018).
No one has to go hungry if we can prevent it. If we
want to end hunger and ensure food security, we should
16/32

19/05/2022

all act now to prevent and stop conflicts by choosing
peace and development.
The President: I now call on the Minister of
Agriculture and Rural Development of Mexico.
Mr. Villalobos Arámbula (Mexico) (spoke in
Spanish): Mexico is grateful to the United States, in
its capacity as President of the Security Council this
month, for convening this open debate, enabling us to
highlight the importance of the link between conflict
and food security. We also appreciate the briefings
by and the presence here today of the SecretaryGeneral of the United Nations, as well as the Executive
Director of the World Food Programme, the DirectorGeneral of the Food and Agriculture Organization
of the United Nations (FAO) and Ms. Sara Menker,
as a representative of civil society. I want to thank
Mr. Qu Dongyu, Director-General of the FAO, for his
references to one of my country’s social programmes
on fertilizer for small corn producers in Mexico. It is
indeed the case that small farmers have doubled their
harvest thanks to Mexican fertilizer production. The
joint and coordinated work of these agencies is essential
to effectively addressing and mitigating the growing
impact of the global food security crisis.
While the causes of food insecurity are
multidimensional, it is inevitable that armed
conflicts — most of which are found on the Security
Council’s agenda — are a determining factor in initiating
or aggravating them, and their consequences are unjustly
borne by the civilian population. Unfortunately, there
is no shortage of examples, from Africa to the Middle
East and, most recently, in Ukraine.
It is unacceptable that in a world of material
abundance and natural resources, vast amounts of money
are spent to meet superfluous or at any rate non-essential
costs while 193 million people across 53 countries are
living with food insecurity. And 100 million of them are
in those unfortunate circumstances as a result of armed
conflict. To take some specific cases, such as in the
Horn of Africa, 15 million people there are in a situation
of food insecurity. In West Africa and the Sahel, more
than 27 million people are experiencing conditions of
severe food insecurity, while child malnutrition rates
are truly alarming. In Syria, the population suffering
from hunger has increased since 2018 and now stands at
close to 60 per cent. In our region of Latin America and
the Caribbean, Haiti is the most serious case, with half
22-35447

19/05/2022

Maintenance of international peace and security

of its population in need of food assistance and more
than a million in extreme poverty.
It is equally important to recognize that despite the
timely food production and distribution efforts of the
World Food Programme and FAO, among others, such
efforts can fall short due to a lack of economic resources,
inputs, the impact of pests and diseases and increases in
food, energy and raw material prices. Other problems
such as climate change, declines in soil fertility and
the coronavirus disease pandemic, as well as a lack
of water for agriculture, have a considerable impact
on food production and distribution. It is therefore
imperative to recognize that the world’s food systems
are interdependent, and that as we have seen, an armed
conflict in one place will sooner or later alter the food
system as a whole. Given that interconnectedness, it is
important to develop alternatives that do not jeopardize
food security in the global context.
The Security Council has tools designed to address
those challenges, although much remains to be done
to ensure that they are utilized to the full. Resolution
2417 (2018), adopted in 2018, was an important step in
responding to the causal links between armed conflict
and famine. Food insecurity is a key issue on the
international peace and security agenda and requires
our immediate and sustained attention. Ending hunger
and malnutrition, addressing protracted humanitarian
crises, preventing and resolving conflicts and building
peace are not separate tasks but complementary
aspects of the same challenge. Presidential statement
S/PRST/2017/14 also acknowledges the importance
and need for the Security Council to be warned by the
Secretary-General whenever there is a risk of famine
in conflict-affected areas. As an elected member of
the Security Council, Mexico reiterates its call for
compliance with the provisions of relevant resolutions
already adopted.
I would like to underscore the importance of the
early-warning mechanisms available to the United
Nations system. Humanitarian and development
agencies should be able to identify and prevent
situations that could lead to famine and its impact
on international peace and security. Humanitarian
exceptions should also be made in order to facilitate the
work of those agencies in such circumstances. If we are
to end food insecurity in conflict situations, we must
redirect resources and priorities. Rather than increasing
our spending on weapons that prolong conflicts and
destroy human, animal and plant life, we should

S/PV.9036

earmark resources for humanitarian action and work
chiefly to address the underlying causes of conflicts,
as my President said in the Council in November 2021
(see S/PV.8909).
In conclusion, Mexico expresses its commitment to
joining all countries with the goal of preventing people
from suffering from or dying of hunger in a world with
the tools and ability to avoid that fate.
The President: I now call on the Minister of
International Development of Norway.
Ms. Tvinnereim (Norway): I thank Secretary
Blinken for organizing today’s debate. I would also
like to thank Secretary-General Guterres, Executive
Director Beasley, Director-General Qu Dongyu
and Chief Executive Officer Sara Menker for their
sobering briefings.
Let us imagine that 70 per cent of the population of
a country needs food assistance — I repeat, 70 per cent.
That is the reality in South Sudan. On a recent visit, I
saw at first-hand the devastating effects of conflict on
food security. That is just one of several examples of
the catastrophic effects of conflict on millions of men,
women and children. At the same time, the climate
crisis is becoming more and more pronounced, affecting
livelihoods and multiplying the risks of further conflict.
In adopting resolution 2417 (2018), the Council
acknowledged that we must break the vicious cycle of
armed conflict and hunger, and that we, the international
community, are committed to ending all forms of
hunger and malnutrition by 2030. Yet the Russian
Federation, a permanent member of the Security
Council, has launched an illegal war against another
independent country. That unprovoked aggression is a
blatant violation of international law and the Charter
of the United Nations. It is also an attack on the 2030
Agenda for Sustainable Development. The invasion has
exacerbated an already strained global food security
situation. It is the Russian war on Ukraine, not targeted
sanctions against the aggressor State, that has caused
the steep rise in global food prices and food insecurity.
The way the war is being conducted is in violation of
international humanitarian law. The obligations not to
attack civilians or civilian objects necessary for food
production are not optional, and neither is the obligation
to facilitate full, safe and unimpeded humanitarian
access to those in need. We are appalled by reports of
starvation as a method of warfare. The perpetrators of
those crimes must be held accountable.

22-3544717/32

S/PV.9036

Maintenance of international peace and security

Disruptions in food markets and rising prices have
the potential to spark unrest and conflict. The Security
Council has a clear preventive role to play, in line with
resolution 2417 (2018). To end hunger, we must pursue
all possible avenues to prevent and resolve armed
conflicts, in line with the Council’s mandate to maintain
international peace and security. Last week, the Food
and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations and
the World Food Programme jointly presented a report
on food crises. The update paints a gloomy picture. The
acute global food insecurity situation is expected to
deteriorate further. However, we also see examples of
how agricultural production can greatly relieve the need
for humanitarian aid, even during a conflict, and that
gives me hope. In addition to our humanitarian efforts,
we must scale up our investments in food production
and resilience, both inside and outside conflict zones.
I see small-scale food producers as the backbone of
our food systems in all countries. I believe in their ability
to work the land and resources in a sustainable way,
while providing food for local and regional markets. I
grew up on such a farm myself. Small-scale farmers are
truly indispensable partners for our collective survival.
We need targeted interventions to provide the seed and
fertilizers that small-scale farmers need, as well as
the tools to enable them to cope with threats they may
encounter — conflicts, climate change or other crises.
Women and girls have a special role to play in that
context. We are food producers, traders, consumers,
decision-makers and negotiators. Protecting women
and girls from violence, including sexual and genderbased violence, is crucial to eliminating hunger. In
many households, food insecurity and poverty prevail
when women are hurt.
The sheer number of people on the verge of
starvation leaves us no choice but to mobilize now.
Norway will invest in resilient food systems, and I am
sure that many other donors will do so as well. We must
listen to African voices and solutions. I learned a great
deal from the briefing given by the Peace and Security
Council of the African Union on food security and
conflict in Africa. I am pleased to note that the private
sector has begun to recognize the value of investing in
agriculture. Furthermore, the agricultural sector needs
predictability from Governments, efficient United
Nations agencies and the constructive involvement
of civil society. The war in Ukraine has also exposed
Africa’s chronic dependence on food imports. That
raises the spectre of mass starvation on a continent that
18/32

19/05/2022

depends on food imports to feed itself. If ever there was
a time to drastically raise food production in Africa, it
is now.
Mrs. Nusseibeh (United Arab Emirates): I would
like to begin by joining others in commending the
United States and Secretary Blinken for focusing the
Security Council’s attention on food insecurity at this
critical time. The global food insecurity crisis is indeed
untenable, and we need to join forces to address the
growing supply and distribution challenges. I want to
thank the Secretary-General and the briefers for their
valuable insights. I was particularly struck by the data
presented by Ms. Sara Menker, which sounded a very
clear alarm to the Council on how close we collectively
are to the brink. As she also said, we all need one
another to work through this crisis, and no nation can
do that alone. Our agricultural system is truly global.
As a country that imports 90 per cent of its food,
the United Arab Emirates sees food security as a top
priority both for itself and for our region more broadly.
We are deeply concerned about the alarming rise
of global food insecurity, driven or exacerbated by
conflicts, climate change and the coronavirus disease.
As yesterday’s call to action reaffirms, we need to act
with urgency and at scale, and in concert with other
international stakeholders. No country is immune to
these shocks. We listened to African leaders yesterday
describe how from Cairo to Cape Town, Africa is
facing an acute shortage of food that will undermine
stability, security and sustainable development. And
we all heard Secretary-General Guterres sound the
alarm today. Price increases on foodstuffs of up to
30 per cent threaten communities across Africa and the
Middle East.
Data from the World Food Programme (WFP)
show that before the conflict in Ukraine began, some
276 million people were already in the grip of acute
hunger globally, and the WFP now projects that the
figure could rise to 323 million in 2022. We cannot
ignore the devastating impact on children in particular.
According to UNICEF, at least 13.6 million children
under five suffer from severe acute malnutrition,
resulting in one in five deaths among the age group. The
situation is simply untenable and morally unfathomable
when juxtaposed against $430 trillion of wealth on the
planet today.
The United Nations Food Price Index also
reached an all-time high this year, with an impact on
22-35447

19/05/2022

Maintenance of international peace and security

Governments, farmers and tens of millions of the world’s
most vulnerable people. Fertilizer price increases are
already undermining future planting seasons, laying
the ground for a protracted food security crisis. Risks
of large-scale domestic and international migration,
criminality, human trafficking and sexual exploitation,
domestic unrest and even conflict will continue to grow
until the issue is addressed urgently at the global level.
The Council has a critical role to play in addressing
the intersection of food insecurity and conflict, and we
would like to highlight three potential actions that the
Council could take that build on resolution 2417 (2018),
unanimously adopted four years ago.
First, we already know that food insecurity is both
a root cause and an accelerator of conflict, and it has
a disproportionate impact on people already living
in fragile and conflict-afflicted situations. In that
context, we urge continuing to actively call for full
respect for international humanitarian law, including
where it relates to the rapid and unimpeded passage
of impartial humanitarian relief to all those in need,
as well as the protection of civilian objects that are
critical to ensuring that civilians have sufficient access
to food. Additionally, we must continue to ensure that
sanctions include the necessary exemptions on food and
agricultural inputs critical to communities and do not
impact the free flow of essential commodities in any
way or impede the passage of impartial humanitarian
relief to those in need.
Secondly, the Council should follow up on its
many calls for risk mitigation strategies in the context
of climate change and other threat multipliers. Last
year, the United Arab Emirates was proud to launch
the Agricultural Innovation Mission for Climate
with the United States and other countries. Many
of those strategies ultimately rely on international
public financing for food, water and social protection
systems in fragile countries. Despite the proven costeffectiveness of those investments, the United Nations
Development Programme reports that just $2 per person
of climate finance flows to highly fragile countries. A
correction there would be a major contribution to food
security and conflict prevention, and the Council’s
normative endorsement of investment targeting fragile
settings would be an important signal for the future
allocation of resources.
In the same way that the Group of Seven is working
on energy transition packages for coal-consuming
countries, it would be timely for a multilateral

S/PV.9036

workstream, perhaps facilitated by the SecretaryGeneral, to apply the same concept to climate adaptation
for fragile and vulnerable countries. It will be critical
to identify and to finance country-specific projects and
policies that can prevent food insecurity.
Thirdly, the Council should continue to bring
attention to and be briefed on the specific gender and
age dimensions of food insecurity. That can improve our
response, the effectiveness of our actions and support
those most disproportionately affected. Furthermore,
we need a proper public-private partnership aimed
at ensuring women’s full, equal and meaningful
inclusion and participation to improve food security.
Women have a role that is critical to the well-being and
resilience of all members of society, particularly during
stabilization efforts and in ensuring a sustainable postconflict recovery.
The global level of food insecurity today, and the
likelihood of growing needs in the foreseeable future, is
a flashing alarm signal for peace and security. It is time
for us to come together and commit to taking concrete
steps towards securing food for everyone around the
world. The Security Council must indeed ensure that
our response is commensurate to the global magnitude
of the threat.
Mr. Muraleedharan (India): Let me begin by
congratulating you, Madam President, and the United
States delegation on organizing this important open
debate on conflict and food security. I thank SecretaryGeneral António Guterres, Mr. David Beasley,
Executive Director of the World Food Programme,
and Mr. Qu Dongyu, Director-General of the Food and
Agriculture Organization, for their useful briefings.
I also thank Ms. Sara Menker, Founder and Chief
Executive Officer of Gro Intelligence, for sharing her
perspectives on the issue.
Ensuring food security, especially for the poor
and marginalized, is a challenge that preoccupies
Governments in developing countries first and
foremost. As the world has been struggling to find ways
to emerge from the effects of the coronavirus disease
pandemic, the conflict in Ukraine has had a profound
impact, with spiralling energy and commodity prices
and disruptions in global logistical supply chains.
The global South has been adversely affected both
by the conflict itself and by the various measures
put in place in response. If the conflict does not give
way to a meaningful path of dialogue and diplomacy

22-3544719/32

S/PV.9036

Maintenance of international peace and security

immediately, there will be severe repercussions in the
global economy that will derail the efforts of the global
South to secure food security and eradicate hunger in
the run-up to 2030. We are already seeing economies
collapse and law-and-order problems increase in some
countries, and it will only get worse. It is therefore
indeed time to start factoring in the multidimensional
impact that this issue is having on the global South,
especially in vulnerable developing countries.
The solution to those challenges lies in global
collective action. On its own, no single country can
handle such complex collateral ramifications. We need
to work collectively, and we need to work together. In
that context, let me submit the following eight points
for the Security Council’s consideration:
First, as I said earlier, a solution through dialogue
and diplomacy to the conflict in Ukraine must be arrived
at without further delay. We have been consistent in
calling for an immediate cessation of hostilities and
pursuing that path to resolve the issue. In that regard,
we reiterate our support to the efforts of the good
offices of the Secretary-General.
Secondly, the food security challenges emanating
from the Ukraine conflict require us to respond
creatively. The growing shortages can be addressed only
by going beyond the constraints that currently bind us.
In that context, we welcome the Secretary-General’s
call for exempting the purchases of food by the World
Food Programme for humanitarian assistance from
food-export restrictions, with immediate effect. But we
need to go beyond that to make a real difference.
Third, energy security is also a serious concern
given that it has been a key collateral fallout of the
conflict. It needs to be addressed by enhancing mutual
cooperative efforts, with greater sensitivity to other
countries’ energy mix and import requirements.
Fourth, a number of low-income societies are today
confronted with the twin challenges of rising costs
and difficult access to food grains. Even countries
like India, which has adequate stocks, have seen an
unjustified increase in food prices. It is clear that
hoarding and speculation are at work. We cannot allow
that to pass unchallenged. As outlined in my statement
yesterday, my Government noted the sudden spike in
global prices of wheat, which put our food security and
that of our neighbours and other vulnerable countries at
risk. We are committed to ensuring that such adverse
impacts on food security are effectively mitigated and
20/32

19/05/2022

that the vulnerable are protected from sudden changes
in the global market.
In order to manage our own overall food security
and support the needs of neighbouring and other
vulnerable developing countries, we announced some
measures regarding wheat exports on 13 May. Let me
reaffirm that those measures allow for exports — once
approved — to help countries meet their food security
demands. That will be done upon request from the
Governments concerned. The policy will ensure that
we will truly respond to those most in need.
Fifth, it is necessary for all of us to fully appreciate
the importance of equity, affordability and accessibility
when it comes to food grains. We already saw how those
principles were disregarded in the case of COVID-19
vaccines. Open markets must not become an argument
to perpetuate inequity and promote discrimination.
Sixth, we need to avoid linking humanitarian and
development assistance with progress in the political
process. If donors were to adopt that position, it would
serve only to exacerbate food insecurity in conflict
situations. There is an urgent need for the donor
community to scale up assistance to conflict-affected
countries and to ensure that humanitarian agencies
receive the necessary funding to fully execute their
plans without the politicization of people’s basic needs.
Seventh, food assistance alone surely cannot be
a long-term sustainable solution to food insecurity.
Peacebuilding and development are paramount and
must include livelihood support, social-protection
programmes and community-based approaches,
including investment in agriculture infrastructure
and
capacity-building
in
rural
development,
especially in conflict areas. That calls for a
multi-stakeholder approach.
Eighth, armed conflict and terrorism, combined
with extreme weather, crop pests, food price volatility,
exclusion and economic shocks, can devastate any
fragile State, leading to food insecurity, and increase
the threat of famine. It is therefore critical to support
capacity-building in countries facing those issues,
especially with regard to designing, implementing and
monitoring policies and programmes related to food.
As the Council may be aware, India is running
the world’s largest food-based safety-net programme,
which has seen a paradigm shift from a welfare to a
rights-based approach. In order to achieve targeted
22-35447

19/05/2022

Maintenance of international peace and security

delivery during COVID-19, the Government provided
food assistance to 800 million people and cash transfers
to 400 million people. India’s mid-day meal programme
continues to tackle undernourishment in school children
by ensuring the provision of healthy meals. A nutrition
drive has also been launched, especially for vulnerable
groups, women and children. Our farm-to-table digital
initiatives include farmer’s portals, farm-advisory
services, online networks of agricultural commodities,
price prediction and the use of blockchain technology
for quality certification.
Even in the heart of the COVID-19 pandemic, India
also provided food aid in the form of thousands of
metric tons of wheat, rice, pulses and lentils to several
countries, including in our neighbourhood and in
Africa, in order to strengthen food security. In view of
the deteriorating humanitarian situation in Afghanistan,
India has commenced the donation of 50,000 metric tons
of wheat to the people of Afghanistan. Similarly, India
has continued its humanitarian support for Myanmar,
including through a grant of 10,000 tons of rice and
wheat. We are also assisting Sri Lanka, including with
food aid, through its difficult times. All these initiatives
are in keeping with our “neighbourhood first” foreign
policy priority and our firm belief in the abiding ethos
of Vasudhaiva Kutumbakam — the world is one family.
In conclusion, I would like to underscore India
remains committed to working with all other Member
States and international organizations, including
the United Nations, to collectively strengthen global
food security, particularly in countries facing
conflict situations.
Mr. Brophy (Ireland): I would like to thank
Secretary Blinken for organizing this debate. Ireland
deeply appreciates his leadership in ensuring that
conflict and hunger are situated at the heart of the
Security Council’s work.
Our discussion today could not be timelier.
Conflict-induced hunger is present in an increasing
number of country situations on the Council’s agenda.
It demands our urgent attention and action.
Executive Director Beasley, Ms. Menker and
Director-General Qu Dongyu could not have been
clearer — hunger is on the rise, and conflict is the
cause. The statistics and the outlook are grim and
difficult to hear. But for the Council to act, to trigger
necessary and urgent action, they must be heard by us
in the Chamber.

S/PV.9036

Ireland speaks to both conflict and food security
from our own lived experiences, which shape our
understanding and sharpen our conviction to act. It is
unconscionable that, in our world of plenty, millions are
on the brink of starvation. Globally, 193 million people
are at crisis levels of food insecurity or worse.
We cannot avoid the difficult reality — conflict
is now the biggest driver of hunger. And, by failing
to prevent or resolve the conflicts on our agenda, the
Council has a responsibility to bear. As members of
the Council, we have a duty to look beyond short term
political or strategic interests to the men, women and
children who are living the reality of the often-dry
reports on our agenda. More and more people are dying
from avoidable, human-made, conflict induced hunger,
and they are doing so on our watch.
Today’s discussion is an opportunity to ask how we
can meet our responsibility and how to turn our words
to action. Let us rise to that opportunity. I wish to share
three points.
The first is an obvious one, but it cannot be
stated enough — conflict is perpetuating immense
humanitarian need and driving global food insecurity.
Conflict displaces people, destroys livelihoods, disrupts
trade and food supplies, damages infrastructure and
impinges access to vital resources.
In Somalia, famine is a terrifying imminent
risk. Conflict in northern Ethiopia and a de facto
humanitarian blockade has resulted in 80 per cent of
Tigray’s population living in food insecurity. Hundreds
of thousands face starvation. Yet the Council has
struggled to find the courage to address this crisis.
There are emergency food insecurity levels across
many conflict-affected countries, including Mali,
Haiti, South Sudan and Afghanistan.
The illegal, unjustified invasion of Ukraine by the
Russian Federation has caused immeasurable suffering
in Ukraine. However, the consequences for hunger
in our interconnected world will be felt far beyond
Ukraine’s sovereign borders. That senseless act of
aggression has now forced millions into acute hunger
this year. The potential impact on security and stability
across multiple countries is deeply worrying.
Our response, too often, is to address the symptoms,
not the disease. We provide the necessary humanitarian
assistance to those trapped in conflicts but lack the
will or commitment to end them. Unless we take real

22-3544721/32

S/PV.9036

Maintenance of international peace and security

steps to end the conflicts on our agenda, our actions
do little more than cruelly sustain millions on the edge
of survival.
Those conflicts are not unsolvable. War is not
inevitable. Ireland knows that from its own experience.
However, we need to use all our tools to turn those
waging war from the path of violence, so that they
embrace dialogue and diplomacy and take the path of
peace. It is a path that we can walk with them.
My second point is that we have the tools to address
conflict-related hunger, but we are failing to use them.
In spite of the unanimous commitment by the Council
to counter conflict-driven hunger, the promise of
resolution 2417 (2018) is not being realized. We continue
to see flagrant violations of international humanitarian
law, including starvation brazenly used as a method
of warfare, humanitarian access repeatedly impeded,
vulnerable populations denied life-saving humanitarian
protection and assistance, and accountability for such
grievous actions absent.
The war in Ukraine has upended global foodsupply chains. It has tightened the screw on already
food-insecure countries such as Yemen. As Executive
Director Beasley told the Council previously, the impact
of this war is that it is forcing humanitarian agencies to
make unconscionable choices — to take food from the
mouths of those who are hungry to feed the starving.

19/05/2022

Early-warning systems, including data analysis,
provide the international community with the means
to anticipate food-insecurity crises. That can save
lives, protect livelihoods and allow food systems to
survive — all the more vital in conflict situations.
In closing, time is running out. Our collective
and comprehensive action is needed to reverse the
frightening trend of conflict-induced food insecurity.
It is needed now. We need to ensure that all parties to
armed conflicts comply with their obligations under
international humanitarian law, including in relation
to humanitarian access. Those who fail to do so must
be held accountable, and the Council must assume its
responsibility to ensure accountability.
That is what we actually committed to when we
unanimously adopted resolution 2417 (2018). We must
recognize our failings and the slow pace of progress.
That is why Ireland has worked as an informal focal
point on conflict and hunger since joining the Council,
to bring forward the provisions of the resolution and to
try to make them work. Now more than ever we need to
summon the political will and honour our commitments.
More importantly, we must have the courage to
act to end conflicts and to break the cycle of conflictinduced food insecurity. That is our responsibility; that
is our duty. The cost of further political inaction will
be devastating — an avoidable and unnecessary human
cost. Let us act together and act now.

The events of the last months have only reinforced
the urgency of the call to action of resolution 2417
(2018). We must match our will to act to the severity of
the food-insecurity situation deepening on our watch.

Dame Barbara Woodward (United Kingdom): I
join others, Mr. President, in thanking you for having
convened the debate today, and I also thank our briefers
for their very insightful remarks.

My third point is a call to do things differently.
The millions upon millions suffering the consequences
of conflict-induced food insecurity and the Council’s
inability to address the crisis shames us all. Reaching
emergency and catastrophic levels of food insecurity
does not happen overnight. Just how many red flags
and alarm bells are needed? What level of suffering
will finally spark a response from the Council?

At the start of the year, the United Nations Global
Humanitarian Overview warned of unprecedented
levels of global food insecurity, driven by a perfect
storm of the coronavirus disease, the climate crisis
and conflict.

Delivering on early action, as foreseen in resolution
2417 (2018), can prevent food insecurity and famine,
especially to safeguard maternal and child health.
Our efforts should support interventions to prevent
malnutrition in children rather than waiting until they
are on the edge of starvation, giving future generations
a chance.
22/32

Yemen faces catastrophic levels of food insecurity
for the fifth year running. Refugees across the Sahel
are suffering from increased violence and reduced
humanitarian access, and, in the Horn of Africa,
particularly in Ethiopia and Somalia, millions of people
affected by conflict are also grappling with the worst
drought in 40 years.
Russia ignored that suffering in choosing to invade
Ukraine, the breadbasket of the world. Ukraine’s food
and fertilizer exports were feeding up to 400 million
22-35447

19/05/2022

Maintenance of international peace and security

S/PV.9036

people worldwide. And now a critical part of the world’s
food supply chain is being throttled by Russia. Across
the world, 13 million hungry children are already
subsisting on a knife edge; of those, 2 million will now
face starvation this year.

Food Programme (WFP), Mr. David Beasley. We thank
them for their briefings. We also note the participation
of a great number of distinguished representatives
of various States Members of the United Nations at
today’s meeting.

As our Minister explained yesterday, the United
Kingdom fully supports the United States-led Road Map
for Global Food Security and the Global Alliance for
Food Security launched under Germany’s presidency of
the Group of Seven. We have the food and the means to
help the most vulnerable, but we must act now.

Recently, the most obvious trend in the evolution
of the political culture in Western States has been
the effort to blame Russia for everything. Since the
beginning of our special military operation in Ukraine,
we have noted almost a quantum leap in the allegations
suggesting that Moscow is guilty of everything.

First, the international community must enable
the free movement of food. Alongside more than 50
members of the World Trade Organization (WTO), the
United Kingdom has committed to keeping food and
agricultural markets open, predictable and transparent.
All WTO members must prohibit export restrictions on
food bought for the World Food Programme.

The stories connected with food security have been
one of the main areas of accusation levelled at Russia.
Today’s meeting is an eloquent illustration of this.
Listening to my colleagues, it would seem to be that
we want to starve everyone to death and that only they
and Ukraine allegedly care about how to save the lives
of the hungry. The picture might be pretty, but it is an
absolutely false one.

Secondly, it is vital that we strengthen global
resilience to prevent future famine risks. As we set out
in the United Kingdom’s international development
strategy, which we launched this week, the United
Kingdom will support the most vulnerable countries
with more than $3.5 billion of humanitarian aid in the
next three years.
British International Investment — the United
Kingdom’s development finance institution — will
scale up high-quality and sustainable investments,
including in the food and agricultural sector. The World
Bank must deliver swiftly on its plans to strengthen
fragile economies by distributing $170 billion over the
next 15 months.
Finally, actors on the ground need to live up to their
responsibilities under international humanitarian law.
We will continue to pursue accountability for those
using starvation as a weapon of war.
This human-made global crisis requires a collective
global response. The United Kingdom stands in
solidarity with vulnerable countries and will play its
part. Russia must now play hers: end the conflict and
the global shocks it is inflicting on the world’s poorest.
Mr. Nebenzia (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We welcome the participation at today’s
meeting of the Secretary-General, Mr. António
Guterres, the Director-General of the Food and
Agriculture Organization of the United Nations (FAO).
Mr. Qu Dongyu, and the Executive Director of the World

Let us recall that the threat of a world food crisis
did not arise this year, and the possibility of hunger on
a biblical scale and a perfect storm were mentioned by
a participant in today’s meeting, namely, the Executive
Director of the World Food Programme, Mr. David
Beasley, in 2020. At that time, 155 million people in 55
countries were facing critical food-security threats, and
among the reasons given for that were conflict, extreme
weather events and economic turmoil.
We regret the fact that our colleagues from the
Western members of the Security Council did not dare
to comment on the root causes of the food and other
crises in such other countries as Afghanistan, Iraq,
Libya or Syria.
Estimates of the number of people potentially at
risk of hunger today are 193 million people. On 10 May,
on behalf of the Global Crisis Response Group on
Food, Energy and Finance, the Secretary-General the
United Nations Conference on Trade and Development,
Ms. Rebeca Grynspan, said that there was no problem
of physical deficit of food in the world, but that the
issue was the system of distribution.
Experts on the grain markets added that a factor in
this regard is also the rapid increases in price, and that
is nothing new. According to data from stock markets,
the year-on-year growth in the price of wheat in 2021
alone came to 25 per cent, and, by February of this year,

22-3544723/32

S/PV.9036

Maintenance of international peace and security

19/05/2022

prices were 60 per cent higher than the average for the
last five years.

recent years, for example, in the United States, Canada,
Australia and France.

Among the reasons for this situation, leading experts
first and foremost indicated the consequences of the
coronavirus disease pandemic in terms of disruption to
the supply chains, as well as more expensive freight and
insurance. There was also the issue of the anti-crisis
financial investment in the economies, where the United
States, the European Union (EU) and Japan spent more
than $8 trillion, which drove up demand and led to a
rise in inflation.

As you can see, Mr. President, none of these key
factors were Russia’s fault, and but these factors did lay
the foundation for the current situation in agricultural
markets. Nonetheless, we did not hear about these issues
in the statements of our Western colleagues almost at
all, and of course they did not mention the unilateral
illegal economic sanctions that are suffocating a whole
range of countries.

Against this background, we also have the already
existing trade wars and the long-standing conflict in
the regulation of the agricultural markets. As a result,
the stored stocks of food were at their lowest levels for
the last 5 to 10 years, which drove up food prices as
well as related costs.
Western countries, however, also arrogated to
themselves all of the trade flows, which worsened
a situation that was already difficult for developing
countries dependent on imports. There is an important
factor in this regard, and that is the very rapid transition
to green energy that is being forced on the whole world
instead of a thought-out gradual energy transition as
well as the open politicization of energy cooperation by
some countries. The outcome, then, is the unreasonable
rejection of energy projects and the sharp increase in
the price of energy products. The price for oil on stock
markets in 2020 to 2022 increased by more than 22 per
cent, and that means gas oil for agricultural machines
and petrol for transporting agricultural products, and it
also covers electricity for the food industry.
There was also a record increase in the price of gas.
In December 2021, the spot price of gas crossed the
psychological barrier of $2,000 for 1000 cubic meters,
and this is despite the fact that Russia had increased
its supply. The direct consequence of this was the
unprecedented increase in prices for mineral fertilizers
as early as December 2021. The prices for urea and
nitrates increased three-and-a-half to four-fold, and for
other forms of fertilizer two-and-a-half to three-fold.
An increase in the price of fertilizer means an increase
in the price of grain.
A significant part of the problem was the speculation
on Western futures markets on food products, which
also led to an increase in the prices of commodities,
including wheat, maize and pulses. In addition, we also
should not forget about the difficult weather situation in
24/32

All that they have harped on about today is that
they think that the special military operation in Ukraine
by Russia is threatening the whole world with hunger,
but everything that happened before that, and which
I mentioned, according to the logic of our Western
colleagues, simply amounts to nothing and does not play
any role. It is clear that this kind of bare-faced lying and
fabricating might have an effect on an unsuspecting
public, but certainly not on serious experts.
The truth is that they got carried away by their
futile attempts to break the back of the Russian
economy at all costs and to isolate our country. I am not
talking in this regard about the inevitable destructive
consequences for their own economies. Ultimately, we
cannot do anything about their obsessive endeavour to
shoot themselves in the foot or even in both feet.
The consequences of these policies in their internal
markets are something they will have to answer for to
their own taxpayers and their own voters. What I am
talking about in this regard is that in the context of this
proxy war with Russia in Ukraine that they are actively
inflating , what they are doing is they are in essence
taking the whole of the developing world hostage and
they are pushing it towards hunger.
Whatever they say in this Chamber, they are the only
ones who can do change this situation, and I will explain
why. They assert that allegedly Russia is preventing
agricultural products from being taken out of Ukraine
by sea. However, the truth is that it is Ukraine, and
not Russia, that continues to block 75 foreign vessels
from 17 countries in the ports of Mykolaiv, Kherson,
Chornomorsk, Mariupol, Ochakov, Odesa and Yuzhne,
and it is also Ukraine that has mined the waters of the
Black Sea.
In this case, how can we talk about getting grain
out of the country? Every day, the Russian armed forces
open humanitarian corridors that represent a safe path
22-35447

19/05/2022

Maintenance of international peace and security

for the movement of vessels to the south-west, from the
territorial waters of Ukraine. However, Kyiv continues
to try and worm out of working with the representatives
of foreign States that are owners of these vessels to
provide a safe exit for these blockaded vessels to an
assembly area. There is also a danger for navigation
and infrastructure from unanchored Ukrainian mines
floating along the coasts of the Black Sea States.
Russia is doing all that it can to guarantee safe
civilian navigation in the Black Sea and the Sea of Azov.
We communicate that information to the United Nations
leadership every day. As you can see, Mr. President,
Ukraine is not undertaking any such efforts, and it is
clear that without resolving this issue, we cannot talk
about exporting grain from Ukraine by sea.
Under these conditions, a positive role could
be played by deliveries of agricultural products and
fertilizers from Russia and Belarus.
In such conditions the deliveries of agricultural
products and fertilizers from Russia and Belarus could
play a positive role. However, there arose another
artificial barrier in terms of our exports, which was
created by the Western countries themselves — the
illegal, unilateral coercive measures imposed by them on
both our countries. They were damaging the agricultural
sector even before the recent events in Ukraine. After
24 February this year, true mayhem started. A total of
more than 10,000 sanctions have been imposed on our
country alone so far. The result has been the disruption
of transport routes, a logistics crisis, threats of delays
and bans on Russian ships entering ports, problems with
freight and insurance and restrictions on international
commercial transactions, to name but a few issues. At
the same time, the difficulties with bank payments
hurt not only vulnerable private importers, but also
humanitarian agencies. The WFP is also said to have
been affected. That is to say nothing of the sanctionsrelated threats to our energy sector by the West, which
continue to destabilize the markets.
One should not mention the so-called sanctions
exemptions that appeared due to Western farmers’
dependence on Russian and Belarusian fertilizers.
Banks and companies intimidated by sanctioning
Governments are still forced to overcomply, which delays
or often scuttles transactions altogether. International
experts, including FAO analysts, also see other risks
from the sanctions, including potential difficulties with

S/PV.9036

deliveries of goods related to agricultural production to
Russia, which could have an impact on the next harvest.
Nevertheless, I would like to affirm that our country
continues to be a responsible supplier of both food and
energy. Secretary of State Antony Blinken cited the
Deputy Chairman of Russia’s Security Council, Dmitry
Medvedev, but distorted the essence of his statement.
He omitted that Mr. Medvedev was talking about not
delivering food to unfriendly States that imposed
sanctions on us. There are no such States among those
that are exposed to the risk of food insecurity. They are
our friends, and we will supply food to them, just as
Mr. Medvedev said. We are expecting a record wheat
harvest this year. In that regard, we can offer 25 million
tons of grain for export through the Novorossiysk port
from 1 August until the end of the year. Other purchases
can also be discussed, taking into account the fact that
from June to December potential exports of fertilizers
will be at least 22 million tons. But if countries do not
want to lift their sanctions of their own accord, why do
they blame us for the food crisis? Why should the poorest
countries and regions suffer from their irresponsible
geopolitical games? In such circumstances, attempts
to shift the blame for this situation onto us without
justification are not just absurd, but also offensive. I
would like to ask David Beasley about the situation
with regard to WFP procurement of Russian food and
its delivery to countries in need in the context of the
above-mentioned sanctions.
I also have to mention the situation with regard to
Ukrainian grain. According to Ukrainian media even
before the Russian special military operation in that
country began, Ukraine fulfilled between 60 and 90 per
cent of its export potential for the 2021-2022 marketing
year, depending on the type of crop. At the same
time, most of the available food-grade wheat — about
13 million tons — had been exported as early as by the
end of 2021, which, according to the Ukrainian press,
caused a shortage and an increase in bread prices. There
should be more corn reserves. However, its main buyers
are not at all susceptible to food security risks; rather,
it is countries of the European Union that buy more
than a third of the supplies. In that context, the appeals
that we have heard from a number of Western officials
for the accelerated export of grain from Ukraine are
frankly bewildering.
I will not address the obvious prospect of starvation
in that country. It is up to the Kyiv authorities to think
about that. Another reasonable question arises: where do

22-3544725/32

S/PV.9036

Maintenance of international peace and security

these supplies go and what do they have to do with food
security in the world? I would again like to ask David
Beasley if there have been any humanitarian shipments
of Ukrainian grain through WFP since February? As
far as we know, there have not. Yet, if we believe the
statements of Western politicians and the media, grain
is actively being shipped out of the country, both by
train and by barge on the Danube. Where is it going?
We have a reasonable suspicion that the grain is not
going to the starving people of the global South but is
being poured into the granaries of European countries.
That, we understand, is how Ukraine is paying for
weapons supplied by the West. Something similar
has already happened in the history of Ukraine. In
February 1918, German and Austrian troops entered
Ukrainian territory, ostensibly for protection against
Soviet Russia, in agreement with the Government of its
Central Council. In return, Kyiv undertook to supply
Berlin and Vienna with food, resulting in 37,000
wagons of provisions being dispatched.
I would appreciate it if our Western colleagues, in
particular the United States of America and the EU,
would publicly refute the theory about grain in exchange
for weapons, put forward by many experts today, and,
at the same time, explain in what way these supplies
actually help to strengthen the global food security that
they claim to be so concerned about.
In conclusion, I would like to comment on two
statements by the Secretary of State, who accused
Russia of blockading Mariupol and starving people
there and compared it with the blockade of Leningrad.
There is a great deal of evidence from Mariupol
residents themselves that the Azov fighters were
taking food away from them in the well-known Nazi
tradition. Our military was supplying humanitarian aid
at great personal risk, but our opponents remain deaf to
those testimonies.
Finally, the United States is calling for collective
action and mentioned yesterday’s meeting of some
ministers on the food crisis. That is very indicative of
the United States desire to foster coalitions of interests
instead of multilateralism, where decisions can be
made that the United States needs, instead of seeking
the compromises that everyone needs.
Mr. De Rivière (France) (spoke in French): I thank
the Secretary-General, Mr. Beasley, Mr. Qu Dongyu
and Ms. Menker for their briefings.
26/32

19/05/2022

The figures speak for themselves: the year 2022
will mark a dark record in terms of the number of people
who are food insecure due to conflict, the coronavirus
disease pandemic and climate change. The Sahel and
Lake Chad regions, South Sudan, the Horn of Africa,
Yemen, Syria and Afghanistan are the most affected.
However, Russia’s war of aggression against
Ukraine is also a war against global food security. It is
contributing to the increased risk of famine in the world.
Russia tries to make us believe, again just now,
that it is the sanctions adopted against it that are
destabilizing global food security. But let us be clear:
there are no sanctions against the food sector. Russia is
solely responsible.
It is Russia’s unjustified and unjustifiable war that
is preventing Ukraine from exporting its agricultural
output, disrupting global supply chains and driving up
prices, jeopardizing the accessibility of agricultural
products for the most vulnerable. It is the continuation
of the fighting that threatens farming in Ukraine and
the upcoming harvests.
The most urgent and effective response to the global
food crisis is an immediate cessation of hostilities and
of the Russian aggression, as well as the withdrawal of
Russian troops from Ukrainian territory.
Food exports by sea must resume from Ukrainian
ports, which are today blocked due to the war. We call
on Russia to provide the necessary guarantees to that
effect. France supports the efforts of the SecretaryGeneral to allow the export of such goods, as well as
the initiatives of the European Union to allow their
transport by land.
International cooperation must be strengthened
in order to counter the risks of famine and prevent
the disastrous effects of this war. That is why France
fully supports the initiative launched by the SecretaryGeneral through the United Nations Global Crisis
Response Group on Food, Energy and Finance.
That is also why, in its capacity as President of the
Council of the European Union, France launched the
Food and Agriculture Resilience Mission initiative,
endorsed by the European Council. It aims to better
regulate markets, guarantee the delivery of aid to the
most vulnerable countries and promote sustainable food
systems. We call on all interested public and private
stakeholders to join the initiative.
22-35447

19/05/2022

Maintenance of international peace and security

France continues to increase its financial
contribution to food aid, which this year has amounted
to €114 million and represents a 241 per cent increase
since 2018. Through its contributions to international
organizations, France is also supporting projects
led by civil society and the activities of the French
Development Agency.
France will continue to act to counter the negative
repercussions of Russia’s war against Ukraine on global
food security.
Mr. Costa Filho (Brazil): I would like to start by
thanking the Secretary-General, the Executive Director
of the World Food Programme (WFP), the DirectorGeneral of the Food and Agriculture Organization of the
United Nations (FAO), and the Chief Executive Officer
of Gro Intelligence for the eloquent and stark briefings
presented, which all attest to the urgency of the issue.
I therefore thank the United States for facilitating this
high-level debate today.
Armed conflict and hunger interact in complex
and multiple forms. Conflict disrupts supply chains
and food markets, impacts essential infrastructure
for trade and distribution and generates displacement
from otherwise productive lands; whereas hunger may
increase disputes for available resources and worsen
political and social instability.
It is no coincidence, therefore, that the majority of
chronically undernourished people live in countries
affected by conflict, or that people facing acute hunger
owing to conflict represent about three-quarters of
all those affected by it. Many of those countries, such
as Yemen and the Sudan, which were already at the
forefront of global food insecurity, face increasing
risks in ensuring an affordable supply of wheat, maize,
other staples and fertilizers.
The international food supply and production
chains were already stressed to the breaking point by
the pandemic. The situation has now been exacerbated
by the conflict in Ukraine. The conflict involves States
that significantly contribute to the global supply of food,
fuel and other critical inputs, such as fertilizers, all of
which have direct impacts on inflation. The conflict
is also affecting critical infrastructure and raising the
price of insurance.
Brazil is among the countries that have also drawn
attention to the risk that unilateral economic measures
adopted by a number of countries contribute to further

S/PV.9036

distorting the flow of foodstuffs. We do so in a manner
consistent with our approach since the beginning of
the conflict, in the sense that our efforts would best be
spent on working on joint solutions to problems rather
than to pointing fingers.
While acknowledging that sanctions have not
been applied to food and fertilizer, our point is that it
is undeniable that the unilateral economic measures
imposed have a secondary impact on the operation of
markets through sanctions on the financial and logistical
aspects of agricultural trade, thereby increasing costs
and hampering the availability of foodstuffs and
fertilizers. It seems somewhat futile to seek to address
the current difficulties while denying those secondary
impacts. It is also critical to remind ourselves that it is
developing countries that are most affected, especially
the most vulnerable ones, and are losing access to vital
food markets and suppliers.
As repeatedly pointed out by FAO and the WFP,
food insecurity is not a by-product of food scarcity, but
rather a lack of affordability and access. In the short
term, international donors must mobilize additional
resources to support countries most affected. Countries
must also refrain from the unnecessary accumulation
of food stocks, avoid trade-restrictive barriers, such
as quantitative export restrictions or prohibitions, and
abstain from imposing unilateral measures that may
endanger a country`s capacity to participate in free
international agricultural markets.
Brazil is concerned about the exponential growth
in agricultural subsidies in developed and developing
countries that are already major agricultural
powerhouses. As demonstrated by the Organization
for Economic Cooperation and Development, market
price support policies generally result in lower real
incomes and reduced access to food. Poor consumers
are disproportionately burdened.
In the longer term, we must ensure a truly
universal, rules-based, open, non-discriminatory and
equitable trade system. We must also redouble our
efforts to invest in innovation and technology, which
are key for sustainable, science-based intensification
of agriculture and livestock rearing. We are therefore
glad to be part of the Agriculture Innovation Mission
for Climate initiative, focused on promoting innovation
and investments in sustainable agriculture for the
coming years.

22-3544727/32

S/PV.9036

Maintenance of international peace and security

On the humanitarian front, we must ensure that
international agencies are adequately equipped and
financed so that food supplies can reach those who most
need it, especially in conflict situations. For more than
50 years, the WFP has been providing direct assistance
to many countries, and yet it faces budgetary and
supply constraints owing to rising food prices and the
increasing number of people in need of assistance. We
reiterate our call on donor countries to increase funding
and in-kind donations to the Rome-based agencies in
support of countries in armed-conflict situations.
However, emergency-food aid cannot be a
permanent solution. At some point, countries affected
by conflicts will need to return to international markets
and organize their food systems and supply chains in
order to avoid the repetition of the hunger-conflict cycle.
In order to do that, they will need adequate and targeted
financing to bring their national supply back to order,
as well as capacity-building and technology transfers.
We are very proud of our long-standing partnership
with WFP and the FAO to promote trilateral SouthSouth cooperation, including in countries affected
by conflict.
Parties involved in conflicts must respect resolution
2417 (2018) and uphold international humanitarian law.
That means condemning and refraining from the use
of starvation as a tool of warfare, as well as protecting
critical infrastructure for the production, storage and
transport of food and agricultural assets. Civilians
must not only be protected, but also be able to access
food supplies, in line with article 25 of the Universal
Declaration of Human Rights and with article 54 (2)
of the 1977 Protocol Additional I and article 14 of the
1977 Protocol Additional II to the Geneva Conventions
of 1949.
It is clear that food security needs a whole-ofsociety approach. In many instances, civil society
organizations are the ones capable of bridging the
gap between Governments and people forced into
precarious situations. Furthermore, we believe that
the private sector, including small- and medium-sized
enterprises and smallholder farmers, can be a catalyst
for investment and innovation.
We must break the vicious cycle of food insecurity
and armed conflict and step up our efforts in order to
meet our goal of zero hunger by 2030.
Mr. Zhang Jun (China) (spoke in Chinese): I
thank Secretary-General Guterres, Director-General
28/32

19/05/2022

Qu Dongyu and Executive Director Beasley for their
briefings. I also listened carefully to Ms. Menker’s
remarks. In the briefings, we were presented with
the current very troubling and disturbing state of
food security. The recommendations provided should
therefore be taken seriously.
Food security is a top priority, as it relates to
people’s well-being and livelihoods. It is also a longstanding challenge facing the international community.
The coronavirus disease pandemic, extreme weather
events, economic recession and geopolitical conflicts
are factors in play that have contributed to the sharp
increase in food prices, further accentuating the
imbalance between supply and demand. As a result,
developing countries are being hit the hardest.
We need to remain calm and objective and take
practical measures to consider the food security issue
holistically. We need to tackle, in a timely fashion,
the bottlenecks and breakpoints of food production
and supply chains and jointly address the challenge of
global food security.
First, we need to strengthen coordination in
order to stabilize the global food market. The current
food crisis is caused by reduced supply, disruption in
logistics and, in particular, rising prices. In order to
fill the supply gap, the international community needs
to work together to seek diversified food supplies and
maintain the smooth operation of the international trade
in agricultural commodities. It is important to bring
agricultural products and fertilizers from Ukraine,
Russia and Belarus back to the international market.
We welcome the efforts of the Secretary-General in
that regard.
In the context of globalization, any slight disruption
in the supply chain is quickly transmitted, generating a
ripple effect. Weaponizing economic interdependence
will only introduce artificially created difficulties and
amplify local risks. We call for a speedy removal of
the restrictions on food production and exportation
imposed by unilateral sanctions, so as to allow for
steady and unobstructed food production and supply
operation. The World Bank estimates that, for every
1 percentage point increase in food prices, 10 million
people worldwide will fall into extreme poverty. Major
food exporting countries and countries with major
food enterprises have a shared responsibility to combat
hoarding for profiteering purposes, to limit financial
speculation, to instil stability and confidence in the
22-35447

19/05/2022

Maintenance of international peace and security

S/PV.9036

market and to bring the steady rise in food prices
under control.

technology, improve agricultural infrastructure and
expand food availability.

Secondly, we must scale up emergency assistance
to help vulnerable countries weather the storm. In the
past year, some 193 million people in 53 countries have
faced food insecurity — the situation this year will only
worsen. When people do not have enough to eat, social,
and indeed even security, problems will arise. At present,
a number of countries are already experiencing foodrelated social unrest, which is a troubling development.
Afghanistan, Syria, Lebanon and countries in the Horn
of Africa and Sahel regions are highly dependent on
food imports. The international community — and
developed countries in particular — should increase
the provision of emergency food supplies and assistance
while providing timely and targeted help to vulnerable
groups such as women and children.

The three Rome-based United Nations agencies and
the international financial institutions should leverage
their respective strengths and play an active role in
situational analysis, policy advice and aid coordination
in order to provide greater support to developing
countries. Developed countries should reduce trade and
technical barriers and offer greater help to developing
countries in terms of capital, technology, market access
and capacity-building, thereby fulfilling their dutiful
role in building a fair, open and efficient global food
supply system.

It is important that international relief agencies be
guaranteed humanitarian access. Many countries are
under pressure in relation to the balance of payments
due to rising food prices. International financial
institutions and developed economies should strengthen
policy and financial support to developing countries in
particular difficulty. A certain country should adopt
responsible monetary policies fully taking into account
the spillover effects of its own interest rate adjustments
in order to avoid adding to the debt service burden of
the developing countries concerned, thereby weakening
their food purchasing power.
Thirdly, we need to promote profound
transformation and enhance the resilience of the global
food system. As with the many food crises that have
erupted since the twentieth century, the current crisis
has once again shed light on the structural problems of
the global food system. The world’s food supply-anddemand pattern is categorized by food production that is
highly concentrated in a few countries, while consumer
countries are geographically dispersed. That makes the
balance in food supply and demand highly vulnerable
to extreme weather events, pandemics, armed conflicts
and other emergency and unforeseen factors.
In order to strengthen the resilience of the global
food system so that it may better withstand risks, it
is crucial to have a long-term strategic perspective
and help developing countries enhance their selfsustaining capacity, increase agricultural and rural
inputs, accelerate progress in agricultural science and

Developed countries’ long-standing practice of
providing large agricultural subsidies have exacerbated
the uneven development of the international food
market, which de-incentivizes developing countries in
terms of grain production. That is an issue to which
we need to pay greater attention and find a solution.
In addition, in order to achieve the energy transition,
developed countries are engaging in large-scale cornand soybean-based biofuel development. Objectively,
that also competes with global food demand. We need
to develop a more integrated and balanced strategy on
that issue.
China has always made food provision for its
population a top priority in its national governance.
Home to 9 per cent of the world’s arable land, we
feed nearly a fifth of the total global population. We
have eliminated the absolute poverty that plagued
our country for thousands of years. We have also
helped other developing countries to improve their
agricultural production capacity through our foreign
aid programmes and South-South cooperation. China
has put forward the Global Development Initiative,
making food security a key area of cooperation. That
will make a positive contribution to the response to the
challenge of global food security.
In conclusion, I wish to emphasize that the world
today is facing multiple crises. There is no greater crisis
than the prevalence of hegemony and power politics,
which poses serious challenges to international equity
and justice. China’s President, Xi Jinping, has pointed out
that the futures of all countries are closely interlinked.
We should choose dialogue over confrontation and
tear down walls rather than build them. We should
pursue integration instead of decoupling and opt for
inclusiveness, not exclusion, while guiding the reform

22-3544729/32

S/PV.9036

Maintenance of international peace and security

of the global governance system based on the principles
of fairness and justice.
In this era plagued with risks and crises, initiating
a new Cold War, provoking bloc confrontation and
seeking decoupling in the economic, scientific and
technological domains will not solve any problems.
On the contrary, that would only bring more trouble
to the world. What the world needs most is true
multilateralism, with consistent, exemplary and
responsible actions by major Powers and equal and
inclusive global cooperation where we all work and
share together.
The President: I wish to remind all speakers to limit
their statements to no more than four minutes in order to
enable the Council to carry out its work expeditiously.
Flashing lights on the collars of the microphones will
prompt speakers to bring their remarks to a close after
four minutes.
I now give the floor to the Minister for Foreign
Affairs of Pakistan.
Mr. Zardari (Pakistan): I am honoured and
humbled to represent my country as Foreign Minister
at this forum. Pakistan welcomes today’s timely debate
on global food security and conflict.
Throughout history, hunger and war have been
grim handmaidens. Although the world has progressed
in promoting prosperity, the systemic causes of conflict
and poverty have yet to be overcome. Inequality and
insecurity are the hallmarks of our era. In this decade of
action to achieve the Sustainable Development Goals,
we have instead confronted a series of disasters — the
coronavirus disease pandemic, economic recession,
spiralling prices and the escalating impacts of climate
change. Those disasters have reversed global growth
and, for the first time in 30 years, increased poverty
and hunger.
Meanwhile, with rising great Power rivalries,
political dialogue has frequently frozen, and the Security
Council has often been paralysed. Old conflicts have
festered, and new conflicts have emerged, eroding the
edifice of the world order established 76 years ago by
the principles of the Charter of the United Nations.
Indeed, the United Nations was founded for that
very purpose — to resolve conflicts, end wars, make
peace and battle hunger, poverty and desperation. Some
80 per cent of the 800 million undernourished people
and the 40 million facing famine inhabit countries riven
30/32

19/05/2022

by conflict or emerging from conflict. Just yesterday,
we participated in the ministerial meeting on the Global
Food Security Call to Action. That initiative will go a
long way in addressing the immediate crises of food
security, and the leadership behind such humanitarian
efforts must be appreciated. The Call to Action will
help ramp up food production, help keep supply chains
open and address blockages, mobilize financial and
agricultural resources to where they are needed, help
poor farmers expand local production and much more.
Pakistan looks forward to playing its active part in this
bold Call to Action. We also look to the United Nations
to provide the leadership to address the root causes of
food insecurity and conflict.
The people of Ukraine go hungry due to the ongoing
conflict. Some 95 per cent of the people of Afghanistan
are under the threat of poverty as a direct result of
conflict. The people in the occupied territories in
Palestine and Indian-occupied Jammu and Kashmir are
constantly imprisoned by perpetual conflict. They are
arbitrarily and inhumanely suffering immense misery,
including hunger. Kashmir has become a symbol of the
dysfunction of this institution and the Council. The
actions on 5 August 2019 and 5 May 2022 by India in
illegally occupied Jammu and Kashmir are not only an
assault on the people of Kashmir, but an assault on the
United Nations, the Security Council and its resolutions
and the Fourth Geneva Convention. They highlight the
inaction of this body as the internationally recognized
disputed status of the region is undermined, and as the
Muslim majority of Kashmir are being turned into a
minority on their own land, in their own home. It leads
the youth of Kashmir to ask the question who will
resolve the conflict. Who will deliver the peace they
were promised? We challenge those who worry about
food security to resolve the Kashmir dispute, open the
doors to peace in South Asia and watch how the farmers
of Pakistan and India can feed the world.
Even those not directly involved in a conflict pay
the price of war. The conflict in Ukraine means that
many across the world will become food insecure and
risk going hungry. Pakistan relied heavily on wheat and
fertilizer from the region. Our farmers are suffering,
and so are our people. The price of such conflicts is
paid at the petrol pump and at the grocery store. For
everyone who finds it difficult to make ends meet,
things just became much more difficult.
We are in the middle of the deadliest pandemic of
our time. Millions have died; people continue to die.
22-35447

19/05/2022

Maintenance of international peace and security

S/PV.9036

The health and economic toll of the pandemic will
outlast the pandemic itself. Our continents are sinking.
Our planet is under threat. Is it not the time to rise above
the conflicts of man and face the threats to humankind?

requests to facilitate aid to Ukraine. For example, we
promptly responded to the request of the World Food
Programme to establish a presence in Romania to
facilitate emergency aid to Ukraine.

They say history repeats itself — first, as tragedy
and then as farce. They say that when new wars end,
old wars return. At the end of the Cold War, we saw
the beginning of what was to become the new war.
Afghanistan was abandoned, and out of the wreckage
emerged the Taliban, Al-Qaida, extremism and
terrorism. Today Afghanistan runs the risk of being
abandoned yet again, and we find ourselves at the
precipice of what many fear may be a new era of great
Power conflict.

The consequences of this irrational war are
multidimensional, and the need for ensuring food
security becomes clearer every day. We already face
production and export challenges and rising prices.
Food and energy import bills are already at record
levels. In an environment reeling from high levels of
socioeconomic stress, the increase in food prices might
generate effects such as social unrest, as it primarily
affects people with low income.

Pakistan has seen the costs of war up close. We are
exhausted by conflict. We just witnessed how, after
decades of conflict, ultimately dialogue and diplomacy
were the path to a conclusion. From our own experience,
we most humbly and respectfully appeal to the Council
to deploy dialogue and diplomacy in the pursuit of
peace before, and not after, the next great war.
Save another generation of humankind from the
misery of conflict, and then watch as a new generation
unlocks its true potential. We can rise to the challenges
of our time. We can be the generation that ends hunger.
We can be the generation that saves our planet. We can
be the generation that breaks the cycle, if the Council
allows us to do so.
The President: I now give the floor to the Minister
for Foreign Affairs of Romania.
Mr. Aurescu (Romania): Romania commends
the initiative of the United States to convene an open
debate on this timely topic, especially in the current
dire circumstances generated by the brutal, unjustified
and unprovoked illegal military aggression of the
Russian Federation against Ukraine.
Romania is the NATO and European Union
member State that shares the longest border with
Ukraine. We have been on the front line, responding to
the humanitarian crisis caused by the invasion. Since
the beginning of the war, more than 1 million refugees
have crossed the Ukrainian-Romanian border, and the
humanitarian support offered by Romania has been very
consistent. The humanitarian hub for the collection and
distribution of international humanitarian aid has been
functioning since March, near the Romanian-Ukrainian
border. We have also responded to international

There is no better time for considerable action
to be taken to address food insecurity. It is crucial to
stress the importance of food systems for progress
to be made on issues related to climate development,
finance and other global priorities. The grain market
is already severely affected following the Russian
aggression against Ukraine, given the market share of
the two countries in world trade in grain and seeds.
The response of the United Nations and international
financial institutions is essential for ensuring global
food security.
As an immediate response to this challenge,
Romanian authorities are facilitating the transit of
products from Ukraine through the ports of Galati,
on the Danube River, and Constanța, the largest port
on the Black Sea coast. Romania is in one of the best
geographic positions to act as a transit and export hub
in that context.
We are looking at all possible solutions in order to
ensure better access to Romanian ports on the Danube
River and the Constanța port. Since the start of the
Russian invasion of Ukraine, Constanța has become
the main gateway for Ukrainian grain shipments to
the outside world. So far, over 240,000 tons of grain
have been exported from Ukraine through the port
of Constanța.
I use this opportunity to stress the need for
wider international efforts, such as a coalition of the
willing, to mobilize as much support as possible for
the creation of a transport corridor, including maritime
access, for Ukrainian products, especially grain, to
third destinations, including by using routes through
Romania such as the port of Constanța.

22-3544731/32

S/PV.9036

Maintenance of international peace and security

Among other measures of support, Romanian
authorities have also liberalized transport conditions for
Ukrainian exports, especially for agricultural products.
Therefore, Romania is a relevant contributor to regional
and global stability and food security by supporting the
export of the Ukrainian grains to those in need.
As an example of our further engagement,
starting in 2023, Romania will host a regional
agrometeorological centre for Europe, as approved
by the World Meteorological Organization. The main
goal of the centre is to support sustainable agricultural
production, and it will play an important role in the
regional efforts for climate change adaptation.
With regard to Russia’s allegations, which we just
heard in this Chamber, that there is a so-called “deal”
between the West and Ukraine to deliver weapons for
grain, let me recall that this is not the first time that
Russia is making such totally false accusations. For
instance, on 1 May, the Russian Defence Ministry stated
that Ukraine was massively exporting grain through

32/32

19/05/2022

Romanian roads, rail and on the Danube in exchange
for weapons and ammunition. The Romanian Ministry
of Defence promptly dismissed those statements as
false and a gross distortion of reality.
Our future decisions and actions need to be aimed
at building safe, secure, accessible and sustainable food
systems at the global level. It is crucial that all of us
make an enhanced global commitment towards the
One Health approach. We believe that only through a
strong commitment to action from world Governments,
the private sector and civil society can we achieve the
Sustainable Development Goals and create a more
resilient and sustainable world.
The President: There are still a number of speakers
remaining on my list for this meeting.
Given the lateness of the hour, with the concurrence
of the members of the Security Council, I intend to
suspend the meeting until 3.15 p.m.
The meeting was suspended at 2.15 p.m.

22-35447
