S/PV.8027

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-second year

8027th meeting

Friday, 18 August 2017, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Aboulatta . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Egypt)

Members:

Bolivia (Plurinational State of). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ethiopia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Italy. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Japan. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kazakhstan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Senegal . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Sweden . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ukraine. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Uruguay. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Llorentty Solíz
Mr. Shen Bo
Mr. Alemu
Mrs. Gueguen
Mr. Cardi
Mr. Bessho
Mr. Sadykov
Mr. Nebenzia
Mr. Seck
Ms. Schoulgin-Nyoni
Mr. Fesko
Mr. Allen
Ms. Sison
Mr. Bermúdez

Agenda
The situation in the Middle East

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

17-26241 (E)
*1726241*

S/PV.8027

The situation in the Middle East

The meeting was called to order at 10.10 a.m.
Tribute to the victims of the terrorist attack in
Barcelona, Spain
The President (spoke in Arabic): On behalf of
the members of the Security Council, I should like to
condemn in the strongest terms the unconscionable
terrorist attack in Barcelona, Spain, which targeted
innocent civilians. The members of the Security Council
express their deepest condolences to the families of
those killed and their sympathy to the people and the
Government of Spain. I ask Council members now to
rise in a minute of silence for the victims.
The members of the Council observed a minute
of silence.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in the Middle East
The President (spoke in Arabic): In accordance
with rule 37 of the Council’s provisional rules of
procedure, I invite the representative of Yemen to
participate in this meeting.
On behalf of the Council, I welcome His Excellency
Mr. Abdulmalik Al-Mikhlafi, Deputy Prime Minister and
Minister for Foreign Affairs for the Republic of Yemen.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the following
briefers to participate in this meeting: Mr. Stephen
O’Brien, Under-Secretary-General for Humanitarian
Affairs and Emergency Relief Coordinator; and
Mr. Ismail Ould Cheikh Ahmed, Special Envoy of the
Secretary-General for Yemen.
Mr. Ould Cheikh Ahmed is joining the meeting via
video-teleconference from Amman.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I now give the floor to Mr. O’Brien.
Mr. O’Brien: This is my tenth statement on
Yemen to the Chamber since I took up my post in June
2015, only a few months after the crisis in Yemen had
escalated. I have visited the country three times during
my tenure — Aden twice, Ibb, Sana’a, by mountainous
road to to Hudaydah city and port, Amran, and in an
2/13

18/08/2017

attempt to get to Taiz, which was aborted after being
caught up in gunfire. Wherever and whatever side of
this horrific fight, and above all for those of neither
side caught up in this maelstrom of fear, death and
destruction, I have been deeply moved by the terrible
human suffering everywhere in Yemen.
It grieves me that in these past two years, and despite
my and my team’s best efforts, I have been unable to
report any significant improvement in the deplorable,
avoidable and completely man-made catastrophe that
is ravaging the country. On the contrary, the Yemeni
people’s suffering has relentlessly intensified. Today,
millions of people in Yemen are facing a triple tragedy:
the spectre of famine, the world’s largest ever single-year
cholera outbreak, and the daily deprivation and injustice
of a brutal conflict that the world is allowing to drag
on and on — all totally preventable, avoidable and
treatable. This human tragedy is deliberate and wanton;
it is political tragedy, but with will and with courage,
which are both in short supply, it is stoppable.
The impact of this conflict on the basic needs and
dignity of ordinary Yemenis every day is clear. We have
been over the harrowing figures time and again in the
Chamber. Seventeen million Yemenis do not know if
or where they will get their next meal; nearly 7 million
are facing the threat of famine; and nearly 16 million
lack access to water or sanitation. With numbers of this
scale, there is a pernicious risk that we may become
mired in a statistical fog or that we may begin to take an
overly technical view of this crisis, almost as if it were
a natural phenomenon. It is not.
We must remember that these figures represent
human faces and enormous suffering — parents
unable to feed their families, children succumbing to
malnutrition or disease, and countless other tragedies.
They represent the heart-breaking story of a six-yearold girl — and her only dignity left is that I have been
asked not to give her name — whose family spent six
months sleeping in a hole in the ground at night in order
to avoid air strikes near their home. This little girl was
already suffering from malnutrition, and her condition
became severe while hiding with her family. After
several rounds of treatment she was recovering, only to
contract and die of acute watery diarrhoea shortly after
her release from hospital.
For the sake of that innocent child and countless
others, the appalling statistics of this crisis must not
obscure the central fact that Yemen’s catastrophe
17-26241

18/08/2017

The situation in the Middle East

is completely man-made. It is a direct result of the
deliberate policies, tactics and actions of the parties
and their powerful proxies to the conflict, and it is
completely preventable.
Before the escalation of conflict, Yemen was making
progress against its long-standing challenges, not least
the kleptocracy under which it was ruled and its people
exploited for so long. In 2014, fewer people were going
hungry than three years earlier. Nutrition was improving
with fewer children stunted or underweight. School
enrolment was rising. All of that has now been sharply
reversed, and with that reversal has come the near total
collapse of public institutions that would otherwise
help Yemenis to cope. Today, only 45 per cent of health
facilities are fully functioning. Sanitation systems have
mostly ground to a halt. Approximately 1.2 million
public employees, including 30,000 health workers and
193,000 teachers, have been paid erratically or not at
all since October 2016, thereby accelerating the decline
in essential services and depriving nearly a quarter of
the population — civil servants and their families — of
a reliable income. We see the consequences of that
collapse in people’s rising needs across all sectors,
and perhaps most dramatically in the current cholera
outbreak, which has spread rapidly across Yemen in
the wake of degraded sanitation systems and shattered
health facilities.
The conduct of the war continues to be really
vicious and brutal, with frequent complete disregard for
international humanitarian law, principles or just the
basic norms of human behaviour. Even wars have rules,
and even wars have their limits, or at least they should
have. Earlier this month, reported air strikes in Sa’dah
killed 12 civilians and injured 10 others. The death
toll included six children killed in their family home.
Investigations continue, although we know already
that only the Saudi-led coalition has the means to
carry out aerial attacks. In Taiz indiscriminate shelling
into populated areas continues as a grotesque feature
of the conflict, mostly by forces affiliated with the
Houthis or former President Saleh. Over the past two
years, those incidents have reportedly killed or injured
dozens of civilians, including children, and damaged
civilian infrastructure.
In the absence of accountability mechanisms
or a concerted push by Member States for a political
settlement, the violence is intensifying. During 2017,
the number of air strikes per month has been three
times higher than it was the previous year, and monthly

S/PV. 8027

reports of armed clashes have increased by more than
50 per cent. All that has been said and the outrage
that has been expressed here around the Security
Council table have only produced a dramatically worse
situation perpetrated by the stubborn, brutal parties
and their proxies to this cynical and inhuman manmade catastrophe.
Parties to the conflict and their proxies also
continue to restrict the flow of essential commercial
and humanitarian supplies and staff. Yemen imports
more than 90 per cent of its staple food and nearly all
medicine and fuel, which is urgently needed to pump
clean drinking water and run hospital generators. The
United Nations Verification and Inspection Mechanism
(UNVIM) was established in May 2016 to facilitate
critical commercial imports, yet the Government of
Yemen and the coalition at times bypass UNVIM by
unilaterally denying or excessively delaying entry to
vessels carrying essential cargo. Member States must
determinedly do more to champion that mechanism. It
is simply wrong to insist that those cargos go to Aden
and not to Hudaydah.
The cruel and baseless closure of Sana’a airport
to civilian traffic by the Saudi-led coalition is another
restriction blocking thousands of Yemenis from
travelling abroad for medical care. Commercial flights
served Sana’a in the first year of the conflict, and I do
not see why they should not immediately resume, at the
very least, for humanitarian cases. It was said recently
that the Yemen Government could see no raison why
Sana’a airport should open as there were flights to
Aden and road access to Sana’a.
I flew on the first United Nations Humanitarian Air
Service flight to Aden. I have been talking to the truck
drivers on that route. That is not a real solution with
regard to the quantities and urgency even approaching
the scale of the human emergency that we are trying
to overcome despite such nasty, cynical machinations
supported by parties to the conflict and their proxies
where there is complete lock-down control of the
airspace. Let us be clear that it is a fact that most of
the need is in the northern and not the southern part of
Yemen. It is a fact that Sana’a and Hudaydah and not
Aden best serve the north.
I therefore also call on all parties to the conflict
and their proxies to ensure that humanitarian staff can
quickly enter Yemen and to avoid any bureaucratic or
administrative requirements that may unduly hinder

17-262413/13

S/PV.8027

The situation in the Middle East

the rapid delivery of assistance or delay the deployment
of aid workers. Once in Yemen, critical commercial or
humanitarian supplies and staff must be able to move to
their destination nearest to the human needs of the most
vulnerable without interference. Too often, the de facto
authorities in Sana’a or local officials in areas under
their control block, delay or otherwise interfere with
humanitarian action. Those restrictions are especially
prevalent in front-line areas, thereby preventing or
delaying partners from reaching the most vulnerable.
Local officials in areas controlled by Sana’a de facto
authorities, at times, also seek to influence the selection
of beneficiaries. We have also seen repeated incidents
of aid diversion in areas under the control of Sana’a de
facto authorities, especially in Taiz governorate.
At a time when Yemen is facing the real near threat
of famine, local authorities in areas controlled by Sana’a
de facto authorities have also hindered humanitarian
assessment missions that are needed so as to establish
the necessary evidence base for humanitarian
assistance. Despite my repeated calls to the de facto
authorities in Sana’a to facilitate imports of armoured
vehicles and other equipment critical to humanitarian
action, progress remains painfully slow. Many of those
incidents are eventually resolved through discussions
with the de facto authorities, but the time lost represents
an unacceptable burden for people who desperately
need help, and directly causes avoidable death.
Humanitarian partners continue to reach the most
vulnerable people through a well-led, principled and
coordinated response despite extraordinary challenges.
More than 120 partners have assisted 5.9 million people
this year in every governorate of Yemen through United
Nations-coordinated humanitarian action. The cholera
response has established 222 treatment centres and 926
oral rehydration points across the country. Despite those
achievements, partners are struggling with funding
shortages. The Yemen humanitarian response plan has
received only 39 per cent of its revised requirements
of $2.3 billion for 2017 although we are already two
thirds of the way through the year. I stress that we now
urgently need Member States and other partners to
provide full funding to the humanitarian response plan.
There is no time to lose, and even if all the fighting and
the restrictions were stopped within the next hour, we
would continue to need that amount. Let us be clear that
the sum of $2.3 billion is not an inflated negotiating
number. It is a careful and collective best estimate
of the cost of meeting the needs of Yemenis that the
4/13

18/08/2017

parties and their proxies either do not want or do not
care for them to get.
Humanitarian action alone cannot and should not
replace the commercial or public sectors in Yemen,
nor can it resolve the underlying crisis. An end to the
violence, a cessation in hostilities and a sustainable
political agreement are the building blocks of Yemen’s
peaceful future. But while those are being sought,
humanitarians must be able to carry out their work
and provide aid and support to the millions of Yemeni
people in desperate need. The international community
must take meaningful action. I renew my call for the
Council’s support not only with additional funding, but
to address the following points.
First, we must ensure that all ports — land, sea and
air — are open to civilian — including commercial — traffic.
This includes supporting UNVIM, lifting restrictions
on commercial imports, immediately re-opening
Sana’a airport and allowing delivery of desperately
needed mobile cranes to Hudaydah port, which handles
some 70 per cent of imports into Yemen and is the
closest port of entry to the majority of people who
need humanitarian assistance. The Council must not be
swayed or deterred by those saying Aden — or other
ports — is good enough.
Secondly, we must influence parties to the conflict
to respect international humanitarian and human
rights law. This entails all Member States using all
possible means of leverage and influence to ensure
that the parties and their proxies protect civilians
and infrastructure, respecting the fundamental rules
of distinction, proportionality and precaution. It also
includes facilitating entry of life-saving supplies into
Yemen and their rapid distribution without interference.
I would like to be clear: of course, the evidence is being
gathered to hold hideous breaches of international
humanitarian law to account one day.
Thirdly, civil servant salaries must be paid. Recent
funding in support of essential services is a temporary
measure that will shore up some services in priority
locations. But only full payment of civil servant
salaries across the country — a basic obligation of the
State — will halt institutional collapse. This collapse
is in no one’s interest and it exacerbates all the death,
disease and human damage.
Fourthly, accountability must be strengthened. More
broadly, there must be accountability for the appalling
conduct of this entire war. We must not get hung up on
17-26241

18/08/2017

The situation in the Middle East

the semantics of who is a party, who is a proxy and who
denies being involved. All the perpetrators and their
facilitators of this hideous Yemen war know who they
are. The evidence of their conduct is being gathered,
preserved and prepared for holding each and all to
account, to seek to avert the abominable confidence
that the sense of impunity is currently motivating
them to perpetrate this horror on the Yemeni people.
We therefore welcome all steps towards improving this
accountability. The United Nations High Commissioner
for Human Rights has rightly called for the creation
of an international independent body to investigate
alleged violations of international humanitarian and
human rights law. I urge the Human Rights Council to
act on this call.
Fifthly, we must demand an immediate cessation
of hostilities, a return to negotiations and a political
settlement. Parties to the conflict have brought ruin
and deprivation to millions of Yemenis for more
than two years. There is no military solution to this
conflict, and the international community must
push for a political settlement based on peaceful
negotiations, and, indeed, compromises. Not to admit
that fact is to deliberately condemn many more Yemeni
people — girls, boys, women and men — to death,
damage, fear and hopelessness in this deliberate, manmade human catastrophe.
On this day, of all days, World Humanitarian
Day, I straight-forwardly ask members of the Security
Council: how much shame can we all, members of the
Council in particular, keep accepting on our failure to
rein in the parties and proxies to this heinous war and
to start meeting the needs and the legitimate hopes that
every Yemeni person should be allowed to have and
that we would demand as the very minimum for each
and every one of us?
The President (spoke in Arabic): I thank Mr. O’Brien
for his briefing.
I now give the floor to Mr. Ould Cheikh Ahmed.
Mr. Ould Cheikh Ahmed (spoke in Arabic):
Yemen today continues to traverse a critical and
agonizing period, as civilians pay a terrible price
in an unending power struggle. Those who survive
the fighting face death by famine or disease, as the
economic situation continues to deteriorate and the
humanitarian conditions worsens.

S/PV. 8027

Military clashes have continued in several
governorates around the country. On 4 August,
according to several field reports, an air strike in the
Madha area of Sa’dah governorate resulted in the death
of eight civilians. On 20 August, another air strike on
the Mawza district of Taiz killed more than 20 civilians.
Houthi forces and forces loyal to Ali Abdullah Saleh
continued to shell residential areas in Taiz, inflicting
heavy losses among civilians who have already been
subjected to much hardship over the past two years. In
addition, several ballistic missiles have been launched
into Saudi Arabia.
There were also reports of attacks on ships in
Mokha port. Those attacks are a further evidence of
the increasing threat to maritime security in the Red
Sea. This threat puts the much-needed humanitarian
and commercial supplies in peril.
We have also observed continued hostilities along
the Yemeni-Saudi borders as well as in Hajjah, Midi and
Ma’rib. Fighting escalated in western Taiz, around the
Khalid Bin Al Walid camp and the Taiz-Al Hudaydah
road. Moreover, forces of the Government of Yemen,
backed by the United Arab Emirates and United States
Special Forces, have launched a military offensive in
Shabwa targeting Al-Qaida in the Arabian Peninsula
fighters. I reiterate that the longer the conflict goes on,
the higher the risk that terrorist groups will spread and
the stronger their influence will become.
Uncontrolled migration to Yemen through the
Gulf of Aden has continued relentlessly with tragic
consequences. On 9 and 10 August, the International
Organization for Migration reported that more than 41
migrants died after they had been forced by traffickers
to abandon the boats and jump into the sea off the coast
of Shabwa.
In brief, death looms for Yemenis by air, land and
sea. Diseases and epidemics are at unprecedented levels,
as the Council has just heard from the Under-Secretary
General for Humanitarian Affairs and Emergency
Relief Coordinator, my colleague, Mr. Stephen O’Brien.
I would like to commend Stephen for the role he has
played. Since this is his last meeting with the Security
Council on Yemen, I would also like to commend him
for his courage and continued support for and visits to
the most dangerous country in the world.
Those who have survived cholera will continue to
suffer the consequences of what I call the “political
cholera” that infects Yemen and continues to obstruct

17-262415/13

S/PV.8027

The situation in the Middle East

the road towards peace. Over the last few weeks, I
have visited Egypt, the Islamic Republic of Iran, the
Sultanate of Oman, the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia,
and the United Arab Emirates. In these visits, I met
with several Ministers for Foreign Affairs as well
as other senior officials from Yemen and the region.
There is still consensus on the need to reach a political
solution for the Yemeni crisis and to support the United
Nations-sponsored peace process under the auspices of
the Secretary-General. The international community
is unified in support of a peaceful settlement, but the
parties to the conflict continue to miss this opportunity.
Certain parties continue to take advantage of internal
divisions and place personal interests ahead of the
urgent need for peace in Yemen.
The political tensions in Yemen continue to
undermine the State institutions on which many
Yemenis depend. Immediate measures are needed to
stop the deterioration of the humanitarian situation
and save the country from further violence, epidemics,
famine and other preventable and controllable crises.
We are currently urging the parties to agree to measures
that will preserve the country’s vital institutions and
help, in the first phase, to secure the continued flow
of humanitarian aid, pay salaries to civil servants and
bring the smuggling of weapons under control.
The proposal seeks to ensure the safe and
uninterrupted functioning of the port of Hudaydah,
which is presently a key artery for the entire Yemeni
economy. It includes a practical plan to hand over the port
to a committee of respected Yemenis with security and
the economic expertise, who would be working under
United Nations guidance and oversight. The committee
would work to prevent the smuggling of weapons and
ensure the safety and security of the port’s operations
and infrastructure. The committee would also ensure
the smooth flow of humanitarian and commercial
goods through the port to all parts of Yemen, as well as
the transfer of port revenues to support the resumption
of salary payments to civil servants.
In parallel, we are working with the parties on
reopening Sana’a International Airport to commercial
flights. That is a vital and fundamental component of the
proposals, as it would make it possible for the wounded
and sick to seek treatment abroad and permit students
to continue their studies outside of Yemen. It would also
ease imports and exports and improve the conditions of
Yemeni citizens. There should also be immediate steps
to reopen roads to and from Taiz for humanitarian and
6/13

18/08/2017

commercial supplies, as many representatives of Taiz
civil society have demanded. The denial of access to
basic goods for the people of Taiz has gone on too long.
Ensuring freedom of movement for civilians is required
by international humanitarian law, but is also called for
out of respect for the long-standing values of solidarity
and compassion of Yemeni society.
Those initiatives should contribute to the
rebuilding of confidence between the parties and
serve as a first step towards a new national cessation
of hostilities and the resumption of discussions for a
full and comprehensive solution consisting of security
and political components based on the Kuwait talks. I
know that Yemenis are demanding those steps, and I
hope that the parties to the conflict will embrace them
as soon as possible.
I met with the President of Yemen, Mr. Abdrabuh
Mansour Hadi Mansour, a few days ago, and we
discussed the ideas and proposals that I presented. The
Ministers for Foreign Affairs of Egypt, Iran, Oman,
Saudi Arabia and the United Arab Emirates expressed
their full support for my proposals, which also received
backing from the Gulf Cooperation Council and the
League of Arab States.
Last month — and I informed members of
this following my open briefing last month (see
S/PV.7999) — I received a letter from Ansar Allah and
the General People’s Congress in which they reaffirmed
the need to build upon what was discussed in the Kuwait
talks. I have invited them to meet with me in a third
country in order to discuss those proposals and turn
them into an agreement that includes concrete steps to
avoid further bloodshed and alleviate human suffering. I
hope they will commit to join those meetings as soon as
possible. Every day we spend lingering without serious
action towards a solution means more destruction and
greater loss of life.
Yemen’s path towards peace is clear, and actionable
proposals are ready that will yield tangible benefits
and serve to build confidence between the parties.
International support for a full and comprehensive
solution and for the efforts of the United Nations is
unwavering. What is missing at this point is for the
parties to the conflict — without any delays, excuses or
procrastination — to demonstrate their determination
to end the war and put the national interests above any
personal gains.
17-26241

18/08/2017

The situation in the Middle East

Placing blame on the United Nations, the Special
Envoy or the international community will not make
peace. Postponement and posturing for the media do
not end the war, but only serve to deepen the rift in the
country. A solid foundation for peace needs to be built
from within Yemeni society. A society at peace, with
competent and responsive institutions, will be built
only through partnership and inclusiveness and policies
that respond to the demands of the people throughout
the country, from north to south. Those aspirations will
need to be reflected in a constitution that protects all
citizens — youth, children, men and women — from all
political and ideological backgrounds.
Those who want peace should find solutions, not
search for pretexts. It is no secret that there are many
merchants of war in Yemen who do not want peace. We
will continue to work with Yemenis, including human
rights groups, women’s groups and civil society, to
mainstream the language of peace and reach a political
solution that provides safety and stability to the Yemeni
people, who deserve no less.
The President (spoke in Arabic): I thank Mr. Ould
Cheikh Ahmed for his briefing.
I shall now give the floor to those Council members
who wish to make statements.
Mr. Bermúdez (Uruguay) (spoke in Spanish):
I should like to thank the Under-Secretary-General
for Humanitarian Affairs and Emergency Relief
Coordinator, Mr. Stephen O’Brien, as well as the
Special Envoy of the Secretary-General for Yemen,
Mr. Ismail Ould Cheikh Ahmed, for their informative
and exhaustive briefings. I would also like to welcome
and thank Mr. Abdulmalik Al-Mikhlafi, Deputy
Prime Minister and Minister for Foreign Affairs of the
Republic of Yemen, for his presence in the Chamber.
Uruguay recognizes the intense work being done
by the staff and institutions involved in humanitarian
assistance activities in Yemen, which provide aid
to millions of people in need and carry out that
praiseworthy task in very hostile conditions.
We commend the Egyptian presidency for having
convened this meeting, which lends visibility to the
tragic situation in Yemen — one from which we all
hope that country will soon emerge. This meeting
also gives greater transparency to the work of the
Security Council.

S/PV. 8027

Because tomorrow marks the observance of World
Humanitarian Day, I would like to take this opportunity
to congratulate the Office for the Coordination of
Humanitarian Affairs for its “Not a Target” campaign,
which we support enthusiastically. We would also like
to highlight today the fact that schools and hospitals
are not a target. Civilians are not a target. And
humanitarian workers are not a target. Humanitarian
workers in every conflict know that they have our
respect and admiration.
Uruguay sees no solution to the bloody conflict
in Yemen other than one of a negotiation process in
which all parties involved participate, that is conducted
by Yemenis themselves and that leads to a political
solution to the crisis. There is no military solution for
this conflict, as we have said so many times.
Civilians are paying the highest price of the war
with their own lives. Putting an end to the suffering
caused by this man-made crisis is possible. However,
that will happen only when the parties return to the
negotiation table — without preconditions and in good
faith — and agree to end the armed conflict.
It is time that the parties resume constructive
peace talks, without any more delay. The actors have
to accept that, to break the deadlock, concessions will
have to be made. In that regard, Uruguay reiterates
its call to resume dialogue and comply fully with
the commitment to cease hostilities, as the first step
towards the establishment of peace. Also, countries that
have an influence on the parties should collaborate in
the search for a peaceful settlement of the conflict.
The long-standing impasse in the peace process
and the lack of concrete results are undermining
the humanitarian situation in the country, which is
exacerbated by hunger and the cholera epidemic,
which is deteriorating every day. It is estimated that
approximately 500,000 persons have been stricken
by the illness. One person dies of cholera every hour
in Yemen.
Regrettably, the widespread violations of
international humanitarian law and international human
rights law committed by all combatants have become the
common denominator in Yemen. Protecting civilians,
especially the most vulnerable, has become critical and
fundamental in this context of barbarism and pitiless
warfare. Lamentably, women in Yemen continue to
suffer deep-rooted discrimination. They do not receive
adequate protection against sexual and gender violence.

17-262417/13

S/PV.8027

The situation in the Middle East

They are victims of abuses and degrading treatment.
This situation is exacerbated by the prolonged war,
insecurity and massive internal movements, in which
women are particularly vulnerable.
We encourage the Government of Yemen to
establish national monitoring and reporting mechanisms
to document violations of the human rights of women,
including sexual violence, and ensure accountability
for those responsible. Moreover, crimes committed
against children have exponentially increased in
this endless conflict. Children in Yemen spend their
childhood in the midst of poverty, hunger, disease and
indiscriminate attacks committed against them by all
parties to the armed conflict. Many have been killed,
mutilated or recruited.
It is critical that all perpetrators of these crimes
be added to the list annexed to the annual report of
the Secretary-General to be issued soon, in order to
clearly denounce before the world all those countries
and entities that have committed violations against
children, in open contempt not only of international law
but of the most elemental rules of humanity.
Those responsible for serious violations of
international humanitarian law should be held
accountable for their crimes. Accountability is crucial
to resolving the conflict and achieving lasting peace. As
we did in the briefing in July (see S/PV.7999), Uruguay
reiterates that the Council has the means and authority
to establish impartial and transparent investigatory
mechanisms for reported violations of international
humanitarian law in Yemen, as committed by both
parties to the dispute.
I wish to briefly refer to the presidential statement
adopted 9 August (S/PRST/2017/14), which highlights
the unprecedented level of global humanitarian need and
the threat of famine looming over more than 20 million
people in some countries, including Yemen. Conflict and
violence have devastating humanitarian consequences,
hamper effective humanitarian responses and are a
primary cause of the famine ravaging the country.
In conclusion, I would like to call on all the parties
to the conflict to agree to an immediate cessation of
hostilities so as to facilitate unhindered and permanent
access to humanitarian aid as well as the resumption of
political negotiations.
Mr. Llorentty Solíz (Plurinational State of Bolivia)
(spoke in Spanish): Beforetturning to my statement, I
8/13

18/08/2017

would like to say that the Government and the people
of the Plurinational State of Bolivia express their deep
regret and heartfelt condolences to the Government and
the people of the Kingdom of Spain for those killed and
wounded as a result of the terrorist attack carried out
yesterday in Barcelona. We also express our solidarity
with the families of the victims, and we hope that
the wounded recover soon. Even as we meet, we are
receiving reports of attacks in Finland and Burkina Faso,
which once again serve to highlight the responsibility
of the Security Council to resolve this and other matters
linked to international peace and security.
We welcome the briefings of the Special Envoy
of the Secretary-General for Yemen, Mr. Ismail Ould
Cheikh Ahmed, and by the Under-Secretary-General
for Humanitarian Affairs, Mr. Stephen O’Brien, to
whom we express our full support for the work that they
carry out. We also welcome the Deputy Prime Minister
and Minister for Foreign Affairs of the Republic of
Yemen, Mr. Abdulmalik Abduljalil Ali Al-Mikhlafi.
Despite the repeated pronouncements of the
Council on the situation in Yemen, it continues to
deteriorate. Unfortunately, many elements are coming
together in this crisis to cause it to continue to worsen
in an alarming manner. A few minutes ago, Mr. O’Brien
noted three such elements, namely, famine, cholera
and the conflict itself. In addition to those three, we
think one of the most serious of those elements is the
indifference of the international community. During
the meeting held on 12 July (see S/PV.7999), it was
noted that the number of persons possibly infected by
the cholera outbreak was already alarming. According
to the World Health Organization report of 14 August,
registered cases of possible infection have exceeded
500,000, of which nearly 2,000 have lost their lives.
According to the same organization, since the month of
April, when we were cautioned about the outbreak, the
death toll has increased fivefold.
Similarly, according to the Office for the
Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs (OCHA), this
grim situation is exacerbated by limited access to
water, sanitation, basic services and, above all, a lack of
medicine and basic supplies for treating those affected.
In additional, the diminished medical infrastructure
in Yemen leaves 14.8 million people without adequate
access to medical assistance. According to OCHA,
the troubling food shortage places 60 per cent of the
population in food insecurity and 7 million people at
risk of famine.
17-26241

18/08/2017

The situation in the Middle East

We are distressed that, despite the Council’s issuance
of presidential statements of 15 June (S/PRST/2017/7)
and 9 August (S/PRST/2017/14), wherein it expressed its
concerns, the deployment of humanitarian aid in Yemen
continues to be obstructed by haphazard unilateral
measures imposed by the parties to the conflict and
by the high risk and insecurity faced by humanitarian
personnel, agencies and organizations on the ground.
By way of example, according to the 17 August
statement of the United Nations Resident Coordinator/
Humanitarian Coordinator in Yemen, Mr. Jamie
McGoldrick, since January 11 vehicles belonging to
humanitarian organizations have been hijacked in the
city of Taiz, in addition to the looting of food and other
humanitarian goods in that same city on three separate
occasions. In addition, the constant threat of air strikes
and sporadic armed clashes between the parties and
with the coalition limit and obstruct the distribution of
humanitarian aid required by Yemeni population.
In that regard, we once again remind the parties
to the conflict that they must allow and guarantee
the security and independence of agencies providing
humanitarian assistance and not identify them as
military objectives under any circumstance. Moreover,
they should guarantee unconditional and unobstructed
access to all places that require humanitarian assistance.
Reports of attacks against civilians and civilian
infrastructure are disturbing, as is the fact that parties
to the conflict continue to consider public spaces
and private homes as military objectives. On 18 July,
six days after the Council received a briefing on the
situation in Yemen, the Office of the United Nations
High Commissioner for Human Rights reported an
aerial bombardment of the population of Taiz, where
the target was a makeshift straw house that housed three
families of internally displaced refugees — killing 18
civilians, including women and children. Following that
incident, in August, the Office of the United Nations
High Commissioner for Refugees reported the death of
more than 10 civilians from an aerial bombardment in
Saada governorate.
Moreover, the situation concerning migrants
continues to be worrisome. According to a report
issued by the International Organization for Migration,
on 10 and 11 August 280 migrants were forced by
their traffickers to abandon in the middle of the sea
the boats they were using to try to reach Yemen. Only
69 of them survived. According to a report issued by

S/PV. 8027

the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner
for Refugees on 11 August, despite the conflict in the
country, Yemen continues to be a destination for many
refugees fleeing the Horn of Africa in search of means
of subsistence, who are victims of criminal groups
and human traffickers. Regrettably, the conflict and a
lack of effective control mechanisms and security have
made possible the proliferation of criminal groups and
networks that traffic in persons by taking advantage of
their poverty and desperation.
For all of those reasons, we believe that the Security
Council should maintain a unanimous and infirm
position in condemning efforts and military actions that
exacerbate the crisis in Yemen and generate a situation
of instability that threatens the lives of millions of
innocent people. In that regard, we once again reiterate
to the parties involved in the conflict that they have
an obligation to respect the provisions of resolution
2140 (2014) and that they must commit to put in place
a sustained dialogue process that makes possible a
peaceful, inclusive and orderly political transition that
meets the legitimate demands and aspirations of the
Yemeni people, all the while respecting the sovereignty,
independence and territorial integrity of the Republic
of Yemen.
Lastly, we would like to express our gratitude for
the work done by the various United Nations agencies
and bodies to provide humanitarian assistance in such
a difficult context, to which we reiterate our support.
The President (spoke in Arabic): I now give the
floor to the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Yemen.
Mr. Al-Mikhlafi (Yemen) (spoke in Arabic): I
should like to convey to the members of the Security
Council greetings replete with hope and peace.
I would first like to congratulate Ambassador
Aboulatta on his wise stewardship of the work of the
Security Council as President during this month, as
well as to thank you, Sir, for giving me this opportunity
to speak to the Council.
I would like to express my condolences to the
victims of the horrific attacks in Spain.
I am delighted to be able to participate in this
exceptional meeting to discuss the political and
humanitarian situation in Yemen. I would like
to stress that my participation reflects our deep
conviction — that of the Yemeni Government under
the leadership of His Excellency President Abdrabuh

17-262419/13

S/PV.8027

The situation in the Middle East

Mansour Hadi Mansour — that the only solution to the
situation in Yemen is a peaceful one.
The humanitarian and health situation in Yemen is
dire and complicated. More than two years have passed
since the bloody coup d’état orchestrated by Houthi
militias in coalition with the previous President. We
need a peaceful solution based on the three terms of
reference endorsed by the international community and
the Council. We are committed to durable peace. We
have never called for war; instead, war was imposed
upon us by that rebel gang, which is rebelling against
international legitimacy. We participated in peace talks
in Geneva and Biel in good faith and with high hopes
of achieving peace in Yemen. Yemen was once called
the happy Arab country. While the coup masters did not
implement the confidence-building measures that we
are agreed upon in Biel, we nevertheless participated in
the talks in Kuwait, where we spent 115 days trying to
achieve peace. We did so because we are a Government
committed to peace that is responsible for its people,
from Saada to Mahra.
However, the coup masters’ participation in all
those rounds of talks was only a way for them to push
forward their criminal plot to destroy Yemen and to
attack neighbouring countries — part of the Iranian
plot to destabilize the region and gain time in order
to deploy more militias and lead to more death and
destruction. This is a large-scale plot that aims to
destroy the national State and replace it with a sectarian
State and a militia army.
Yemen has become the epitome of the so-called
triangle of death of illiteracy, poverty and disease. That
is precisely the sort of triangle we have been suffering
from during the authoritarian rule of imams. Our people
reject this rule. They reject tyranny and dictatorship.
Would Europe or the civilized world today accept
a divine right to rule? Of course not. Similarly, the
Yemeni people reject being ruled by the coup masters,
who claim a divine right to rule.
The Yemeni Government has made considerable
efforts at reconstruction and has improved security
and health services, with the support and assistance of
our brethren in the Arab coalition under the leadership
of the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia and the United Arab
Emirates. However, the areas under the control of the
coup masters are still suffering from repression, famine
and the cholera outbreak. That is not attributed to a
lack of food, which is indeed available in the markets.
10/13

18/08/2017

Instead, it is due to the fact that militias have stopped
paying the salaries of civil servants for more than 10
months now, to pillaging funds from the Central Bank in
Sana’a and to trading in food and humanitaran aid — all
of which enables the coup authors — while millions of
Yemenis are dying of hunger and curable diseases.
The Yemeni Government has always been open
to the suggestions of the Special Envoy, as we believe
in peace and did not choose war. However, the coup
masters reject all those suggestions, thereby rendering
the conflict intractable. We accepted all the suggestions
in Kuwait and unilaterally signed them. But the coup
masters did not accept any suggestions. Again, the
conflict is intractable. And the reason is very simple:
the war has become lucrative for the militias. While
the Yemeni people are suffering from famine, Houthi
warlords are making millions. Why would they then
accept peace and lose all that money, which is tainted
with Yemeni blood?
At this juncture I would like to commend the
presidential statement of 9 August (S/PRST/2017/14)
on the risk of famine in Yemen, Somalia, South
Sudan and the north-east of Nigeria. The statement
condemned certain parties that are failing to ensure
the uninterrupted and unhindered delivery of food and
humanitarian aid. For more than two and a half years,
the Houthi and Saleh militias have besieged the city
of Taiz and prevented the delivery of humanitarian
assistance and medical supplies. They have also been
shelling the city day and night.
We appreciate international appeals for the opening
of the Sana’a airport. Despite our concerns and the
security threat associated with the operation of the
airport by the rebel militias, we are willing to agree to
the opening of the airport — so long as the militias leave
the airport’s management to official staff affiliated
with the State before the coup, under the supervision of
the United Nations.
We are determined to mitigate the suffering of the
people in our beloved capital of Sana’a. However, we
are surprised that we hear no appeals or tugging at the
human conscience in the context of the siege on the city
of Taiz. The people of Taiz feel that the international
community is applying double standards. Taiz is being
shelled and destroyed day by day. That beautiful and
peaceful city, which was once even referred to as
the cultural capital and a “city of dreams”, has been
reduced to rubble. Its buildings, schools, hospitals,
17-26241

18/08/2017

The situation in the Middle East

mosques and historical landmarks have been obliterated
by unrelenting, indiscriminate shelling. The shelling
has not only destroyed infrastructure, but it has also
led to civilian casualties, especially among women and
children, who are killed daily and affected by famine
and disease. The siege has exacerbated the situation.
Currently exiting and returning to the city takes seven
hours, whereas it previously only took 10 minutes.
Since the beginning of the war, 4,164 people have died
and 17,911 have been wounded in the city, most of
whom were civilians, including women and children.
The life for residents of the city of Taiz has become
hell. It used to be a city known for its culture, education
and love of the arts.
This tragedy, which is akin to some of the most
horrific that the world has seen, has not received
sufficient attention from humanitarian organizations
and United Nations agencies. Taiz is appealing to
Council members’ conscience, before the law, to stand
by it and lift the siege. Lifting the siege should be a
priority for everyone who believes in the right to life
and the right to restore peace in Yemen, including those
who want to end the suffering of Yemenis. Lifting the
siege in Taiz was among the top the priorities during
the previous rounds of peace consultations. We have
reached a number of agreements concerning the siege,
under the supervision of the United Nations, the Special
Envoy and the international community; but none of
them has been implemented. The people of Taiz are
waiting for delegations to visit the blighted city so that
they can fathom the gravity of the suffering. I express
my gratitude and appreciation to all those who have
fulfilled, or tried to, their humanitarian obligations
despite the siege.
We are committed to a peaceful and political
settlement to the crisis in Yemen that will maintain
the security, the independence and the territorial
integrity of Yemen based on the three locally,
regionally and internationally agreed-on terms of
reference — the Initiative of the Gulf Cooperation
Council and its Implementation Mechanism, the
National Dialogue Conference outcomes and the
relevant Security Council resolutions, particularly
resolution 2216 (2015). We reiterate that the Yemeni
Government is willing to make concessions, however
difficult, to restore just and sustainable peace, which
the great Yemeni people deserve. We have therefore
accepted all the proposals put forward by the Special
Envoy, to which he referred today in his briefing. We

S/PV. 8027

reiterate that we support those proposals and that we
are open to any other proposals or ideas.
But, in turn, the Security Council and the
international community must send a clear, strong
and decisive message to the party that rejects those
proposals. It should bring pressure to bear on the
coup masters so that they accept the proposals that
were endorsed by the Council in its latest presidential
statement and participate in negotiations in good faith
and with an open mind, just as we are committed to
participate in negotiations in good faith and with an
open mind. In that regard, I would like to quote the
preamble of the Constitution of UNESCO:
“That since wars begin in the minds of men, it
is in the minds of men that the defences of peace
must be constructed”.
I would like to clarify a number of points.
First, the Yemeni Government reiterates that it
will continue to support the efforts of Special Envoy
Ould Cheikh Ahmed. We support his suggestions and
proposals to the President of Yemen, which include
provisions for the withdrawal of militias from the
port and the governorate of Hudaydah based on last
year’s peace consultations in Kuwait, as well as the
establishment of a technical committee of economic
and financial experts to help the Government establish
an appropriate and urgently needed mechanism to
pay civil servants’ salaries and deal with revenues
generated within the regions controlled by the coup
masters, in order to provide the income needed to cover
such expenses. Unfortunately, however, the HouthiSaleh coalition has rejected those proposals.
Second, those gangs would have never been able to
continue rejecting those proposals if they had not been
receiving financial, logistical and military support
from Iran. Thanks to that support and smuggled Iranian
weapons, the militias are now turning into a serious
threat to Yemenis and neighbouring countries, in
particular the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia. That country
is being targeted by ballistic missiles, which poses a
serious threat to navigation and international shipping
routes in the Red Sea, including attacks on ships and
mining in the reigon.
Third, we will continue our cooperation with the
international community to combat that scourge, to
which Yemen has one of the first victims. Our latest
success in combating Al-Qaida and liberating the city

17-2624111/13

S/PV.8027

The situation in the Middle East

of Al Mukalla from that group in April 2016, with the
support of Arab coalition forces, was a demonstration
of our commitment to combat all terrorist and radical
groups, not only militarily but also culturally and
intellectually. That includes putting an end to the coup
that is fuelling terrorism and usurping the role of the
Government in order to plunge the country into chaos,
violence, murder and destruction. They are preparing
fertile ground for terrorism to flourish.
Fourth, the number of our prisoners and detainees
in Houthi prisons is increasing daily. The international
community has not raised its voice with regard to the
violation of their human rights. Their suffering is
augmented by the fact that their families and children
have no knowledge of the fate of their missing loved
ones — fathers, brothers and bread winners. The
conscience of the international community continues to
manifest itself in deafening silence.
Fifth, any attempt by a minority or sect to exclude
others and alone control power and wealth in Yemen,
which is exactly what the militias and coup masters
are trying to achieve, will eventuallly fail. Peace will
prevail through the renunciation of violence and the
exclusion of others, through sharing power and wealth,
and through coexistence, civil liberties and political
engagement.
Sixth, leveraging human suffering is a crime.
Finding serioius, genuine and comprehensive solutions
and being open to all proposals and ideas are the
courageous steps our people expect.
Seventh, the coup masters can achieve peace with
all segments of Yemeni society if they adhere to the
terms of reference for peace and what they require.
They should not be rewarded for their crimes.
The militias have turned a blind eye to all the
options for peace and all the concessions and sacrifices
that President Mansour has made in an effort to avoid
this foolish war, in which the first and last to lose are
the great Yemeni people. We will remain committed to
a peaceful solution based on a just and comprehensive
peace according to the terms of reference. We will
not tolerate blackmail or rewarding the militias for
violating State sovereignty.
The Yemeni Government, under President Mansour,
is making great efforts to address the dire humanitarian
situation, especially with regard to the cholera epidemic
and the situation in the areas under the control of the
12/13

18/08/2017

coup masters. Our responsibility extends to the whole
country. We are coordinating our work with the relevant
international and humanitarian organizations so as
to facilitate the delivery of humanitarian and medical
assistance. According to a statement by the Ministry of
Health of Yemen issued on 15 August, the number of
suspected cases of cholera stands at 508,680. Another
1,970 of people have died from the disease. On the other
hand, those who were successfully treated account for
99 per cent of the suspected cases. That reflects the
success of our common efforts and the effectiveness
of treatment despite the difficult circumstances on the
ground.
However, the situation remains dire and we need
more assistance and support. We are deeply grateful to
the donor countries and organizations that funded the
2017 Yemen humanitarian response plan, but we appeal
to the international community to prioritize this issue
and provide assistance. To date, we have received only
44 per cent of the funding for the humanitarian response
plan, although we are already in the second half of the
year. We therefore call on all States, especially those
that pledged funds to Yemen at the Geneva conference,
to fulfil their commitments.
I cannot fail to express the thanks and appreciation
of the Government of Yemen to Secretary-General
António Guterres, donor countries, the King Salman
Center for Relief and Humanitarian AID, UNICEF, the
World Health Organization (WHO), the World Food
Programme, and aid organizations in neighbouring
countries, including the United Arab Emirates and
Kuwait, for their continuous suport and assistance to
address the humanitarian situation and the cholera
outbreak in Yemen. We have enjoyed the generous
support of the King Salman Center, in the form of 550
tons of medicines and fluids, and signed agreements with
WHO and UNICEF to cover the costs of several projects
to prevent the spread of cholera — worth $66.7 million,
in addition to $8.2 million to fund WHO’s activities
related to treating cholera cases. This assistance has
contributed to the success of our efforts. We in the
Yemeni Government are fully committed — morally,
humanly and by our Constitution — to fulfilling our
obligations towards our country, our nation and our
people. We are working to provide health services to
all Yemenis without exception or discrimination, and
we are working to overcome all difficulties that stand
in our way.
17-26241

18/08/2017

The situation in the Middle East

In conclusion, I am confident that settling the
situation in Yemen genuinely and sustainably lies
in addressing the root causes of the crisis by ending
the causes for war and coup against the State and by
achieving national political consensus. We need to
restore legitimacy and State institutions and normalize
life through a peace process that saves the country from
being hijacked by Tehran’s militias and its affiliates in
the region. We need to pressure the Houthi-Saleh to
return to peace talks and engage sincerely and with
genuine willingness to make concessions for the sake
of Yemen. The unity of the Council will increase the
chances of reaching a peaceful solution in Yemen.
We need to revert to the terms of reference and the
resolutions of the Security Council and respect for

S/PV. 8027

international law. We appreciate the efforts of the
Council, the Ambassadors of the group of 18 and the
Secretary-General and his Special Envoy to achieve
security and stability in Yemen. We reiterate our
deepest gratitude to the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia, the
United Arab Emirates and all the countries of the Arab
coalition for restoring legitimacy in Yemen. We are
committed to peace. We ask the Council to remain at
our side in order to save Yemen and its people.
The President (spoke in Arabic): I now invite
Council members to informal consultations to continue
our discussion on this subject.
The meeting rose at 11.25 a.m.

17-2624113/13
