UNITED
NATIONS

S
Security Council
Distr.
GENERAL
S/26134
22 July 1993
ORIGINAL:

ENGLISH

NOTE BY THE PRESIDENT OF THE SECURITY COUNCIL

Following consultations with the members of the Security Council, the
President of the Council made the following statement, on behalf of the Council,
at its 3257th meeting, held on 22 July 1993, in connection with the Council’s
consideration of the item entitled "The situation in the Republic of Bosnia and
Herzegovina":
"The Security Council has noted with grave concern the letter of
19 July 1993 from the President of the Presidency of the Republic of Bosnia
and Herzegovina addressed to the President of the Security Council
(S/26107, annex) about the Bosnian Serb military offensive in the area of
Mount Igman, close to Sarajevo, a city which has stood for centuries as an
outstanding example of a multicultural, multi-ethnic and pluri-religious
society, which needs to be protected and preserved.
"The Security Council renews its demand that all hostilities in the
Republic of Bosnia and Herzegovina cease and that the parties and others
concerned refrain from any hostile acts. It supports the call from the
Co-Chairmen of the International Conference on the Former Yugoslavia in
this regard, designed to facilitate the peace talks.
"The Security Council reaffirms its resolutions 824 (1993) and
836 (1993), in the first of which the Council declared Sarajevo a safe area
that should be free from armed attacks and any hostile acts, and from which
Bosnian Serb military or para-military units should be withdrawn to a
distance wherefrom they cease to constitute a menace to its security and
that of its inhabitants. It condemns the offensive by the Bosnian Serbs on
Mount Igman aimed at further isolating Sarajevo and escalating the recent
unprecedented and unacceptable pressures on the Government and people of
the Republic of Bosnia and Herzegovina before the forthcoming talks in
Geneva. It demands an immediate end to this offensive and to all attacks
on Sarajevo. It also demands an immediate end to all violations of
international humanitarian law. It demands an end to the disruption of
public utilities (including water, electricity, fuel and communications) by
the Bosnian Serb party and to the blocking of, and interference with, the
delivery of humanitarian relief by both the Bosnian Serb and the Bosnian
Croat parties.
"The Security Council calls on the parties to meet in Geneva under the
auspices of the co-Chairmen of the International Conference on the Former
93-41224 (E)

220793

/...

S/26134
English
Page 2

Yugoslavia. It calls on the parties to negotiate in earnest with the aim
of achieving a just and equitable settlement on the basis of the
sovereignty, territorial integrity and political independence of the
Republic of Bosnia and Herzegovina and the principles agreed at the
International Conference on the Former Yugoslavia in London on
26 August 1992 and supported by the Council in its statement of
2 September 1992 (S/24510). In particular it reaffirms the unacceptability
of ethnic cleansing, or the acquisition of territory by the use of force,
or any dissolution of the Republic of Bosnia and Herzegovina.
"The Security Council emphasizes that it will keep open all options,
none of which is prejudged or excluded from consideration."

-----
