28

General AHembly-Eleventh ~eNlon

World Health Organization and the United Nations
Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization ;
2. Invites the Secretary-General, in collaboration
with the specialized agencies concerned, to prepare,
for submission to the General Assembly at its fourteenth session, a report on the progress that has taken
place in the Non-Self-Governing Territories, in those
fields on which information has been transmitted, in
accordance with the objectives set forth in Chapter
XI of the Charter, since the establishment of the United
Nations;
3. Invites the specialized agencies concerned to collaborate with the Secretary-General in the preparation
of the report ;
4. Considers that the report should be based on
the information transmitted under Article 73 e of the
Charter and on the supplemental information supplied
to the secretariats of the United Nations and of the
specialized agencies by the Administering Members
ocncerned;
5. Invites the Administering Members to include in
the information regularly transmitted by them under
Article 73 e of the Charter such information as may be
practicable for the preparation of the report, including
a survey of the principles and practical measures showing general trends in the Territories concerned as
indicated in section C of the explanatory preface of
the Standard Form for the guidance of Members in
the preparation of information to be transmitted under
Article 73 e of the Charter ;
6. Invites the Secretary-General to keep the Committee on Information from Non-Self-Governing Territories regularly informed of the progress of the report
provided for in the present resolution.

657th plenary meeting,
20 February 1957.

the Government of the Union of South Africa as the
Mandatory Power, and in particular draws the attention of the Government of the Union of South Africa
to those recommendations in respect of:
(a) The progressive transfer of responsibility to
representative, executive and legislative institutions
proper to the Territory;
( b) The revision of existing policies and practices
of "Native" administration in accordance with the
spirit of the Mandates System;
( c) The extension to all the inhabitants of representation in the existing territorial legislature;
( d) The basing of public employment on qualifications other than race and the progressive training of
non-Europeans for higher posts in the Administration;
( e) The review and revision of the land settlement
policy;
(f) The discontinuance of residential restrictions
based on a policy of racial separation, or apartheid,
and the repeal of laws of the Territory having racially
discriminatory restrictions ;
(g) The immediate elimination from the law and
practice of the Territory of the existing discriminatory
restrictions upon freedom of movement ;
(h) The elimination of racial" discrimination from
the educational svstem and the establishment of a
programme for the progressive unification of the
system;
5. Invites the Government of the Union of South
Africa to submit to the United Nations information
concerning its consideration of these conclusions and
recommendations and the action taken by it in each case
in order to ensure the fulfilment of its obligations and
responsibilities under the Mandate.

661st plenary meeting,
26 February 1957.

1054 (XI). Report of the Committee on South
West Africa

1055 (XI). Status of the Territory of South
West Africa

The General Assembly,
Having considered the third report and observation
submitted to it, in accordance with its resolutions
749 A (VIII) of 28 November 1953 and 941 (X) of
3 December 1955, by the Committee on South West
Africa concerning conditions in the Territory of South
West Africa,14
1. Expresses its appreciation of the work of the
Committee on South West Africa ;
2. Approves the report of the Committee concerning conditions in the Territory of South West Africa;
3. Notes with concern that, for the third year in
succession, the Committee has been unable to escape
the conclusion that conditions in the Territory are for
the most part, and particularly for the "Native" majority, still far from meeting in a reasonable way the
standards implicit in the purposes of the Mandates
System;
4. Approves and endorses accordingly, and without prejudice to the solution of the broader issues raised
by the Committee concerning the situation in the Territory, all the conclusions and recommendations of the
Committee as to the action which should be t;ken by

The General Assembly,
Having recommended, by its resolution 65 (I) of 14
December 1946, 141 (II) of 1 November 1947, 227
(III) of 26 November 1948, 337 (IV) of 6 December
1949, 449 B (V) of 13 December 1950, 570 B (VI)
of 19 January 1952, 749 B (VIII) of 28 November
1953, 852 (IX) of 23 November 1954 and' 940 (X) of 3
December 1955, that the Mandated Territory of South
West Africa be placed under the International Trusteeship System, and having repeatedly invited the Government of the Union of South Africa to propose, for
the consideration of the General Assembly, a trusteeship agreement for South West Africa,
Having accepted, by its resolution 449 A (V) of
13 December 1950, the advisory opinion15 of 11 July
1950 of the International Court of Justice on the question of South West Africa,
Considering that, in accordance with Chapter XII
of the Charter of the United Nations, all Mandated
Territories which have not achieved independence have
been brought under the International Trusteeship System with the sole exception of the Territory of South
West Africa,

"Ibid., Eleventh Session, Supplement No. 12 (A/3151 and
Corr.I), annex II.

Opinion: J.C.J. Reports 1950, p. 128.

"'International status of South-West

Africa, Advisory
