S/2002/496

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
30 April 2002
Original: English

Letter dated 30 April 2002 from the Secretary-General addressed
to the President of the Security Council
I have the honour to convey the attached communication, dated 25 April 2002,
which I have received from the Secretary-General of the North Atlantic Treaty
Organization (see annex).
I should be grateful if you would bring it to the attention of the members of the
Security Council.
(Signed) Kofi A. Annan

02-36080 (E) 010502

*0236080*

S/2002/496

Annex
Letter dated 25 April 2002 from the Secretary-General of the
North Atlantic Treaty Organization to the Secretary-General
In accordance with Security Council resolution 1088 (1996), I attach the
monthly report on the operations of the Stabilization Force (see enclosure). I would
appreciate your making this report available to the Security Council.
(Signed) George Robertson

2

S/2002/496

Enclosure
Monthly report to the United Nations on the operations of the
Stabilization Force
1.
Over the reporting period (1-31 March 2002) there were just over 18,400
troops deployed in Bosnia and Herzegovina and Croatia with contributions from all
the NATO allies and from 15 non-NATO countries.
2.
The Stabilization Force (SFOR) continues to contribute towards the
maintenance of a safe and secure environment in Bosnia and Herzegovina, monitor
compliance by the Entity Armed Forces, conduct inspections and consolidation of
weapons storage sites, provide support to the international organizations working in
theatre, provide support to the Federation authorities in collecting weapons and
ammunition in the framework of Operation Harvest, and monitor possible terroristrelated threats throughout the country. On 24 March, SFOR launched an operation
around Brcko, Vlasenica, Srebrenica and Zvornik in the Republika Srpska to deter
weapons smuggling.
3.
Although the general security situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina remained
stable during the reporting period, the increase of inter-ethnic incidents, the poor
economy and unemployment, demonstrations by Bosnian war veterans,1 and
increasing reports of surveillance of SFOR forces and facilities are areas of concern.
4.
Ten cases of surveillance of SFOR facilities have been reported since the
beginning of January.
5.
Inter-ethnic incidents included the desecration of both the Catholic graveyard
in Donja Dreznica (Mostar North), and the Serb cemetery in Cekrcici (Visoko). A
bomb was thrown and damaged the mosque in Polje (in the municipality of
Bosanska Dubica in Republika Srpska); an explosive device was detonated in the
backyard of the Islamic community house in Janja (south of Bijeljina) causing
structural damage; Bosnian Serbs were threatened with a pistol when attempting to
claim their property in Rakovac (west of Tuzla); and a grenade was thrown into the
yard of a house owned by Bosniacs, but currently inhabited by displaced Bosnian
Serbs, and at a vehicle parked in front of a Bosniac’s house in the Bijeljina area.
6.
With regard to operations concerning persons indicted for war crimes,2 a
suspect was detained by SFOR troops on 31 March and subsequently transferred to
The Hague. During follow-on operations to find Radovan Karadzic, a bunker
complex was discovered in the area of Prijedor in Multinational Division (South
West), and a weapons cache of eight tons of weapons and ammunition3 was also
found in Multinational Division (South West).
Cooperation and compliance by the parties
7.
The armed forces of Bosnia and Herzegovina carried out normal training
activities during the reporting period in substantial compliance with the military
provisions of the Peace Agreement. Cooperation and coordination between SFOR
and the Bosnian air forces on air traffic normalization continues. In addition, SFOR
supported rescue and medical evacuation training at Sarajevo airport. Although there
is a lack of equipment, the current training is seen as a positive step towards the
creation of an effective search and rescue organization in the country.

3

S/2002/496

8.
During the period under review, SFOR troops conducted 93 weapons storage
site inspections: 37 Bosnian Serb; 31 Bosniac; 14 Bosnian Croat; and 11 Federation.
9.
SFOR troops monitored 287 training and movement activities during the
reporting period: 168 Bosnian Serb; 109 Bosniac; 9 Bosnian Croat; and 1 Federation
Army Department.
10. A total of 119 mine-clearing activities were monitored over this period: 39
Bosnian Serb; 56 Bosnian Croat; 8 Croat; and 16 Federation.
Cooperation with international organizations
11. Within capabilities and in accordance with its mandate, SFOR continues to
provide assistance to the international organizations in theatre, including the United
Nations Mission in Bosnia and Herzegovina, the International Police Task Force, the
Office of the High Representative, the International Tribunal for the former
Yugoslavia, the Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe and the Office
of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees.
12. SFOR continues to support the International Police Task Force in training local
police special units. The second phase of the training started on 7 March and will
conclude in October. So far, 228 special unit personnel from the Federation and the
Republika Srpska have completed the course, which is being conducted within the
Camp Butmir facility.
13. On 7 March, SFOR supported the Tribunal in an exhumation in the Bosanski
Petrovac area; on 26 March, during an exhumation of some 10 bodies south of
Brcko; and on 31 March, when a mass grave with 11 bodies was found in Sipovo.
Outlook
14. The overall security situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina is expected to remain
stable.

Notes

4

1

A draft law intended to revise the War Veterans’ Law by reducing the 25 per cent of the
Federation budget spent on military pensions has been withdrawn. Peaceful demonstrations by a
majority of Bosniacs were held in Sarajevo. Members of Croat associations demonstrated
separately at other sites.

2

The Russian Federation confirms its special position on this matter.

3

1,897 x 40-mm anti-aircraft rounds; 235 x 120-mm mortar rounds; 28 x 76-mm mortar rounds;
over 400 mines; and 10,000 rounds of small arms ammunition.
