A/63/PV.79

United Nations

General Assembly

Official Records

Sixty-third session

79

th plenary meeting
Tuesday, 7 April 2009, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. D’Escoto Brockmann . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (Nicaragua)

The meeting was called to order at 10.15 a.m.
Agenda item 122 (continued)
Scale of assessments for the apportionment of the
expenses of the United Nations (A/63/725/Add.3)
The President: I would like, in keeping with
established practice, to invite the attention of the
General Assembly to document A/63/725/Add.3, in
which the Secretary-General informs the President of
the General Assembly that, since the issuance of his
communication contained in documents A/63/725 and
A/63/725/Add.1 and Add.2, Tajikistan has made the
necessary payment to reduce its arrears below the
amount specified in Article 19 of the Charter.
May I take it that the General Assembly duly
takes note of the information contained in this
document?
It was so decided.
Reports of the Fifth Committee
The President: The General Assembly will now
consider the reports of the Fifth Committee on agenda
items 118, 123, 124, 139, 146, 149, 157 and 117.
I request the Rapporteur of the Fifth Committee,
Mr. Patrick Chuasoto of the Philippines, to introduce in
one intervention the reports of the Fifth Committee
before the Assembly.
Mr. Chuasoto (Philippines) (Rapporteur of the
Fifth Committee) (spoke in Chinese): I have the honour

today to present to the General Assembly the reports of
the Fifth Committee containing recommendations on
issues that required action during the first part of the
resumed 63rd session of the General Assembly. The
Fifth Committee met from 2 to 27 March 2009 and
held 11 plenary meetings and numerous rounds of
informal and informal/informal consultations.
I therefore have the honour to present the
following brief report on the work of the Fifth
Committee.
(spoke in Spanish)
Concerning
agenda
item
118,
entitled
“Programme budget for the biennium 2008-2009”, in
paragraph 10 of its report in document A/63/648/Add.5
the Fifth Committee recommends to the General
Assembly the adoption of three draft resolutions that
were adopted by the Committee without a vote. Draft
resolution I is entitled “Special subjects relating to the
programme budget for the biennium 2008-2009”. Draft
resolution
II
is
entitled
“Information
and
communications technology, disaster recovery and
business continuity for the United Nations:
arrangements for the secondary data centre at
Headquarters”. Draft resolution III is entitled “Capital
master plan”.
Under agenda item 123, entitled “Human
resources management”, in paragraph 6 of its report in
document A/63/639/Add.1 the Committee recommends
to the General Assembly the adoption of a draft
resolution that was adopted by the Committee without
a vote.

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. Corrections should be submitted to the original
languages only. They should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature
of a member of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room
C-154A. Corrections will be issued after the end of the session in a consolidated corrigendum.

09-29453 (E)

*0929453*

A/63/PV.79

Under agenda item 124, entitled “Joint Inspection
Unit”, in paragraph 6 of its report contained in
document A/63/786 the Committee recommends to the
General Assembly the adoption of a draft resolution
that was adopted by the Committee without a vote.

I wish to thank delegations for their cooperation
and to assure them that the changes made at the
39th plenary meeting of the Fifth Committee have been
duly taken into account and are reflected in the draft
resolutions and reports before them.

The report of the Fifth Committee on agenda item
139, entitled “Financing of the United Nations Mission
in Ethiopia and Eritrea”, is contained in document
A/63/646/Add.1. In paragraph 6 of its report, the
Committee recommends to the General Assembly the
adoption of a draft decision that the Committee
adopted without a vote.

The President: If there is no proposal under rule
66 of the rules of procedure, I shall take it that the
General Assembly decides not to discuss the reports of
the Fifth Committee that are before the Assembly
today.

Under agenda item 146, entitled “Financing of
the United Nations Mission in the Sudan”, the report of
the Fifth Committee is contained in document
A/63/787. In paragraph 6 of its report, the Committee
recommends to the General Assembly the adoption of a
draft resolution that the Committee adopted without a
vote.

It was so decided.
The President: Statements will therefore be
limited to explanations of vote. The positions of
delegations regarding the recommendations of the Fifth
Committee have been made clear in the Committee and
are reflected in the relevant official records.
May I remind members that, under paragraph 7 of
decision 34/401, the General Assembly agreed that

Under agenda item 149, entitled “Financing of
the United Nations Mission in the Central African
Republic and Chad”, the report of the Fifth Committee
is contained in document A/63/788. In paragraph 6 of
its report, the Committee recommends to the General
Assembly the adoption of a draft resolution that the
Committee adopted without a vote.

“When the same draft resolution is
considered in a Main Committee and in plenary
meeting, a delegation should, as far as possible,
explain its vote only once, that is, either in the
Committee or in plenary meeting, unless that
delegation’s vote in plenary meeting is different
from its vote in the Committee.”

Under agenda item 157, entitled “Financing of
the activities arising from Security Council resolution
1863 (2009)”, the report of the Fifth Committee is
contained in document A/63/789. In paragraph 6 of its
report, the Committee recommends to the General
Assembly the adoption of a draft resolution that the
Committee adopted without a vote.

May I remind delegations that, also in accordance
with General Assembly decision 34/401, explanations
of vote are limited to 10 minutes and should be made
by delegations from their seats.

Finally, under agenda item 117, entitled “Review
of the efficiency of the administrative and financial
functioning of the United Nations”, the report of the
Fifth Committee is contained in document
A/63/649/Add.1. In paragraph 8 of its report, the
Committee recommends to the General Assembly the
adoption of a draft resolution entitled “Accountability
framework, enterprise risk management and internal
control framework, and results-based management
framework”. Furthermore, in paragraph 9 of the same
report, the Committee recommends to the General
Assembly the adoption of a draft decision entitled
“Questions deferred for future consideration”. Both
proposals were adopted by the Committee without a
vote.

2

Before we begin to take action on the
recommendations contained in the reports of the Fifth
Committee, I should like to advise representatives that
we are going to proceed to take decisions in the same
manner as was done in the Fifth Committee, unless
notified otherwise in advance.
Agenda item 118 (continued)
Programme budget for the biennium 2008-2009
Report of the Fifth Committee (A/63/648/Add.5)
The President: The Assembly has before it three
draft resolutions recommended by the Fifth Committee
in paragraph 10 of its report.
We will now take a decision on draft resolutions I
to III. Draft resolution I is entitled “Special subjects
relating to the programme budget for the biennium

09-29453

A/63/PV.79

2008-2009”. The Fifth Committee adopted it without a
vote. May I take it that the Assembly wishes to do the
same?
Draft resolution I was adopted (resolution
63/268).
The President: Draft resolution II is entitled
“Information and communications technology, disaster
recovery and business continuity for the United
Nations: arrangements for the secondary data centre at
Headquarters”. The Fifth Committee adopted it without
a vote. May I take it that the Assembly wishes to do
likewise?
Draft resolution II was adopted (resolution
63/269).
The President: Draft resolution III is entitled
“Capital master plan”. The Fifth Committee adopted it
without a vote. May I take it that the Assembly wishes
to do the same?
Draft resolution III was adopted (resolution
63/270).
The President: I now call on the representative
of the Syrian Arab Republic, who wishes to speak in
explanation of position on the resolution just adopted.
Mr. Diab (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in
Arabic): My delegation’s explanation of position
concerns section IV of the resolution just adopted,
entitled “Special subjects relating to the programme
budget for the biennium 2008-2009”.
Our delegation would like to reiterate its position
regarding the logical framework for the budget of the
Special Envoy of the Secretary-General for the
implementation of Security Council resolution 1559
(2004). That framework continues to contain flaws and
distortions with regard to the principles of resultsbased budgeting and the legislative mandate given to
the Secretariat by the Council.
Because of our country’s sense of responsibility,
we have always expressed our opinions to
representatives of the Secretariat regarding the
formulation of the logical framework. Since the
discussion of the framework began in the Fifth
Committee in 2006, we have very clearly described to
the Secretariat the attempts of the Secretary-General’s
Special Envoy to distort and exceed his mandate by
adopting a special budget for himself, and we have
provided evidence in that regard.

09-29453

Representatives of the Secretariat used to point
out that our observations were appropriate and correct,
and they tried to match them with a logical framework.
However, before the eyes of representatives of the
Secretariat, the Special Envoy of the Secretary-General
continued to disregard those remarks and to exceed his
mandate and the principles of work of the United
Nations established by the Charter.
That state of affairs continued despite the
ongoing affirmations of our delegation, supported by
the Charter of the United Nations, that the expected
achievements and indications thereof included in the
budget of the Special Envoy on the establishment of
diplomatic relations between sovereign States was a
matter that was not connected to the mandate
established in Security Council resolution 1559 (2004)
and constituted interference in the internal affairs of
States. It was also in violation of Security Council
resolution 1680 (2006), which states that the
establishment of diplomatic relations between States is
by definition a bilateral matter.
The Special Envoy of the Secretary-General
continued to disregard paragraph 2 of Security Council
resolution 1559 (2004), which clearly and explicitly
calls for the withdrawal of foreign troops from
Lebanon. This indicates and establishes that the
Special Envoy of the Secretary-General was neither
objective nor impartial in formulating the expected
achievements and indications while he was preparing
his budget. The purpose and objective of that disregard
was to distract from the true problem facing the region,
which is Israel’s continued occupation of practices in
Arab lands.
Our delegation would like to emphasize that,
when the General Assembly decided to take note of the
logical framework of the budget of the Special Envoy
of the Secretary-General for the implementation of
Security Council resolution 1559 (2004), our country
did not approve. The Secretariat needs to take into
consideration the concerns of our delegation and must
translate the relevant legislative mandates honestly. We
would like to point out that our understanding of that
resolution is that the Secretariat is not authorized to
spend from the budget allocated for Security Council
resolution 1559 (2004) because the logical framework
was not adopted on the basis of results-based
budgeting.

3

A/63/PV.79

The President: The Assembly has thus concluded
this stage of its consideration of agenda item 118.

The President: The General Assembly has thus
concluded this stage of its consideration of agenda
item 139.

Agenda item 123 (continued)
Human resources management
Report of the Fifth Committee (A/63/639/Add.1)
The President: The Assembly has before it a
draft resolution recommended by the Fifth Committee
in paragraph 6 of its report. We will now take a
decision on the draft resolution, entitled “Amendments
to the Staff Regulations”. The Fifth Committee adopted
it without a vote. May I take it that the Assembly
wishes to do likewise?
The draft resolution was adopted (resolution
63/271).
The President: The Assembly has thus concluded
this stage of its consideration of agenda item 123.

Agenda item 146
Financing of the United Nations Mission in
the Sudan
Report of the Fifth Committee (A/63/787)
The President: The Assembly has before it a
draft resolution recommended by the Fifth Committee
in paragraph 6 of its report. The Assembly will now
take action on the draft resolution. The Fifth
Committee adopted it without a vote. May I take it that
the Assembly wishes to do the same?
The draft resolution was adopted (resolution
63/273).
The President: The Assembly has thus concluded
this stage of its consideration of agenda item 146.

Agenda item 124
Joint Inspection Unit
Report of the Fifth Committee (A/63/786)
The President: The Assembly has before it a
draft resolution recommended by the Fifth Committee
in paragraph 6 of its report. We will now take a
decision on the draft resolution. The Fifth Committee
adopted it without a vote. May I take it that the
Assembly wishes to do the same?
The draft resolution was adopted (resolution
63/272).
The President: The General Assembly has thus
concluded this stage of its consideration of agenda
item 124.
Agenda item 139 (continued)
Financing of the United Nations Mission in Ethiopia
and Eritrea
Report of the Fifth Committee (A/63/646/Add.1)
The President: The Assembly has before it a
draft decision recommended by the Fifth Committee in
paragraph 6 of its report. We will now take a decision
on the draft decision. The Fifth Committee adopted it
without a vote. May I take it that the Assembly wishes
to do the same?
The draft decision was adopted.

4

Agenda item 149
Financing of the United Nations Mission in the
Central African Republic and Chad
Report of the Fifth Committee (A/63/788)
The President: The Assembly has before it a
draft resolution recommended by the Fifth Committee
in paragraph 6 of its report. We will now take a
decision on the draft resolution. The Fifth Committee
adopted it without a vote. May I take it that the
Assembly wishes to do the same?
The draft resolution was adopted (resolution
63/274).
The President: The General Assembly has thus
concluded this stage of its consideration of agenda
item 149.
Agenda item 157
Financing of the activities arising from Security
Council resolution 1863 (2009)
Report of the Fifth Committee (A/63/789)
The President: The Assembly has before it a
draft resolution recommended by the Fifth Committee
in paragraph 6 of its report. We will now take a
decision on the draft resolution. The Fifth Committee
adopted it without a vote. May I take it that the
Assembly wishes to do the same?

09-29453

A/63/PV.79

The draft resolution was adopted (resolution
63/275).
The President: The Assembly has thus concluded
this stage of its consideration of agenda item 157.
Agenda item 117 (continued)
Review of the efficiency of the administrative and
financial functioning of the United Nations
Report of the Fifth Committee (A/63/649/Add.1)
The President: The Assembly has before it a
draft resolution recommended by the Fifth Committee
in paragraph 8 of its report and a draft decision
recommended in paragraph 9 of the same report.
The Assembly will now take a decision on the
draft resolution and on the draft decision. The Fifth
Committee adopted the draft resolution, entitled
“Accountability
framework,
enterprise
risk
management and internal control framework, and
results-based management framework”, without a vote.
May I take it that the Assembly wishes to do the same?
The draft resolution was adopted (resolution
63/276).
The President: The Fifth Committee adopted the
draft decision, entitled “Questions deferred for future
consideration”, without a vote. May I take it that the
Assembly wishes to do likewise?
The draft decision was adopted.
The President: The Assembly has thus concluded
this stage of its consideration of agenda item 117.
The General Assembly has thus concluded its
consideration of all the reports of the Fifth Committee
before it.
Agenda item 48 (continued)
Follow-up to and implementation of the outcome of
the 2002 International Conference on Financing for
Development and the preparation of the 2008
Review Conference
Draft resolution (A/63/L.66)
Report of the Fifth Committee (A/63/807)
The President: I should like to inform members
that, at its 74th plenary meeting, held on 23 December
2008, the General Assembly decided to consider
agenda item 48 directly in plenary meeting under
heading B, “Promotion of sustained economic growth

09-29453

and sustainable development in accordance with the
relevant resolutions of the General Assembly and
recent United Nations conferences”.
The Assembly now has before it a draft resolution
issued as document A/63/L.66. The report of the Fifth
Committee on the programme budget implications of
this draft resolution is contained in document
A/63/807.
We shall now proceed to consider draft resolution
A/63/L.66, entitled “Organization of the United
Nations conference at the highest level on the world
financial and economic crisis and its impact on
development”. May I take it that the Assembly decides
to adopt draft resolution A/63/L.66?
Draft resolution A/63/L.66
(resolution 63/277).

was

adopted

The President: I now call on those
representatives who wish to speak in explanation of
position on the resolution just adopted.
Mr. Gonsalves (Saint Vincent and the
Grenadines): I have the honour to deliver this joint
statement of the co-facilitators on behalf of the
delegations of the Kingdom of the Netherlands and
Saint Vincent and the Grenadines.
We thank the General Assembly for adopting
resolution 63/277 by consensus. Since our recent
appointments as co-facilitators to complete the
negotiations on modalities and the preparatory process
of the United Nations conference on the world
financial and economic crisis and its impact on
development, we have committed ourselves to
upholding the openness, transparency and inclusivity
of the process, as mandated in the 23 March 2009 letter
of the President of the General Assembly. Paragraph 9
of the resolution further embodies the sentiment.
Member States have drawn lessons from previous
negotiation processes and have rightly sought to ensure
that those lessons help to inform the preparatory
process for our June conference. During our
involvement as co-facilitators, we have repeatedly
stressed our joint assessment that many aspects of
behaviour or managerial discretion cannot be legislated
or controlled by semantic adjustments to the resolution.
We have pledged to facilitate and conduct the
preparatory process in full regard for the explicit
mandates of paragraphs 9 and 1 (e) that the process be

5

A/63/PV.79

led by Member States and result in an outcome to be
agreed by Member States.
As Permanent Representatives of Member States
of the United Nations, which is an intergovernmental
body, we have no difficulty in understanding and
upholding the leadership and decision-making role of
Member States in the preparatory process. The
23 March letter of the President of the General
Assembly cited the membership’s broad agreement that
the preparatory process of the conference would
benefit from the inclusion of invited non-Member
groups and organizations. We agree with the
President’s assessment.
The negotiation process is driven by Member
States. The outcome of the Conference will have to be
agreed by Member States and Member States only. The
resolution leaves no room for interpretation on that
point. We will ensure that participants in the
consultations respect each other’s respective and
distinct roles and responsibilities. Accordingly, we look
forward to assisting the Member States in arriving at an
agreed and concise outcome. Our understanding of the
phrase “concise outcome” reflects the Member States’
desire to produce an outcome free of extraneous or
superfluous verbiage. The content of the outcome will
be determined by the scope of the conference, as
outlined in the second preambular paragraph of the
resolution, and ultimately by the agreement of the
Member States themselves.
We consider the resolution to be a carefully
calibrated and balanced document designed to
engender the support of all Member States. No single
paragraph should be read in isolation because such an
approach will detract from the totality of the good-faith
compromises and concessions made by all Member
States to date. We view the resolution in this holistic
light and pledge to uphold its letter and spirit in such a
manner as to achieve a successful June conference.
Mr. Valero Briceño (Bolivarian Republic of
Venezuela) (spoke in Spanish): On behalf of the
Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela, allow me to express
our gratitude for the excellent work that you, Sir, have
been carrying out as President of the General
Assembly. We trust in your wise leadership. We are
certain that you will continue to work towards a
successful United Nations conference on the global
financial and economic crisis and its impact on
development in June.

6

We would also like to express our gratitude to the
Group of 77 and China, and in particular its
Chairperson, for their decisive support for this largescale United Nations conference. We believe that a
united G-77 and China is a prerequisite for ensuring
that the interests of the peoples of the South will be
reflected in the document that the Conference will
adopt.
The leader of the Bolivarian revolution, President
Hugo Chávez Frías, proposed that the United Nations
hold a world summit on the global financial and
economic crisis. Our delegation to the United Nations
went to work and prepared a draft resolution on the
subject. It promoted wide-ranging consultations with
the countries of the Bolivarian Alternative for the
Americas (ALBA) and with all the regional groups
represented at the United Nations in order to prepare
the draft resolution.
On 11 November 2008, Venezuela introduced a
draft resolution entitled “The world financial and
economic crisis and its consequences” contained in
document A/63/L.22. This draft resolution, in its first
iteration, was sponsored by 33 countries of this body.
On 20 November 2008, the Group of 77 and China
adopted it by consensus and, on 21 November of the
same year, submitted it to the General Assembly.
The G-77 and China went to the Doha Review
Conference on Financing for Development, held in late
November 2008, with a common draft resolution that
called for the holding of a world summit, organized by
the President of the General Assembly, during the
sixty-third session of that body. The G-77 and China
proposed
“to examine the underlying causes of the
financial crisis and undertake a comprehensive
review of the international financial system with
a view to advancing efforts to reform the Bretton
Woods institutions” (A/63/L.22/Rev.1, para. 1).
In the capital of the State of Qatar, we approved
the convening of a conference at the highest level on
the world financial and economic crisis and its impact
on development. We particularly welcome, Sir, the
selection of you as President and organizer of that
conference and that it will take place during the sixtythird session of the General Assembly. We also
welcome the fact that it has been agreed to hold it at
the highest level, and we hope that all heads of State
and Government of the Member States will participate.

09-29453

A/63/PV.79

Furthermore, we are pleased that it has been
agreed to make the outcome document of the
conference intergovernmental. We would like to stress
the historic nature of the General Assembly’s active
participation in the debate on the reform of the global
financial and economic system and architecture and of
its opportunity to respond to the crisis.
We appreciate, Sir, the fact that the facilitators
appointed by you, the Permanent Representatives of
Saint Vincent and the Grenadines and of the
Netherlands, have determined — as we heard a few
minutes ago — the conditions of participation in the
conference of entities other than the Member States, as
well as some terms of the outcome document.
The Bretton Woods institutions are the main
culprits of the current crisis, together with the United
States Federal Reserve and the Department of the
Treasury of George W. Bush’s Administration. Its
consequences are terrible: increasing poverty,
unemployment, hunger and social inequality that
primarily affect the most vulnerable in developing
countries and in developed capitalist countries alike.
In response to the crisis, it has been proposed to
recapitalize the International Monetary Fund (IMF) in
order to consolidate the credit monopoly and maintain
conditionality. That is an attempt to strengthen
neo-liberal globalization and uphold the historic
transfer of capital from the South to the North. Thus,
referring to the outcome of the recent G-20 summit,
President Hugo Chávez Frías pointed out that “the IMF
is being heralded as a saviour and hero when in fact it
was the villain that sunk the world”.
The Bolivarian Government believes that, in
order to achieve true global human development and to
address the current crisis, it is necessary to break the
credit monopoly of the countries of the North and the
Bretton Woods
institutions;
to
abolish
the
conditionality that the IMF imposes on developing
countries; to strengthen regional banks, such as the
Bank of the South and the ALBA bank — at the recent
summit of South American and Arab countries,
Venezuela proposed the establishment of a bank under
the Organization of Petroleum Exporting Countries —
and to establish regional monetary agreements and
regional currencies. The ALBA countries are moving
towards creating a unified regional compensation
system.
Venezuela
proposes
establishing
the
petrodollar as an exchange currency among oil-

09-29453

producing countries. It should be stressed that progress
has been made in other geographical areas — such as
Chiang Mai in South-East Asia, Africa and Arab
countries — that must be taken into account.
It is also necessary to regionalize the monetary
reserves, including the possibility of issuing regional
special drawing rights, to abolish the dollar as a
reserve currency and to prevent voracious imperialist
interests from continuing to swindle the world by
financing its deficit by issuing notes. We must liberate
ourselves from the yoke of the dollar.
Allow me to conclude by stating that the
revolutionary Government over which Hugo Chávez
Frías presides believes that the United Nations
conference will be an opportunity to discuss the
destiny of the world and the challenges facing
humankind at this historic time; to denounce the
miseries and infeasibility of capitalism; to oppose the
economic and financial system that has resulted in such
disastrous consequences for the peoples of the world;
and to advocate the structural transformation of the
current global financial and economic architecture.
New alternatives for the development and
happiness of the people have been suggested. In that
context, the future will see the rise of an alternative
twenty-first century humanist socialism that fosters the
liberation of humanity and nature.
The President: I would like to express my
sincere thanks to Mr. Kaire Mbuende, Permanent
Representative of Namibia, together with Mr. Frank
Majoor of the Kingdom of the Netherlands and
Mr. Camillo Gonsalves of Saint Vincent and the
Grenadines, who have so ably and patiently conducted
the discussions and complex negotiations in the
informal consultations to bring them to a successful
conclusion. I am sure that Members of the Assembly
join me in extending to them our sincere appreciation.
I am very pleased that the Member States have
agreed on the modalities of the United Nations
conference at the highest level on the economic and
financial crisis and its impact on development. I
congratulate them.
In the midst of the most serious economic
downturn since the Great Depression, we now have the
opportunity and the responsibility to search for
solutions that take into account the interests of all
nations, rich and poor, large and small. That is the

7

A/63/PV.79

mission of the G-192. Among the many international
processes searching for solutions, the decisions of the
States Members of the United Nations are taken within
a legally defined structure that offers inclusiveness and
credibility within an established framework of
sovereign equality. In sum, the General Assembly is the
most universal, comprehensive and legitimate
international decision-making body that bases its
decisions on the right of all peoples to participate
actively in decisions that affect all humankind.
In the past weeks and months, trillions of dollars
have been spent or committed to restore trust and
confidence in financial markets and institutions.
However, trust and confidence are obviously about
more than money; they are also about values, ethics
and justice. There is widespread consensus among
world leaders that the current crisis has its roots in
ethical failure, in unrestrained greed, in reckless
denigration of the common good and in a denial of any
sense of social justice or obligation. The result has
been a continual concentration of income, wealth and
power, increased instability and a genuine risk of
catastrophe.
As the G-20 leaders said last week, we face a
global crisis that requires a global solution. All of us
are affected by the breakdown of the financial
economic order, and all of us must participate to
establish a more just and more sustainable financial
and economic system. In agreeing to hold the United
Nations conference at the highest level, Member States

8

are recognizing the vital importance of assuring that all
nations have an opportunity to participate equally and
fully in the common search for solutions that meet the
concerns and needs of all countries, large and small.
In this effort, we must draw upon technical
expertise and practical wisdom from all over the world
and from countries at every stage of development, as
well as from international organizations, academia,
private sector organizations and civil society. Our
preparatory work has been ongoing, but now, with the
completion of the modalities resolution, we must
approach the preparations for the June United Nations
conference with a redoubled sense of urgency. With the
assistance of the facilitators, I hope to be able to
present a programme of work for the Assembly’s
consideration next week. In addition, I will be inviting
the heads of State and Government of all Member
States and observers to attend the meeting. I shall rely
on the goodwill and good offices of Members to
confirm, as early as possible, the highest level
participation of their Governments.
We have a historic responsibility to demonstrate
that the United Nations system, headed by the General
Assembly, has the capacity and the will to respond
effectively and with dispatch to threats to our global
community. Let us now begin our work together.
The General Assembly has thus concluded this
stage of its consideration of agenda item 48.
The meeting rose at 11.10 a.m.

09-29453
