S/PV.7664

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-first year

7664

th meeting
Friday, 1 April 2016, 7 p.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Liu Jieyi . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(China)

Members:

Angola. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Egypt. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Japan. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Malaysia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
New Zealand. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Senegal . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Spain. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ukraine. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Uruguay. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Santa Rosa
Mr. Aboulatta
Mr. Delattre
Mr. Akahori
Mrs. Adnin
Mr. Walbridge
Mr. Iliichev
Mr. Barro
Mr. González de Linares Palou
Mr. Vitrenko
Mr. Wilson
Mr. Pressman
Mr. Bermúdez
Mr. Suárez Moreno

Agenda
The situation in Burundi

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

16-09420 (E)
*1609420*

S/PV.7664

The situation in Burundi

The meeting was called to order at 7.05 p.m.
Expression of thanks to the outgoing President
The President (spoke in Chinese): As this is the
first formal meeting of the Security Council for the
month of April, I should like to take this opportunity to
pay tribute, on behalf of the Council, to His Excellency
Mr. Ismael Gaspar Martins, Permanent Representative
of Angola, for his service as President of the Council for
the month of March 2016. I am sure I speak for all the
members of the Council in expressing deep appreciation
to Ambassador Gaspar Martins and his delegation for
the great diplomatic skill with which they conducted
the Council’s business last month.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in Burundi
The President (spoke in Chinese): In accordance
with rule 37 of the Council’s provisional rules of
procedure, I invite the representative of Burundi to
participate in this meeting.
The Security Council will now begin its consideration
of the item on its agenda.
Members of the Council have before them document
S/2016/301, which contains the text of a draft resolution
submitted by France, Japan and Spain.
I shall now give the floor to those members of the
Council who wish to make statements before the voting.
Mr. Delattre (France) (spoke in French): Before
we proceed to the voting, I would like to tell you how
pleased I am, Mr. President, that we are meeting now
to adopt the draft resolution on Burundi contained
in document S/2016/301, thus marking the launch
of the Chinese presidency of the Security Council, a
presidency to which I extend my most heartfelt wishes
for success. I would also like to thank all my colleagues
and their teams for the constructive discussions that
have enabled us to meet here for this important vote. I
would briefly like to recall the objectives of our draft
resolution.
The draft has five main objectives. The first, and
main, objective of our draft resolution is to back African
efforts to bring about an emergence from the crisis in
Burundi, efforts undertaken by both the East African
2/8

01/04/2016

Community and the African Union. In backing those
efforts, we want to contribute to forging inclusive and
genuine dialogue — I will come back to this — among
Burundians, and to find a peaceful solution to the crisis.
The second objective of this draft resolution is
to bolster the United Nations presence in Burundi
and strengthen the team of the Special Adviser to
the Secretary-General, Mr. Jamal Benomar. This is
fundamental. We need the United Nations to be more
present on the ground and, as the Security Council, we
should be able to follow the situation in Burundi closely
so that we can be alerted if the situation continues to
deteriorate and so that we would be in a position to
react in timely fashion to avoid the worst.
The third objective of the draft resolution is to
call for the immediate launch of genuine inclusive
dialogue between the Burundian Government and all
stakeholders committed to a peaceful solution, whether
present in their country or not. That is a fundamental
message for reconciliation among Burundians.
The fourth objective is to request the SecretaryGeneral to propose to the Security Council options for
a United Nations police presence in Burundi, and that
within a maximum period of 15 days. The goal in that
regard is also to back the efforts of the African Union,
which has deployed observers to Burundi.
Finally, the fifth objective is to preserve and
consolidate the achievements of the Arusha Agreement
by respecting both the letter and spirit of the Agreement.
These peace agreements serve more than ever as a
compass that should guide all stakeholders in Burundi
and the international community.
I will not go any further. I would just like to stress
our collective responsibility. France is convinced
that the Security Council must do everything it can
to help Burundians to return to the path of peace and
reconciliation. That is our responsibility as the Security
Council. That is our responsibility vis-à-vis the people
of Burundi. That is the thrust of our draft resolution.
The President (spoke in Chinese): The Council
is ready to proceed to the vote on the draft resolution
before it. I shall put the draft resolution to the vote now.
A vote was taken by show of hands.
In favour:
Angola, China, Egypt, France, Japan, Malaysia,
New Zealand, Russian Federation, Senegal, Spain,
16-09420

01/04/2016

The situation in Burundi

Ukraine, United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland, United States of America,
Uruguay and Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of)
The President (spoke in Chinese): The draft
resolution received 15 votes in favour. The draft
resolution has been adopted unanimously as resolution
2279 (2016).
I shall now give the floor to those members of
the Council who wish to make statements following
the voting.
Mr. Aboulatta (Egypt) (spoke in Arabic): I would
like, at the outset, to congratulate you, Mr. President,
on your assumption of the presidency of the Security
Council for this month. I would also like to extend
our thanks to Ambassador Ismael Gaspar Martins,
Permanent Representative of Angola, for his prudent
presidency of the Council last month.
Egypt welcomes the resolution just adopted by the
Council today on the situation in Burundi (resolution
2279 (2016)), which comes as a result of constructive
consultations that reflect the great importance accorded
by all members of the Council to the situation in Burundi
and their desire to find the best ways to help Burundi
overcome the humanitarian and security difficulties it
faces. The resolution is based on the constructive efforts
undertaken by the Government of Burundi to improve
the conditions on the ground as well as those undertaken
by many international and regional partners over the
past few months. Those efforts were reflected in the
important visits undertaken by the Secretary-General,
the high-level delegation of the African Union and the
Burundi country configuration of the Peacebuilding
Commission, as well as the prior visit undertaken by
members of the Security Council in January.
Egypt welcomes the resolution as an important
step that will bolster the efforts of the United Nations
and regional partners to reach a political solution to
the crisis. The mediation role played by the African
Union and the East African Community with a view to
launching a serious and inclusive dialogue in Burundi
has strengthened the foundational work of the United
Nations and regional partners together with that of
the Burundian authorities and national stakeholders
designed to foster a national dialogue that would
address the challenges facing Burundi in the areas of
security and the rule of law.

S/PV.7664

In conclusion, Egypt would like to express its wish
to continue working with other members of the Council
to enforce resolution 2279 (2016) and build on it through
further efforts by the United Nations with a view to
overcoming the current challenges and difficulties
and returning to the pursuit of development and the
promotion of peace in cooperation with Burundi’s
bilateral, regional and international partners.
Mr. Barro (Senegal) (spoke in French): As this is
the first statement we are making under your leadership,
Mr. President, the delegation of Senegal would like to
warmly congratulate you on your assumption of the
presidency and wish you every possible success in the
coming month. I would also like to take this opportunity
to thank the delegation of Angola for the way in which it
conducted the business of the Security Council during
the month of March.
Today’s vote follows a series of initiatives
undertaken within the framework of the United Nations
since the beginning of the year and clearly demonstrates
the interest that we have taken in the situation in
Burundi. The delegation of Senegal, in taking part in
the negotiations on the text of the resolution we have just
adopted (resolution 2279 (2016)), has striven to forge,
alongside other members of the Council, the consensus
that was so evident here today, because in our eyes it is
of primary importance that we show a united cohesive
front in tackling the situation in Burundi.
It therefore behoves me to pay tribute to the spirit
of cooperation and mutual understanding that prevailed
and enabled us to achieve this conclusion to a process
that was launched a few weeks ago, following the visit
of the Council to Burundi. The Secretary-General, as
well as a high-level delegation of the African Union
composed of five Heads of State and Government,
then also visited Bujumbura. With respect to those
initiatives, my delegation would especially like to
underscore that the current resolution is intended to
serve as a formal framework for bringing into harmony
all of the international community’s efforts.
It is therefore important to take note of the
resolution’s mention of the main results achieved by the
high-level delegation of the African Union and the new
momentum generated by the strengthening of regional
mediation undertaken by Ugandan President assisted in
this since the most recent summit of the East African
Community by the former President of Tanzania,
Mr. Benjamin Mkapa. In our eyes, the current resolution

16-094203/8

S/PV.7664

The situation in Burundi

could also serve as a tool to enable the Secretariat’s
team led by Mr. Jamal Benomar to maintain and
strengthen its interaction with the regional mediation
and the African Union to create conditions conducive
to a cessation of violence, the protection of civilians
and the effective launch of an inclusive dialogue.
Finally, it seems to us to be of primary importance
to recall the necessity to configure the United Nations
presence in Burundi in a way to meet all the challenges
of the situation, including a gradual approach mindful
of the momentum behind the action of regional and
continental actors.
Mr. Wilson (United Kingdom): This evening we
have sent a clear and unanimous message. It is time for the
Government of Burundi to live up to the commitments
President Nkurunziza made to the Secretary-General,
to the international community and, most important,
to the people of Burundi themselves. That means that
the Government of Burundi must commit fully to the
mediated dialogue and that the Government must show
its firm commitment by agreeing to a timetable and a
participants list for genuine and inclusive talks.
Support from the United Nations will be critical
if the talks are to succeed. We therefore support the
strengthening of Special Adviser Benomar’s team to
buttress the mediated dialogue. But let me be clear:
President Nkurunziza needs to commit to working with
the United Nations, and he needs to let Mr. Benomar’s
team provide the technical support that is so vital to
the success of genuine dialogue. Such support is not
unconditional. The Council and Mr. Benomar need
to be clear that the United Nations will not support a
Government that habitually commits human rights
violations against its own people.
We have sent a clear message today. Through this
resolution we have provided valuable tools to help
deliver the peace and stability that the citizens of
Burundi deserve. Let us now work together to secure
that outcome.

01/04/2016

taking the lead in preparing the resolution, of which
Japan is pleased to be a co-sponsor.
The United Nations should work together with the
African Union and the East African Community to find
a solution to the Burundian crisis through dialogue.
We must stop violence and human rights violations
in Burundi. As members of the Security Council, it is
our responsibility to take action to prevent a further
deterioration of the situation on the ground. We expect
that the United Nations enhanced presence in Burundi
will contribute to strengthening an adequate channel
between the Security Council and the Burundian
parties. We consider today’s adoption an important
first step. We look forward to discussing, seriously and
actively, the options that will be presented to us by the
Secretary-General.
Mr. González de Linares Palou (Spain) (spoke in
Spanish): I would like to start by congratulating and
thanking the Permanent Representative of Angola,
Ambassador Gaspar Martins, and his colleagues for
their work in leading the Security Council in March.
I would also like to express to you, Ambassador Liu
Jieyi, our pleasure at seeing at the helm of the Council.
I wish you and your team every success in your
mandate, as well as a calm and peaceful presidency.
Spain would also like to thank France for its resolute
and tireless commitment to the adoption of resolution
2279 (2016), as well as the other delegations for their
always constructive contributions, made in a spirit
of flexibility.
If the Security Council was able to adopt this
resolution unanimously this afternoon it was because,
beyond the differences we have, there are some
fundamental objectives on which we all agree: the
urgency of ending the violence afflicting Burundi
for months and to return to the path of dialogue — a
dialogue that must be genuine and inclusive, based on
respect for the Constitution and the Arusha Agreement
and open to all actors committed to a peaceful resolution
of the crisis.

Mr. Akahori (Japan): On the occasion of the first
meeting of the Security Council for this month, Japan
would like to congratulate China on its assumption of
the presidency for the month of April. We promise you,
Sir, our full cooperation.

We hope that this resolution will contribute
significantly to national, regional and international
efforts to bring peace, stability and prosperity to the
people of Burundi, for that is simply the whole of the
aspiration of the Council. We will continue working to
that end.

Japan welcomes the unanimous adoption of
resolution 2279 (2016). I would like to thank France for

Mr. Vitrenko (Ukraine): Let me congratulate you,
Sir, on your assumption of the presidency of the Security

4/8

16-09420

01/04/2016

The situation in Burundi

Council for the month of April, as well as to express our
appreciation for Angola’s presidency during the month
of March.
My delegation welcomes the adoption of resolution
2279 (2016). We consider today’s decision to be the next
important step towards the stabilization of the situation
in Burundi. Our unity demonstrates the Council’s
readiness to take responsibility and to react in a timely
and efficient manner.
The message to the Government of Burundi should
be clear: it should respect, protect and guarantee
all human rights and fundamental freedoms for all
citizens of the country; and all those responsible for
gross violations and abuses of human rights, as well
as violations of international humanitarian law, in
Burundi should be held responsible.
We welcome the active role of the African Union
and of the East African Community in the mediation
efforts. In that regard, we would like to underscore that
every tool available to ensure the implementation of
commitments in the area of human rights by all sides
has to be applied in full. To that end, the cooperation
of the Government of Burundi with all United Nations
and African Union human rights observers, as well as
with the United Nations independent investigation on
Burundi established by the Human Rights Council last
December, is of the utmost priority.
(spoke in French)
Taking into account the main role of the countries
of the region in mediating and finding a lasting solution
to the crisis in Burundi, we would like to underscore
the need to increase the pressure by the international
community on the Government of Burundi in order to
set a concrete and precise timetable of steps to relaunch
the inter-Burundian dialogue in a truly inclusive
manner.
My delegation believes that the contribution of
police is very important to increase the capacity of the
United Nations to monitor the security situation and
promote respect for human rights. At the same time, we
would like to underscore that the effectiveness of that
future presence will depend upon on the impartiality of
the mandate and clear goals, as well as the availability
of the necessary means to carry out its functions.
Mr. Pressman (United States of America): Let me
begin by congratulating you, Mr. President, and the
Chinese delegation on assuming the presidency of the

S/PV.7664

Security Council. I also thank you for convening us
this evening.
The situation in Burundi is beyond fragile. The
ongoing repression, harassment and violence against
the legitimate political opposition, the closure of free
and impartial media, and widespread impunity for
human rights violations and abuses — including those
involving killings and alleged sexual violence by
security services against political opponents, members
of civil society and others — continue. Almost a quarter
of a million Burundians have fled the country since
April 2015 out of fear for their lives, and countless
more have been internally displaced. People do not
flee in the hundreds of thousands unless there is a very
serious problem.
Against that backdrop, let us be clear: progress
will be measured by peace, and peace will come from
genuine political dialogue that is inclusive. To date,
while there have been opening ceremonies, the real
discussions have not commenced. We strongly support
former President Mkapa in his efforts to move the
process forward and we urge that a date be scheduled for
discussions to begin. Each day that this crisis continues
makes it that much harder for Burundi to regain the
progress it has achieved over the past decade, risking a
much longer-term and much deadlier crisis.
While in our discussions some pointed to the release
of a “significant number of prisoners”, resolution
2279 (2016) does not do that. The resolution instead
welcomes “the steps made by the Government of
Burundi” towards that end and urges them to fulfil their
commitments. The progress made by the Government
of Burundi to date is woefully insufficient. There have
been plenty of press releases, but not enough political
prisoner releases. We acknowledge the Government’s
acts of clemency for prisoners who are old, under-aged
or infirm, but that is not the same as releasing political
prisoners, and they must begin to deliver on those
important promises.
We have been promised that free media would be
allowed to operate, but only two out of five banned outlets
are today operating. It was agreed that 200 African
Union (AU) human rights and military observers would
be deployed, but today there are currently 32 human
rights observers and 15 military observers on the ground
in Burundi, and they do not have a memorandum of
understanding with the Government.

16-094205/8

S/PV.7664

The situation in Burundi

Recognizing the enormity of those problems,
today’s action by the Security Council is indeed
important. With this resolution, the Security Council
expresses its support for the African Union’s efforts
in Burundi, including the deployment of the 200 AU
human rights observers and military observers. We
call on the Government of Burundi to cooperate fully
to facilitate the implementation of the mandate of the
human rights observers and military experts.
With this resolution, the Security Council endorses
the East African Community-led, regionally mediated
dialogue. Only such an inclusive and regionally
mediated dialogue can resolve this crisis and restore
stability to Burundi. We urge all stakeholders to
expedite the resumption of the dialogue in pursuit of a
peaceful and consensual path forward for Burundi.

01/04/2016

China has always supported Africa in resolving
African issues in an African way and appreciates the
constructive mediation efforts on this issue by the East
African Community and other relevant regional and
subregional organizations. The unanimous adoption of
resolution 2279 (2016) by the Security Council signifies
the strong support of the international community
for the East African Community-led mediation and
demonstrates the firm support of the international
community for a political settlement for this issue. China
hopes that by implementing resolution 2279 (2016)
the relevant parties will fully respect the sovereignty,
independence and territorial integrity of Burundi,
strengthen their consultation with the Government of
Burundi and jointly agree on a solution so as to achieve
peace, security, stability and development in Burundi
at an early date.

With this resolution, the Security Council urges the
Government of Burundi to deliver in reality what it has
committed to in the press.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Council.

With this resolution, the Security Council has
sent a strong message to the Government of Burundi
and the opposition to cease all violence, refrain from
provocation and commit to peacefully resolving this
crisis through dialogue — a dialogue based on respect
for the Arusha Agreement.

Mr. Shingiro (Burundi) (spoke in French): At
the outset, Mr. President, my delegation would like
to congratulate you personally and your country,
the People’s Republic of China, for acceding to the
presidency of the Security Council for the month of
April. I would also like to thank you, Sir, for having
organized this important meeting devoted to the
adoption of resolution 2279 (2016), on Burundi,
especially as it takes its place following resolution 2248
(2015), which remains very topical.

And with this resolution, we are today sending a
more robust, larger international civilian presence into
Burundi to advance political dialogue, security and
the rule of law. We are also asking for options for the
deployment of a police mission, which should include
options on the deployment of formed police units, to
Burundi to advance rule of law.
The United States appreciates the efforts the
Security Council members and our colleagues made to
find consensus on this important resolution.
The President (spoke in Chinese): I shall now
make a statement in my capacity as the representative
of China.
China believes that political dialogue is the only
way out of the situation in Burundi. China welcomes
the positive efforts by the Government of Burundi
to safeguard the stability of the country and promote
national reconciliation, and encourages all parties in
Burundi to actively participate in dialogue and resolve
their differences peacefully.
6/8

I give the floor to the representative of Burundi.

I would also like to thank all of the other members
of the Security Council that have spared no effort to
assist Burundians to find their own solutions to political
issues that concern them. I would also thank you,
Mr. President, for the great flexibility you have shown
during several hours of intense negotiations, which
reflects your awareness of the lofty responsibility you
have to safeguard international peace and security,
which is, of course, the main mission of the Council.
Without taking an exhaustive look at the entire
resolution that has just been adopted, I would like to
make a few general comments — constructive ones,
of course — on certain passages of the text that are
important for peacebuilding process in Burundi.
I would like to begin with the preambular part,
which is dominated by the question of the protection of
human rights and the promotion of the rule of law, and by
16-09420

01/04/2016

The situation in Burundi

the fight against impunity in particular. My delegation
takes note of the appeals of the Security Council on this
matter and promises to do everything it can to ensure
that this advice would be followed by concrete facts on
the ground in an atmosphere of total transparency.
On this specific issue, however, I would like to
recall that the Government of Burundi has always
attached great importance to human rights issues. We
have adopted a zero-tolerance policy with respect to
human rights, and the National Independent Human
Rights Commission is working day and night to take up
this challenge. Despite the very tangible progress on the
ground, we humbly acknowledge that there have been
human rights violation here and there, as there have
been elsewhere. We have set up a judicial commission
of inquiry to shed light on certain allegations of human
rights violations since the beginning of the uprising to
the present day. Resolution 2279 (2016) refers to this in
its preambular part and in paragraph 2.
We furthermore recall that the Government of
Burundi has made the fight against impunity the
centrepiece of its priorities, and all of this without
taking into account political affiliations. We cooperate
very closely with the Office of the United Nations
High Commissioner for Human Rights, to which we
have given free access to our services for reasons of
transparency. We have offered the same quality of
cooperation with United Nations human rights experts
who, as you know, Mr. President, visited Burundi from
1 to 8 March.
With respect to freedom of expression and civil
society, I would like to inform Council members once
again that Burundi has a great tradition of freedom
of expression as well as a tradition of active civil
society in the region, and we would like to strengthen
this practice and make it permanent. That leads me to
thank the Council for having acknowledged, through
paragraph 4 of the current resolution, the recent
good measures taken by the Government of Burundi
with a view to easing political tensions and restoring
confidence among the financial and technical partners
of our country.
As is underscored in the resolution the Council has
just adopted, we recently authorized the reopening of
private radio stations that were destroyed in the wake of
the attempted coup of 13 May 2015, namely, the Radio
Isanganiro and Radio-Television Rema FM, which are
both back on the air broadcasting freely throughout

S/PV.7664

the national territory. Besides those stations, which
have been authorized to resume their activities,
the National Council of Communication also has
authorized two private radio stations — Izere FM and
Humuriza — and without forgetting, I would stress,
that judicial proceedings against two civil society
non-governmental organizations were lifted, namely,
PARCEM and AJCB, which now have free access to
their bank accounts. That is something new.
With respect to political dialogue, we reiterate our
firm commitment to continuing an inclusive, frank and
sincere inter-Burundian dialogue among the peaceful
and clearly committed young men and women of the
country, those from within the country as well as those
in the diaspora, who are determined to find peaceful
solutions to our disputes. We also welcome the fact
that paragraph 5 of the resolution refers explicitly to
the importance of conducting a dialogue with only
non-violent actors, which automatically excludes the
coup plotters who wanted to overthrow democratic
institutions through unconstitutional means, which
violates the purposes ​a nd principles of the Charter of
the United Nations.
From a regional point of view and within the East
African Community, consultations are ongoing with
the facilitation and with the region in order to come
to an agreement — some delegations have pointed this
out — on two important points, namely, who should
take part in the dialogue in an objective way and what
the agenda will be, that is, what will be discussed at the
next session. Those are two very important issues. If
the dialogue has taken some time, it is not because of
the Government. We are ready to start even tomorrow.
Just give us the date and the agenda, and we are
ready to start and meet our compatriots. We therefore
remain quite committed to the dialogue in good faith.
As the Council is aware, the internal dynamics are
very advanced under the leadership of the National
Commission for the Inter-Burundian Dialogue, which
has done an excellent job throughout the country so that
everyone can have their say.
With regard to security, I confirm that it is
generally good throughout the national territory and
that citizens are going about their activities in calmly,
except for some residual elements of the opposition
who continue to throw grenades at peaceful citizens.
In that regard, my delegation welcomes the fact that
the Council has recognized the decrease in killings in
Burundi and has condemned the use of force to achieve

16-094207/8

S/PV.7664

The situation in Burundi

political objectives, whatever its origins or its authors,
including strong condemnation of the indiscriminate
throwing of grenades at peaceful citizens. We hope that
this message will be heard by those who remotely guide
such acts from host countries abroad. I note in passing
that no ideology or political struggle can justify such
senseless acts that take the lives of women and children
in our country.
Still on the subject of security, with regard to
the desire to continue the disarmament process in
transparency and full cooperation with our partners,
the Government of Burundi agreed, before the highlevel delegation of the African Union, to the deployment
in Bujumbura of 100 human rights observers and
100 unarmed military observers to observe what
we are doing. For us, transparency is a priority. If
the observers are not all yet in Bujumbura, it is not
because of the Government. The President made a
firm commitment, and we are ready to receive them
at any time. If there are administrative delays on the
part of the other party that has to sign the memorandum
of understanding, for Burundi’s part we are prepared
to do so at any time. It is a matter of improving the
existing memorandum — merely a matter of changing
the number of observers. Again, we are acting in good
faith. We are not stalling.
With regard to cooperation with the United
Nations, Burundi would once again like to reiterate
before the Council its full cooperation with the country
team and with the team of the Secretary-General’s
Special Representative, Mr. Jamal Benomar. We take
note of the offer of the contribution of police stipulated
in paragraph 10 of resolution 2279 (2016), which will
of course be determined in consultation with the
Government of Burundi. My country remains available
to the Secretary-General to discuss and agree upon
the nature, size and tasks of the police presence in
support the team of the special adviser envisaged in
resolution 2248 (2015).
In that regard — and this is extremely important
to emphasize — I recall that the primacy of the option
of an un-armed international presence was one of
the recommendations of the latest Summit of Heads
of State of the African Union, held in Addis Ababa;
of the the high-level delegation of the African Union
made up of five Presidents that visited Bujumbura
from 25 to 26 March; of the meeting of the ministerial

8/8

01/04/2016

committee of the International Conference on the Great
Lakes Region held on 10 February in Luanda; and of
the Government of Burundi itself via its Parliament.
All those actors have opposed an armed international,
preferring instead the presence of human rights
observers and unarmed military experts. That unarmed
configuration, and I emphasize this, which is also the
preference of the African Union, is what we expect
to discuss in detail with the Secretariat in a spirit of
openness and respect for national sovereignty.
With regard to acts of aggression from Rwanda,
which several credible reports have established,
including at the United Nations, my delegation welcomes
the call on regional States in paragraph 8 of today’s
resolution to contribute to a peaceful resolution of the
situation in Burundi and to refrain from supporting the
activities of armed groups. The resolution also reminds
all States of the region to respect the Peace, Security
and Cooperation Framework for the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and the Region and the 1951
Convention relating to the Status of Refugees. Among
other things, that Convention emphasizes the need to
respect the civilian character of refugee camps — as
recalled as well by the Secretary-General himself here
on 21 March (see S/PV.7653) in the presence of several
ministers from the region. We hope that Kigali will
unequivocally hear that call by the Council so that
that neighbouring country, with which we share so
much, immediately ceases to facilitate the recruitment,
training and arming of the negative forces that commit
acts of aggression in our country. We also welcome the
fact that paragraph 9 of the resolution also pertains to
actors outside Burundian territory, including others in
the region.
With regard to cooperation with our partners, we
appreciate the fact that the Council pays particular
attention to the issue in the preambular part of the
resolution, notably by encouraging bilateral and
multilateral partners and the Government of Burundi to
continue their dialogue in order to create a favourable
environment for a resumption of assistance to Burundi.
I would like to conclude by saying that my country
of course welcomes that appeal. We remain very
committed to make every effort to rectify the situation
at the political and security levels, in the interests of the
Burundian people and of the region.
The meeting rose at 7.45 p.m.

16-09420
