S/PV.7514

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventieth year

7514th meeting

Friday, 28 August 2015, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mrs. Ogwu. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Nigeria)

Members:

Angola. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Chad . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Chile . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Jordan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Lithuania. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Malaysia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
New Zealand . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Spain. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Gaspar Martins
Mr. Gombo
Mr. Barros Melet
Mr. Zhao Yong
Mr. Lamek
Mrs. Kawar
Mrs. Jakubonė
Mr. Abdul Razak
Mr. Taula
Mr. Iliichev
Mr. Gasso Matoses
Mr. Rycroft
Mr. Pressman
Mr. Ramírez Carreño

Agenda
The situation in Guinea-Bissau
Report of the Secretary-General on the progress made with regard to the
stabilization of and restoration of constitutional order in Guinea-Bissau
(S/2015/619)
Report of the Secretary-General on developments in Guinea-Bissau and the
activities of the United Nations Integrated Peacebuilding Office in GuineaBissau (S/2015/626)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

15-26668 (E)
*1526668*

S/PV.7514

The situation in Guinea-Bissau

The meeting was called to order at 10.05 a.m.

Nations Integrated Peacebuilding Office in GuineaBissau (UNOGBIS).

Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in Guinea-Bissau
Report of the Secretary-General on the
progress made with regard to the stabilization
of and restoration of constitutional order in
Guinea-Bissau (S/2015/619)
Report of the Secretary-General on developments
in Guinea-Bissau and the activities of the
United Nations Integrated Peacebuilding Office
in Guinea-Bissau (S/2015/626)
The President: In accordance with rule 37 of the
Council’s provisional rules of procedure, I invite the
representatives of Guinea-Bissau, Senegal and TimorLeste to participate in this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the following
briefers to participate in this meeting: Mr. Miguel
Trovoada, Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral and Head of the United Nations Integrated
Peacebuilding Office in Guinea-Bissau, and His
Excellency Mr. Antonio de Aguiar Patriota, Chair of
the Guinea-Bissau configuration of the Peacebuilding
Commission and Permanent Representative of Brazil.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I wish to draw the attention of Council members to
document S/2015/619, which contains the report of the
Secretary-General on the progress made with regard
to the stabilization of and restoration of constitutional
order in Guinea-Bissau.
I also wish to draw the attention of Council
members to document S/2015/626, which contains the
report of the Secretary-General on developments in
Guinea-Bissau and the activities of the United Nations
Integrated Peacebuilding Office in Guinea-Bissau.
I now give the floor to Mr. Trovoada.
Mr. Trovoada (spoke in French): I thank you,
Madam President, for the opportunity afforded me to
present to the Security Council the most recent report
(S/2015/626) of the Secretary-General on the situation
in Guinea Bissau and on the activities of the United

2/8

28/08/2015

His Excellency the President of the Republic of
Guinea-Bissau, Mr. José Mário Vaz, who had planned to
speak at this Council meeting, decided to resign owing
to the recent political events in his country. Just a little
over a year after the restoration of the constitutional
order, Guinea-Bissau is again experiencing political
turbulence, following the President’s dismissal of the
Government of Prime Minister Domingos Simões
Pereira, on 12 August. On August 20, Mr. Baciro Djá,
former Minister of the Presidency of the Council of
Ministers of the dismissed Government, was appointed
Prime Minister by a presidential decree and was sworn
in by the President on the same day. Before removing
the Prime Minister, President Vaz sent a message to the
nation in which he set forth his observations about the
state of the country, the action of the executive power, the
relations among the country’s institutions, in general,
and between himself and the Head of Government, in
particular, and on the factors giving rise to a serious
political crisis that, under the Constitution, could lead
to the fall of the Government.
This is an unexpected situation, since the main
institutions of the State, formed after the general
elections of April and May 2014, are all from the same
political family, the African Party for the Independence
of Guinea and Cabo Verde. The party, whose statute
states that, if the party wins the election, its leader
will be the candidate for Prime Minister, now enjoys
an absolute majority in Parliament. Moreover, the party
chose among its leaders and presented as presidential
candidate the current President of the country. The
dismissed Government was inclusive, including almost
all political parties represented in the People’s National
Assembly, which guaranteed that it had a comfortable
base of parliamentary support. It therefore seemed that,
a priori, the main conditions had been met to ensure a
framework for political stability that was favourable to
the proper functioning of the State. Upon the initiative
of the Government, and with the support of the United
Nations Development Programme and the European
Union, a round table of Guinea-Bissau’s cooperation
partners was held in Brussels last March, the results
of which have opened for the country the prospect
of obtaining significant financial resources for the
realization of its Strategic and Operational Plan 20152020.

15-26668

28/08/2015

The situation in Guinea-Bissau

In previous reports to the Security Council on
Guinea-Bissau, it was always emphasized that stability
in the country remained fragile because the underlying
causes of the recurrent instability that undermined it
had not been eradicated. Recently, the statements made
in public by the State’s highest officials gave rise to an
impression that there was a climate of political tension
that might lead to institutional failure if they did not
seek to overcome their disagreements through dialogue.
The absence of this essential dialogue left the way open
to the heightening of mutual distrust and the deepening
of antagonisms, ensuring that the country would arrive
at the point where it is today.
In the exercise of the good offices mission of the
Secretary-General that I lead locally in Guinea-Bissau
in his name and as his representative, I maintain frequent
contacts with Government entities at the highest levels
and with the political class and the different components
of civil society. Given the unfolding of current events,
these contacts have been intensified in order to urge
the parties concerned to favour dialogue as the most
reliable tool to achieve a lasting solution to the conflict
among them. I am pleased to note that representatives
of the international community in Guinea-Bissau,
both bilaterally and multilaterally, were mobilized and
engaged in the same direction, making their voices heard
in unison and calling for dialogue and an agreement
in order to safeguard political stability and peace, so
that the achievements of the return to democratic order
and constitutional normality would not be called into
question.
It is worth noting here the efforts made personally
by Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon and by the
President Macky Sall of Senegal and President Alpha
Condé of Guinea, in their respective capacities as Chair
of the Economic Community of West African States
and that organization’s mediator for Guinea-Bissau.
I also wish to commend the positions of solidarity
with the people of Guinea-Bissau expressed by the
African Union, the European Union, the Community of
Portuguese-speaking Countries and the Peacebuilding
Commission and its country-specific configuration
for Guinea-Bissau, the presence of whose Chair,
Ambassador Antonio de Aguiar Patriota, I welcome,
as well as the many other organizations and friendly
countries that voiced concern about the current crisis
and expressed their hope that Guinea-Bissau would
rise to the stability challenge and continue without
upheavals on the path towards economic development

S/PV.7514

and progress. The Council has also closely followed
the situation through briefings, after which it has
made public statements in support of dialogue and
consultation.
Before concluding, I would like to make three
observations about the political situation in GuineaBissau.
First, the political parties and all those who have
a role to play in resolving this crisis are proclaiming
their firm determination to democratically defend
their rights and their legitimacy in the context of strict
respect for the Constitution and the law. Secondly, the
demonstrations that have taken place so far have been
peaceful, orderly and without any clashes or violence.
Thirdly, during a meeting I had with the Chief of the
General Staff, including the commanders of the three
branches of the armed forces, the military strongly
affirmed that it was determined to remain completely
outside the political scene and observe a republican
attitude of submission to civil authority and obedience
to the Constitution and the democratic institutions of
the State.
The international community, which has always
supported Guinea-Bissau in the course of the various
hardships that the country has faced, remains open
to backing it in its march towards development and
progress, as was recently demonstrated again at the
Brussels round table. But it is clear that, in a scenario
of repeated crises without peace or lasting stability,
support from the international community has not been
able to find fertile ground so that its efforts can fully
achieve the desired objectives. I am convinced that the
leaders of Guinea-Bissau, in whom the people have
placed their hope and trust, are well aware of that fact
and that, in an outpouring of patriotism and sense of
responsibility to history, they will do everything within
their reach not to jeopardize the great opportunity
they have before them to transform their country and
significantly improve the living conditions of their
people.
The President: I thank Mr. Trovoada for his
briefing.
I now give the floor to Mr. Patriota.
Mr. De Aguiar Patriota: I wish to thank you,
Madam President, for the invitation to address the
Security Council this morning in my capacity as
the Chair of the Guinea-Bissau configuration of the

15-266683/8

S/PV.7514

The situation in Guinea-Bissau

Peacebuilding Commission (PBC). Let me also thank
Special Representative of the Secretary-General
Miguel Trovoada for his detailed briefing and update
on the political crisis that Guinea-Bissau is facing
today. I am particularly grateful for his ongoing efforts
to help end the crisis and for his cooperation with the
Peacebuilding Commission in this matter and in the
broader peacebuilding agenda in Guinea-Bissau.
Last week on 17 August 2015, I chaired a meeting
of the Guinea-Bissau configuration of the PBC to
discuss the situation in Guinea-Bissau and ways for the
PBC to respond to the escalation of a crisis that had
begun as tension between President Vaz and former
Prime Minister Simões Pereira. At that meeting, I
reported a telephone conversation I had with Special
Representative of the Secretary-General Trovoada
on Friday, 14 August. The configuration also heard
a comprehensive briefing by Mr. João Honwana,
Director of the Africa II Division of the Department of
Political Affairs (DPA). Their insightful input enabled
members of the PBC to have a useful discussion. A
statement was issued on 18 August in which the PBC
expressed concern that recent political developments
might undermine the progress achieved so far and
risk destabilizing the fragile political situation in the
country and compromise economic progress. In the
statement, the PBC regretted that national, regional and
international efforts to help resolve the political crisis, in
particular the Security Council statement of 12 August
(SC/12007) calling for the resumption of dialogue and
the statement of the representatives of the international
community in Bissau issued on 10 August, as well as
the engagement of the African Union, the Community
of Portuguese-speaking Countries and the European
Union, had not prevented an escalation of the crisis.
The PBC called for the resumption of political
dialogue in order to address the current tensions,
with full respect for the national Constitution and the
rule of law, and for the national stakeholders to find
a concerted way out of the current political crisis. To
complement the briefing and suggestions of the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General Trovoada, let
me offer three main comments.
First, the current crisis carries the risk of having
a negative impact on the already fragile economic
situation, the stability of the country and its democratic
gains. The PBC believes that Guinea-Bissau was making
good progress towards stabilization and development
since the elections of 2014 and the round table held

4/8

28/08/2015

in Brussels in March 2015. Our main goal should be
to prevent possible escalation of the political crisis to
undermine the progress achieved so far. The PBC and
the international community as a whole have invested
in those processes and in the overall peacebuilding
agenda in Guinea-Bissau. The efforts undertaken by
the PBC have greatly contributed to the holding of free,
fair and transparent elections, resulting in a legitimate,
competent and inclusive Government for the first time
in the history of the country.
For its part, since September 2013, the
Peacebuilding Fund has allocated approximately
$4.8 million to contribute to establishing the
constitutional order, filling crucial gaps through a
package of immediate-response-facility projects,
which include support for the Electoral Commission,
peace dividends through employment for youth and
women, joint work of the DPA and the High-level
Commission for Planning, electoral security, the media
during and after the elections, women’s participation
in the elections and the Transnational Crime Unit in
Bissau as part of the West Africa Coast Initiative. More
recently, the Peacebuilding Fund has approved a new
peacebuilding priority plan, amounting to $10 million
to help the Government implement crucial reforms.
Secondly, the nature of the crisis illustrates that
there may be space for debates on better delineating
the spheres of competence of the President and the
Prime Minister so as to avoid it becoming a source
of instability and fragility in an otherwise promising
environment. In that regard, should Bissau-Guineans
eventually decide to go forward with a political reform
and request for support, the United Nations Integrated
Peacebuilding Office in Guinea-Bissau and the
Community of Portuguese-speaking Countries are well
positioned to provide the expertise that may be required
for a revision of the Constitution.
Thirdly, it is worth noting that the various partners
of Guinea-Bissau have been consistent, speaking
with one voice, in their engagement on the crisis. The
role played by the region as well as the coherence
demonstrated by international partners will remain
a key element to achieve any sustainable solution. In
that vein, one cannot overemphasize that the current
political deadlock can be overcome only by BissauGuineans themselves, through a constructive dialogue
based on full respect for the constitutional provisions
and the rule of law. The success of Guinea-Bissau is in
the hands of its Government and people.

15-26668

28/08/2015

The situation in Guinea-Bissau

To conclude, allow me to point out that the PBC
will continue to complement the work of the Security
Council in providing support and advice to the
authorities of Guinea-Bissau to address the current
crisis and to implement the broader peacebuilding
agenda in the country.
The President: I thank Mr. De Aguiar Patriota for
his briefing.
I now give the floor to the representative of GuineaBissau.
Mr. Da Gama (Guinea-Bissau): I thank you,
Madam President, for inviting my delegation to the
Security Council. I wish to congratulate you on Nigeria’s
presidency of the Council for the month of August and
to wish the Council successful deliberations. It is an
honour to see you presiding at this important meeting
on the situation in Guinea-Bissau, a country in which
Nigeria is very much present and engaged.
Allow me to express my special thanks to His
Excellency Secretary-General Ban Ki-Moon for his
report on Guinea-Bissau (S/2015/626) and for his
personal engagement on the latest developments in
my country. The work of his Special Representative,
Mr. Miguel Trovoada, of the United Nations Integrated
Peacebuilding Office in Guinea-Bissau team and of all
United Nations offices and agencies in Guinea-Bissau
are also very much appreciated.
I would also like to thank His Excellency Ambassador
Antonio de Aguiar Pariota, Permanent Representative
of Brazil, in his capacity as Chair of the Guinea-Bissau
configuration of the Peacebuilding Commission;
Her Excellency Ambassador Sofia Mesquita Borges,
Permanent Representative of Timor-Leste, on behalf
of the Community of Portuguese-speaking Countries;
and His Excellency Ambassador Fodé Seck, Permanent
Representative of Senegal, on behalf of the Chair of
the Economic Community of West African States
(ECOWAS), for their briefings and for their engagement
on the situation in Guinea-Bissau.
After a short period on a relatively successful path
towards peace and development in the country, once
again Guinea-Bissau is confronted with a political
crisis. The misunderstanding between His Excellency
Mr. José Mário Vaz, President of the Republic, and
His Excellency Mr. Domingos Simões Pereira, Prime
Minister, unfortunately ended with the dismissal of
the Prime Minister, on 12 August, and the nomination

S/PV.7514

of His Excellency Mr. Baciro Djá as the new Prime
Minister, on 20 August.
Despite that situation, the calm and civility that
has been demonstrated by the population so far on the
decision of the National Assembly to seek the necessary
legal guidance of the Supreme Court — which also
rules on the constitutionality of decisions in the
absence of a constitutional court in the country — as to
the constitutionality of the nomination of a new Prime
Minister by the President is to be congratulated. That
democratic method for finding a solution to the existing
differences within the highest levels of the country, in
our view, offers assurances that, although difficult,
there will be a way out of the political crisis through
constitutional and legal procedures. The neutral
position of the military so far in the political crisis
is very much appreciated, and we hope that they will
maintain a position of noninterference.
In that context, we understand the resulting
frustration of our partners and all the friends of
Guinea-Bissau who have worked so hard to help us
to consolidate our democracy and to sustain longlasting peace and development. However, on behalf of
the peaceful people of Guinea-Bissau, who time and
time again have demonstrated their commitment to
the goals of peace and development, we are counting
on the hope that the Council and all our partners will
remain engaged with the country. Do not give up on the
people of Guinea-Bissau. The dreams and aspirations
of youth, and of women as mothers, for a better future
for their children are at risk. They have high hopes
and expectations on the programmes proposed by the
Government that led to the successful donor round
table on Guinea-Bissau held in Brussels in March, and
they are counting on all of the pledges made by all our
partners and friends.
We are aware that we Bissau-Guineans bear the
primary responsibility for resolving our internal
differences, avoiding instability and promoting
sustainable development. But without continued and
strong engagement on the part of the international
community and close and effective monitoring strategies,
all of the efforts made risk being compromised. To
that end, the support of the international community
towards a peaceful resolution of the current situation
is very important. It will help restore confidence in
Guinea-Bissau and promote an environment conducive
to the disbursement of the funds that have been pledged,
thereby leading to the implementation of the reforms

15-266685/8

S/PV.7514

The situation in Guinea-Bissau

and strategic development programmes that have been
proposed by the national authorities.
It has been repeated many times in the Council that
the instability in Guinea-Bissau will not end with the
elections, and the current situation is such an example.
The international community should do more to help
consolidate stronger institutions. And it should remain
alert and work more closely in terms of guidance,
through open and frank dialogue with the national
authorities and all political stakeholders, as a way to
prevent situations such as the one we are facing today.
It is our hope that the country will overcome this
crisis and that the relevant political stakeholders,
the National Assembly and civil society will remain
engaged in constructive dialogue for the good of
Guinea-Bissau and its people.
Before concluding, I would like to express our
gratitude for the engagement of the international
community in following the political situation in our
country. I also wish to commend the continued support
of the Secretary-General, the head of ECOWAS,
namely, the President of Senegal as its current Chair,
the President of the Republic of Guinea, the President
of Nigeria and all our partners and friends who have
tried their best, and are still trying, to mediate and help
Guinea-Bissau resolve the current political crisis and
regain its course towards the consolidation of peace and
achievement of sustainable development.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Senegal.
Mr. Ciss (Senegal) (spoke in French): The
Senegalese delegation thanks you, Madam President,
for allowing us to participate on behalf of the Chair
of the Economic Community of West African States
(ECOWAS). We welcome the holding of this meeting
of the Security Council devoted to the situation in
the Republic of Guinea-Bissau. We also take this
opportunity to commend your deft handling of the high
office of the presidency of the Council for the month
of August. Allow me also to commend the detailed and
informative briefings by Mr. Trovoada, Mr. De Aguiar
Patriota and the Permanent Representative of GuineaBissau.
The situation in Guinea-Bissau, which has
deteriorated significantly since a decree was issued
calling for Prime Minister, Mr. Domingos Simões
Pereira, to step down, remains troubling, at a time

6/8

28/08/2015

when the country needs more than ever before to forge a
robust consensus to overcome the numerous challenges
it continues to face. Aware of the need to establish and
preserve such consensus in order to contribute to the
stabilization of the country, His Excellency President
Macky Sall, ECOWAS Chair, has offered his good
offices in an attempt to renew dialogue among the
principal parties. Moreover, in order to prevent further
deterioration of the political climate in Guinea-Bissau,
he dispatched, on 23 June, his Minister for Foreign
Affairs who held talks with the country’s authorities,
with a view to bolstering confidence among them in
order to re-establish properly functioning institutions.
In addition, during his stay, the President’s envoy
took the opportunity to make courtesy calls of Special
Representative of the Secretary-General Trovoada,
representative of the European Union Victor Dos
Santos, African Union representative Pequeno and
ECOWAS representative Ansumana Ceesay.
Subsequently, President José Mário Vaz was
received in Dakar on 7 August, in the presence of His
Excellency President Alpha Condé of the Republic of
Guinea, who was also on an official visit to Dakar, with
a view to finding a solution to the political crisis in the
country.
Subsequently, on 20 August, President Macky Sall
received Mr. Olusegun Obasanjo, former President of
Nigeria, who carried a message from current President
Muhammadu Buhari and had come to gather opinions
and advice with a view to a mission that he was due
to undertake to Guinea-Bissau, which he ultimately
cancelled, following an appointment on that same day
of a new Prime Minister, namely, Mr. Baciro Djá. It
is therefore regrettable that the various aforementioned
efforts were insufficient to put an end to the crisis.
On 24 august, the National Assembly adopted a
resolution calling for the new Prime Minister to step
down. As we see it, the situation remains particularly
delicate. We believe it is important to call on the various
parties to show restraint, so as to ensure a better chance
for the diplomatic efforts with a view to establishing
trust and peace.
For his part, the ECOWAS Chair regretted the
stepping down of Prime Minister Pereira. He also
reiterated the commitment undertaken by the political
actors in Guinea-Bissau in March during the donor
conference in Brussels, including those undertaken by
President José Mário Vaz and Prime Minister Pereira

15-26668

28/08/2015

The situation in Guinea-Bissau

working together towards political stability, economic
development and security on behalf of the citizens of
Guinea-Bissau.
We highlight and welcome the responsible attitude
adopted by the army of Guinea-Bissau, which has kept
its distance from the events under way, thereby allowing
a greater chance of achieving a political solution to this
fragile situation.
Confident that a peaceful, lasting solution can be
found to the crisis under way, with the valuable assistance
of its partners, the ECOWAS Chair is convinced that the
building of peace and stability in Guinea-Bissau can
be achieved only through a consensual process, which
must be inclusive and nationally owned. Where there
is respect for the constitutional order, the interest and
well-being of the people of Guinea-Bissau will be at the
heart of the discussion to bolster national reconciliation,
democracy, good governance and development.
The political tensions should in no way
obscure the progress achieved thus far by GuineaBissau, particularly in terms of the constitutional
revision process, combating corruption through
strengthening the judicial system and improving the
administration, pursuing defence and security reform
and the establishment by the National Assembly of a
commission on peace and stability, in order to accelerate
the reconciliation process.
The situation I have described calls for pursuing
structural defence, security and justice reforms,
promoting the rule of law and socioeconomic
development, in line with the promotion and protection
of human rights and combating impunity.
ECOWAS therefore welcomes the success of the
donor round table on Guinea-Bissau held on 25 March
in Brussels, with the assistance of the United Nations
Development Programme and the European Union. At
the conference, international partners supported the
Government’s National Strategic and Operational Plan
for 2015-2020, with pledges standing at $1.2 billion.
In that respect, the Economic Community of West
African States calls on international partners to remain
strongly mobilized and committed in their support to
the stabilization process in Guinea-Bissau, particularly
by delivering on their commitments undertaken at that
occasion. Such support remains crucial for conducting
the aforementioned reforms.
For its part, ECOWAS is continuing its efforts to
help Guinea-Bissau maintain peace and security and

S/PV.7514

to support the reconciliation process. Aware of the
importance of security and defence sector reform in
the stabilization process, the forty-seventh ordinary
session of ECOWAS Heads of State and Government,
held in Accra on 19 May, extended the mandate of the
ECOWAS Mission in Guinea-Bissau until 31 December.
In any case, it goes without saying that security sector
reform also requires increased efforts to curb drug
trafficking and transnational organized crime in all its
forms and manifestations.
The challenges ahead to achieve stabilization in
Guinea-Bissau remain enormous. The normalization of
the situation in the country will undoubtedly require
bolstering democratic gains and coordinating the
actions of the various partners in support of efforts
made by the Government of Guinea-Bissau. To that end,
ECOWAS remains more than ever willing to pursue
the work launched with all its partners in order to help
Guinea-Bissau to emerge from the current situation.
Allow me to commend the special emphasis placed
by the Security Council on the situation in GuineaBissau, as well as to commend the efforts of the
Secretary-General and of the United Nations Integrated
Peacebuilding Office in Guinea-Bissau, in addition to
the important support of all the bodies of the United
Nations system, the European Union, the African
Union, Community of Portuguese-speaking Countries,
the World Bank and the African Development Bank.
The hope kindled of a return to constitutional
order following presidential and legislative elections
in Guinea-Bissau must not be extinguished. That is the
very essence of the commitment of ECOWAS, including
Senegal, towards lasting peace and the harmonious
socioeconomic development in Guinea-Bissau.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Timor-Leste.
Mrs. Mesquita Borges (Timor-Leste): At the outset,
let me thank you, Madam President, for presiding over
this meeting and on assumping the presidency of the
Security Council for this month. I thank Mr. Trovoada,
Special Representative of the Secretary-General for
Guinea-Bissau, for his briefing to the Council and his
efforts to resolve the crisis.
I am honoured to address the Council on behalf
of the Community of Portuguese-speaking Countries
(CPLP), whose members include Angola, Brazil,
Cape Verde, Equatorial Guinea, Guinea-Bissau,
Mozambique, Portugal, Sao Tomé and Principe and my

15-266687/8

S/PV.7514

The situation in Guinea-Bissau

own country, Timor-Leste. We welcome the statements
issued by the Council on the situation in Guinea-Bissau,
as well as the Secretary-General’s reports (S/2015/619
and S/2015/626), whose recommendations we fully
endorse.
Since the peaceful, free and fair elections of 2014,
in which the people of Guinea-Bissau clearly expressed
their desire for stability and their commitment to
democratic rule, much progress has been made in
Guinea-Bissau, not only in the provision of services to
the population, or the payment of arrears, but also in
the important steps made concerning the much-needed
reforms and on consolidation of the rule of law. It is
vital for Guinea-Bissau and its people that the gains
made are not jeopardized, and that the reforms continue
to be implemented.
The CPLP member States regret the recent political
developments and remain deeply concerned at the
current situation in Guinea-Bissau. We call on all
stakeholders, namely, the organs of sovereignty, the
political parties represented in Parliament, civil society
and others, to engage in constructive political dialogue.
Statesmanship is required to defuse the current political
crisis, with full respect of the Constitution and the rule
of law, as well as the spirit of inclusion.
While the authorities in Guinea-Bissau are solely
responsible for resolving the political crisis, it is
crucial that the process fully respect the Constitution.
It is equally paramount to the continued stability of the
country that the reforms initiated be pursued, especially
the reforms of the security and justice sectors and the
fight against impunity. We welcome the fact that the
armed forces of Guinea-Bissau are complying with
their constitutional role and the law by avoiding any
interference in the present political crisis.
The national Strategic and Operational Plan,
entitled “Terra Ranka”, reflects the aspirations
of Bissau-Guineans for greater political stability
and socioeconomic development, as well as for the
consolidation of the rule of law and the protection
and promotion of civil, political, economic, social
and cultural rights. The document, presented by the
President and the Prime Minister at the donor round

8/8

28/08/2015

table in Brussels in March, garnered the support of the
international partners. The current political crisis could
undermine the progress already made in that regard,
and compromise continued economic progress.
We call on the international community to
continue to support Guinea-Bissau and its people
in the implementation of the State reforms and
development plans. At the same time, we stress that the
key responsibility for achieving the necessary stable
environment of political and institutional cooperation
rests on the national stakeholders.
In conclusion, we would like to recognize the
concerted efforts of the international community to
assist Guinea-Bissau in the crisis. In that regard, we
appreciate and commend the efforts of the Peacebuilding
Commission, in particular those of Ambassador
Patriota, Chair of the Guinea-Bissau configuration,
who convened an opportune meeting on 17 August
to evaluate the situation. The meeting resulted in a
statement that the CPLP fully endorses.
We also welcome the efforts made by regional
leaders and by regional organizations, such as the
African Union and the Economic Community of
West African States (ECOWAS). In particular, we
thank ECOWAS for its mediation efforts and for the
ECOWAS Mission in Guinea-Bissau’s important role in
maintaining peace and security.
The CPLP stands ready, together with the rest of
the international community, to continue its support
to Guinea-Bissau, while fully respecting national
ownership. I take this opportunity to inform Council
members that, at its meeting of the Council of Ministers
held in Dili in July, the CPLP decided to deploy to
Guinea-Bissau in the near future a joint mission of the
President of the CPLP Council of Ministers and the
Executive Secretary.
The President: There are no more names inscribed
on the list of speakers.
I now invite Council members to informal
consultations to continue our discussion on the subject.
The meeting rose at 10.50 a.m.

15-26668
