S/PV.9142

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-seventh year

9142nd meeting

Friday, 30 September 2022, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. De Rivière/Mrs. Jaraud-Darnault. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(France)

Members:

Albania . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Brazil. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Gabon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ghana . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
India . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ireland. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kenya. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Mexico. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Norway . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Arab Emirates . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Ms. Dautllari
Mr. De Almeida Filho
Mr. Dai Bing
Mr. Biang
Mr. Korbieh
Mr. Raguttahalli
Mr. Mythen
Mr. Kimani
Mr. Gómez Robledo Verduzco
Ms. Heimerback
Ms. Evstigneeva
Mrs. Alhefeiti
Mr. Kariuki
Mr. Mills

Agenda
The situation concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo
Report of the Secretary-General on the United Nations Organization
Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo (S/2022/709)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

2260732 (E)
*2260732*

S/PV.9142

The situation concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo

The meeting was called to order at 10 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation concerning the Democratic Republic
of the Congo
Report of the Secretary-General on the
United Nations Organization Stabilization
Mission in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo (S/2022/709)
The President: In accordance with rule 37 of the
Council’s provisional rules of procedure, I invite the
representatives of Burundi, the Democratic Republic of
the Congo and Rwanda to participate in this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the following
briefers to participate in this meeting: Ms. Bintou Keita,
Special Representative of the Secretary-General and
Head of the United Nations Organization Stabilization
Mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo, and
Mr. Emery Mudinga, Director of the Angaza Institute.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I wish to draw the attention of Council members to
document S/2022/709, which contains the report of the
Secretary-General on the United Nations Organization
Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo.
At this meeting, the Security Council will hear
briefings by Special Representative Keita; Ambassador
Biang, Permanent Representative of Gabon, in his
capacity as Chair of the Security Council Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1533 (2004),
concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo; and
Mr. Mudinga.
Ms. Keita (spoke in French): I thank you, Sir,
for giving me the opportunity to take the floor today
to present the report of the Secretary-General on the
situation in the Democratic Republic of the Congo
(S/2022/709).
I welcome the presence of Mr. Georges NzongolaNtalaja, Permanent Representative of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo to the United Nations, and
Mr. Emery Mudinga, a Congolese civil society
representative who joins us from Bukavu.
2/23

30/09/2022

Since the previous report (S/2022/503), significant
progress has been made in the preparations for the
general elections to be held by December 2023. The
promulgation of the revised electoral law on 29 June
and the development of its implementation measures
by the Independent National Electoral Commission,
the establishment of thematic consultation frameworks
with women, young people, political parties and civil
society, and the preparations for the launch of voter
registration next December are all important steps. I
welcome the efforts of the Government, the Parliament
and the Independent National Electoral Commission
to establish the legal framework and conditions for the
proper conduct of the elections.
However, major challenges remain — notably in
relation to reaching a broad consensus on the various
aspects of the electoral process. In that regard, I reiterate
the readiness of the United Nations Organization
Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic
of the Congo (MONUSCO) and its good offices to
facilitate dialogue and ensure a transparent, inclusive
and peaceful process held within the constitutional
time frame, while supporting the active participation of
women and young people at every stage.
The ordinary parliamentary session that opened on
15 September, dedicated to the 2023 budget, offers an
opportunity to address the socioeconomic challenges
facing the Democratic Republic of the Congo. The Prime
Minister tabled the 2023 budget bill with the National
Assembly. The draft budget of $14.6 billion represents
an increase of approximately 32 per cent over the 2022
budget. That is the result of good macroeconomic
performance and record tax collections, marking
significant progress in financial governance, which has
been supported by efforts in the area of accountability,
notably through the operationalization of the Court
of Audit.
The adoption of the budget should make it possible
to accelerate the implementation of the development
programme for the 145 territories and to provide the
Independent National Electoral Commission with the
necessary means to conduct the electoral process. I
would also like to emphasize the strategic nature of
the 2022-2025 military programming law, estimated
at $1 billion per year, which Parliament must examine.
That instrument is essential to allow the Forces armées
de la République démocratique du Congo (FARDC)
to grow in strength and to carry out security sector
2260732

30/09/2022

The situation concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo

reforms, both of which are fundamental to meeting the
country’s security challenges.
(spoke in English)
My call to empower the FARDC stems from the
persistent security challenges in eastern Democratic
Republic of the Congo. Armed groups continue
to pose a significant threat and commit violence
against civilians. Most abuses are being perpetrated
by the Coopérative pour le développement du Congo
(CODECO), the Allied Democratic Forces (ADF) and
the Mouvement du 23 mars (M-23) in Ituri and North
Kivu, while Mayi-Mayi groups and other militias have
intensified attacks on civilians in South Kivu.
That insecurity fuels human rights violations
and has exacerbated an already dire humanitarian
situation. An estimated 27 million people are in need of
humanitarian assistance, with many having protection
needs. A clear indicator of the deteriorating situation is
the surge in internal displacement since January 2022,
which has brought the total number of displaced people
to 5.5 million — the largest caseload in Africa.
In that context, I strongly condemn attacks against
humanitarian workers, which reached their highest
level since the beginning of the year in the month of
July, with 34 security incidents recorded. I call on the
Congolese authorities to take all necessary measures
to ensure the safety of humanitarian personnel and
installations and to provide security for the delivery of
life-saving assistance.
I applaud the commitment of the humanitarian
community to stay and deliver and scale up its
operations. Its ability to do so will require longterm engagement with communities and other key
actors, as well as predictable funding. To date, the
2022 humanitarian response plan for the Democratic
Republic of the Congo has received 37 per cent of the
$1.88 billion required. I therefore call on donors to
continue their support, while thanking them for the
life-saving contributions already provided.
MONUSCO remains fully mobilized to address the
persistent insecurity created by the criminal activities
of armed groups in the eastern Democratic Republic
of the Congo. The force has continued to engage with
military governors and operational commanders and
has maintained a robust posture, while providing
operational, logistical and tactical support to both
the FARDC and the Congolese National Police in

S/PV.9142

the fight against all armed groups. The Mission is
working with the FARDC to conduct joint offensive
operations in areas affected by the ADF and CODECO,
in compliance with the United Nations Human Rights
Due Diligence Policy. Those efforts are supported by
information-sharing through the Centre de Coordination
des Opérations, which was set up in Goma in November
2021. The Mission continues to prioritize the allocation
of resources to support the implementation of its
protection-of-civilians mandate and has adopted a new
lay-down to compensate for the redeployment of units
to contain the M-23 in the Rutshuru territory.
In addition to the efforts of MONUSCO and the
national security forces, regional initiatives are also
under way to support the stabilization of the eastern
Democratic Republic of the Congo and the easing of
regional tensions fuelled by the M-23’s resurgence.
Those
regional
initiatives
require
consistent
international support. On 22 July, the Heads of State
of the East African Community (EAC) appointed the
then-President of Kenya, Uhuru Kenyatta, as Facilitator
of the Nairobi process and directed that a special fund
be established for military operations. On 8 September,
the Government of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo and the East African Community secretariat
signed a status of forces agreement for its regional force
to be deployed in the eastern part of the country for an
initial period of six months. As I speak, a contingent
of the Burundian armed forces has already deployed
in South Kivu, while Operation Shujaa, the joint
operation against the ADF between the FARDC and the
Uganda People’s Defence Force, is continuing in North
Kivu and Ituri. I want to stress the vital importance
of effective coordination between MONUSCO and all
the forces deployed on Congolese territory in order to
enable the Mission to fully carry out its mandate for the
protection of civilians.
I welcome the adoption on 6 July of the Luanda
road map by President Tshisekedi Tshilombo of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and President
Kagame of Rwanda, through the mediation of
President João Lourenço of Angola, current Chair
of the International Conference on the Great Lakes
Region, who has been mandated by the African Union
to de-escalate tensions between the two countries. I
also welcome the Democratic Republic of the Congo
and Rwanda’s reactivation of their Joint Permanent
Commission, which at its last meeting called for the
rapid deployment of the East African regional force, a

22607323/23

S/PV.9142

The situation concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo

cessation of hostilities by the M-23 and the disarmament
of the Forces démocratiques de libération du Rwanda
and their splinter groups.
The Commission also urged Angola to fast-track
the establishment of the proposed ad hoc verification
mechanism to monitor incidents at the border between
the two countries. I encourage them to pursue the
implementation of the road map for the sake of their
populations and the peace and stability of the region.
The discussions in support of the Nairobi and Luanda
processes between President Tshisekedi Tshilombo and
President Kagame, facilitated by President Macron
of France on the margins of the general debate of the
General Assembly, constitute another positive step in
the right direction.
Meanwhile, the Economic Community of Central
African States and the Southern African Development
Community, both currently chaired by President
Tshisekedi Tshilombo, have also expressed support
for the ongoing regional initiatives. On 31 August, the
African Union Peace and Security Council decided to
establish a strategic support cell to support the EAC
regional force, and to explore and mobilize funding to
ensure the efficient and effective implementation of
the peace process in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, including the possible use of the African Union
Peace Fund.
(spoke in French)
Those regional initiatives and the deployment
of troops from EAC countries must go hand in hand
with non-military measures, without which no lasting
peace is possible. The Nairobi process, in particular, is
inextricably linked to the Disarmament, Demobilization,
Community Recovery and Stabilization Programme.
The people enduring violence perpetrated by armed
groups have enormous expectations for the Programme,
and we must therefore mobilize the operational means
and resources necessary to ensure that the provincial
authorities have the capacities they need to implement it.
I would like to point out here that the Mission has been
providing ongoing support to the Programme since its
establishment. In June $14 million was disbursed from
the Stabilization Coherence Fund to support its launch.
In the coming months, I encourage financial partners
to provide active support to the implementation of
the provincial operational plans that are now being
developed, so as to take swift advantage of the current
disarmament opportunities in Ituri, North and South
4/23

30/09/2022

Kivu and Tanganyika. I also want to underscore the
importance of ensuring that the Programme contributes
to reconciliation through close coordination with the
transitional justice process. I applaud the progress made
by the Government in that regard, including through the
Ministry of Human Rights’ launch of national public
consultations in six provinces.
I would also like to welcome President Tshisekedi
Tshilombo’s denunciation of tribalism and hate
speech in his address at the general debate of the
General Assembly (see A/77/PV.5), which bolsters the
measures already taken by the Government to ease
intercommunal tensions, particularly in the eastern
areas of the country. I encourage the Democratic
Republic of the Congo to continue those efforts and
strengthen its legal arsenal to prevent a deterioration of
the situation, including through the adoption of a draft
law to combat tribalism, racism and xenophobia that
has been submitted to Parliament.
As the Council is aware, in the wake of the M-23’s
resurgence in recent months, the crisis of confidence
already plaguing the Mission and the Congolese people
in the east of the country has worsened. That situation
has provided fertile ground for disinformation about
and stigmatization of MONUSCO, which has led to
violent new protests and serious incidents that have
claimed the lives of dozens of protesters and four
Mission employees. I want to once again reiterate my
deepest condolences to the families of the victims of
that violence, which I deeply deplore. I condemn in
the strongest terms any incitements to hatred, hostility
and violence. Lastly, I welcome the efforts of the
Congolese authorities, members of civil society and
those with influence in the communities to promote
calm and restraint in an extremely challenging security
environment, and I implore them to continue to focus
on easing tensions in order to enable MONUSCO’s
full and unimpeded resumption of its operations in the
eastern Democratic Republic of the Congo. Following
those incidents, President Tshisekedi Tshilombo has
instructed his Government to re-evaluate the transition
plan in order to step up the pace of MONUSCO’s
withdrawal. We are ready and willing to work closely
with the Government to that end.
In conclusion, I would like to thank all the troopand police-contributing countries and their personnel
for their tireless support to the Mission over the
challenging weeks it has endured, as well as all national
and international civilian personnel. All of us remain
2260732

30/09/2022

The situation concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo

committed to implementing the mandate conferred
upon us by the Council, in close collaboration and
partnership with the Government of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, the relevant agencies, funds
and programmes, and other regional and international
partners of the country, so that the Mission’s definitive
withdrawal from the remaining three provinces in
which it is deployed can be carried out in a peaceful,
responsible and lasting manner.
The President (spoke in French): I thank Ms. Keita
for her briefing.
I now give the floor to Ambassador Biang.
Mr. Biang (Gabon): I have the honour to deliver
a statement in my capacity as Chair of the Security
Council Committee established pursuant to resolution
1533 (2004), concerning the Democratic Republic of
the Congo. I intend to provide an overview of the work
of the Committee since my predecessor last briefed the
Security Council on 5 October 2021 (see S/PV.8873).
Since my predecessor’s briefing, the Committee
held a total of five in-person meetings and met via
video-teleconference (VTC) on four occasions, all in
2022. During the informal consultations held via VTC
on 14 January, the Committee heard a presentation
from the Coordinator of the Group of Experts outlining
the Group’s workplan for the mandate that ended on
1 August this year. Following a hold on all proposed
expert candidates in the Committee on 12 July 2021, the
members of the Group were appointed by the SecretaryGeneral on 2 December 2021, with their contracts
starting shortly thereafter. During the informal
consultations held on 15 March, the Committee heard
a briefing by Mrs. Antoinette N’Samba Kalambayi,
Minister of Mines of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, on the illicit exploitation of mineral resources.
During the informal consultations held on 13 May,
the Committee heard a briefing by the Coordinator
of the Group of Experts on the Group’s final report
(see S/2022/479) and discussed the findings and
recommendations contained therein. During the
informal consultations held on 1 July, the Committee
heard a briefing by the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for Children and Armed Conflict,
Ms. Virginia Gamba de Potgieter, on the situation of
children in the Democratic Republic of the Congo.
During the informal consultations with regional
and other interested States held on 15 July, the

S/PV.9142

Coordinator of the Group of Experts provided an
overview of the main findings and recommendations
contained in its final report, following which a number
of Committee members and regional States shared their
views on the report. During the informal consultations
held on 15 September, the Committee heard a briefing
by the Coordinator of the Group of Experts outlining
the Group’s workplan for its current mandate ending
1 August 2023, in line with resolution 2641 (2022), of
30 June 2022.
The Committee also held three informal informals
via VTC with the former Senior Official of the follow-up
mechanism for the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
Mr. Richard Roy, on 17 February, 11 April and 27 June.
I would like to reiterate that the Committee continues
to support the mechanism, which provides assistance
to the Government of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo in its investigations into the March 2017 murders
of two former members of the Group of Experts, Zaida
Catalán and Michael Sharp.
In accordance with paragraph 104 of the annex
to presidential note S/2017/507, the Committee issued
three press releases containing a brief summary of the
informal consultations held, respectively, on 13 May,
15 July and 27 September.
Furthermore, I am pleased to inform the Council
that I intend to lead a delegation of Committee members
during a visit to the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
the Republic of Rwanda and the Republic of Uganda
during the period from 7 to 18 November. The purpose
of the visit is to gather first-hand accounts concerning
the effective implementation of the sanctions measures
imposed by resolution 2360 (2017), as reaffirmed by
resolution 2641 (2022).
The visit will also provide an opportunity, pursuant
to paragraph 30 of resolution 2360 (2017), to hold
consultations with the Governments of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, Rwanda and Uganda, the United
Nations Organization Stabilization Mission in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, and representatives
of civil society and the business community working on
issues relevant to the Committee’s mandate.
In conclusion, the notification requirements for the
delivery to Congolese forces of all weapons and related
materiel, except for five categories of weapons listed
in annex A of resolution 2641 (2022), were abolished
following the adoption of that resolution on 30 June 2022.
During my upcoming visit to the Democratic Republic

22607325/23

S/PV.9142

The situation concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo

of the Congo, Rwanda and Uganda, I look forward to
receiving the views of Government officials and other
interlocutors on the possible sanctions designation by
the Committee of additional individuals and entities
whose acts may be subject to targeted sanctions.
The President (spoke in French): I thank
Ambassador Biang for his briefing.
I now give the floor to Mr. Mudinga.
Mr. Mudinga (spoke in French): It is an honour
to address the Security Council on the specific issue
of forests and the protection of the forests of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo. My remarks will
focus on three points: the state of the forests, the threats
posed to them and recommendations for Member States.
First, the Democratic Republic of the Congo has
the largest share of the tropical rainforests in the Congo
basin, and the country’s open forests are also important.
However, recent studies have established that the
forest area of the Democratic Republic of the Congo
is contracting by 1 million hectares a year, threatening
the destruction of almost all of its forest cover within
a century if nothing is done. Such a development
would have enormous consequences for rainfall
patterns, agricultural production and food security.
The disappearance of the Congolese forest would have
a heavy impact on the global economy, climate change
and especially on the lives of the Congolese people.
Secondly, concerning the main threats facing the
Congolese forests that call for urgent international
solidarity, the most important point is that the forests
of the Democratic Republic of the Congo have been
transformed into hiding places and bases for more
than 120 armed groups; some 20 per cent of the armed
groups operating in the eastern part of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo are based in the Congolese
forests, where they are involved in various activities
related to the illegal exploitation of natural resources,
poaching and the destruction of biodiversity. At the
same time, the presence of armed groups, particularly
in eastern areas of the country, is the main cause for
the decline in tourism and is costing the Congolese
economy millions of dollars.
Thirdly, the transformation of several forests,
including protected areas, into illicit mineral extraction
sites and the transformation of the vast expanses of the
forests into economic opportunities are the root cause
of the progressive deforestation.
6/23

30/09/2022

Fourthly,
the
land-grabbing
practices
of
multinational corporations and Congolese elites, which
are sometimes State-sanctioned, drive rural populations
to inflict more stress on the forests.
Fifthly, the irresponsibility of some Congolese
authorities, who regularly break their own laws by
issuing logging permits to companies that do not care
about environmental protection, is a serious threat. In
that regard, I would like to address my third point to the
members of the Security Council.
First, I call on the Council to enable the Democratic
Republic of the Congo to access weapons capable of
neutralizing the armed groups, and to impose sanctions
on Member States whose support for armed groups
operating in the Democratic Republic of Congo has
been documented. Secondly, we need funding for road
infrastructure projects aimed at improving access to
forest areas in order to ensure that illegal activities are
monitored. Thirdly, I urge that sanctions be imposed
with a view to preventing the sale of wood, protected
animals and other natural resources by armed rebel
groups and Governments. Fourthly, I call for financial
and technical support to the Democratic Republic of
Congo’s forest policy and its development projects. I
also call for the development of a specific policy on
peacekeeping in forested areas.
Finally, if the mandate of the United Nations
Organization Stabilization Mission in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo is renewed, I would like the
Council to urge the Democratic Republic of Congo
to include in its policy frameworks consideration of
climate-related conflict.
The President (spoke in French): I thank
Mr. Mudinga for his briefing.
I shall now give the floor to those members of the
Council who wish to make statements.
Mr. Kimani (Kenya): I have the pleasure to deliver
this statement on behalf of the three African countries
that are members of the Security Council (A3), Gabon,
Ghana and Kenya.
We thank Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral Bintou Keita and Mr. Emery Mudinga for
their briefings. We also welcome the participation
of Ambassadors Georges Nzongola-Ntalaja of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, Claver Gatete of
Rwanda and Zéphyrin Maniratanga of Burundi in today’s
meeting. We thank Ambassador Michel Biang, Chair
2260732

30/09/2022

The situation concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo

of the Committee established pursuant to resolution
1533 (2004) concerning the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, for his briefing. Our statement will focus on the
political, security and humanitarian situations.
On the political front, we welcome President
Tshisekedi Tshilombo’s commitment to enhancing trust
between the Democratic Republic of the Congo and
neighbouring countries through continued consultation
on issues of common interest, including by concluding
security cooperation and economic partnership
agreements for the development and prosperity for the
region. We also welcome the Government’s commitment
to holding elections in 2023, in accordance with the
Constitution. We are particularly encouraged by the
comprehensive approach adopted by the Independent
National Electoral Commission in planning and
managing the electoral process. We welcome the
revisions made to the electoral law to create spaces
for dialogue and ensure the wider participation of
all Congolese in the elections. We further recognize
the progress made in promoting gender equality and
opportunities for women in governance, judicial and
administrative institutions, as well as political and
peace processes.
Regarding the security situation, we are gravely
concerned about the fact that armed and terroristaffiliated groups continue to operate with impunity,
especially in the eastern part of the country,
disproportionately affecting civilians, especially
women and children. The A3 strongly condemns those
armed groups and their terror activities and reiterates
the need for concerted efforts to bring an end to them.
We demand that all armed groups surrender their
weapons unconditionally, engage with the Government
under the inter-Congolese peace dialogue process and
embrace the national Disarmament, Demobilization,
Community Recovery and Stabilization Programme.
Another issue of concern to the A3 is the strained
relations between the United Nations Organization
Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo (MONUSCO) and the local populations.
It is unfortunate that MONUSCO forces have faced
hostilities from the people who should be looking to
them for protection. Every effort must be made to
rebuild trust and confidence between MONUSCO and
the host communities. A starting point would be for
MONUSCO to focus on the many areas highlighted in
the Secretary-General’s report (S/2022/709), including
the need for the Mission to prioritize the protection of

S/PV.9142

civilians, improve troop preparedness through capacitybuilding and training and invest in base defences and
other force multipliers.
The A3 welcomes the communiqué adopted by
the African Union Peace and Security Council on
31 August endorsing the Nairobi and Luanda processes
for reconciliation, stabilization and securing lasting
peace in the eastern Democratic Republic of the Congo
and the region. We urge the United Nations and the
international community to enhance their support for
those mechanisms and processes in order to sustain the
peace and security efforts. To improve the effectiveness
of all the forces deployed on Congolese territory, it will
be essential to set up a joint coordination mechanism
under the auspices of the Democratic Republic of
the Congo.
Regarding the progress of priority benchmarks for
the effective withdrawal and exit of MONUSCO, the
A3 would like to remind the Council that an effective
transition of the Mission should include benchmarks
that ensure the successful transfer of key securityrelated tasks to the Government of the Democratic
Republic of Congo. We note with concern that some of
the priority benchmarks outlined do not provide for the
successful and sustainable drawdown and exit of the
Mission. We support the Government of the Democratic
Republic of Congo’s call to MONUSCO to review the
joint transition plan and ensure that among other things
the benchmarks encompass strengthening key defence
and security institutions and early-warning initiatives,
as well as preventive interventions that can mitigate
any relapses into conflict.
Regarding the humanitarian situation, the A3 is
deeply concerned about the humanitarian crisis in
the eastern Democratic Republic of Congo, where an
estimated 27 million people are in need of assistance
or protection. We commend the outstanding work of
humanitarian organizations in providing continued
support to the people of the Democratic Republic of
Congo in difficult circumstances. Going forward, it will
be important to systematically shift from short-term to
long-term, resilience-based humanitarian assistance.
That will entail rebuilding civilian infrastructure,
restoring essential services and empowering the host
communities through the provision of farm inputs
for improved food security, as well as equipment and
technology in support of local entrepreneurships that
can sustain livelihoods.

22607327/23

S/PV.9142

The situation concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo

The world is staring at a climate-change-induced
energy crisis. But Africa remains rich in sustainable
renewable energy sources and raw materials, and a
substantial part of them are located in the Democratic
Republic of Congo. In his statement to the General
Assembly at its seventy-seventh session (see A/77/
PV.5), President Tshisekedi Tshilombo expressed
the Democratic Republic of Congo’s commitment to
managing its rich biodiversity in order to contribute
to saving humankind from climate change. We
encourage the countries of the region to cooperate
and pursue a common approach to protecting and
sustainably exploiting their biodiversity for their
social and economic development. Strengthening
regional economic integration is a critical component
in mobilizing resources to promote peace, stability and
economic development.
In conclusion, the A3 commends the efforts of
MONUSCO in promoting peace and security in the
Democratic Republic of Congo. We emphasize our
solidarity with the Government and the people of
the Democratic Republic of Congo and reaffirm our
respect for its territorial integrity, sovereignty, and
political independence.
Mr. Mythen (Ireland): I would like to thank
Special Representative Keita, Mr. Mudinga and our
colleague Ambassador Biang, in his capacity as Chair
of the Committee established pursuant to resolution
1533 (2004) concerning the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, for their briefings today.
Ireland is deeply disturbed by the ongoing insecurity
in the eastern Democratic Republic of Congo and
the recent demonstrations against the United Nations
Organization Stabilization Mission in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO). The activities
of the Mouvement du 23 mars and their growing
sophistication, as well as the increased attacks by the
Allied Democratic Forces and the Coopérative pour
le développement du Congo and other armed groups,
are alarming. That persistent armed group activity is
contributing to the complex humanitarian crisis. It is
undermining the ability of humanitarian organizations
to deliver assistance to 27 million people in dire need.
The consequences of failing to resolve this conflict
would be catastrophic.
There are also consistently high rates of human
rights violations and abuses, conflict-related sexual
violence and gender-based violence perpetrated by
8/23

30/09/2022

armed groups and State actors. Ireland condemns those
acts. We must end impunity and deliver accountability
for all instances of violence, human rights violations
and abuses. Accountability is necessary for all actors,
and we await the outcome of the joint investigation into
the Kasindi border incident.
Ireland continues to support MONUSCO’s role
in the protection of civilians, and we recognize the
challenges that it faces. It is imperative that the Mission
deliver on that role through increased communication
with communities and partners.
We also remain concerned about the tensions
between the Democratic Republic of the Congo and
Rwanda. We welcome the recent meetings between
President Tshisekedi Tshilombo and President Kagame,
including those convened by President Macron,
President Lourenço and former President Kenyatta.
We hope that those discussions result in de-escalation
and concerted action to address the activities of
armed groups.
Ireland has consistently highlighted that regional
cooperation is paramount for peace. We reiterate the
importance of the Peace, Security and Cooperation
Framework for the Democratic Republic of the Congo
and the Region and commend regional Member States,
the International Conference on the Great Lakes Region,
the African Union, the East African Community and
the Southern African Development Community for
their efforts to ease tensions and build trust.
Ireland continues to advocate for dialogue and
diplomatic solutions. We urge the full inclusion of
civil society and the provision of space for women’s
full participation across those efforts towards peace.
For any peace process to succeed and to be sustained,
women must be at its centre.
We urge all parties to engage constructively with
the ongoing Nairobi process. We reiterate that the
deployment of the East African Community regional
force should progress in tandem with the political track.
The deployment must have clear objectives and must be
delivered in close cooperation and coordination with
MONUSCO and other actors. The regional force must
comply with human rights standards and accountability,
such as the commitments of the United Nations Due
Diligence Policy on Human Rights.
Disarmament, demobilization and reintegration
are fundamental to a lasting peace in the Democratic
2260732

30/09/2022

The situation concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo

Republic of the Congo. We welcome the support of
the multi-donor Stabilization Coherence Fund to the
Disarmament, Demobilization, Community Recovery
and Stabilization Programme. We also recognize the
work of the Government and MONUSCO to strengthen
the security and justice sectors.
Effective transitions are essential to sustaining
peace. Ireland recently hosted a high-level event on
“Ensuring the Success of Transitions in UN Peace
Operations: implementing resolution 2594 (2021)”. The
event marked one year since the unanimous adoption of
resolution 2594 (2021), the first stand-alone resolution
on United Nations transitions.
We reiterate the need for inclusive, integrated
planning for transitions, and we urge that transition
processes respond to the conditions on the ground,
first and foremost. Any review of the joint transition
plan must recognize that. Much remains to be done
to advance towards the agreed benchmarks on the
security, protection and stabilization of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo.
Ireland welcomes President Tshisekedi Tshilombo’s
commitment to conducting elections in 2023, in line
with the constitutional deadlines. Holding free, fair and
inclusive elections is another vital benchmark towards
a peaceful and prosperous future for all the people of
the Democratic Republic of the Congo.
Ms. Heimerback (Norway): I thank the briefers for
their relevant briefings.
Norway is deeply concerned by the deteriorating
security situation in the eastern Democratic Republic
of the Congo and its regional implications, particularly
the recurrent and recently intensified attacks by armed
groups, including the Mouvement du 23 mars and the
Allied Democratic Forces.
We also note with concern the rising tensions
between the Democratic Republic of the Congo and
Rwanda, and we call on both countries to exercise
restraint and pursue a diplomatic solution.
We welcome the efforts of the region to address
those security challenges, such as the initiative taken
by Angola’s President Lourenço and former President
Kenyatta’s leadership of the Nairobi process. We
encourage the inclusion of all relevant stakeholders,
including civil society, women and young people, in
those processes.

S/PV.9142

Close coordination between various actors, such as
the United Nations Organization Stabilization Mission
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO)
and the East African regional force, once it deploys, is
also essential.
We reiterate that all countries must respect the
sovereignty of the Democratic Republic of the Congo.
For more than 20 years, United Nations personnel
have contributed to protecting civilians and stabilizing
the Democratic Republic of the Congo. They have
done so under extremely challenging circumstances,
sometimes paying the ultimate price. We are deeply
troubled by the deaths of United Nations personnel
during the recent violent protests against MONUSCO
in North Kivu. We remain concerned that hostile and
anti-MONUSCO rhetoric may incite more violence.
The joint transition plan and the timeline for the
drawdown are increasingly being questioned throughout
the Democratic Republic of the Congo. As agreed
with the Government in as late as November 2021, the
plan lists priorities and benchmarks for MONUSCO’s
withdrawal. It is important that the transition now take
place based on the situation on the ground and in line
with the plan for withdrawal.
Armed groups remain a real and constant threat,
killing civilians, including children, and committing
grave violations, such as conflict-related sexual
violence. We reiterate that all civilians must be protected
and that the primary responsibility for protecting the
civilian population rests with the Government.
The dramatic decline of the humanitarian situation
also raises the stakes of a well-planned MONUSCO
exit, including the progressive transfer of its tasks to the
United Nations country team and the implementation of
the children and armed conflict agenda.
Strengthening the capacity of a representative,
responsive, accountable security sector and rule-of-law
institutions in the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
which are compliant with international law, is critical.
The upcoming December elections will be an
important milestone. Through the United Nations
Development Programme, Norway is providing
financial support for the preparations carried out by
the Independent National Electoral Commission. We
urge the Government, as well as other stakeholders,
to do their utmost to secure peaceful, inclusive and
transparent elections.

22607329/23

S/PV.9142

The situation concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo

Norway stands ready to work with all stakeholders
for a sustainable and responsible recalibration of
MONUSCO and for peace in the Democratic Republic
of the Congo.
Mr. Mills (United States of America): I want to begin
by thanking our briefers today. I particularly want to
thank Special Representative of the Secretary-General
Keita for her briefing. The United States appreciates
her leadership, particularly at this challenging time for
the United Nations Organization Stabilization Mission
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO).
I also want to express in this forum my delegation’s
gratitude for the commitment and contributions of
the Ukrainian aviation unit that recently departed
MONUSCO after 10 years of service to the people of
the Democratic Republic of the Congo. However, we
acknowledge that the departure of the aviation unit
really limits MONUSCO’s air capabilities at a time
when the Mission needs all the resources that it can get.
We urge the Secretariat to act quickly to fill that gap.
Without sufficient capabilities, MONUSCO will
continue to struggle to protect civilians from armed
groups in the eastern Democratic Republic of the
Congo, including, but not limited to, the Islamic State in
Iraq and the Sham-Democratic Republic of the Congo,
the Coopérative pour le développement du Congo
(CODECO) and the Mouvement du 23 mars (M-23).
As noted in the most recent report of the SecretaryGeneral (S/2022/709), attacks by those and other groups
killed hundreds of civilians and perpetrated more than
500 human rights violations between June and August.
That continued violence is unacceptable, and the
United States calls on those groups to discontinue their
assaults on the Democratic Republic of the Congo’s
most vulnerable populations.
The United States also remains deeply concerned
by the ongoing M-23 campaign and by the assistance
that the group receives from external actors, including
the Rwanda Defence Force. We note that M-23 remains
designated under the sanctions regime of the Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1533 (2004),
concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo.
Member States are therefore required to freeze the
assets of this armed group and ensure that no funds or
economic resources are made available to it.
United States Secretary of State Blinken also
made clear during his recent visits to the Democratic
10/23

30/09/2022

Republic of the Congo and to Rwanda that State support
for illicit armed groups and the disregard of territorial
integrity are unacceptable and must end immediately.
More specifically, in the case of the Democratic
Republic, the United States reminds the Council that all
countries must notify the Security Council in advance
on matters involving defence cooperation, including
the deployment of troops and the provision of arms.
We encourage regional leaders to continue to bear this
obligation in mind, as well the need to respect human
rights, as the planning for the East African Community
regional force moves ahead.
East African Community leaders and officials
of the Democratic Republic of the Congo alike must
also ensure the regional force does not disrupt the
important and life-saving work of the country’s armed
forces, MONUSCO and United Nations humanitarian
agencies
and
non-governmental
organizations.
Similarly, to further safeguard the Mission’s personnel
and operations, it is important for all relevant parties
to work earnestly with the United Nations Mission to
enable it to more fully fulfil its mandate.
Speaking out against anti-United Nations rhetoric,
which has tragically led directly to the deaths of United
Nations peacekeepers and civilians in recent months,
is critical in the Democratic Republic of the Congo
and in all contexts where myths and disinformation
are undermining the ability of peacekeepers to carry
out the mandates the Security Council has given them.
The United States is clear-eyed about the challenges
MONUSCO is facing in executing its mandate. We
share with our United Nations counterparts a desire for
peacekeeper accountability, especially with regard to
situations like the shooting in Kasindi in late July, and
we urge the Government of the Democratic Republic
and Tanzanian authorities, in coordination with the
United Nations, to continue and complete a thorough
investigation into this senseless act and to hold
perpetrators fully accountable.
Finally, in conclusion, I would like to make a
comment on Mission transition. No one would argue
MONUSCO should remain in the Democratic Republic
of the Congo forever. The Mission has already jointly
established with the Government of the Democratic
Republic, as we have heard, a plan for its phased and
benchmark-driven drawdown, and it is making progress
on that, as demonstrated by the discontinuation of
operations in Tanganyika province earlier this year and
the Kasai last year.
2260732

30/09/2022

The situation concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo

But today, the work of the Mission remains critically
important, and MONUSCO and the Democratic
Republic of the Congo need the Security Council’s
complete and unequivocal support. The United States
stands with Ms. Keita and her team of dedicated
peacekeepers. We thank her again for her commitment
to supporting peace and stability in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo.
Mr. Kariuki (United Kingdom): I thank Special
Representative of the Secretary-General Keita and
Mr. Mudinga for their briefings.
We commend the Special Representative for her
continued efforts in what are increasingly challenging
and, in some cases, deadly circumstances. I also thank
the representative of Gabon for the briefing on behalf of
the Security Council Committee established pursuant to
resolution 1533 (2004), and I welcome the participation
of representatives of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, Rwanda and Burundi in this meeting.
I will focus on the security and humanitarian
situation in eastern part of the Democratic Republic
of the Congo, regional efforts and the United Nations
Organization Stabilization Mission in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO).
The United Kingdom remains deeply concerned by
the security situation in eastern part of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo. The redeployment of resources
to tackle the Mouvement du 23 mars (M-23) has
undermined the protection of civilians and created a
vacuum that armed groups like the Allied Democratic
Forces have exploited. We again call for the withdrawal
of M-23 from their current positions.
Since 2017, United Kingdom funding has provided
over 2.5 million people with humanitarian assistance
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo. We urge
all actors to address the humanitarian impacts of the
violence, ensuring that those affected, including the
1.29 million newly displaced this year, receive the
assistance they need.
We condemn recent violent protests against
MONUSCO, which undermine its ability to implement
its mandate, including civilian protection. We call on
MONUSCO and the Government of the Democratic
Republic to engage in a structured dialogue that
clarifies roles and responsibilities in a responsible,
conditions-based drawdown of MONUSCO.

S/PV.9142

A military solution will not bring peace. A
credible and legitimate political process needs to be the
foundation of any lasting settlement. Diplomatic efforts
and dialogue through existing regional processes should
continue to help de-escalate tensions and end violence
in the east.
While military pressure has a role, it is important
that international and domestic efforts complement
rather than contradict each other. The East African
Community force and armed forces of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo must substantively engage with
MONUSCO on deconfliction of forces to ensure the
protection of civilians, safety of peacekeepers and
effectiveness of operations.
Implementation of the Government of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo’s Demobilization,
Disarmament, Community Recovery and Stabilization
Programme (PDDRCS) should be accelerated to ensure
willing armed groups are disarmed, protect civilians and
bring stability to the east. We encourage MONUSCO
to continue supporting PDDRCS to overcome internal
coordination issues and agree appropriate fiduciary
arrangements to facilitate their better funding.
Finally, as Mr. Mudinga has reminded us, the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and the Congo basin
are central to tackling climate change. At the twentysixth session of the Conference of the Parties to the
United Nations Framework Convention on Climate
Change in Glasgow, the United Kingdom committed
$200 million to the Congo Basin pledge and will
become chair of the Central African Forest Initiative
in June 2023.
Mr. Gómez Robledo Verduzco (Mexico) (spoke in
Spanish): My delegation appreciates the very important
report introduced by the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General (S/2022/709). I welcome the
participation of the representatives of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, Rwanda and Burundi in
this meeting.
Mexico reiterates its concern over the continuing
deterioration of the security situation in the eastern
provinces of the Democratic Republic of the Congo. As
it has done for the past year, my country insists that
it is necessary to effectively stem the illicit flows of
weapons and trafficking of natural resources so as to
deprive armed groups of their ability to continue to
destabilize the country.

226073211/23

S/PV.9142

The situation concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo

I will focus my remarks this morning on four issues.
First, we very strongly condemn the activity of
armed groups such as the Mouvement du 23 mars,
Coopérative pour le développement du Congo and
Allied Democratic Forces. We particularly deplore the
attacks against civilians and civilian infrastructure,
as well as the recruitment of children. The violence of
these groups forces the civilian population to abandon
their homes and livelihoods, thus increasing the number
of internally displaced persons in a country that has
already recorded more than 5.5 million internally
displaced people.
At the same time, armed clashes limit the access
of humanitarian personnel to the population in need of
assistance to meet their basic needs. We therefore urge
all actors in the conflict to ensure that humanitarian
organizations operate unhindered and have access to
the population. In that context, we pay tribute to the
efforts of the United Nations Organization Stabilization
Mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo
(MONUSCO) and of the Special Representative.
Secondly, Mexico believes that the successful
holding of peaceful, fair, credible and inclusive elections
is key to making progress towards better governance,
which will then make it possible to address the structural
causes of the conflict. With this conviction, we support
the Secretary-General’s call for the institutions in
charge of the process to broaden consultations with
all political groups to agree on an acceptable electoral
calendar and procedures that guarantee the right to vote
for all citizens, including women and youth, throughout
the national territory. However, without a doubt, the
advances made are extremely encouraging.
Thirdly, my country is concerned about the
tensions that persist between the Democratic Republic
of the Congo and Rwanda, in view of their potential
effects on the region as a whole. We urge the parties
to avoid escalation and use dialogue to resolve their
differences. In that regard, we welcome the efforts
undertaken in recent days, in particular those of the
President of France.
We also welcome the efforts of the International
Conference on the Great Lakes Region to achieve the
adoption of the Luanda road map, as well as the personal
involvement of the President of Angola. We recognize
the work of the East African Community, which through
the Nairobi process has demonstrated the interest of
the region as a whole in contributing to peace in the
12/23

30/09/2022

Democratic Republic of the Congo. Indeed, it is clear
that the African Union and its subregional processes
have been very active and have driven those efforts.
We note the progress made towards the deployment
of the regional force agreed in the framework of the
Nairobi process, and we call for its deployment to
be effectively coordinated with the United Nations
Organization Stabilization Mission in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO).
Finally, I would like to once again reiterate
Mexico’s support for MONUSCO. Mexico condemns
the disinformation campaigns orchestrated against the
Mission’s work, which have led to violent demonstrations
against it and have resulted in the regrettable deaths of
peacekeepers and, of course, of civilians. We hope that
the joint investigations into those regrettable events
will make it possible to establish who was responsible
and ensure justice for the victims’ relatives.
We note the interest of the Democratic Republic
of the Congo authorities in reviewing the MONUSCO
transition plan. We also ask that that exercise be
carried out with prudence and caution, in the light of
the limited progress on the benchmarks linked to that
plan and recent events. Consequently, any potential
changes or adjustments to MONUSCO’s mandate
should not be made in haste. Mexico believes that it is
essential that any potential adjustments to the transition
plan prioritize the protection of the civilian population
and not exacerbate the worrisome trends in terms of
security and regional dynamics that we are currently
witnessing. In any scenario, it is essential that the
national authorities fully cooperate with the Mission for
the protection of its personnel and ensure compliance
with the status-of-forces agreement.
Mr. Raguttahalli (India): I thank Special
Representative of the Secretary-General Bintou Keita
for her update on the United Nations Organization
Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo (MONUSCO) and the situation in the country. I
also thank Mr. Emery Mudinga for sharing his insights
with us, as well as the Permanent Representative of
Gabon for his briefing on the activities of the Security
Council Committee established pursuant to resolution
1533 (2004), concerning the Democratic Republic of
the Congo.
I welcome the presence of the Permanent
Representatives of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, Rwanda and Burundi at today’s briefing.
2260732

30/09/2022

The situation concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo

Over the past few months, the Council has met
several times to discuss the security situation in the
eastern Democratic Republic of the Congo, particularly
the relentless attacks against peacekeepers. As one of
the largest troop-contributing Countries in MONUSCO,
we are deeply concerned at the recent turn of events.
The increasing activities of armed groups, particularly
the Mouvement du 23 mars, among others such as the
Allied Democratic Forces, the Coopérative pour le
développement du Congo, the Forces démocratiques
de libération du Rwanda, Mayi-Mayi and so forth, call
into question the overall approach towards conflict
resolution in the Democratic Republic of the Congo.
The complex set of factors that contribute to the
situation in the eastern Democratic Republic of the
Congo require a comprehensive political solution, not
a military one. It is important to draw the right lessons
from the recent history of the eastern Democratic
Republic of the Congo. We have consistently highlighted
that position in our interventions in the Council and
with the Secretariat as well.
The calls for a robust mandate for MONUSCO have
fed into the ongoing disinformation campaign against
United Nations peacekeepers. As a result, peacekeepers
were attacked by the agitating population and armed
elements, resulting in avoidable killing of peacekeepers
and civilians. We reiterate our strong condemnation
of attacks against peacekeepers and hope that the
Democratic Republic of the Congo Government will
bring the perpetrators to justice. We also hope the
Mission leadership accords primacy to addressing the
political challenges impeding MONUSCO’s effective
mandate fulfilment.
In that context, the deployment of the East
African Community joint regional force is a positive
development. We look forward to the complete details of
the deployment, particularly concerning the timelines,
the concept of operations and coordination with
MONUSCO troops. We also underscore the importance
of proactive and purposeful regional initiatives
prioritizing the development and demobilization of
armed groups in the eastern Democratic Republic of
the Congo and mediation efforts for the cessation
of hostilities. The success of the Disarmament,
Demobilization, Community Recovery and Stabilization
Programme is crucial for the broader political process
that is under way. That cannot be overemphasized. But
getting armed groups to lay down their weapons and

S/PV.9142

commit to the peace process will require strengthening
the community reintegration pillar.
We also welcome the progress made towards laying
the ground for the upcoming elections to be held in 2023.
We hope political actors will work towards building
consensus on key aspects of the electoral process
and towards increasing the meaningful participation
of Congolese women in the country’s political and
peace processes.
While the closure of MONUSCO’s field offices in
Tanganyika in June went as planned, the situation on the
ground should guide MONUSCO’s eventual drawdown
to ensure that gains made in violence-prone provinces
are consolidated. The transition and eventual exit of
MONUSCO must be gradual, responsible and orderly.
The shortcomings reflected in the update on
transition benchmarks need to be addressed, in
coordination with the Democratic Republic of the
Congo authorities. We also reiterate that all components
of the peacekeeping mission must be equally and
impartially assessed given their interlinkages. We also
continue to call for the implementation of resolution
2589 (2021), on ensuring accountability for crimes
against peacekeepers.
The Democratic Republic of the Congo is at a
crucial juncture. A peaceful and stable Democratic
Republic of the Congo will contribute immensely to
the peace and development of the region. The country’s
leadership must stay the course and continue providing
impetus to the political peace process.
India’s commitment to the Democratic Republic of
the Congo and its people dates back to 1961, when India
sent its peacekeepers to protect the territorial integrity
of the newly independent country. Our commitment
since has only become stronger. Through development
partnership, including in critical infrastructure projects
and capacity-building programmes, India remains
steadfast in assisting the people of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo in their pursuit of lasting peace,
stability and development.
Mrs. Alhefeiti (United Arab Emirates) (spoke in
Arabic): At the outset, I would like to thank Ms. Keita
and Ambassador Biang for their valuable briefings. We
also listened carefully to the briefing by Mr. Mudinga.
We welcome the participation of the representatives of
the Democratic Republic of the Congo, Burundi and
Rwanda in today’s meeting.

226073213/23

S/PV.9142

The situation concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo

The difficult security situation in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo requires the urgent attention of
the international community. We must not deviate from
our shared goal to work with the Democratic Republic
of the Congo to help address the root causes of the
violence and put the country on the path to peace and
sustainable development.
In order for that to be achieved, it is essential to
put an end to the violence afflicting the eastern part
of the country through de-escalation and a cessation of
hostilities. That call has been made repeatedly by regional
actors, including the East African Community and the
Conference of Heads of State and Government of the
Economic Community of Central African States. There
is also a need to address the challenges undermining
security and preventing the achievement of sustainable
peace in the Democratic Republic of the Congo. At the
forefront of those challenges is addressing the activities
of armed groups and their illegal exploitation of natural
resources, as well as intercommunal violence. All
those challenges undermine the capabilities of the
national forces and of the United Nations Organization
Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo (MONUSCO) to provide adequate protection to
civilians. It is regrettable that, in every meeting we
hold on this dossier, we express our condolences to the
families of victims of new attacks in the eastern part of
the country.
The situation of women and girls in areas of
increased violence also requires special attention,
particularly considering the concerning escalation
of sexual violence against them. We hear the tragic
stories and psychological trauma of women and girls
who continue to suffer because of those heinous acts.
We therefore reiterate our firm position to address
those situations by ensuring that such crimes continue
to be reported, that perpetrators are held accountable
and that women and girls are provided with adequate
protection and support.
Establishing security in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo cannot be realized without political dialogue
at both the national and regional levels. We believe that
the continued and effective leadership at the regional
level is pivotal and indispensable to sustainably
address the political and security situation in the
country. Initiatives such as the Luanda road map and
the Nairobi process help regional leaders to coordinate
efforts and strengthen cooperation to achieve those
goals. In that context, the Security Council certainly
14/23

30/09/2022

plays an important role by sustaining support for
confidence-building measures among regional actors
and for making efforts that promote overall cooperation.
We believe that multilateralism is important for the
maintenance of international peace and security. In that
context, the United Arab Emirates stresses its support
for MONUSCO and its endeavours in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo. We also believe that preserving
the gains made by the United Nations after its decadeslong presence in the country requires all stakeholders to
remain constructively engaged in making the necessary
arrangements for the next steps, in the context of the
gradual drawdown of the Mission and its eventual
withdrawal from the country.
The Secretary-General’s report (S/2022/709)
notes the continued deterioration of the humanitarian
situation in the eastern Democratic Republic of the
Congo. As a result, millions of people are suffering,
especially so in the context of the recurring Ebola and
cholera outbreaks. The number of displaced people
has sharply increased, reaching 5.5 million displaced
people according to the Office of the United Nations
High Commissioner for Refugees, and, as Ms. Keita
mentioned in her briefing, all of whom are in need
of urgent relief assistance. In addition, that situation
impacts the new academic year as many schools are now
overcrowded with displaced people instead of students.
There is a need to address this situation rapidly, both to
alleviate the suffering of displaced people and to allow
children to access education. The current circumstances
require protection for the humanitarian workers and
civilian infrastructure from attacks in order to ensure
that humanitarian assistance reaches those in need.
In conclusion, the United Arab Emirates reiterates
its commitment to continue working with the
Government of the Democratic Republic of the Congo
and with all Member States in support of efforts aimed
at achieving peace and stability in the country.
Ms. Dautllari (Albania): I too would like to thank
all of the briefers for their insights and would like now
to stress a few points.
First, Albania welcomes the ongoing progress in
preparing the groundwork for holding elections in 2023.
We call on all parties to work together in good faith
to create the conditions necessary to hold inclusive,
free and transparent elections that are acceptable to
all parties.
2260732

30/09/2022

The situation concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo

Secondly, Albania is encouraged by the public
commitment expressed by national and regional actors
to defuse tensions, but the security situation on the
ground remains of great concern. We take note of the
initiative to create a coordination mechanism between
the Luanda road map and the Nairobi process.
Given the complexity of the situation, it is
important for there to be effective implementation of
those initiatives. The obligations and responsibilities of
the East African Community regional force should be
implemented in full coordination and cooperation with
the United Nations Organization Stabilization Mission
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO)
in order to ensure the protection of civilians and
maintain humanitarian access.
The seventy-seventh session of the General
Assembly provided some additional impetus to that
effort. We welcome the meeting between the Presidents
of the Democratic Republic of the Congo and Rwanda
and their commitment to work together to achieve
the withdrawal of the Movement du 23 mars from all
occupied territories and the return of war-displaced
persons, with the support of the United Nations, the
African Union and the International Conference on the
Great Lakes Region.
Thirdly, the suffering of civilians, particularly
women, children and internally displaced persons,
is deeply troubling. Adding to that suffering, the
Democratic Republic of the Congo continues to rank
as one of the most insecure places for humanitarian
workers, affecting the ability of humanitarian partners to
deliver assistance. We request that a secure environment
for humanitarian partners be guaranteed. No military
initiative can tackle the sources of conflict or provide a
lasting solution. That is why we call on armed groups to
unconditionally lay down their weapons and encourage
national authorities to step up their efforts to promote
national reconciliation. In that vein, the inclusive
implementation of the Disarmament, Demobilization,
Community Recovery and Stabilization Programme
is a must, as is the demobilization of foreign armed
groups, who must return to their country of origin.
Albania welcomes the measures taken by the
Government against the recent unacceptable hate
speech in the Democratic Republic of the Congo. We
call on it to further develop a wider legal framework in
that regard.

S/PV.9142

Lastly, in the light of the Government’s call to
review MONUSCO’s withdrawal plan, Albania calls for
the plan to be conducted in a way that will guarantee
minimum-security conditions for the Mission’s staff,
as well as a conditions-based exit from the provinces
that constitute the focus of its operations. We further
reiterate that it is the responsibility of the authorities
of the Democratic Republic of the Congo to ensure the
protection of United Nations assets and personnel and
to hold accountable those involved in the latest violent
anti-MONUSCO demonstrations.
Mr. De Almeida Filho (Brazil): I would like to
thank Special Representative of the Secretary-General
Keita for her briefing, as well as for her tireless
work at the head of the United Nations Organization
Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo (MONUSCO). I also thank Ambassador
Biang for his detailed briefing on the activities of the
Committee established pursuant to resolution 1533
(2004). I listened with great attention to the civil society
briefer. I welcome to this meeting the participation
of the delegations of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, Burundi and Rwanda.
During more than two decades of the presence in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo of MONUSCO
and its predecessor, the United Nations Organization
Mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo, the
dramatic security and humanitarian reality in parts of
the country has become all too familiar to the members
of the Council. There were some improvements.
The Secretary-General’s report (S/2022/709) points
out, for example, to a significant decrease in human
rights violations in June and July, as compared to
both the previous months and to the same period in
2021. However, the overall security and humanitarian
situation remains dire, with 1.3 million people newly
displaced since January, bringing the total to 5.5 million
internally displaced people. There are almost 25 million
people in need of assistance and protection. Needless
to say, the 2022 humanitarian response plan for the
Democratic Republic of the Congo has received only a
fraction of the required amount, as has been the pattern
in several other countries.
In spite of the continuity of the humanitarian crises
and of the activities of armed groups, I would like to
highlight two important developments.
First, the new revised electoral law and the
announcement of the period for voter registration

226073215/23

S/PV.9142

The situation concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo

by the Independent National Electoral Commission
represent important steps in the implementation of the
electoral calendar. Brazil welcomes the commitment
of the Government, the Parliament and the Electoral
Commission of the Democratic Republic of the Congo
to holding elections in 2023. It is important that the
elections be held in line with the constitutional deadlines
Also, the Congolese authorities should take account
of the concerns of the opposition and of civil society
about aspects of the new law and preparations for
the elections.
Secondly, we have observed a renewed impetus for
regional diplomacy and cooperation. Brazil welcomes
the convening of the Nairobi process, facilitated by
Kenya, which has already resulted in the accession of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo to the East African
Community (EAC) and in the decision to deploy an EAC
regional force in the east of the country. The adoption
of a concept of operations for the new force in June
and of its status of forces agreement earlier this month
shows how determined the countries of the region are
to contribute to addressing the security situation in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo. The arrival of
Burundian troops in August and Kenyan troops last
week marks the actual start of that new initiative.
Brazil looks forward to tangible progress on both
the political and military tracks of the Nairobi process
in the near future. The mediation of President João
Lourenço of Angola, which brought about a meeting
in Luanda between President Félix-Antoine Tshisekedi
Tshilombo of the Democratic Republic of the Congo
and President Paul Kagame of Rwanda that led to the
adoption of the Luanda road map, is another laudable
instance of regional diplomacy. We commend the
consistent role played by the International Conference
on the Great Lakes Region in the pursuit of regional
peace and security and development.
Against that backdrop, we witnessed with
consternation how protests against MONUSCO in late
July deteriorated into riots, resulting in the deaths of
three peacekeepers and dozens of Congolese nationals.
While we reiterate our support for the right to peaceful
protest, we firmly condemn acts of violence and
intimidation against United Nations personnel. We
expect the investigations into those attacks, and into
the incident on 31 July at the Kasindi border post, to
shed light on who is responsible for the violence. They
must be held accountable for their actions. We also note
with concern reports that some Congolese authorities
16/23

30/09/2022

may have encouraged the protests against MONUSCO
due to the Mission`s perceived inaction in the face of
threats to the civilian population.
Furthermore,
the
increasing
number
of
disinformation campaigns directed at MONUSCO
hinder the Mission`s ability to implement its mandate
and threaten the safety and security of peacekeepers.
We therefore emphasize the need to continue enhancing
MONUSCO`s strategic communications capabilities
and scaling up community engagement activities and
quick-impact projects. We commend the efforts of the
United Nations and MONUSCO leadership to address
such issues, always in close coordination with the
authorities in the Democratic Republic of the Congo.
In that regard, for instance, I would point to the visit by
Under-Secretary-General Lacroix and Military Adviser
Diop to the country immediately after the incidents. I
also commend Special Representative Keita and Force
Commander Lieutenant General Affonso da Costa for
their skilful navigation in such difficult circumstances.
The current domestic political situation in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, combined with
renewed regional efforts to address the conflict, bodes
well for the implementation of MONUSCO`s transition
plan. Transitions are a delicate moment in any peace
operation, particularly in such a long and complex
conflict as that in the eastern Democratic Republic of
the Congo. The protests in July have highlighted the
importance of taking the transition into account in all
aspects of MONUSCO’s planning.
Ms. Evstigneeva (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We thank Special Representative Keita for
her briefing and listened carefully to Mr. Mudinga’s
remarks. We would also like to thank the Permanent
Representative of Gabon for presenting the report on
the work of the Security Council Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1533 (2004) concerning the
Democratic Republic of the Congo. We welcome the
participation of the Permanent Representatives of
the Democratic Republic of the Congo, Burundi and
Rwanda in this meeting.
Like all of our Security Council colleagues, we
are following the situation in the eastern region of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo with concern. We
note with regret that despite the state of emergency
that has been in force in the provinces of Ituri and
North Kivu since May 2021, as well as the military
operation led by the Forces armées de la République
2260732

30/09/2022

The situation concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo

démocratique du Congo and Uganda and the efforts of
the peacekeepers of the United Nations Organization
Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo (MONUSCO), the situation in the eastern
part of the country has not improved. While at the
moment we are seeing a certain level of calm thanks
to the absence of large-scale hostilities, particularly
between the Mouvement du 23 mars and Government
forces, the numerous illegal armed groups operating in
the east continue to terrorize the local population and
fight actively among themselves over natural resources,
using the revenues from the illegal exploitation of those
resources to finance their illicit activities and expand
their armed capacity.
As a result of militants’ attacks, dozens of
Congolese civilians are dying every month while
thousands of men, women, children and the elderly end
up internally displaced or refugees. The humanitarian
situation is also worsening. The recent spike in clashes
between the local population and peacekeepers was an
additional challenge. We strongly condemn the attacks
on MONUSCO facilities in North Kivu in which
Blue Helmets and Berets, as well as local residents,
were killed and injured. We have no doubt that the
Democratic Republic of the Congo authorities will
conduct a thorough investigation into the incidents and
take all the necessary measures.
For our part, we consider it important to do
everything in our power to resolve these issues without
violence. We believe it is therefore vital to significantly
increase the coordination and exchange of information
between MONUSCO and the official structures of
the Democratic Republic of the Congo. With regard
to the implementation of the joint transition plan for
the phased downsizing and subsequent withdrawal
of the Mission from the country, we believe that first
and foremost it is essential to take the evolution of
the situation on the ground into account and to act
gradually and responsibly. We believe that the events
that took place this summer have confirmed that our top
priority should be to ensure peace and stability in the
region through political means. It is therefore essential
to achieve a comprehensive cessation of hostilities and
create the conditions for constructive dialogue with a
view to fostering a sustainable stabilization process. In
our view, the key to resolving security issues lies in
constructive cooperation between regional players.
In that regard, we welcome the resolute approach
of the Democratic Republic of the Congo’s neighbours

S/PV.9142

to overcoming the escalation in the east and launching
new conflict resolution mechanisms in the Great
Lakes region. We commend the peacekeeping efforts
of President Lourenço of Angola. We are also closely
monitoring the Nairobi process, launched in April, and
we welcome the significant decisions taken by the States
of the region during the consultations in the Kenyan
capital, including the decision on the creation of a joint
force. It is important to ensure that they are implemented
with the support of the international community and in
direct coordination with MONUSCO, with Kinshasa
playing the leading role. At the same time, it will be
vital to continue working for the full implementation
of 2013’s fundamental Peace, Security and Cooperation
Framework Agreement for the Democratic Republic of
the Congo and the Great Lakes Region.
We want to reaffirm our principled support
for the efforts of MONUSCO, its leadership and
its peacekeepers, as well as the activities of Xuang
Shia. We hope that together with the peacekeeping
Mission and its partners in the region, the Democratic
Republic of the Congo will be able to regain control
over the situation and begin to implement long-overdue
measures to address the root causes of the crisis in the
east of the country. Normalizing the security situation
will be crucial to improving the humanitarian situation,
achieving sustainable socioeconomic development and
strengthening integration processes in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, as well as with regard to the
preparations for the presidential elections, scheduled
for the end of 2023.
In conclusion, we would like to underscore that
responsibility for the country’s fate ultimately lies
with the Congolese themselves. The future of their
families and of their State is in their hands. We are
convinced that, with the support and engagement of the
international community, the Democratic Republic of
the Congo will be able to overcome all its difficulties
and return to peace and development.
Mr. Dai Bing (China) (spoke in Chinese): I thank
Special Representative of the Secretary-General Keita
and Ambassador Biang for their briefings. I also
listened carefully to Mr. Mudinga’s remarks.
I welcome the presence of the Permanent
Representatives of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, Rwanda and Burundi at today’s meeting.
The recent reporting period was marked by
ongoing turmoil and escalating violence in the eastern

226073217/23

S/PV.9142

The situation concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo

Democratic Republic of the Congo, ensnaring innocent
civilians and seriously undermining peace and stability
in the country and the wider region. During the recently
concluded general debate of the General Assembly, the
situation drew heightened attention from the leaders of
the region and the international community. In the light
of the Secretary-General’s report (S/2022/709), I would
like to highlight the following points.
First, restoring stability is the top priority. The
Mouvement du 23 mars and other armed groups
continue to wreak havoc, resulting in heavy casualties
and the displacement of millions of people. The
Congolese Government, working alongside the United
Nations Organization Stabilization Mission in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO) and
the countries of the region, has taken military action to
combat the violence. China expresses its support. We
urge all armed groups in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo to provide an immediate response to the call
of the Nairobi process, cease violence without delay,
and participate unconditionally in political dialogue,
reconciliation and the disarmament, demobilization
and reintegration process.
Political stability is the cornerstone of the peaceful
development of the Democratic Republic of the Congo.
China welcomes the efforts of the Congolese authorities
to appoint the President of the Constitutional Court and
amend the electoral law. We welcome the announcement
of the Independent National Electoral Commission
concerning the date for voter registration and call on
all parties in the Democratic Republic of the Congo to
enhance consultations, bridge differences and create
a favourable political atmosphere for the smooth and
timely holding of general elections.
Secondly, we should support regional efforts as
an effective way to address the situation. The Kenyan
and Angolan leaders have been actively engaged in
providing their good offices. The operationalization of
the joint regional force of the East African Community
continues to make progress. The Presidents of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and Rwanda met
recently in Luanda and adopted a road map. Special
Representative of the Secretary-General Keita and
Special Envoy Huang Xia visited several countries in
the region. China applauds those developments.
The situation in the eastern Democratic Republic of
the Congo affects the stability of the entire region. The
international community should continue to support
18/23

30/09/2022

efforts to resolve African issues with African solutions,
support the synergy between the Nairobi process
and the Luanda process and help the countries of the
region to respect each other’s interests and concerns
and resolve their differences through dialogue and
consultation, with a view to de-escalating the situation
as soon as possible.
Thirdly, delivering on the MONUSCO mandate is
key. MONUSCO peacekeepers have braved hardship
and peril and made enormous sacrifices for the
maintenance of peace and stability in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo. At the same time, MONUSCO
must keep abreast of the evolution of the situation and
meet the expectations of the Congolese Government
and people.
In accordance with presidential statement
S/PRST/2022/6, on capacity-building for sustaining
peace in Africa, which was adopted in August, the
Security Council should streamline and optimize
MONUSCO’s tasks, roll back and curb mandates
that are beyond the Mission’s capabilities and devote
resources to core tasks such as protecting civilians
and maintaining security and stability. MONUSCO
should continue to communicate with all sectors of the
Congolese community, through various channels, in
order to enhance mutual understanding and trust.
We express our condolences to the families of
the peacekeepers and civilians who died in the recent
clashes and hope that there will be a timely investigation
and a proper handling of the incident.
China supports MONUSCO in strengthening its
coordination with the Congolese authorities on the
drawdown plan, while respecting the concerns of the
host country and implementing the drawdown plan in a
steady, orderly and responsible manner, in accordance
with the situation on the ground and in keeping with
exit benchmarks.
The Government of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo has repeatedly requested the Security Council to
lift the arms embargo. President Tshisekedi Tshilombo
again raised that issue during his statement at the
general debate (see A/77/PV.5). The Security Council
should respond positively to that request.
The President (spoke in French): I shall now
make a statement in my capacity as the representative
of France.
2260732

30/09/2022

The situation concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo

I thank Ms. Keita and the other briefers for
their statements.
Security must be restored in the eastern Democratic
Republic of the Congo. Civilians and security forces
remain the targets of armed groups. A coordinated
response from the States of the region is urgently
needed. France welcomes the efforts of the East African
Community and Angola. The Nairobi process and
the Luanda process should help to demobilize armed
groups and restore trust in the region. The support of the
United Nations, the African Union and the International
Conference on the Great Lakes Region will be crucial.
At the initiative of President Macron, the Presidents
of the Democratic Republic of the Congo and Rwanda
met last week in New York. They agreed to work
together towards the withdrawal of the Mouvement
du 23 mars from occupied areas as soon as possible.
Commitments have been made to put an end to the
activities of all armed groups in the region.
The United Nations Organization Stabilization
Mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo
(MONUSCO) must regain the freedom to take action
to protect civilians. France deplores the death of
Congolese citizens and Blue Helmets during the recent
demonstrations against the Mission. It is primarily up
to the Congolese authorities to ensure the safety of the
United Nations and to combat disinformation.
The status-of-forces agreement must be respected,
and the Mission’s freedom of movement must be
restored. A full investigation of the serious incident that
occurred in Kasindi must be carried out. France notes
the request from the Congolese authorities for a review
of the MONUSCO transition plan. That transition is
already under way.
The Mission left Tanganyika province in June,
where the country team needs to be strengthened in order
to preserve the gains achieved. Ultimately, the gradual
withdrawal of MONUSCO will depend on meeting the
benchmarks set out in the transition plan. Until then,
MONUSCO must continue to implement its robust
mandate on the protection of civilians. The Mission
can count on France’s support in that regard. That same
goal — the protection of civilians — should also guide
the regional force announced in Nairobi, which should
work in close coordination with MONUSCO.
Lastly, efforts to stabilize the country must not
waver ahead of the 2023 elections. Measures have

S/PV.9142

already been taken by the Congolese authorities in
the lead-up to the elections. The European Union has
the means to assist the country in its preparations
for elections, if requested by national authorities.
Meanwhile, efforts must continue towards stability in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo, in particular
through the emergency humanitarian response, the
protection of human rights, the fight against hate
speech, the sustainable exploitation of natural resources
and the fight against illicit trafficking, which will all be
additional determining factors for peace.
I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.
I give the floor to the representative of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo.
Mr. Nzongola-Ntalaja (Democratic Republic
of the Congo) (spoke in French): I thank the
briefers — Ms. Bintou Keita, Mr. Emery Mudinga and
the Ambassador of Gabon, in his capacity as Chair
of the Committee established pursuant to resolution
1533 (2004), concerning the Democratic Republic of
the Congo — as well as all members of the Security
Council who made statements on the situation in the
eastern Democratic Republic of the Congo.
Allow me to congratulate you, Mr. President, on
your country’s presidency of the Security Council in
September and to thank you for convening today’s
meeting on the situation in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo.
I also wish to thank the Secretary-General, His
Excellency Mr. António Guterres, for his commitment
to my country’s cause.
I would like to commend all the members of the
Security Council, friends and partners who stand with
the Democratic Republic of the Congo. I would also
like to single out the three African countries that are
members of this key organ for their commitment to
and sacrifice for my country and for Africa as a whole.
I would also like to welcome Mr. Emery Mudinga,
Director of the Angaza Institute, based in Bukavu, for
his very relevant briefing.
I will say it once again — the Congo, which has
remained on the Security Council’s agenda almost
continuously for many years, is more than ever in
need of peace in order to further its development.
As we sit in this Chamber, the city of Bunagana, an
integral part of my country’s eastern territory, remains

226073219/23

S/PV.9142

The situation concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo

under occupation by Rwanda through its control of the
Mouvement du 23 mars (M-23). Families have been
decimated. The Congolese women and children of
Bunagana are suffering under the yoke of oppression.
This continuing series of aggressions is unacceptable.
The Council, which is very well informed by its own
Group of Experts, must stop turning a blind eye.
We earnestly ask the Security Council to join the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and President FélixAntoine Tshisekedi Tshilombo in demanding loudly
and clearly, in unambiguous terms, that the forces of
aggression and occupation immediately leave that area
of my country, Bunagana, and that they do so without
preconditions or subterfuge.
My delegation has taken note of the report of the
Secretary-General (S/2022/709) on the United Nations
Organization Stabilization Mission in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO), which Ms. Bintou
Keita, Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral and Head of the Mission, just presented to us.
I commend her on her commitment and express my
Government’s deep gratitude for the work she is doing
in our country. Our thanks also go to the MONUSCO
troops in general, and the quick-reaction forces of the
Mission’s Force Intervention Brigade and the Southern
African Development Community in particular, for the
sacrifices that they continue to make to achieve peace.
I would now like to make a few remarks on the issues
discussed in the report and the various concerns raised
by Council members. There is a lot to say, but, given the
time constraints, I will focus on the most critical points.
The Nairobi process, which has had a technical
delay, will be relaunched in the coming days. The
political component of the process is still ongoing. The
rebel groups that have adhered to it will be processed
by the Disarmament, Demobilization, Community
Recovery and Stabilization Programme. The President
recently appointed the regional coordinators of the
Programme, who will be deployed on the ground, and
the full operationalization of that vital programme will
require funding. With regard to the military component
of the Nairobi process, we would like to draw the
attention of the Security Council to a number of negative
forces that have continued to be the most resistant to the
process, as Ms. Keita mentioned earlier. They include
the M-23 terrorist group supported by Rwanda; the
Allied Democratic Forces terrorist group; the armed
forces of the Coopérative pour le développement du
20/23

30/09/2022

Congo and Zaire, in Ituri; and lastly, the Mayi-Mayi
Yakutumba in South Kivu.
Where foreign armed groups are concerned,
there can be no possibility of discussion. My
Government demands that they lay down their weapons
unconditionally and return home. While we do not
intend to infringe on the sovereignty of the countries
concerned, the Democratic Republic of the Congo
will ask the countries of origin of those negative
forces to show good faith by setting up the processes
and conditions necessary to absorb the fighters. The
Democratic Republic of the Congo is not a way station.
The military component of the Nairobi process, which is
also being fully implemented, will address both of those
issues through a resumption of joint military operations
by the Forces armées de la République démocratique
du Congo (FARDC) and MONUSCO, as well as the
regional force of the East African Community, which
continues to be deployed.
Concerning the regional force, my Government
would like to assure the Security Council that it will
cooperate with MONUSCO. The MONUSCO force is
there to support the FARDC, and the regional force will
not operate in the Democratic Republic of the Congo
without the FARDC. For that reason, the joint command
of that force will also be provided by the FARDC under
the leadership of General Kaputu, and the force’s
focal point is therefore the FARDC. Furthermore, to
avoid friendly fire, my Government will encourage
cooperation, information-sharing and so forth. In our
humble opinion, cooperation is a self-evident necessity.
As the report before us indicates, the political
situation in my country has been mainly dominated
by preparations for the holding of the 2023 elections,
mediation initiatives to de-escalate tensions between
the Democratic Republic of the Congo and Rwanda and
anti-MONUSCO protests. Concerning the elections,
the revised electoral law was adopted on 29 June.
The electoral calendar will soon be published by the
Independent National Electoral Commission. The
Government is in the process of ensuring preliminary
financing for the process. The Democratic Republic of
the Congo welcomes the support from MONUSCO and
the United Nations country team that it has requested
for the electoral process.
As far as de-escalation efforts are concerned, the
Democratic Republic of the Congo has shown good
faith through the good offices of the President, who
2260732

30/09/2022

The situation concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo

has agreed to participate in the various mediation
initiatives, including in Kenya, in Angola with
President João Lourenço, and most recently under the
auspices of President Emmanuel Macron of France.
The only observation that we would make is that
Bunagana remains under attack and occupation, despite
President Kagame’s statements during the meeting with
President Macron.
Concerning anti-MONUSCO sentiment, the
authorities of the Democratic Republic of the Congo have
made efforts to calm the population. My Government
hopes, however, that its efforts will not be undermined
by the concurrent announcement of the withdrawal.
MONUSCO is an important partner in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo’s quest for peace and stability in
its eastern regions, as President Tshisekedi Tshilombo
reminded us in his address to the General Assembly
(see A/77/PV.5). The re-evaluation of the transition plan
and the gradual withdrawal of the MONUSCO force are
essential. A group of experts is already being set up at
the Government level to work on the transition. They
will examine progress on the 18 benchmarks one by one
from our national perspective. The work will then be
followed up jointly with MONUSCO.
With regard to the Mission’s mandates, as I
underscored to the Council in June (see S/PV.9081),
under Chapter VII of the Charter of the United Nations,
the most important element in a situation of war is
the protection of civilians. It is therefore crucial for
MONUSCO to work on that area. A robust offensive
position is also essential. If MONUSCO is unable make
its presence felt and be a deterrent on the ground, it will
struggle to discharge its mission and main mandate to
protect civilians. To that end, the Democratic Republic
of the Congo once again calls on the Council to allocate
sufficient resources to MONUSCO to update its
weaponry and improve the quality of its equipment.
With regard to the humanitarian situation, the
greatest challenge remains raising the funds necessary
to cover the immense needs. We would like to take this
opportunity to reiterate our appeal to donors and other
funding agencies to fill the 67 per cent gap in overall
funding. Before concluding my remarks, on behalf
of my delegation, I would like to make the following
requests to the Council:
First, I call on the Council to ensure respect for
the integrity and inviolability of the borders of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo.

S/PV.9142

Second, I call on the Council to demand an
immediate and unconditional withdrawal of Rwandan
and M-23 troops from the city of Bunagana in the
eastern Democratic Republic of the Congo.
Third, as our President stated at the general debate
of the seventy-seventh session of the General Assembly
(see A/77/PV.5), the Democratic Republic of the Congo
reiterates its request for the Council to take up, without
any complacency, the report (see S/2022/479) of the
United Nations Group of Experts on the aggression on
the Democratic Republic of the Congo and to draw all
the appropriate conclusions therefrom.
Fourth, I call on the Council to clearly and firmly
condemn the criminal aggression of the M-23 — and its
backers, starting with the State of Rwanda — against
the Democratic Republic of the Congo.
Fifth, I call on the Council to support the
Nairobi process.
Sixth, I call on the Council to urge all armed
groups, without exception, to lay down their weapons
in order to join the Disarmament, Demobilization,
Community Recovery and Stabilization Programme. I
also call on the Council to provide increased support to
that programme.
Seventh, I call on the Council to strengthen
sanctions against the mafia networks inside and
outside the Democratic Republic of the Congo that
illegally exploit its natural resources, including the
entire supply chains from their points of transit to their
destinations — namely, the multinational corporations
that benefit from such illegal trafficking.
Eighth, the Democratic Republic of the Congo
calls on the Security Council to fully — and not
partially — lift the prior notification clause required
by the 1533 Sanctions Committee on the Democratic
Republic of the Congo. I want to thank the delegation
of China for raising the issue in today’s meeting. The
fact is that such a notification measure is not useful,
is totally unfair and does not enable us to defend our
country properly. Our President also requested that the
clause be lifted during his address at the general debate
of the seventy-sixth session of the General Assembly
(see A/76/PV.3).
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Rwanda.

226073221/23

S/PV.9142

The situation concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo

Mr. Gatete (Rwanda): I thank the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, Ms. Bintou
Keita, for her briefing, as well as the members of
the Security Council for their remarks. I also thank
Mr. Emery Mudinga, Director of the Angaza Institute,
for his briefing.
We take note of the Secretary General’s report
(S/2022/709), in particular its comprehensive coverage
of the impact of domestic and foreign armed groups in the
eastern Democratic Republic of the Congo. The report
comes at a time when the East Africa Community’s
regional force is being deployed to implement the
Nairobi process. Implementing the two tracks of the
Nairobi process provides solid ground for ending the
presence of foreign and domestic armed groups in the
eastern part of the Democratic Republic of the Congo.
Rwanda is also committed to the Luanda road map and
its implementation, as elaborated in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and Rwanda’s Joint Permanent
Commission for ensuring its implementation.
Those two processes complement each other, and
we trust that a sustainable solution can be implemented
through them. As Paul Kagame, President of the
Republic of Rwanda, noted in his statement at the
general debate of the seventy-seventh session of the
General Assembly,
“There is an urgent need to find the political will
to finally address the root causes of instability in
the eastern Democratic Republic of the Congo.
The blame game does not solve the problems. Such
challenges are not insurmountable, and solutions
can be found.” (see A/77/PV.6)
The Forces démocratiques de libération du Rwanda
(FDLR) and its splinter groups continue to pose a serious
threat to Rwanda. Troubling concerns therefore arise
when the FDLR and splinter groups receive support
and operate comfortably alongside the Forces armées
de la République démocratique du Congo (FARDC).
Such treatment enables those destructive forces to
reorganize, recruit and conduct cross-border incursions
on Rwandan territory. The FARDC must stop forging
alliances with hostile and sanctioned armed groups
such as the FDLR.
The FDLR’s presence in the Democratic Republic
of the Congo should never be underestimated. We
should not be evaluating a genocidal ideological
group on the basis of its numbers. Whatever the size
of the FDLR, if it can conduct cross-border attacks on
22/23

30/09/2022

Rwandan territory, inflict damage, kill people and loot,
that demonstrates that it is in a position to continually
undermine Rwanda’s security.
Rwanda has on several occasions suffered crossborder attacks from the FDLR that were entirely
preventable. In November 2019, the group attacked
Rwanda from its base in the eastern Democratic
Republic of the Congo, killing several of our people.
The FDLR, with support from the FARDC, also fired
multiple rockets into Rwandan territory three times in
2022 — in March, in May and again in June. In view
of those attacks, the FDLR and splinter groups clearly
represent a credible threat to Rwanda’s security, and
assertions to the contrary are disingenuous.
Rwanda wishes to reiterate that the tendency of
some Congolese leaders to make Rwanda a scapegoat
in order to gain political attention serves only to deepen
anti-Rwanda sentiment and xenophobic behaviour that
leads to the escalation of the conflict among communities
in Democratic Republic of the Congo. If the hate speech
continues, it will exacerbate the problems in the eastern
Democratic Republic of the Congo and further divide
the country by deepening hatred and mistrust among
Congolese communities.
Furthermore, the attitude of always externalizing
the problem or blaming others for the internal failures
of the Democratic Republic of the Congo is problematic.
Rwanda believes that all the problems I have mentioned
can be dealt with if there is political will. In that regard,
the Government of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo should accept its obligations under regional
agreements and implement the existing signed and
agreed peace arrangements.
Rwanda reaffirms its support for the Nairobi process
and the Luanda initiative. As I said earlier, we believe that
those processes are essential and complement existing
regional and subregional arrangements for dealing
with the security situation in the eastern Democratic
Republic of the Congo in a sustainable manner. The
problem is not the mechanisms but rather the lack of
implementation of existing agreements. Rwanda will
always do its part, while also ensuring its constitutional
obligation to protect its people and sovereignty.
In conclusion, Rwanda believes that the successful
implementation of the Nairobi process and Luanda
initiative requires the political and material support
of various stakeholders and — most important — the
2260732

30/09/2022

The situation concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo

political will and ownership of the Government of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Burundi.
Mr. Maniratanga (Burundi) (spoke in French):
At the outset, I would like to commend France for
organizing today’s meeting. We welcome the very
valuable contributions made today by the Permanent
Representative of Gabon in his capacity as Chair of
the Security Council Committee established pursuant
to resolution 1533 (2004), concerning the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, and by Mr. Emery Mudinga. My
delegation would like to commend Ms. Bintou Keita
for the work she and the United Nations Organization
Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic
of the Congo (MONUSCO) are doing in a somewhat
difficult context.
My delegation is pleased with Burundi’s excellent
diplomatic, commercial and socioeconomic relations
with all of its neighbours, especially the Democratic
Republic of Congo, as reflected in several agreements
related to trade and the free movement of people and
goods, among many other areas. We would also like to
remind the Security Council that Burundi has welcomed
with dignity and warmth thousands of refugees from
the eastern part of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, where several local and foreign armed groups
are active.
Given the complex security environment in the
eastern Democratic Republic of the Congo, Burundi
joined the efforts of the East African Community
(EAC) to stabilize the eastern Democratic Republic of
the Congo in the context of the Nairobi process. In that
spirit, Burundi deployed a contingent of the Burundi
National Defence Force to the Democratic Republic of
the Congo to assist in restoring peace and security in
South Kivu province.
In view of the recurring security problems, my
delegation strongly supports the regional approaches
and, in particular, the Nairobi process, initiated by
the East African Community, as reflected in the

S/PV.9142

communiqué of 21 April and in the outcome of the
20 June summit, in order to improve the security
situation and try to address the building of a genuine
peace process in the eastern Democratic Republic of
the Congo between armed groups and Government
forces, on the one hand, and among local communities,
on the other, in response to the somewhat complex
conflict situation.
My delegation is strongly encouraged by the
determination of the region’s leaders to strengthen
political and military efforts to build lasting peace
and stability in the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
and we request the multifaceted and multidimensional
support of the United Nations and the Security Council
members for the Nairobi process.
My delegation wishes to reaffirm that Burundi,
which holds the rotating chairpersonship of the EAC,
will do its utmost, in its national capacity and in its
capacity as Chairperson of the EAC, to actively
participate in all United Nations and/or African
initiatives to restore peace. The Government of Burundi
will never abandon the urgent and noble task of assisting
in restoring international peace and security wherever
the need arises.
With regard to the situation in the South Kivu
region, my delegation believes that it is essential not
only to counter the destructive terrorist forces, which
are sowing havoc in the subregion, but also to develop
an approach aimed at reconciliation among the local
communities in order to establish a culture of peace
in the minds of the communities required to coexist
peacefully.
Burundi is therefore ready to draw on its experience
to provide the necessary means and tools for the
peaceful coexistence of all communities living in the
eastern Democratic Republic of the Congo.
The President (spoke in French): There are no
more names inscribed on the list of speakers. I now
invite Council members to informal consultations to
continue our discussion on the subject.
The meeting rose at 12.05 p.m.

226073223/23
