UNITED

NATIONS

SECURITY
OFFICIAL
THIRTY-FOURTH

2172”

NEW

COUNCIL
RECORDS

’
JUN 1 4 4982

YEAR

MEETING:

27 NOVEMBER

1979

YORK

CONTENTS
Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/2172)
........ ........... ........ .........
Adoption of the agenda .*.....,.........,,........,....................
Letter dated 25 Novembtr 1979 from the Secretary-General addressed to the
President of the Security Council (S/13646) .,...........................

Page

SjPV.2172

1
1
1

NOTE
Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined
with figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United Nations
document.
Documents of the Security Council (symbol S/. . .) are normally published in quarterly Supplements of the O$iciaI Records of the Security Council. The date of the document
indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which information about it is given.
The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a system
adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Resolutions and Decisions of the
Security Council. The new system, which has been applied retroactively to resolutions
adopted before 1 January 1965, became fully operative on that date.

2172nd MEETING
Held in New York on Tuesday, 27 November 1979, at 3 p.m.
President: Mr. Sergio PALACIOS

de VIZZIO

(Bolivia).

Present: The representatives of the following States:
Bangladesh, Bolivia, China, Czechoslovakia,
France,
Gabon, Jamaica, Kuwait, Nigeria, Norway, Portugal,
Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, United Kingdom of
Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United States of
America, Zambia.

Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/2172)
I.

Adoption

of the agenda

2.

Letter dated 25 November 1979 from the SecretaryGeneral addressed to the President of the Security
Council (S/13646)
The meeting was called to order at 3.55 p.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.

Letter dated 25 November 1979 from the SecretaryGeneral addressed to the President of the Security
Council (S/13646)
1. The PRESIDENT (interpretationfrom Spanish): I wish
to inform members of the Council that I have received
letters from the representatives of Iran and Sri Lanka in
which they request to be invited to participate in the discus. sion of the item on its agenda. In accordance with the usual
practice I propose, with the consent of the Council, to invite
those representatives to participate in the discussion without the right to vote, in accordance with the relevant provisions of the Charter and rule 37 of the provisional rules of
procedure.
At the invitation of the President, Mr. Salamatian (Iran)
took a place at the Council table; Mr. Fernando (Sri Lanka)
took the place reserved for him at the side of the Council
chamber.
2. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation from Spanish): The
Security Council is meeting today in response to a request
by the Secretary-General contained in a letter dated 25
November addressed to the President of the Council in
document S/13646.
3. I wish to draw the attention of members of the Council
to document S/13650, which contains the text of a letter
dated 27 November from the Charge d’affaires of the Per-

manent Mission of Iran to the United Nations addressed to
the President of the Council.
4.

I now call on the Secretary-General.

5. The SECRETARY-GENERAL:
Mr. President, may I
first of all express my appreciation to you and to the
members of the Security Council for having convened this
highest organ of the United Nations for international peace
and security in response to my letter of 25 November. This
demonstrates clearly the overriding concern of the Council
to find a Peaceful solution of the crisis which has arisen
between the United States and Iran.
6. As members of the Council are aware, within the past
three weeks I have been continuously involved in efforts to
find means of resolving this very serious problem:Similar
efforts have been made by you, Mr. President, as well as by
many Governments. I take this opportunity to express my
sincere appreciation for these efforts.
7. We all know the basic elements of the problem before
us. The Government of the United States is deeply concerned at the seizure of its embassy at Teheran and the
detention of its diplomatic personnel, in violation of the
relevant international conventions. The Government of
Iran seeks redress for injustices and abuse of human rights
which, in its view, were committed by the previous regime.
8. A major concern, of course, must be for the fate of the
individuals involved. But apart from the humanitarian,
legal and psychological aspects of the problem there can be
no question that the international community has become
increasingly disturbed at the dangerous level of tension
arising from this situation. This threatens the peace and
stability of the region and could well have very grave consequences for the entire world. In the prevailing circumstances it became clear to me that the efforts I have
mentioned, which were conducted with good faith and
determination, could not for the time being overcome the
very difficult obstacles with which we were faced. Although
at times in the past few days agreement seemed close, in the
end the gap appeared to be too wide to be bridged at this
stage.
9. It was in the light of these developments and of the
escalation of tension that I concluded that the present crisis
poses a serious threat to international peace and security.
Accordingly, in the exercise of my responsibility under the
Charter, I asked for the urgent convening of the Security
Council. I may mention here that this move was supported
and welcomed by the Governments of Iran and the United

which he requested that formal deliberations of the Security
Council be postponed out of respect for the most holy-days
of Tassua and Ashura, days highly revered and commemorated for centuries in many Islamic countries, particularly
Iran, and in order to enable His Excellency Mr. Abolhassan
Bani-Sadr, the Foreign Minister of Iran, to arrive in New
York, so as to be able to participate in full debate of the
Council as of Saturday evening, 1 December. After consultations, the Council has therefore agreed to adjourn its
meeting until 1 December at 9 p.m., subject to the understanding that it will reconvene before then if the situation
demands it.

States. As you are aware, Mr. President, it was also unanimously supported by the members of the Council in the
consultations which took place yesterday. I earnestly hope
that the Council can be ofassistance in helping the parties to
find ways and means to reconcile their differences. In this
connexion, I was pleased to have confirmation today that
the Foreign Minister of Iran will come to New York to
participate in our deliberations.
10. Although in the past weeks we have discussed various
formulae which might prove useful in resolving this very
serious crisis, I do not think it would be appropriate for me
to make any detailed proposals at this time. I am sure that
the parties concerned are as anxious as anyone to see an end
to the present deplorable situation and I would urge them to
make every effort to avail themselves of the opportunities
offered by the machinery of the United Nations. In the
meantime I appeal to them to exercise the maximum restraint and to avoid any actions which could further inflame
the situation.

16. I also wish to draw the attention of the Council to the
fact that on 9 November, following consultations among
members of the Council, I issued the following statement on
their behalf [S/Z36ZaJ, urgently asking for the release and
protection of American diplomatic personnel who have
been detained in Iran since 4 November:
“Following consultations among the members of the
Security Council, I am authorized, as President of the
Council, to express the profound concern of the Council
at the prolonged detention of American diplomatic personnel in Iran. Speaking as President of the Council on
behalf of the Council, and while not wishing to interfere
in the internal affairs of any country, I must emphasize
that the principle of the inviolability of diplomatic personnel and establishments must be respected in all cases
in accordance with internationally accepted norms.
Therefore I urge in the strongest terms that the diplomatic personnel being held in Iran should be released
without delay and provided protection. I further urge the
Secretary-General to continue to use his good offices to
assist towards this objective.”

11. I believe that the Security Council can be of great
assistance in these diflicult days and that it has a right and a
duty to assist in resolving a situation which poses grave
dangers to the structure of international peace. I am contident that the Council will make every effort to do this,
guided by the principles of justice and international law.
12. Before concluding, Mr. President, I wish to pay a
tribute to you personally and to the members of the Council
for your very helpful and responsible handling of the preparatory consultations. We all realize the very delicate and
unusual nature of this situation. I wish to say how grateful I
am for your constructive response.
13. The PRESIDENT:
I would like to thank the Secretary-General for his statement.

On behalf of the Security Council, I strongly reiterate this
appeal.

14. I wish to refer to the letter of the Secretary-General
dated 25 November [S/13646], on the basis of which the
Council is meeting.

17. In view of the serious threat to international peace and
security, the Security Council will not relent in its urgent
efforts to seek a peaceful solution of the problem in conformity with the principles of justice and international law.

15. I also wish to refer to the letter dated 27 November
from the Charge d’affaires of the Permanent Mission of
Iran to the United Nations addressed to me [S/13650], by

The meeting rose at 4.15 p.m.

2
Litho

in United

Nations,

New York

Price:

W.S.

1.50

79-70002-February

1982-2.250
