S/2021/634

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
9 July 2021
Original: English

Mission of good offices in Cyprus
Report of the Secretary-General

I. Introduction
1.
The Security Council, in its resolution 2561 (2021), requested me to submit a
report by 10 July 2021 on my good offices, in particular on progress towards reaching
a consensus starting point for meaningful results-oriented negotiations leading to a
settlement. In that resolution, the Council encouraged the leaders of the Greek Cypriot
and Turkish Cypriot communities to provide written updates on the actions that they
have taken in support of the relevant parts of the resolution since its adoption, in
particular with regard to paragraphs 5, 6 and 8, with a view to reaching a sustainable
and comprehensive settlement, and requested me to include the contents of those
updates in my report. The updates submitted by the two leaders are contained in
annexes I and II to the present report.
2.
The present report is focused on developments from 19 December 2020 to
18 June 2021, providing an update on the activities carried out by my mission of good
offices under the leadership of my Deputy Special Adviser on Cyprus, Elizabeth
Spehar. It also includes an update on the consultations conducted by senior United
Nations official Jane Holl Lute on my behalf and on the informal five -plus-one
meeting that took place in Geneva, under my auspices, from 27 to 29 April 2021. 1

II. Background and context
3.
In the period since the previous report on my mission of good offices (S/2021/5),
it was demonstrated that public confidence in the possibility of resuming peace talks
and securing a negotiated settlement has continued to fall and that the two
communities have become increasingly polarized. The period was characterized by
heightened attention paid to the respective responses to the coronavirus disease
(COVID-19) pandemic, economic pressures and movements in the political landscape.
4.
The four-year absence of fully-fledged negotiations following the inconclusive
closing of the Conference on Cyprus in July 2017 has led to increasing concern about
the future of the peace process, exacerbated by the negative effects of the COVID -19
pandemic and related restrictions on movement. With the announcement on
__________________
1

21-09465 (E)

An informal meeting of the Greek Cypriot leader, the Turkish Cypriot leader, the guarantor
powers and the United Nations.

160721

*2109465*

S/2021/634

24 February that I would convene an informal five-plus-one meeting on Cyprus in
Geneva, the focus of the parties turned to positioning in advance of, and preparations
for, the meeting. Despite multiple calls from citizens’ groups for the two sides to
invest in building trust between them and in renewing confidence in the peac e
process, the negative rhetoric continued. While civil society groups on both sides held
a number of marches in support of a mutually agreed solution, the leaders continued
their separate outreach efforts, promoting their divergent positions both before a nd
after the informal meeting in Geneva.
5.
Against the backdrop of a fluctuating epidemiological situation regarding
COVID-19 cases on both sides of the island, greater restrictions were reintroduced
during times of high numbers of positive cases and whe n hospitals, including
intensive care units, were under pressure owing to an elevated number of COVID -19
patients. In general, tight restrictions were enforced, with curfews limiting night -time
movement on both sides during most of the reporting period, as were testing
requirements. Certain implementation problems were reported during shifts in
lockdown levels on both sides. In addition to adverse effects on public health, the
COVID-19 pandemic continued to have a significant socioeconomic impact,
including in the form of an unprecedented low number of tourist arrivals.
6.
On both sides of the island, there was a marked increase in rallies and marches
organized to protest a range of grievances. There were also increased public calls for
a settlement, as well as petitions and letters sent to the two leaders and the United
Nations in advance of the informal meeting held in Geneva. As an example, a large
bicommunal march and peace event, “Together for Federation”, was held separately
(owing to COVID-19 restrictions) on 24 April, on both sides of the divide, in support
of a federal solution and against the partition of the island. Representatives of the This
Country Is Ours platform read out a joint declaration signed by 120 Greek Cypriot and
Turkish Cypriot organizations. Another entity, Unite Cyprus Now, engaged in the
organizing and training of youth activists island-wide, running dialogue groups and
online webinars and undertaking mobilization activities along with other civil society
organizations and groups. The Bi-communal Peace Initiative – United Cyprus, a
platform of about 70 organizations, commenced consultations and issued a call to
entities, initiatives, personalities and people from across the island to establish a civic
constituent assembly that brings together forces with a shared vision for reunification
on the island. Finally, the Cyprus Dialogue Forum launched a digital guide on the
Cyprus peace process based on open-source material, in English, Greek and Turkish,
providing easy access to key documents on the Cyprus peace talks over the decades.
The comprehensive guide contains factsheets and infographics that map the core
elements of a range of peace proposals submitted to date, in order to facilitate fact based dialogue across the island. Despite this burst of activity in favour of a solution,
the majority of Cypriots on both sides continued to not engage publicly on the matter.
7.
In March, to support the call by the Security Council in its resolution 2561
(2021) for the two sides to work together on confidence-building measures and to
restart and revitalize the work of the technical committees, my Deputy Special
Adviser/Special Representative of the Secretary-General in Cyprus and Head of the
United Nations Peacekeeping Force in Cyprus established regular trilateral meetings
with representatives of the Greek Cypriot and the Turkish Cypriot leaders, supported
by my mission of good offices, in a process of continual engagement. Politica l
tensions at various levels persisted during this period. In addition, for as long as the
three crossing points remained closed, with uncoordinated and differing restrictive
procedures at the crossing points prevailing, movement across the island remained
limited. Unauthorized activity continued to occur in and around the buffer zone,
causing frequent disputes between the two sides, as described in more detail in my
most recent report on the United Nations Peacekeeping Force in Cyprus ( S/2021/635).
2/27

21-09465

S/2021/634

On a positive note, in addition to advancing confidence-building between the two
sides, the regular trilateral meetings also constituted a forum in which to raise issues
of concern, such as those arising in and adjacent to the buffer zone. Several issues,
such as the harmonization of COVID-19 measures and the reopening of crossing
points, were ultimately solved through that format.
8.
On 2 June, following extensive discussions by the Technical Committee on
Health and between the two sides through the trilateral dialogue with my Deputy
Special Adviser and Special Representative, the two leaders decided to harmonize
measures related to COVID-19 and to reopen the three remaining crossing points. On
4 June, the crossings reopened, and the new measures were put in place, in a decision
that was well received in both communities.
9.
The religious leaders who make up the Religious Track of the Cyprus Peace
Process, under the auspices of the Embassy of Sweden, continued to b e active during
the reporting period, working together in support of religious freedom, reconciliation,
co-existence and peace on the island. The religious leaders met in person on 7 June,
for the first time in a year, owing to the pandemic. They also issu ed a statement on
the informal five-plus-one meeting, in which they expressed their wish for an end to
the current stalemate and the resumption of dialogue on the future of the island and
advocated “increased cooperation, dialogue and empathy between our c ommunities,
for memories to heal, trust replacing fear and for hope to grow”. In recent months,
the religious leaders of Cyprus also demonstrated public unity against various
manifestations of hate speech and in relation to cases of desecration and vandali sm
against places of worship, which occurred on both sides of the divide. The religious
leaders continued to visit each other’s places of worship, provided Greek and Turkish
language courses for clerics and participated in a webinar on International Women’s
Day, during which Cypriot women of faith from both communities were invited to
discuss the challenges that women face island-wide, especially during the pandemic,
and to share information on community initiatives that they were leading.
10. The leaders and representatives of Greek Cypriot and Turkish Cypriot political
parties continued to meet under the auspices of the Embassy of Slovakia, issuing joint
statements in which the leaders were urged to demonstrate political will to resume
negotiations and to agree on confidence-building measures. More details are provided
in my most recent report on UNFICYP.
11. On 12 April, building on many years of discussions between the two
communities, including through the Technical Committee on Economic and
Commercial Matters and on the common understanding reached by the two leaders
on
the
matter
in
2015,
the
European
Commission
adopted
a
“Χαλλούμι/Halloumi/Hellim” protected designation of origin package. The package
consisted of two measures, one allowing producers based anywhere on the island of
Cyprus to benefit from the protected designation of origin status for Halloumi/Hellim,
and the other allowing such products to cross the Green Line, provided that the cheese
and milk from which it was made had met all European Union animal and public
health standards.
12. During the reporting period, there were repeated instances of Turkish Cypriot and
Turkish officials publicly stating their intention to develop Varosha in such a way that
would, in their view, strengthen the economy in the north, including through attracting
tourism. Those statements and developments on the ground triggered objections from
Greek Cypriots, who stressed that ongoing activities in Varosha violated relevant
Security Council resolutions, including 550 (1984) and 789 (1992), as well as the
statement, dated 9 October 2020, by the President of the Council ( S/PRST/2020/9) on
the issue. As noted in my most recent report on UNFICYP, developments on the ground
continued to be observed in the fenced-off town of Varosha.
21-09465

3/27

S/2021/634

13. With respect to the regional situation, following a period of heightened tensions
over hydrocarbon exploration and maritime zone claims, including the delimitation
of maritime boundaries, the current reporting period saw no major developments in
that regard. Although those issues are far from resolved, the period was characteri zed
by a lessening of tensions and some renewed momentum created for dialogue,
including between the guarantor powers Greece and Turkey.

III. Status of the process: informal five-plus-one meeting held
in Geneva
14. During the reporting period, Ms. Lute held numerous discussions, both in person
and virtually, with the leaders of the two communities and their representatives, as
well as with representatives of Greece, Turkey and the United Kingdom of Great
Britain and Northern Ireland. She was also in contact with representatives of the
European Union.
15. I convened an informal five-plus-one meeting on the Cyprus issue at the Palais
des Nations in Geneva, from 27 to 29 April 2021, with the objective of determining
whether common ground exists for the parties to negotiate a lasting solution to the
Cyprus problem within a foreseeable horizon. The idea for such an informal meeting
had initially been put forward by Turkey, in the context of the consultations that had
been undertaken by Ms. Lute after the Conference on Cyprus closed inconclusively
in Crans-Montana, Switzerland, in July 2017. As outlined in my previous report on
my mission of good offices in Cyprus, following consultations with Ms. Lute, the
sides and the guarantor powers had expressed a willingness to attend such a meeting
under my auspices.
16. With the participation of the Greek Cypriot and Turkish Cypriot leaders and the
Ministers for Foreign Affairs of Greece, Turkey and the United Kingdom, the informal
five-plus-one meeting was the first time that the parties had been brought together
since the Conference on Cyprus. During the meeting, I held a succession of bilateral
and plenary meetings with the parties, in order to exchange informally and openly
about the vision for the future and how to chart a path forward. In our deliberations,
participants shared their views with me and with each other with openness and
frankness, which allowed us to explore the extent of commonality and consider ideas
and options for the way forward.
17. As I explained publicly on 29 April, the Turkish Cypriot delegation expressed
the position that the many efforts made to solve the Cyprus issue over the years had
failed, including the most recent attempt made in Crans-Montana, and that efforts to
negotiate a bizonal, bicommunal federation had been exhausted. They believe that the
Turkish Cypriots have inherent sovereign equality and should enjoy equal
international status. In their view, the solution should be based on two states
cooperating with each other. The Greek Cypriot delegation expressed the position that
negotiations should resume from where they left off in Crans -Montana and be aimed
at achieving a settlement based on a bizonal, bicommunal federation with political
equality, on the basis of relevant Security Council resolutions, the Joint Declaration
of 2014, the existing body of work, the six elements I presented in Crans -Montana,
and in line with the European Union acquis.
18. Despite our efforts, sufficient common ground could not be found during the
informal meeting to allow for the resumption of formal negotiations in relation to the
settlement of the Cyprus problem. Notwithstanding the results, it was agreed to
continue the dialogue, with the objective of moving in the direction of reaching
common ground, so as to allow for the start of formal negotiations.

4/27

21-09465

S/2021/634

IV. Status of the process: activities of my mission of good offices
19. My Deputy Special Adviser and my mission of good offices conducted an
intensive outreach programme throughout the reporting period, with political parties,
economic actors and civil society organizations island-wide, and held regular
meetings with European Union officials, the World Bank and the diplomatic
community. Views were exchanged on the prospects for the informal five-plus-one
meeting, the state of readiness of the parties and the socioeconomic situation on the
island. Efforts were also focused on addressing the negative impacts of COVID -19,
on furthering confidence-building measures and on the resumption and revitalization
of the work of the technical committees.
20. My Deputy Special Adviser also held a number of high-level meetings,
including with the Secretary of State for Foreign and Commonwealth Affairs of the
United Kingdom, Dominic Raab, the Minister for Foreign Affairs, the European
Union and Cooperation of Spain, Maria Aránzazu González Laya, the Minister of
European and Foreign Affairs of Slovakia, Ivan Korčok, and the European Union
High Representative for Foreign Affairs and Security Policy and Vice-President of
the European Commission, Josep Borrell, during their respective visits to Cyprus. My
mission of good offices has continued to meet regularly with World Bank
counterparts, in particular regarding the continued dissemination of the findings of
the gender-sensitive socioeconomic impact assessment of a settlement that the
mission had completed with the support of the Bank in late 2019, in accordance with
the call made by the Security Council in its resolution 2453 (2019).
21. A slight revitalization of the work of the technical committees occurred during
the reporting period, following a quieter period that had resulted from the impact of
COVID-19 and the change in Turkish Cypriot leadership in October 2020, with a new
slate of Turkish Cypriot members appointed to various committees in February 2021.
My mission of good offices, as part of its efforts towards the resumption and
reinvigoration of the activities of the committees, convened regular meetings with
representatives of the Greek Cypriot and Turkish Cypriot leaders to discuss the status
of the committees and the way forward. In those meetings, both sides reaffirmed their
support for the technical committees and underscored the value of their work to
improve the daily lives of Cypriots. Possible cooperation in the area of sports and
peacebuilding was also suggested to the two sides.
22. Despite those efforts, they did not always result in the full reactivation of
concrete activities. While all the committees, except the Technical Committee on
Crossings, resumed their engagement, most of them only met sporadically. The
Technical Committee on Broadcasting continued its work with the same members,
while the Technical Committees on Culture, Education, the Environment, Gender
Equality and Humanitarian Affairs all held introductory meetings among some or all
members following changes to the memberships of those committees. While the
committees discussed future work, including possible project ideas, there have been
delays in the full resumption of the activities of most of the committees, owing to
scheduling challenges and the need for familiarization by new members.
23. My mission of good offices, in collaboration with the United Nations
Development Programme, organized virtual information sessions on the European
Union-funded support facility for the technical committees, held from 22 to
25 February, for the team leaders of all committees, encouraging greater utilization
of the funding available for their projects and initiatives and informing them of the
practical support also available to them for the preparation and execution of activities.
The purpose of the funding mechanism is to assist the technical committees in
building capacity and enhancing the impact and visibility of their joint work.

21-09465

5/27

S/2021/634

Although projects were in discussion and undergoing implementation in the Technical
Committees on Crime and Criminal Matters, Education, the Environment and Health,
and the facility helpfully provided translation services for certain committee
meetings, the funding remains significantly underutilized. While funding has been
extended until the end of April 2022 so as to enable the technical committees to take
advantage of the facility further into the future, no new projects were proposed during
the reporting period.
24. As called for in Security Council resolution 2561 (2021), during the period, the
two sides decided to work, as a matter of priority, on addressing the negative impacts
of COVID-19, focusing on issues related to health and welfare, contact between the
communities and the economic effects of the pandemic. With United Nations
facilitation, all technical committees were asked to identify related issues within their
respective mandates for the representatives of the two leaders to consider, and the
Technical Committee on Health was specifically tasked with discussing a package of
measures to be presented to the leaderships of both communities. Emphasis was also
placed on the work of the Technical Committee on Economic and Commercial
Matters, which met four times after a hiatus of several months. The Greek Cypriot
and Turkish Cypriot members of that Committee put forward proposals in areas where
the two sides could work together, including ways to address the economic fallout
from the pandemic, while also promoting greater economic ties and increased
intra-island trade.
25. While the provision of vaccines to European Union member States encountered
some delays, the European Commission reported that European Union -approved
vaccines would be provided to cover the needs of all Cypriots. The Technical
Committee on Health was tasked with overseeing the transfer of vaccines betwee n
the two communities. According to the European Centre for Disease Prevention and
Control, as at 18 June, a total of 831,205 doses had been received by the authorities
of the Republic of Cyprus. According to the Technical Committee on Health, 61,050
of those doses had been transferred to the north. Work is ongoing between the sides
with respect to the recognition of vaccines for the purposes of future travel, both
through the crossings and on and off the island.
26. It was also decided that specific emphasis would be placed on tackling the issue
of irregular migration, with the Technical Committees on Gender Equality,
Humanitarian Affairs, Crisis Management and Crime and Criminal Matters, meeting
to share information as a first step to addressing the situation. On 12 May, the first
virtual meeting on irregular migration with experts from both communities took
place, facilitated by my mission of good offices and with the attendance of the
representative in Cyprus of the United Nations High Commissioner fo r Refugees.
Discussions are now ongoing on how to proceed and on whether to set up a standing
body to continue regular dialogue on the issue.
27. A total of four committees (the Technical Committees on Health, Cultural
Heritage, Broadcasting and Crime and Criminal Matters) remained fully active, with
regular meetings and the implementation of ongoing projects. The Technical
Committee on Health sustained regular engagement, in particular through frequent
interaction between the two co-chairs, who exchanged relevant information on the
COVID-19 responses of the respective sides. The co-chairs also helped to ensure the
smooth delivery of humanitarian aid, in addition to overseeing vaccine delivery.
Weeks of discussions and building on the consensus reached on a set of harmonized
COVID-19-related measures devised by the Technical Committee on Health, and the
regular engagement of my Deputy Special Adviser with representatives of the two
leaders, proved critical to fostering the agreement announced on 2 June on the
reopening of the three remaining crossing points and on the harmonization of
pandemic-related procedures for all crossings.
6/27

21-09465

S/2021/634

28. The Technical Committee on Cultural Heritage completed conservation works at
several sites, including the historic Afendrika archaeological site, two historic fountains
and two Greek Cypriot and two Turkish Cypriot cemeteries, which were part of pilot
projects. Several other sites benefited from emergency support works. The Committee
also started numerous tendering processes for conservation works and designs islandwide. On 25 May, the Committee was awarded the European Heritage Award/Europa
Nostra Award in the category of dedicated service to heritage, for demonstrating a high
degree of commitment and civic engagement, coupled with excellence in the
safeguarding and enhancement of cultural heritage, monuments and sites.
29. The Technical Committee on Crime and Criminal Matters, through its
subcommittee, the Joint Contact Room (also known as the Joint Communications
Room), successfully continued its daily operations, facilitating the handover of two
suspects between the sides and the exchange of 151 pieces of information on crime
and criminal issues as at 31 May 2021.
30. Contact among the members of the Technical Committee on Gen der Equality
was reinitiated following changes in its membership, as described in my previous
report. In early 2021, the mission facilitated a meeting of the two co -chairs, during
which the future work of the Committee was discussed, including the developm ent of
an action plan supporting the full, equal and meaningful participation of women in
peace talks, as called for by the Security Council in its resolution 2483 (2019) and
repeated in subsequent resolutions.
31. The Technical Committee on Education discussed projects under development
and started preparations to resume its activities, including the Imagine project, in the
upcoming academic year (2021/22).
32. Although the Technical Committee on Crossings did not meet during the
reporting period, discussions on the reopening of crossings took place regularly in the
context of discussions in the trilateral dialogue described above.
33. While the issue of confidence-building measures has been raised in discussions
in the regular trilateral meetings, stand-alone confidence-building measures outside
the technical committees were not furthered during the reporting period.
34. Despite ongoing COVID-19 restrictions, my mission of good offices and
UNFICYP continued their joint efforts to support the implementation of the women
and peace and security agenda, including the promotion of the active participation of
women in peacemaking, through virtual forums. Those efforts included engagement
with and support for women civil society activists and women’s organizations and
platforms. These actors came together ahead of the informal five-plus-one meeting in
Geneva, with a shared vision to encourage the parties to ensure the e ffective
participation of women and the inclusion of a gender perspective at the informal
meeting and in the future, should the sides commence full-fledged negotiations.
Outreach was undertaken by the intercommunal women’s group, Hands Across the
Divide, which conducted meetings with decision makers on both sides of the island
and with the diplomatic community. Several women’s organizations and platforms
issued statements and sent letters to the parties in anticipation of the informal
five-plus-one meeting. While those initiatives made a positive contribution to the
public discourse, they did not have an impact on the level of participation by women
in the delegations of the two sides, which was minimal. Nevertheless, the initiatives
reflected a growing trend of intercommunal pro-solutionist activity and constitute a
positive step towards further sensitizing key stakeholders regarding the perspectives
of women in relation to the peace process.
35. On 22 February, my mission of good offices, in partnership with UNFICYP,
continued to raise the profile of initiatives (such as on financial literacy for women),
21-09465

7/27

S/2021/634

in line with and to promote the results of the gender-sensitive socioeconomic impact
assessment called for by the Security Council and conducted by the mis sion of good
offices in partnership with the World Bank. The outcome of the assessment
substantiated that delaying a settlement in Cyprus increases both the economic and
non-economic costs of the prevailing political status quo. The translation of the
assessment into both Greek and Turkish was also completed during the period under
review, and both documents were made freely accessible on the website of my mission
of good offices. 2
36. Increased outreach to the business community on both sides was also conducted,
primarily through virtual means, to obtain a better understanding of the corporate
landscape and its impact on the peace process. That outreach included not only owners
of women-led businesses and representatives of women’s business associa tions, but
also embassies with an interest in supporting efforts to promote discussions on the
gender-differentiated impact of a settlement and on the necessary policies to be
implemented to ensure that a settlement can more effectively benefit both women and
men. Engagement with business interlocutors had a special focus on women and
young entrepreneurs, and views were solicited from young female members of
family-owned businesses, well-established female heads of companies and young
female entrepreneurs.
37. During the reporting period, my mission of good offices continued to cooperate
with UNFICYP on an environmental peacebuilding initiative and supported activities
to highlight and address environmental challenges in the buffer zone and throughout
the island, including through outreach to civil society. A photo competition aimed at
young people across the island, on the topic “What does water mean to you?”, was
launched on the occasion of World Water Day, on 22 March in collaboration with the
Technical Committee on the Environment and the Embassy of the United States of
America, concluding with a panel discussion held on 17 June. During that period,
preparations were also made for the launch of a second iteration of the United Nations
Youth Champions for Environment and Peace programme.
38. During the reporting period, my mission of good offices commissioned polling
exercise conducted in the Greek Cypriot and the Turkish Cypriot communities. A
majority of respondents from both communities reconfirmed their aspirations for a
mutually agreed settlement and expressed the belief that it was imperative to reach
one as soon as possible. Despite the desire and urgency expressed, significantly fewer
respondents of those polled had confidence that a settlement would , in fact, be
reached. The exercise also showed that, while COVID-19-related issues on the island
have not negatively affected the image of each community vis-à-vis the other, they
have contributed to lowered expectations regarding a solution.

V. Observations
39. The passage of time since the historic opportunity in Crans-Montana has
complicated the efforts to find a mutually acceptable solution in Cyprus. I convened the
parties in Geneva because I believed that their readiness to participate in an in formal
five-plus-one meeting offered a valuable opportunity for them to meet and exchange
perspectives with a view to determining whether common ground exists to negotiate a
lasting solution to the Cyprus problem within a foreseeable horizon. The question before
us was, and remains, a critical and difficult one, with potentially far-reaching
implications. In an informal meeting convened without preconditions, it is useful that all
parties are able to express their positions in an open manner; however, it is clear that, as
__________________
2

8/27

See: https://uncyprustalks.unmissions.org/launch-un-world-bank-gender-sensitive-socioeconomic-impact-assesment-settlement-cyprus.
21-09465

S/2021/634

Secretary-General, I am guided in the negotiations on Cyprus by relevant Security
Council resolutions that have established the United Nations parameters.
40. For more than five decades, the parties have sought the help of the United Nations
and the international community to solve the long-standing Cyprus issue. The peace
process in Cyprus is sui generis; the Turkish Cypriots and the Greek Cypriots have equal
inherent rights and engage in negotiations as equals in the process. The Security Council
has made clear in numerous resolutions over nearly 50 years that there is only one
sovereign state on the island of Cyprus. At the same time, I note the realities on the
island, and that the parties have expressed to me the importance of finding a practicable
framework within which genuine political equality would manifest as shared and
effective participation in the political and economic life of the island.
41. It is now four years since Crans-Montana, and I reiterate that the issues have
become more complicated. While it remains to be seen whether common ground can
be reached to resume negotiations for a lasting settlement in Cyprus, it should be
recalled that the future of the process remains in the hands of the parties, especially
the two Cypriot leaders. As can be seen by the written updates by the two sides
annexed to the present report, their positions remain far apart. As we endeavour to
support the two sides in seeking common ground, the parties’ display of flexibility
and political will, and a clear-eyed view of the best interests of the Cypriots, will be
of paramount importance.
42. The Security Council has given me a clear mandate that has guided my efforts.
I reiterate my determination to continue to assist the parties in reachi ng a
comprehensive settlement within a foreseeable horizon, so as to bring lasting security
and well-being to all Cypriots, to the Greek Cypriots and the Turkish Cypriots, who
deserve to live in peace and prosperity together in the exercise of their equal inherent
rights. Therefore, I urge the parties to engage constructively in the continuing
consultations so that meaningful talks can resume.
43. My mission of good offices, under the leadership and guidance of my Deputy
Special Adviser, is working on the island to promote rapprochement between the
communities and improve the climate. Important work was done to support the two
sides in restarting the technical committees, in considering confidence -building
measures and in engaging with each other on addressing serious problems on the
island, including, as a priority, the negative impacts of COVID -19. The regularity of
the trilateral meetings hosted by the Deputy Special Adviser and of related
discussions during the reporting period is notable and represents a substantial increase
in engagement as compared with the previous period. This is positive, given the
current absence of full-fledged negotiations, and I encourage the two sides in Cyprus
to continue engaging with the United Nations in that vein.
44. At the same time, despite some progress in the work of the technical committees,
I continue to consider that these bodies are significantly underutilized. I strongly urge
the sides to work together on confidence-building measures and to revitalize the work
of the technical committees so that they can fulfil their potential in improving the
daily lives of Cypriots, also in accordance with Security Council resolution 2561
(2021). I urge the leaders to move beyond discussion and to provide political support
and guidance to all the committees for the full reinvigoration of their work.
45. Pursuant to the call by the Security Council in resolution 2561 (2021), I
welcome the decision of the two leaders to empower the Technical Committee on
Health during the reporting period to reach consensus on a set of harmonized
measures governing crossings during the COVID-19 pandemic, as well as the full
reopening of crossing points. The agreement reached by the two leaders, announced
on 2 June, on uniform measures and the reopening of the three crossings that had
remained closed, is to be heralded.
21-09465

9/27

S/2021/634

46. In line with my recent statement to the Security Council on 17 Februar y, on
global vaccine equity, I underscore the importance of providing European Union approved vaccines to both communities and of the equitable sharing of those vaccines,
both to ensure public health safety on the island and as a key confidence -building
measure.
47. The two economies continue to drift further apart with ever-greater disparities,
while intercommunal, person-to-person contact remains limited. Both communities
could benefit from greater trade and economic cooperation. The two communities
could also benefit from hearing about positive examples of cooperation on the island,
in general, and involving youth specifically. The idea of cooperation on sport to bring
young people together and promote interaction between the two communities via
sports activities, including possibly through the establishment of a technical
committee, is worth considering.
48. I welcome the registration by the European Union of the joint Cypriot heritage,
Halloumi/Hellim, as a protected designation of origin. That accomplishment has the
potential to boost the economies of both communities and increase trade across the
Green Line, in compliance with European Union animal and public health standards.
I hope for implementation of the protected designation of origin pro ducts registration
in such a way that fully benefits both Greek Cypriot and Turkish Cypriot producers.
49. I continue to monitor developments in and around Cyprus closely. I call on the
leaders to address matters of concern between them in an open and cons tructive
manner, especially while consultations continue in order to find common ground to
allow for formal negotiations to start. I have repeatedly stressed the need to avoid
actions on the island, including in Varosha, that could complicate chances for f inding
common ground between the parties or that could trigger tensions. I reiterate my
concern over developments in the fenced-off area of the town and recall that the
position of the United Nations remains unchanged. I further recall the statement dated
of 9 October 2020 by the President of the Security Council and the relevant Council
resolutions related to Varosha, notably resolutions 550 (1984) and 789 (1992), and
the importance of adhering fully to those resolutions. I stress again that natural
resources around the island should benefit both communities and constitute a strong
incentive for the parties to find a mutually acceptable and durable so lution in Cyprus
and to engender deeper regional cooperation. I welcome the lessening of tensions and
the positive steps taken towards dialogue in the region, including between guarantor
powers Greece and Turkey, on issues that divide them.
50. As the years have passed with no settlement on the island, both the sense of
fatigue over the situation and scepticism regarding the process have deepened. Cyprus
negotiations remain closed and leader-focused, information is insufficiently shared
with the public and very few actors are involved. Despite the repeated calls in my
reports and in Security Council resolutions to involve civil society actors, including
women and young people, peace talks in Cyprus have spanned decades without
significant input from civil society, with negotiations for a comprehensive settlement
in Cyprus being an exclusively track 1 affair since their inception. It is therefore
heartening to see pro-settlement voices in both communities engaged in heightened
activism in the period before the informal five-plus-one meeting. I echo the Council’s
support for greater civic engagement and trust building and urge the leaders to be more
explicit in encouraging contact and cooperation between the two communities. The
leaders should strongly consider involving underrepresented groups in discussions
pertaining to the Cyprus problem and in any resumed peace talks, including women,
minorities, young people and persons with disabilities. I emphasize the important
support role of the two United Nations missions on the ground in this regard and their
mutually reinforcing activities. Both missions will further that engagement.

10/27

21-09465

S/2021/634

51. I especially encourage the parties to follow international best practice on the
participation of women, as highlighted in consecutive Security Council resolutions
since the adoption of its resolution 1325 (2000). I wish the Cypriot delegations to the
informal five-plus-one meeting in April had been more inclusive in that regard, and I
urge the parties to ensure the inclusion of at least 30 per cent women in their future
delegations and to explore ways to ensure the effective participation of women and
the inclusion of a gender perspective in a possible resumed negotiation proce ss. In
that regard, I urge the leaders to request the Technical Committee on Gender Equality
to undertake, as a matter of priority, the development of an action plan to support the
full, equal and meaningful participation of women in the peace talks, as al so requested
by the Council in its resolution 2483 (2019) and underlined in subsequent resolutions.
In developing such an action plan, the Committee should, inter alia, consider how
best to engage, support and sustain linkages with women’s civil society groups. I also
urge the leaders to seriously consider the implementation of the recommendations of
the gender-sensitive socioeconomic impact assessment to address existing barriers to
the full economic participation of women, not only to benefit women today, but also
to ensure that a future peace agreement will more equally benefit both men and
women in Cyprus.
52. The coming months could prove to be decisive for the future of the Cyprus peace
process, with possible repercussions on the island, as well as around the Eastern
Mediterranean region. While international actors need to be ready to fully play their
part, I look first to Cyprus: to the leaders, to truly act in the best interests of their
people and to explain clearly to their constituents what is at stake; and to all Cypriots
to assume responsibility for their future, from the leaders of the political parties, to
the economic actors, to society at large. However, the guarantor powers also have to
be ready to support the efforts made to bring this long-standing dispute to a
conclusion, to the benefit of all Cypriots. Interested parties need to recognize that,
without decisive action now, continuing dynamics in and around Cyprus could render
future efforts to reach a mutually agreeable settlement to the Cyprus issue
unattainable.
53. I would like to express my gratitude to Elizabeth Spehar for her service as my
Deputy Special Adviser on Cyprus and to Ms. Lute for conducting consultations on
my behalf. I also express my appreciation to all the women and men serving in my
mission of good offices in Cyprus for their dedication and commitment to discharging
the responsibilities entrusted to them.

21-09465

11/27

S/2021/634

Annex I
Written update by the Greek Cypriot leader to the good offices
mission of the Secretary-General, pursuant to and in accordance
with Security Council resolution 2561 (2021)
This submission is made in response to the encouragement in UN Security
Council Resolution 2561, to “the leaders of the two communities to provide written
updates to the Good Offices Mission of the Secretary General on the actions they have
taken in support of the relevant parts of this resolution since its adoption, in
particular with regard to paragraphs 5 and 6 and 8, with a view to reaching a
sustainable and comprehensive settlement”.
The present update includes all developments relevant to the effort to resu me
the peace process in the framework of the Good Offices Mission of the UNSG,
irrespective of their inter-state or inter-communal character. References to
communities are without prejudice to the Republic of Cyprus as a Member State of
the United Nations and references to UNFICYP are made without prejudice to the
Republic of Cyprus as the host country of the Force.

I.

Efforts to resume the peace process
During the last 4 years, since the inconclusive closing of the Crans Montana
Conference on Cyprus in July 2017, our efforts to resume the peace process from the
point that it was left and based on agreed Terms of Reference were undermined by an
intransigent refusal on the part of Ankara to allow the Cyprus-led process to move
forward, despite an agreement in principle between the leaders of the two
communities in August 2019, confirmed at a trilateral meeting with the UNSG the
following November in Berlin.
Although at Crans Montana we came closer than even before to a strategic
agreement and the understanding between the two Cypriot leaders was based on the
existing body of work, any attempt to resume and conclude the negotiations was met
with resistance by Ankara and a systematic undermining of the agreed framework, as
not befitting Turkish views on a settlement in Cyprus.
At the same time, Turkey’s illegal and provocative activities in the territorial
sea, the continental shelf and the EEZ of Cyprus, the violations of the military status
quo along the Turkish forces ceasefire line and Strovilia, as well as the audacious
opening of the beachfront in the fenced area of Varosha, in contravention to relevant
UNSC Resolutions, created an extremely negative political climate that gravely
jeopardizes the prospects of the peace process and would pave the way for the revival
of the old rhetoric for a “two states” solution, now branded as “paradigm shift”.
Given the eventual shift indeed of the Turkish Cypriot position on the form of
the settlement of the Cyprus problem from reunification to partition, th rough the
recognition of two states and of sovereign equality and its consequent repositioning
outside the UN-established parameters of negotiations, with the open encouragement
of Ankara, it is not surprising that the 5+1 meeting in Geneva in April did no t result
in an agreement for the resumption of negotiations.
While Ankara and the Turkish Cypriot leadership insist that trust between the
sides has been lost and any effort to continue the peace process building on what we
have already achieved would be futile, their argument on what happened at Crans
Montana illustrates exactly that we have exercised full flexibility and constructive
approach, presenting at the final stage a comprehensive proposal that went beyond
what we had previously accepted, in an attempt to bring positions as close as possible.

12/27

21-09465

S/2021/634

Regrettably though, they have now entrenched themselves in their intransigent
written positions, setting as a precondition for the resumption of negotiations the
recognition of two states in Cyprus and expecting the UN Security Council to ignore
all its previous Resolutions on the matter, while denying to the UNSC any other role
in the process. This amounts to a significant impediment to the efforts of the UN
Secretary General aiming at finding common ground that would allow moving to the
next step of the process.
We also note, with grave concern, that Ankara has maintained its hostile rhetoric
towards Cyprus and they would not hesitate to repeat threats for use of military force
on and around Cyprus, exhibited inter alia through the upgrading of the illegal airport
at Lefkonoiko, where now Turkish drones are stationed, ready to be used in military
operations in Cyprus and in the region, according to statements of Turkish officials at
the highest level.
Even more worrisome and with potential devastating effect for the peace
process, is the fact that despite the repeated calls by the international community and
the UN Security Council in particular, to refrain from creating new faits accomplis in
the fenced area of Varosha, they carry on their plans for further violations contrary to
the relevant UNSC Resolutions, thus further fueling the escalation of tension, under
the pretense of disturbing what they call a “comfort zone”.
The Cyprus peace process should not be left to degenerate into strong-arm
tactics. There should be no room for intimidation and threats, neither ultimata based
on demands that are outside the UN established parameters. All these constitute a real
obstruction to the efforts for resumption of the Cyprus peace process, at a difficult
juncture for the Eastern Mediterranean region, and in disregard of the appeal of the
UN Secretary General in Geneva to refrain from such acts.
Yet engaged by geography, we just cannot waver over the peace process. As the
prolongation of the status quo is not an option, our resolve to pursue a peaceful settlement
becomes stronger, along with our readiness to support the UN Secretary General in his
effort to keep the process alive and the window of opportunity open. In this direction, we
will continue working with his Special Envoy, Ms. Jane Holl Lute, in preparation of the
informal meeting announced by the UNSG at Geneva for the next weeks.
As stated already, we are ready to engage in a constructive manner, tak ing into
account the expressed concerns of the Turkish Cypriot side, within the agreed basis of
a bi-zonal, bi-communal federation with political equality, as defined in
UN Resolutions with a single sovereignty, citizenship and international personality. In
this direction in particular, we have already proposed to work on the idea of
decentralisation of the exercise of power, which could provide an opportunity to involve
to the extent possible and as close to the people as possible all levels of administra tion
in decision-making and implementation, reduce the number of instances of potential
friction and thus further enhance the overall functioning of the state.
Furthermore, we would like to stress our genuine and strong belief that good
faith negotiation on issues of substance is the best way forward. Having heard the
Turkish Cypriot leader in Geneva, we have already explained that any issue of
concern could be discussed, provided that we have a strategic agreement on all issues,
including inter alia territory and property, as well as security and guarantees, in line
with the UN established parameters and the logic and methodology of the framework
proposed by the UN Secretary General in Crans Montana.
For substantive negotiations to resume with realistic prospects of success, it is
imperative to avoid further escalation of tension. We therefore maintain as a priority the
creation of an environment conducive to fruitful talks. To this end, we have submitted
to the UN Secretary General a package proposal of game-changing CBMs (incl.
21-09465

13/27

S/2021/634

Varosha), designed to contribute in creating the much needed right conditions. We
believe that it is time for our willingness to engage constructively to be reciprocated.
Our vision of a peaceful Cyprus firmly remains within the e stablished
framework and a settlement of a bi-zonal, bi-communal federation with political
equality, as set out in the relevant United Nations Security Council Resolutions.
As we strive for a meaningful and fruitful process, we need the support of the
UN and of the UN Security Council in particular to impress upon all parties the need
to refrain from any acts that could undermine the prospects of resumption of
negotiations. Our approach should always point to our expectations to establish peace,
stability and prosperity in Cyprus and in our region.

II.

Effective mechanism for direct military contacts
Given the tension on and around Cyprus, including threats for use of military
force emboldened by the upgrading of military capacity in the occupied are as, the
necessity for the establishment of a mechanism for direct military contacts, between
the opposing forces in Cyprus, facilitated by UNFICYP, becomes urgent.
Even more so, taking into account the continuous violations in the fenced area
of Varosha of the relevant UN Security Council Resolutions, and the obstructions and
interference on behalf of the Turkish occupation forces with UNFICYP duties,
rendering the latter unable to perform its mandated tasks.
The calls by the UN Security Council to the parties involved to engage in the
discussion testify to the urgent need to prevent further deterioration. In this direction,
the government of the Republic of Cyprus presented a proposal already in December
2019, outlining a framework for a mechanism for direct military contacts between the
opposing forces, namely the National Guard and the Turkish occupation forces, at the
level of their Commanders, facilitated by UNFICYP at respective level, in accordance
with its mandate, as prescribed by the UN Security Council Resolution 186 (1964).
The government of the Republic of Cyprus stands ready to engage in further
discussion, while in the meantime expects a firm and decisive stance on behalf of
UNFICYP that would effectively deter further provocations by the Turkish
occupation army.

III.

Committee on Missing Persons
The work of the Committee on Missing Persons in Cyprus remains a
fundamental aspect of the peace process and therefore, the support of all parties is
indeed considered a conditio sine qua non.
In this regard, we would like to stress once more the importance of gaining
access to relevant archives of countries and organizations that had a military or police
presence in Cyprus in 1963, 1964 and 1974, in a manner that would allow the
Committee to be more effective.
In particular, the Turkish military archives, especially of the period around 1974.
Turkey has the obligation to exercise due diligence and provide information from its
archives in good faith, to help determine the fate of missing persons in Cyprus.
Access to military archives would inter alia provide information regarding
primary locations of burial of missing persons, as well as secondary locations given
that a great number of remains were relocated, rendering the efforts of the Committee
extremely difficult.

14/27

21-09465

S/2021/634

As pointed out numerous times in the past, it is indeed critical to grant access to
these archives and obtain pertinent information to the question of the fate of missing
persons, which constitutes one of the grave humanitarian challenges of the co nflict.

IV.

Crossing-points
Although the COVID-19 pandemic still poses a grave challenge for public
health at a global scale, conditions in Cyprus have allowed in recent weeks the gradual
lifting of many of the restrictions. Taking into account also progress in the vaccination
programme, the Technical Committee on Health was mandated to facilitate exchange
of views on the best way to restore the status quo ante, i.e. pre-COVID-19 outbreak
emergency measures.
It should be noted that the gradual lifting of the restrictions at the crossing points
started in June 2020 based on an understanding of the leaders of the two communities.
Although we have fully respected this understanding, it is a fact that not the same
level of commitment has been manifested from the Turkish Cypriot side, creating
tension and distress, primarily to those people, whose daily life was adversely
affected.
Having set as a priority the need to address these issues, our efforts focused in
recent weeks on further facilitating crossings, while maintaining the highest possible
level of protection of public health safety, through the synchronisation of practices
followed at the crossing points. Based on the work of experts in the framework of the
Technical Committee on Health, an understanding was reached to restore the status
quo ante, starting from June 2021 onwards.
As announced at the time, the crossing points are expected to facilitate
unhindered movement and intercommunal contacts, while we hope this will also
contribute in building more trust and a positive momentum that would benefit all the
Cypriots and also enhance our efforts in the framework of the peace process.

V.

Technical Committees
The positive momentum, as well as the practical aspect of restoring COVID-19
status quo ante will hopefully allow the Technical Committees to intensify their work.
It is true that they tried to carry on under adverse circumstances, given the restrictions
imposed due to the pandemic but also the change of a substantial number of their
members, that admittedly had a distinct impact on their work in the framework of
their mandate to mitigate the adverse effects of the status quo and the de facto division
of the island in the daily lives of all Cypriots, amplified by the challenges posed by
the COVID-19 pandemic.
As already indicated, the Technical Committee on Health spearheaded efforts to
address the additional challenges posed by the COVID-19 pandemic, inter alia
exchanging real time scientific information, addressing urgent requests concerning
medical cases, and facilitating supply of medicines and delivery of vaccines for the
Turkish Cypriot community. At the same time, they have managed to guide the project
on the identification and distribution of mosquito vectors to address the risk for
disease transmission, through public awareness and exchange of views and
information on necessary measures to protect public health to its final stage.
At the same stage, more or less, is the online platform of the Technical
Committee on Environment, which is envisaged to bring closer experts from both
communities in order to exchange experience and information, while at the same time
identify necessary key environmental projects for future i mplementation.

21-09465

15/27

S/2021/634

A step before its conclusion is also the project concerning the production of
supplementary education material (30 lesson plans), a flagship initiative of the
Technical Committee on Education. The plans evolve around “the right of children to
participate”, discussed via various thematic areas that are based but not restricted to
peacebuilding, intercultural dialogue, human rights and anti -racist education. At the
same time, planning on the “Imagine” project has focused on the next academic year’s
preparation, as circumstances during recent months proved not to be favorable for
timely implementation of this year ’s planning.
In collaboration and synergy with the Technical Committee on Crime and
Criminal Matters, they have also initiated the Prevalence, Correlates and prevention
of conventional bullying in schools and cyberbullying project, consisted of research
to collect systematic data on stereotypes, prejudice and other factors of bullying,
identify both risk and protective factors and use of this information in teachers’
training. One more project that would hopefully benefit from the intensification of
the Technical Committees work.
Despite the extraordinary challenges of the recent months, the Joint Contacts
Room, under the auspices of the Technical Committee on Crime and Criminal
Matters, has been persistently facilitating exchange of information regarding crimes,
based on the principle that no crime should remain unpunished, whenever that may
happen.
As an established trusted channel for exchange of sensitive information, we
believe that it could prove extremely useful in our efforts to analyse the multifaceted
phenomenon of irregular migration and identify sectoral challenges, with the
cooperation and synergy between a number of relevant Technical Committees (e.g.
Crime and Criminal Affairs, Humanitarian Affairs, Crisis Management, Gender
Equality) and the contribution of experts, where needed.
Technical Committee on Entrepreneurship and Commercial Affairs has resumed
discussions on a number of issues, with more prominent the vehicles insurances and
the recycling. The latter could be further elaborated in cooperation with the Technical
Committee on Environment.
Hopefully setting the tone for the coming months, the Technical Committee on
Cultural Heritage has maintained a steady pace in their work, with 31 projects
concluded or in progress in 2021 and a forward looking planning.
While trying to establish better conditions on the ground and a more positive
political atmosphere, it is a critical moment for the Technical Committees as well and
their efforts to meet expectations, within the framework of their mandate.
We will keep encouraging them to use all tools available, most notably the
Support Facility funded by the EU in the framework of the Aid Regulation, in order
to continue and enhance their work, bearing in mind their valuable contribution in
creating a more positive political environment, in their supplementary role to the
substantial negotiations in the context of peace process.

16/27

21-09465

S/2021/634

Annex II
Actions taken by the Turkish Cypriot side in support of the
relevant parts of Security Council resolution 2561 (2021) adopted
on 29 January 2021
I.

Actions Taken in Support of Reaching a Sustainable and
Comprehensive Settlement
The New Vision for the island of Cyprus

a.

Brief Background
As the fifth President of the Turkish Republic of Northern Cyprus (TRNC), I have
put forward a new vision for the island of Cyprus and the region as a whole. This vision
is based on a win-win approach that would be beneficial to both sides on the island, as
well as the Eastern Mediterranean region.
The island of Cyprus has been held hostage to the unsustainable status quo,
which has been harming the Turkish Cypriot people in every way, in relation to all
aspects of their lives.
This injustice must end.
Bearing in mind that repeated UN efforts to realize an equality based
bi-communal, bi-zonal federal settlement have failed, we must change the rules of the
game in order to open the way for a just and sustainable settlement.
The failed negotiations of more than half a century have resulted in the
exhaustion of the bi-zonal and bi-communal federation model as a basis for a
settlement.
In addition to a change in the basis for a settlement, the settlement process needs
to address the lack of equilibrium between the two sides – a key violation of the
principle of equality and an obstruction to an equality based settlement. While t he
Greek Cypriot side continues to enjoy the hijacked status as the sole representative of
the bi-communal partnership Republic of Cyprus since December 1963 and engages
in the negotiations in the comfort zone provided by this, Turkish Cypriots have
continued to suffer under inhuman isolation despite their ongoing constructive stance.
The unjust privileges granted to the Greek Cypriot side by the international community
leave no room for them to share power as equals with the Turkish Cypriot side.
The unwavering support of my People to the past negotiation processes is clear
from the acceptance of nearly all the UN-proposed settlement plans, including the UN
Plan entitled “The Comprehensive Settlement of the Cyprus Problem ” (the “Annan
Plan”) of 2004, which for the first time in the history of Cyprus settlement
negotiations, was a plan that was submitted for approval by the respective electorate
on both sides, in separate simultaneous referenda.
What happened next is very telling; the Turkish Cypriot People continue to
suffer under isolation and restrictions, despite our overwhelming support to the
internationally backed UN Plan, while the Greek Cypriots, despite their
overwhelming rejection of the settlement, have become a member of the EU, thereby
bolstering their international status. This situation has further boosted the Greek
Cypriot side’s intransigent stance in the negotiation processes.
If this is not injustice, what is?

21-09465

17/27

S/2021/634

b.

Activities leading up to the Informal 5+UN Meeting in Geneva
I have been sharing my vision at the different meetings I have been conducting
with key international counterparts.
I held a teleconference with the UN Secretary-General António Guterres on
25 January 2021, in which, in addition to my vision, I also shared my expectation
from the 5+UN informal meeting.
On 25 February 2021, the UNSG sent an invitation expressing his intention to
hold the 5+UN informal meeting in Geneva from 27-29 April 2021, stating the
purpose of the 5+UN informal meeting to be the determination of whether common
ground exists for the parties to start a new, time-framed formal negotiation process
for a just, realistic and sustainable settlement in Cyprus within the foreseeable future.
I gave my immediate acceptance to the UNSG’s invitation in writing on 1 March
2021, and I expressed my intention to attend the informal 5+UN meeting with an open
mind and the necessary determination to explore whether common ground exists that
would pave the way for formal negotiations. I underlined that after more than half-acentury of failed processes for a settlement in Cyprus, we are at a critical juncture.
Given the internationally accepted view that the status quo is unsustainable and
unacceptable, I underlined the UNSG’s principled expression that “this time must be
different” and confirmed my determination to transform these words into practice.
I also reiterated that the aim of the Turkish Cypriot Side is to seek a solution
based on the inherent sovereign equality and equal international sta tus of the two
States on the island, with cooperation between them. I underlined my conviction that
the establishment of a cooperative relationship between the two sides on the above
basis would not only provide mutual benefits for the two Peoples on the i sland, but
would also contribute to the much needed security, stability and cooperation in our
region.
In preparing for the informal 5+UN meeting, I also shared my vision with a
number of high-level officials. Among others, I met with the Turkish Foreign Minister
H.E. Mr Mevlüt Çavuşoğlu; the UK Secretary of State for Foreign, Commonwealth
and Development Affairs and First Secretary of State, H.E. Mr Dominic Raab; the EU
High Representative for Foreign Affairs and Security Policy H.E. Mr Josep Borrell;
UK Minister for European Neighbourhood and the Americas H.E. Ms Wendy Morton,
and Ambassadors from numerous countries.
During this period, I also met with the UN Senior Official Jane Holl Lute, on
11 January, 8 March and 11 April in preparation for the Geneva meeting.
Prior to my departure to Geneva, on 26 April 2021, I met with the President of
the Republic of Turkey, H.E. Mr Recep Tayyip Erdoğan. As a Guarantor Power and
one of the participants of the 5+UN informal meeting, President Erdoğan reiterated
the full support of the Republic of Turkey to the Turkish Cypriot vision at the highest
level.

c.

The Informal 5+UN meeting in Geneva
On 27 April 2021, I held my first bilateral meeting in Geneva with the UNSG
Guterres. I thanked the UNSG for organizing his first international meeting on Cyprus
since the outbreak of the pandemic, as well as his team for the hard work they have
put in towards the realisation of the informal meeting.
Using this opportunity, I made it clear that the rules of the game had to be
changed, drawing lessons from the failed processes. I reiterated my conviction that
the exhausted basis, bi-zonal, bi-communal federation, had to be put aside. I also

18/27

21-09465

S/2021/634

pointed at the results of the Presidential elections in the TRNC, which clearly
demonstrated the withdrawal of the Turkish Cypriot People’s consent from a federal
basis. I underlined that my People entrusted me with the mandate to seek a solution
based on two States; because a sustainable settlement providing for stability, peaceful
co-existence and cooperation in Cyprus and the region can best be achieved through
mutual respect and the recognition of the inherent sovereign equality and equal
international status of the two States. It is a fact that the result of the usurpation of
the bi-communal partnership Republic of Cyprus in December 1963 has been physical
separation and the emergence, out of necessity, of administrative, judicial and
legislative organs on the island for each of the two distinct Peoples.
The new mandate determined by the democratic will of the Turkish Cypriot
People also brought to light the need for a paradigm shift for ending the unsustainable
status-quo, which is also acknowledged as such by the UN and the international
community at large. I underlined that this could only be achieved through the new basis.
I told the UNSG that:
“We have not come to this point in one day. In the background of where we stand
here today, there lies a long and hard struggle on the part of my People. This is a
struggle for survival and dignity as an equal co-owner of the island of Cyprus and
a co-founding partner of the 1960 Republic of Cyprus, which was destroyed by
the Greek Cypriots in 1963. This meant not only destruction of lives, homes and
properties, but also the destruction of the bi-communal partnership Republic
itself. We were forcibly expelled from that Republic which has since been
monopolized and occupied by the Greek Cypriot side, it continues to be so.”
Against this background, I reminded that the Turkish Cypriot side nevertheless
negotiated in good faith in order to find a settlement to the Cyprus dispute. However,
the Greek Cypriot side, as confirmed by their own former foreign minister, has
rejected at least 15 major UN documents for a settlement. Among them were the Set
of Ideas of 1992, the Confidence-Building Measures package of 1994 and finally the
Annan Plan of 2004. In the immediate aftermath of the referenda, former UN
Secretary-General Kofi Annan had written in his report of 28 May 2004 to the
Security Council, “what was rejected was the solution itself rather than a mere
blueprint” (paragraph 83).
The last instance of this intransigent attitude was in Crans-Montana in 2017,
which the UNSG has witnessed personally. It is evident that the deeply rooted ideology
of dominance and hegemony on the part of the Greek Cypriot side has not changed.
Under these circumstances, the only way for the Turkish Cypriot People to
preserve and protect our existence, identity and equal rights on the island of Cyprus
is through respect for our right to self-determination, equal international status and
sovereign equality. International law does not sanction differential treatment of the
two sides, which are inherently equal.
I told the UNSG that the Turkish Cypriot side considers that the preparation of
the conditions for settlement necessitates the recognition of the sovereign equality
and equal international status of the two sides and underlined that any negotiation
under the existing political asymmetry on the island cannot yield a result, as proven
by over 50 years of fruitless negotiations.
In addition to the above, I brought to the attention of UNSG Guterres that the
lifting of the isolation and restrictions on the Turkish Cypriot People would
significantly contribute to the efforts to prepare the ground for sustainable settlement
by levelling the playing field. It would also enhance prosp ects for cooperation
between the authorities of the two sides by helping build confidence between them.

21-09465

19/27

S/2021/634

On 28 April 2021 at the first plenary of the 5+UN informal meeting, I addressed
the participants on behalf of my People as their President. In my speec h, I shared the
Turkish Cypriot formula for a just, realistic and sustainable settlement as the common
ground to start the new formal process. I explained the reasons, in detail, based on
excerpts from numerous reports and official statements, why the bi -zonal,
bi-communal federation basis had been exhausted and only served to perpetuate the
unsustainable status-quo.
Drawing from my personal experiences starting from 1960’s, I shared with the
participants those difficult days when my late father, Mr. Rüste m Tatar, the then
Auditor-General of the 1960 partnership Republic, could not to go to work because
his life was in danger, due to his Turkish Cypriot identity.
In my deliberations, I explained the root-causes of the failure as the Greek
Cypriot and Greek vision that Cyprus is an integral part of Hellenism and the unequal
status of the two sides that was created in violation of the 1960 Treaties and
Constitution after the usurpation of the partnership State in 1963 and its continued
occupation. This resulted in a purely Greek Cypriot administration passing itself off
internationally as “the sole legitimate government for the whole of Cyprus”.
The mere fact of international recognition, no matter how widespread, cannot
excuse or confer legitimacy upon the violations of both domestic constitutional law
and international treaty law, through which the Greek Cypriot side usurped the name
as well as the government of the “Republic of Cyprus”.
As one of the parties to the 1960 Treaties (Treaty of Guarantee, Treaty of
Establishment, and the Treaty of Alliance) and co-founder, as well as co-owner of the
partnership state of the Republic of Cyprus, reflecting its inherent sovereign equality
and equal status, I clarified that the Turkish Cypriot side, which possesse s all the
attributes of statehood, is thus entitled to the same rights and status that the Greek
Cypriot side is entitled to, and is currently exercising.
At the first plenary I also shared in writing the Turkish Cypriot proposal for a
sustainable settlement.
The essence of the Turkish Cypriot proposal is the recognition of the inherent
sovereign equality and equal international status of the State of the Turkish Cypriot
People, through which a cooperative relationship can be established between the two
existing States on the Island. This would pave the way for results-oriented, timeframed negotiations towards a realistic and sustainable settlement.
I explained that for too long, the Turkish Cypriot side has been treated as by standers or even non-existent, while resolutions, decisions, statements, have been
adopted in their absence, in platforms where they were not even represented or heard,
while the Greek Cypriot side, having usurped and monopolized the title of
government, has given a totally distorted, one-sided view of the situation to the
international community.
In our proposal, I pointed out that it is based on concrete experience and the
drastically changed local, regional and international environment, together with the
current realities on the Island that compelled the Turkish Cypriot Side to put forward
a new proposal that would make Cyprus an island of sustainable stability and peaceful
co-existence.
I expressed the willingness of the Turkish Cypriot Side to rise to the chal lenge
that this time must be different by putting its new vision into clear and practical terms.
Also, in this context, I expressed our readiness to take the necessary steps not only
to rectify a grave injustice that continues to be done against the Turkish Cypriot People,
but also for removing the root-causes of failure in the way of a sustainable settlement.

20/27

21-09465

S/2021/634

The Turkish Cypriots proposal which was presented on 28 April 2021 at Geneva
is as follows:
1)

The UN Secretary-General to take an initiative so that the Security Council
adopts a resolution in which the equal international status and sovereign
equality of the two sides is secured. Such a resolution will form the new
basis for the establishment of a cooperative relationship between the two
existing States.

2)

Once the equal international status and sovereign equality of the two sides
is secured through the above-mentioned arrangement, they will enter into
results-oriented, time-framed negotiations, on this new basis, under the
auspices of the UN Secretary-General to establish a freely-reached and
mutually acceptable cooperative agreement.

3)

The negotiations will focus on the future relationship between the two
independent States, property, security and border adjustment, as well as
relations with the EU.

4)

The negotiations will be supported by Turkey, Greece and the UK, as well
as, where appropriate, the EU as observer.

5)

In the context of any agreement the two States will mutually recognize
each other; the three Guarantor States will support this.

6)

Any agreement to be reached as a result of these negotiations will be
submitted for approval in separate simultaneous referenda in the two States.

I explained the rationale behind the new Turkish Cypriot proposal first to the
UNSG during our second bilateral meeting and then to the participants on the second
plenary on 28 April 2021.
The rationale behind the Turkish Cypriot proposal is as follows:
– Negotiations that have continued for over half a century on the same failed
basis have shown us results-oriented negotiations should be conducted
between equals. Entering into results-oriented, time-framed negotiations only
after establishing the equilibrium between the two sides is of crucial
importance. Experience has shown that negotiations in Cyprus fail when
equality is recognized only at the negotiation table, always leaving the option
to one of the Sides to walk away at a whim as the recognized Government
knowing that the other Side will continue to suffer under inhuman isolation
and restrictions. This is obviously not equality between the two Sides.
– The Turkish Cypriot proposal does not aim at opening a discussion on whether
or not Turkish Cypriots have sovereignty, which we do. The proposal is to
level the playing field, both at the negotiation table and outside, by securing
the equal international status and sovereign equality of the two sides, which
is inherent, through a UN Security Council Resolution.
– It is time to acknowledge this fact through the adoption of the new basi s with
the assistance of the UN Secretary-General in order to establish a freelyreached and mutually acceptable cooperative agreement.
– The formal negotiations can then focus on substance, including the future
relationship between the two independent States.
– Concepts like loose federation and decentralised federation put forward after
Crans-Montana as ‘new ideas’ are positions that are even more maximalist
than what the Greek Cypriot side had put forward in previous rounds of
negotiations on the failed basis.
21-09465

21/27

S/2021/634

On the final day in Geneva, at the closing of the 5+UN informal meeting, I
proposed UN Senior Official Ms Jane Holl Lute to continue her consultations to
assess whether common ground exists and gave my consent for the convening of
another 5+UN informal meeting within a few months.
In the Press Conference UNSG held following the informal 5+UN meeting on
29 April, he referred to the respective positions of the Turkish Cypriots and Greek
Cypriots and confirmed that there will be another 5+UN in th e near future and
Ms Lute would continue her current responsibilities. In explaining the Turkish
Cypriot position, UNSG said Turkish Cypriots believe the many efforts made to solve
the Cyprus issue over the years have failed, including the most recent atte mpt made
in Crans Montana. UNSG also said Turkish Cypriots believe that efforts to negotiate
the bi-zonal, bi-communal federation have been exhausted, and that the Turkish
Cypriots have inherent sovereign equality and an equal international status and the
solution should be based on two States cooperating with each other. UNSG confirmed
that we have not yet found common ground for the initiation of formal negotiations,
but he would not give up and he would continue to fight for the security and well being of Turkish Cypriots and Greek Cypriots who deserve to live in peace and
prosperity.

II.

Actions Taken in Support of Confidence Building as well as
Promoting Contacts and Reconciliation
Confidence Building issues and measures
After I assumed my duties as the President, as the Turkish Cypriot Side, I
acknowledged the importance of creating confidence between the two Sides and gave
instructions towards this goal.
During this period, a mechanism has been introduced by Elizabeth Spehar, the
UNSG’s Special Representative and Head of the United Nations Peacekeeping Force
in Cyprus, where the Special Representative and Negotiator of the two sides, as well
as the Coordinators of the Technical Committees, hold separate weekly meetings
under the auspices of the UN. At those online meetings, both Sides try to tackle issues
with a view to easing the daily lives of Turkish Cypriots and Greek Cypriots.
Within the framework of this mechanism the two sides try to address and
facilitate the solution to daily issues and challenges. So far, we have achieved positive
results in arranging for special Covid-19 related terms for the crossings (return
included) of Kato Pirgo area residents to Lefkoşa/Nicosia, ambulance crossings
(return included) and the replacement of electric poles in Erenköy/Kokkina. Within
the context of this mechanism, we also agreed on making all the crossing points
operational as they were in the pre-COVID-19 period, full implementation of
Yeşilırmak Agreement and also the main principles for a proposal to be considered as
a Confidence-Building Measure (CBM). The agreed principles to be considered in
proposing CBMs are as follows:
CBMs:
– must be mutually agreed by the two Sides;
– must be mutually beneficial for two Sides;
– must respect the equality of the two Sides;
– must not involve or imply the extension of one side’s authority over the other.
On 2nd June 2021, I have agreed with my counterpart, Mr Anastasiades, to make
all the crossing points operational, as of 4th June 2021. This significant development

22/27

21-09465

S/2021/634

will help ease the repercussions of the COVID-19 pandemic on the adversely affected
economies of the two Sides. As the Turkish Cypriot Side, we are committed to
maintaining the channels of cooperation. I am determined to explore and implement
mutually beneficial measures that would also help build confidence between the two
Sides in good faith and through diplomacy.
On occasion of making all of the crossing points operational I have underlined
the importance of cooperation between the two Sides, which needs to be based on
equality and mutual respect for it to contribute to peace, stability and prosperity for
our island and our region as a whole.
Also, during the reporting period, the two sides have been exchanging views on
cooperation on irregular migration with a view to establishing an effective mechanism.
It is universally accepted that irregular migration is a global phenomenon and cannot
be addressed only at the technical committee level, but necessitates a mechanism where
the officials from the relevant Departments and institutions cooperate.
1.

Technical Committees
The Turkish Cypriot Side believes that the technical committees are a powerful
tool for cooperation and for the creation of a climate of reconciliation between the
two Sides on the island. We believe that an active and productive working relationship
of the technical committees would contribute to the improvement of the daily lives of
Turkish Cypriots and Greek Cypriots. In line with this approach, I have given utmost
importance to the enhancement of the expert capacity of the technical committees.
Since the beginning of the COVID-19 pandemic, the Technical Committee on
Health has been the most active technical committee. In line with the understanding
reached between the two Sides, the Technical Committee on Health has been tasked
with making all the crossing points operational with the same conditions as in the
pre-COVID-19 period. After intensive deliberations, the harmonisation of pandemic
related measures governing the crossing of all Greek Cypriots, Turkish Cypriots,
other citizens and residents, as well as third-country nationals wishing to cross to the
other side, have been successfully completed. The Technical Committee on Health
has also been implementing the Action “Identification and distribution of vectors of
medical importance in Cyprus (ID-VEC)”, which is in its final stages and is expected
to be completed soon. We are also supporting the implementation of the second phase
of this project.
During the reporting period, the Technical Committee on Cultural Heritage
(TCCH) continued to meet online once a week. Despite the difficult circumstances
caused by COVID-19, the TCCH has intensified its work. The TCCH has completed
conservation works at several sites including the historic Afendrika Archeological site
and has started numerous tendering processes for conservation works and designs all
over the island. Furthermore, the TCCH has completed the conservation works of two
more historic Ottoman-era fountains in Girne/Kyrenia, part of the Venetian walls of
Lefkoşa/Nicosia and several other sites that benefited from emergency support works
of the TCCH. Moreover, the TCCH has completed its pilot projects on two Turkish
Cypriot and two Greek Cypriot cemeteries.
The Technical Committee on Environment actively worked on finalizing the
website designed to bring the experts from both Sides together to exchange their
views and experiences on actions and policies for the protection of the environment.
The Turkish Cypriot Side also proposed to start a project for the island -wide
protection of endangered species. In honour of World Water Day, the Technical
Committee on Environment, the US Embassy and the UN Mission in Cyprus opened
a photo contest for young Turkish Cypriots and Greek Cypriots under the theme
“The Value of Water: What Does Water Mean to You?”

21-09465

23/27

S/2021/634

After a long break due to COVID-19 conditions, the Crisis Management
Technical Committee resumed its activities. In order to prevent the reoccurrence of
situations that would endanger safety of air travel and the lives of passengers, the
Turkish Cypriot Members of this Committee proposed that UN helicopters and other
aircraft in the vicinity of Ercan Airport establish direct contact with Ercan Airport
Tower Frequency 120.250. This will ensure, among others, that inbound/outbound
traffic to Ercan is aware of the ongoing border control by the UN helicopter and vice
versa (Approach 127.750. Control 126.700). Furthermore, regarding the Flight
Information Region (FIR) Crossing Points; as there is no direct line of communication
between Nicosia Air Traffic Control and Ercan Control, aircraft under different
control zones may encounter difficulties while avoiding bad weather close to FIR
service areas i.e. escaping through a clean air at a specific altitude. Congested air
traffic at bad weather might cause safety compromising situations, which may be
fatal. Therefore, the Turkish Cypriot Members proposed a direct line of
communication between Nicosia Air Traffic Control and Ercan Control. The
Committee also discussed organizing joint seminars on forest fires and floo ds.
The Technical Committee on Broadcasting also continued to discuss the issues
within its mandate. The Turkish Cypriot and the Greek Cypriot representatives of the
Committee continued to exchange information regarding the use of the 700 MHz
frequency band. The Turkish Cypriot side also proposed a project that would aim at
raising awareness regarding 5G technology and addressing concerns on the effects of
5G wireless communication on human health.
The Technical Committee on Education continued to discuss its ongoing
projects. The Committee has proceeded with preparations for the continuation of the
“Imagine” program, the Pilot Project on Educational Materials, and the joint project
of the Technical Committee on Education and the Technical Committee on Cr ime and
Criminal Matters on “Prevalence, Correlates, and Prevention of Conventional
Bullying in Schools and Cyberbullying”. Due to the challenges posed by the ongoing
COVID-19 restrictions, trainings for students under the “Imagine” program were
suspended for this semester. However, the Committee has decided to continue online
training for teachers.
The Technical Committee on Economic and Commercial Matters is another very
active committee. The Committee has been tasked to work on the preparation of the
ground on both Sides for the post-pandemic era. The Committee has continued to
work on issues such as the lifting of restrictions on crossings in conformity with the
Green Line Regulation, IBAN implementation, facilitating contact between the
banking systems of the two Sides, facilitating the free movement of commercial
vehicles from North Cyprus to South Cyprus, facilitating car insurance policies that
would apply throughout the island, island wide GSM Roaming services, Ring Tour
(hop on-hop off) for Lefkoşa/Nicosia and joint recycling wherever relevant. All of
these aim at improving the everyday lives of ordinary Turkish Cypriots and Greek
Cypriots, encouraging and facilitating greater interaction and understanding between
the two sides and helping build confidence between them.
The Technical Committee on Crime and Criminal Matters and the Joint
Communications Room in the buffer zone has continued to carry out their daily duties.
During the reporting period, the Turkish Cypriot Side submitted 31 request/rep ly
documents and received 47 request/reply documents. On 18 April 2021, the Turkish
Cypriot Side handed over another murder suspect to the Greek Cypriot authorities. We
hope that our goodwill will be reciprocated by the Greek Cypriot Side by the handing
over to the Turkish Cypriot Side of Abdulhakim Alkan, who escaped to the Greek
Cypriot Side after committing offences in North Cyprus. A request for the handing over
of Abdulhakim Alkan was made on 5 January 2021, which is yet to be fulfilled.

24/27

21-09465

S/2021/634

The Technical Committee on Gender Equality also held online meetings. During
these meetings, the Turkish Cypriot and the Greek Cypriot members of the committee
started to exchange ideas regarding the development of projects aimed at raising
awareness on violence against women, gender sensitive language and the situation of
women during the COVID-19 pandemic.
During the reporting period the Technical Committees on Humanitarian Matters
and Culture also held online meetings and exchanged ideas regarding possible joint
activities that can be carried out in the period ahead.
The activities of all Technical Committees were seriously hampered because of
negative conditions imposed by the COVID-19 pandemic.
2.

The Committee on Missing Persons
TRNC authorities continued to support the Committee on Missing Persons
(CMP) which has been an indispensable tool to help address the years-long anguish
of the families of missing persons in Cyprus.
TRNC has been providing information on possible burial sites to the CMP as new
facts come to light. All information at the disposal of the Turkish side has already been
provided to the CMP in 1998, also recorded in the Secretary-General’s report to the
Security Council dated 1 December 2000 (S/2000/1138, para. 14). In addition to the
investigations conducted by the CMP in various state archives, the Archive Committee
that was established in 2016 continued to address the specific requests of the CMP from
the relevant archives, with a view to locating the burial sites. Within this context, during
the reporting period the Turkish Cypriot Member ’s Office of the CMP had access to
aerial photos that belong to eight different regions, dating from 1974.
The TRNC also continues to arrange for access to the CMP to any area
throughout the TRNC, irrespective of whether this necessitates interrupting
construction of a major road or access to military areas. In this context, in June 2019,
access to 30 additional suspected burial sites in military ar eas in the TRNC had been
granted, with the understanding that excavations will be done according to the
excavation planning of the CMP. CMP was conducting excavations, also in two
suspected burial sites in the military areas, when excavations in all sites had to be
suspended in March 2020 due to COVID-19 measures. During the reporting period,
CMP resumed its work, subject to the applicable COVID-19-related measure, also in
military areas. In the reporting period CMP completed excavations in one military
area on 14 April 2021.
TRNC continues to support CMP financially. In addition to annual financial
contributions to the budget of the Office of the Turkish Cypriot Member of the CMP,
an amount approximately EUR 1,000,000 per year, the total amount of addition al
TRNC contributions amount to EUR 433,000. To date, the EU ’s total contributions,
amounting to 30,700,000 EUR, are from the funds the European Union earmarked for
the economic development of Turkish Cypriots. Additional funding, including the
UN, will enable CMP to accelerate its work.
According to the most recent statistics CMP published, up to 30 April 2021,
CMP exhumed 1187 missing persons. The identity of 1006 of these missing persons
have been established. 284 of these are Turkish Cypriots and 722 G reek Cypriots.
During the reporting period CMP conducted 34 excavations and found the remains of
5 persons. CMP also identified 12 addition missing persons during the reporting
period, 2 of whom were Turkish Cypriot and 10 were Greek Cypriot, as well as
2 Greek Cypriot deceased who were not on the CMP’s official missing persons list.

21-09465

25/27

S/2021/634

3.

Hellim/Halloumi
The Turkish Cypriot side participated in the process of registration of
Hellim/Halloumi, as a Protected Designation of Origin (PDO) in the European Union
and its trade across the Green Line in good faith. Hellim/Halloumi is a common
traditional cheese product that belongs to both Turkish Cypriots and Greek Cypriots.
When I took up office, I, together with my Government, the relevant Chambers
and associations, participated in this ongoing process with a view to ensuring its
completion in a mutually beneficial and acceptable way.
I have sought to preserve the established mechanism sanctioned in the Green
Line Regulation, embedded in EU primary law, which has been designed in full
respect of the political positions of both sides, and held a teleconference with EU
High Representative/Vice President Mr Josep Borrell Fontelles on 18 Janua ry and
16 February 2021, followed by a meeting with him in person on 5 March 2021.
I have consistently expressed my readiness to announce the registration of the
PDO, as well as the joint appointment of an independent body, that was required to
be in place to conduct the health and safety inspections, together with my Greek
Cypriot counterpart, to foster a culture of cooperation in good faith. Unfortunately,
the Greek Cypriot Side did not accept this proposal and the legislative instruments
were nevertheless enacted, leaving many questions and uncertainties as to their
implementation.

4.

Isolation and Restrictions
Isolation and restrictions imposed on all aspects of the lives of the Turkish
Cypriot People since 1963, from direct trade to cultural and sp orting events, direct
flights and representation at the international forums, have continued.
The gap between the two sides on economic, social, cultural issues keeps on
widening. The technical and financial assistance sought from numerous organizations
and the initiatives taken to tackle the negative effects of COVID -19, with a view to
contributing to the overall objective of promoting social and economic development
of the Turkish Cypriot Side, was either not responded to or failed to come anywhere
close to the assistance provided to the Greek Cypriot Side. This failure resulted in
further socio-economic disparity between the two Sides.
In his report of 7 January 2020 (S/2020/23) UNSG Guterres underlined that
there is need to achieve greater economic and social parity between the two sides and
to broaden and deepen economic, cultural, sporting and other forms of cooperation.
He added that increased cross-island trade, together with deeper economic, social,
cultural, sporting and other ties and contacts, would promote trust between the two
sides. With the above in mind he called on the full implementation of European
Council regulation (EC) No. 866/2004 (the Green Line Regulation), stating that this
would help significantly to increase the volume of trade and should be pursued with
renewed vigour.

5.

Hydrocarbons
Due to the Greek Cypriot side’s claim that their government is the sole owner
of the island to the detriment of the Turkish Cypriot side, the hydrocarbon deposits
discovered in the Eastern Mediterranean region have become yet another element of
contention, further jeopardizing security, stability and cooperation not only in Cyprus,
but also the entire region.
As co-owners of hydrocarbon resources, the Turkish Cypriot side believes that,
if treated rightly, hydrocarbons could be an element that would contribute to political

26/27

21-09465

S/2021/634

settlement, cooperation, security and welfare between the Turkish Cypriot and the
Greek Cypriot sides, as well as the entire region. To this end, the Turkish Cypriot side
has proposed the establishment of a joint ad hoc committee for the joint management
and exploitation of hydrocarbons, respectively in 2011, 2012, and 2019.
The proposal of the Turkish Cypriot side of July 201 9 is still on the table, and I
am ready to discuss the matter to contribute to the desired regional cooperation on
energy issues. Cooperation in hydrocarbons will also be the litmus test for the real
intentions of the Greek Cypriot Side regarding sharing.
The 13 July 2019 proposal envisages the establishment of a joint committee,
with the facilitation of the UN, and the EU as an observer, to plan, decide and
implement future hydrocarbon activities, including an agreement on revenue -sharing
for the exploration and production of off-shore oil and gas resources across the island.
As the Turkish Cypriot Side, I fully support the proposal of Turkey to convene
a regional Conference on hydrocarbons. I am ready to attend such a Conference on
an equal footing with the Greek Cypriot Side.
In the meantime, the Turkish Cypriot side will continue their own hydrocarbon
exploration and exploitation activities until the Greek Cypriot side recognizes their
co-ownership rights and agrees to find a mutually acceptable form ula for the way
forward.
6.

Maraş (Varosha)
The Fenced Area of Maraş/Varosha is TRNC territory and is a military area with
no current users. We have been receiving an increasing number of applications and
claims from the former inhabitants of this area and have now decided to address these
claims.
We have accordingly decided to implement a plan that aims at removing the
military status of the area so as to enable the European Court of Human Rights sanctioned Immovable Property Commission (IPC) to deliver restitution decisions in
relation to the applicants who request this remedy. We see this as a humanitarian act
which will provide economic benefits to both Greek Cypriots and Turkish Cypriots
and provide a unique area where Turkish Cypriots and Greek Cypriots, as well as
other foreign nationals, can work together for mutual benefit, thus contributing to the
building of trust and confidence.
Those who oppose our opening of the Fenced Area of Maraş/Varosha are in fact
serving to prevent the former inhabitants from obtaining remedies to their claims.
We consider this process as a confidence building measure that respects the
rights of the inhabitants of the area in line with the relevant UN Security Council
resolutions.

21-09465

27/27
