A

UNITED
NATIONS

General Assembly
Distr.
GENERAL
A/RES/51/16
21 November 1996

Fifty-first session
Agenda item 25
RESOLUTION ADOPTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY
[without reference to a Main Committee (A/51/L.14/Rev.2)]
51/16.

Cooperation between the United Nations and
the Caribbean Community

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 46/8 of 16 October 1991, by which it granted
observer status to the Caribbean Community, and 49/141 of 20 December 1994,
Noting with satisfaction the report of the Secretary-General on
cooperation between the United Nations and the Caribbean Community,1
Recalling that the Charter of the United Nations contemplates the
existence of regional arrangements or agencies for dealing with such matters
as are appropriate for regional action and other activities consistent with
the purposes and principles of the United Nations,
Taking into account the reports of the Secretary-General entitled "An
Agenda for Peace"2 and "An Agenda for Development"3 and the related
consultations within the United Nations, including the various working groups
on those subjects,
Taking note of the final communiqué of the twenty-second meeting of the
Standing Committee of Ministers Responsible for Foreign Affairs, held at

1

A/51/299.

2

A/47/277-S/24111.

3

A/48/935.

96-77485

/...

A/RES/51/16
Page 2

Kingston on 13 and 14 May 1996,4 and the final communiqué of the seventeenth
meeting of the Conference of Heads of Government of the Caribbean Community,
held at Bridgetown from 3 to 6 July 1996,5 which, inter alia, outlines areas
of cooperation between the United Nations and the Caribbean Community and
stresses the importance of furthering the possible role of the Community in
the development of peace and security within the Caribbean region, and
expresses appreciation to the Secretary-General of the United Nations for
promoting this heightened level of cooperation,
Recalling the request made of the Secretary-General of the United
Nations, in consultation with the Secretary-General of the Caribbean
Community, to promote meetings between their representatives for consultations
on policies, projects, measures and procedures that will facilitate and
broaden cooperation and coordination between the two organizations,
Welcoming the inter-agency consultations between the Caribbean Community
and its associated institutions, the Inter-American Development Bank, the
Organization of American States and the United Nations on the first conference
on governance and development in the Caribbean,
Affirming the need to strengthen the cooperation that already exists
between entities of the United Nations system and the Caribbean Community in
the areas of economic and social development, as well as of political and
humanitarian affairs,
Convinced of the need for the coordinated utilization of available
resources to promote common objectives of the two organizations,
1.
Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General on cooperation
between the United Nations and the Caribbean Community,1 as well as his
efforts to strengthen that cooperation;
2.
Invites the Secretary-General to continue taking the necessary
measures for promoting and expanding cooperation and coordination between the
United Nations and the Caribbean Community in order to increase the capacity
of the two organizations to attain their objectives;
3.
Requests the Secretary-General of the United Nations and the
Secretary-General of the Caribbean Community, or their representatives, to
hold consultations with a view to signing an agreement on cooperation between
the two organizations;
4.
Notes the areas of cooperation approved by the Ministers for
Foreign Affairs in the final communiqué of the twenty-second meeting of the
Standing Committee of Ministers Responsible for Foreign Affairs,4 namely,
follow-up to the global conferences; the advancement of the new international
human order; law of the sea; follow-up and implementation of the Programme of
Action for the Sustainable Development of Small Island Developing States; the
development of poverty reduction programmes; peace-keeping; diplomatic
training; governance and development in the Caribbean; and the strengthening
of the Regional Secretariat Information Base;

4

See A/51/299, para. 9.

5

A/51/295, annex.
/...

A/RES/51/16
Page 3

5.
Also notes the special role played by States members of the
Caribbean Community in the restoration of democracy in Haiti and in its
participation in the United Nations Mission in Haiti;
6.
Calls upon the Secretary-General of the United Nations, in
consultation with the Secretary-General of the Caribbean Community, to assist
in furthering the development of peace and security within the Caribbean
region;
7.
Recommends that the first general meeting between representatives
of the Caribbean Community and its associated institutions and of the United
Nations system be held in 1997 for the purpose of holding consultations on
projects, measures and procedures to facilitate and strengthen cooperation
between those organizations;
8.
Requests the Secretary-General of the United Nations and the
Secretary-General of the Caribbean Community, or their representatives, to
encourage inter-agency, sectoral and focal point meetings on areas of priority
or mutually agreed issues;
9.
Urges the specialized agencies and other organizations and
programmes of the United Nations system to cooperate with the SecretaryGeneral of the United Nations and the Secretary-General of the Caribbean
Community in order to initiate, maintain and increase consultations and
programmes with the Caribbean Community and its associated institutions in the
attainment of their objectives, and in this connection welcomes the special
relationship between the Caribbean Community and the United Nations
Development Programme;
10.
Requests the Secretary-General to submit to the General Assembly
at its fifty-third session a report on the implementation of the present
resolution;
11.
Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its fifty-third
session the item entitled "Cooperation between the United Nations and the
Caribbean Community".
56th plenary meeting
11 November 1996
