S/2012/218

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
12 April 2012
Original: English

Letter dated 9 April 2012 from the Secretary-General to the
President of the Security Council
I have the honour to transmit herewith letters dated 20 and 29 March 2012
from the President of the International Residual Mechanism for Criminal Tribunals
and Presiding Judge of the Appeals Chamber of the International Criminal Tribunal
for Rwanda, Judge Theodor Meron, and the President of the International Criminal
Tribunal for Rwanda, Judge Vagn Joensen (see annexes I and II).
In their letters, Judges Meron and Joensen jointly request that the appeals, if
any, in the Ngirabatware, Nizeyimana and Nzabonimana cases should be heard by
the Appeals Chamber of the International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda and not the
Appeals Chamber of the Mechanism.
I recall that, pursuant to article 2 (2) of the Transitional Arrangements set out
in annex 2 to Security Council resolution 1966 (2010), the International Criminal
Tribunal for Rwanda shall have competence to conduct, and complete, all appellate
proceedings for which the notice of appeal against the judgement or sentence is filed
before 1 July 2012, and the Mechanism shall have competence to conduct, and
complete, all appellate proceedings for which the notice of appeal against the
judgement or sentence is filed on or after 1 July 2012. Since it is projected that the
notices of appeals, if any, in the aforementioned cases would be filed after 1 July
2012, the appeals would, according to this provision, be heard by the Appeals
Chamber of the Mechanism.
However, Judges Meron and Joensen are of the view that it would be more
efficient if the appeals were handled by the Appeals Chamber of the International
Criminal Tribunal, as opposed to the Appeals Chamber of the Mechanism. They are
therefore seeking derogation from the provisions of the Transitional Arrangements
in order that the Appeals Chamber of the Tribunal may exercise jurisdiction over the
appeal. They further state that the Prosecutor of the Tribunal and the Mechanism,
and the Registrars of the Tribunal and the Mechanism, support the request.
It falls to the Security Council, as the parent organ of both the Tribunal and the
Mechanism, to consider and decide on this request. I would therefore be grateful if
you would bring the present letters from Judge Meron and Judge Joensen to the
attention of members of the Council.
(Signed) BAN Ki-moon

12-29351 (E) 170412

*1229351*

S/2012/218

Annex I
Letter dated 20 March 2012 from the President of the International
Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda and the President of the
International Residual Mechanism for Criminal Tribunals and
Presiding Judge of the Appeals Chamber of the International
Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda addressed to the President of the
Security Council
We write to request a limited derogation of the jurisdictional provisions of the
International Residual Mechanism for Criminal Tribunals with respect to any appeal
in the case of The Prosecutor v. Augustin Ngirabatware. We transmit this request on
behalf of the International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda and the Mechanism, and
with the agreement of the Registrar of the Tribunal, Mr. Adama Dieng; the Registrar
of the Mechanism, Mr. John Hocking; and the Prosecutor of the Tribunal and the
Mechanism, Mr. Hassan Bubacar Jallow.
As you are aware, Security Council resolution 1966 (2010) establishing the
Mechanism provides that the Arusha branch shall commence functioning on 1 July
2012. The Transitional Arrangements of the International Residual Mechanism for
Criminal Tribunals prescribe that the International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda
has competence to conduct and complete all appellate proceedings for which the
notice of appeal against the judgement or sentence is filed prior to the date of 1 July
2012. The appellate proceedings in all other cases are within the jurisdictional
competence of the Mechanism.
Currently, three substantive cases remain to be completed before the International
Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda at the trial level. In two of the cases, the trial judgements
are expected to be delivered in writing more than 30 days prior to 1 July 2012,
allowing for the timely filing before the Tribunal of any notices of appeal in these
cases. In the Ngirabatware case, however, the written judgement and any notice of
appeal are projected to be filed after 1 July 2012. Consequently, any appeal would,
under the Transitional Arrangements, fall to the jurisdictional competence of the
Mechanism.
The Appeals Chamber of the Mechanism is currently not expected to have any
other matter before it in 2012. Therefore, from the point of view of organizational
efficiency, it would be preferable to have any appeal against the trial judgement in
the Ngirabatware case adjudicated by the Appeals Chamber of the International
Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda. The Appeals Chamber of the Tribunal had planned to
consider the Ngirabatware case and included the case in the Tribunal’s budgetary
projections when it appeared that the trial judgement would be rendered prior to the
commencement date of the Arusha branch of the Mechanism. The Tribunal’s
Appeals Chamber could thus incorporate any appeal in the Ngirabatware case into
its remaining caseload without disturbing the Completion Strategy or impacting the
Tribunal’s budget. Moreover, at the time the Ngirabatware case is expected to come
before it, the Tribunal’s Appeals Chamber will have a full complement of Judges on
its bench and will be supported by its existing staff. Permitting the Tribunal’s
Appeals Chamber to hear and decide any appeal in the Ngirabatware case would
prevent unnecessarily burdening the Mechanism with the need to empanel and
support a five-Judge bench in the Mechanism’s Appeals Chamber.

2

12-29351

S/2012/218

Assigning any appeal from judgement or sentence in the Ngirabatware case to
the Appeals Chamber of the Tribunal could be accomplished by a resolution of the
Security Council vesting the Tribunal, on an exceptional basis, with jurisdictional
competence over any such appeal, notwithstanding the applicable provision of the
Transitional Arrangements. We believe that such a resolution is the most efficient
means of addressing the remaining workload of the Tribunal, to assure a smooth
transition to the Mechanism, and to serve the broader goals of the Council.
(Signed) Vagn Joensen
President, International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda
(Signed) Theodor Meron
President, International Residual Mechanism for Criminal Tribunals
Presiding Judge, Appeals Chamber of the
International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda

12-29351

3

S/2012/218

Annex II
Letter dated 29 March 2012 from the President of the International
Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda and the President of the
International Residual Mechanism for Criminal Tribunals and
Presiding Judge of the Appeals Chamber of the International
Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda addressed to the President of the
Security Council
We refer to our letter of 20 March 2012, requesting a limited derogation of the
jurisdictional provisions of the International Residual Mechanism for Criminal
Tribunals with respect to any appeal in the case of The Prosecutor v. Augustin
Ngirabatware. It has now come to our attention that it is probable that there will
also be delays in the delivery of the written trial judgements in the case of The
Prosecutor v. Ildephonse Nizeyimana and in the case of The Prosecutor v. Callixte
Nzabonimana.
Accordingly, we transmit this request for a limited derogation in the case of
The Prosecutor v. Ildephonse Nizeyimana and in the case of The Prosecutor v.
Callixte Nzabonimana on behalf of the International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda
and the Mechanism, and with the agreement of the Registrar of the International
Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda, Mr. Adama Dieng; the Registrar of the Mechanism,
Mr. John Hocking; and the Prosecutor of the Tribunal and the Mechanism, Mr. Hassan
Bubacar Jallow. We ask that this request be considered in conjunction with our request
of 20 March 2012.
As you are aware, Security Council resolution 1966 (2010) establishing the
Mechanism provides that the Arusha branch shall commence functioning on 1 July
2012. The Transitional Arrangements of the International Residual Mechanism for
Criminal Tribunals prescribe that the International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda
has competence to conduct and complete all appellate proceedings for which the
notice of appeal against the judgement or sentence is filed prior to the date of 1 July
2012. The appellate proceedings in all other cases are within the jurisdictional
competence of the Mechanism.
The cases of The Prosecutor v. Augustin Ngirabatware, The Prosecutor v.
Ildephonse Nizeyimana and The Prosecutor v. Callixte Nzabonimana are the only
substantive cases that remain to be completed before the International Criminal Tribunal
for Rwanda at the trial level. As we earlier advised, in the Ngirabatware case, the
written judgement and any notice of appeal are projected to be filed after 1 July
2012. Consequently, any appeal would, under the Transitional Arrangements, fall to
the jurisdictional competence of the Mechanism. It is probable that the written
judgements in the Nizeyimana case and the Nzabonimana case will also not be
delivered in writing more than 30 days prior to 1 July 2012, and thus any appeals
from these cases may also fall to the jurisdictional competence of the Mechanism.
Without a grant of derogation from the jurisdictional provisions of the
Mechanism, the Appeals Chamber of the Mechanism could have three cases before
it in 2012. However, from the point of view of organizational efficiency, it would be
preferable to have any appeal against the trial judgements in these cases adjudicated
by the Appeals Chamber of the International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda. The
Appeals Chamber of the Tribunal had planned to consider these cases and included

4

12-29351

S/2012/218

them in the Tribunal’s budgetary projections when it appeared that all trial
judgements would be rendered prior to the commencement date of the Arusha
branch of the Mechanism. The Tribunal’s Appeals Chamber had already thus
incorporated the expected appeals in these three cases into its remaining projected
caseload. The appeals in these cases could therefore be handled by the Tribunal
without disturbing the Completion Strategy or impacting the Tribunal’s budget.
Moreover, at the time these cases are expected to come before it, the Tribunal’s
Appeals Chamber will have a full complement of Judges on its bench and will be
supported by its existing staff. Permitting the Tribunal’s Appeals Chamber to hear
and decide any appeal in all of these cases would avoid unnecessarily burdening the
Mechanism with the need to empanel and support a five-Judge bench in the
Mechanism’s Appeals Chamber.
Assigning any appeal from judgement or sentence in these cases to the
Tribunal’s Appeals Chamber could be accomplished by a resolution of the Security
Council vesting the Tribunal, on an exceptional basis, with jurisdictional
competence over any such appeal, notwithstanding the applicable provision of the
Transitional Arrangements. We believe that such a resolution is the most efficient
means of addressing the remaining workload of the Tribunal, to assure a smooth
transition to the Mechanism, and to serve the broader goals of the Council.
(Signed) Vagn Joensen
President, International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda
(Signed) Theodor Meron
President, International Residual Mechanism for Criminal Tribunals
Presiding Judge, Appeals Chamber of the International
Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda

12-29351

5
