Reaolution■ adopted on the reports of the Sixth Committee

1. Decides that the Ad Hoe Committee established
pursuant to General Assembly resolution 3349 (XXIX)
of 17 December 1974 should be reconvened as the
Special Committee on the Charter of the United Nations
and on the Strengthening of the Role of the Organization and continue its work in pursuance of the following tasks with which it is entrusted:
(a) To examine in detail the observations received
from Governments concerning:
(i) Suggestions and proposals regarding the Charter of the United Nations;
(ii) The strengthening of the role of the United
Nations with regard to the maintenance and
consolidation of international peace and security, •the development of co-operation among all
nations and the promotion of the rules of international law in relations between States;
(b) To consider any additional specific proposals
that Governments may make with a view to enhancing
the ability of the United Nations to achieve its purposes;
(c) To list the proposals which have been made in
the Committee and to identify those which have awakened special interest;
2. Requests the Committee to examine the proposals which have been made or will be made with a
view to according priority to the consideration of those
areas on which general agreement is possible;
3. Decides to enlarge the Ad Hoe Committee by the
addition of the following five Member States: Barbados,
Belgium, Egypt, Iraq and Romania;
4. Invites Governments to continue the submission
of, or to bring up to date, their observations and proposals in accordance with paragraph 1 above;
5. Requests the Secretary-General to prepare for the
use of the Committee a study, to complement those
submitted pursuant to General Assembly resolutions
3073 (XXVIII) of 30 November 1973 and 3349
(XXIX) of 17 December 1974, which shouild present
analytically the views expressed by Governments with
respect to the various aspects of the functioning of the
United Nations, including those relating specifically to
the Charter, and also to render all necessary assistance
to the Committee, including the preparation of summary records of its meetings;
6. Requests the Committee to submit a report on its
work to the General Assembly at its thirty~fuist session;
. 7. . Decides to ~elude !n the provisional agenda of
its thirty-first seSS1on an item entitled "Report of the
Special Committee on the Charter of the United Nations
and on the Strengthening of the Role of the Organization'.'.
2440th plenary meeting
15 December 1975

*

•

•

As a result of the appointments set forth in paragraph 3 of
the above resolution, the Special Committee on the Charter
of the United Nations and on the Strengthening of the Role
of the Organization is composed of the following Member
States: AuiEIUA, AJlGENTINA, BARBADOS, BBI..OJUM, BRAZIL,
CHINA, CoLOMBJA, CoNGO, CYPRUS, CzECHOSLOVAKM, EcUADOR,
E.oYPT, EL SALVADOR., FINLAND, FRANCE, GERMAN DEMOCllATIC
REPUBLIC, GERMANY (FEDERAL REPUBLIC OP), GHANA, GREECE,
GUYANA, INDJA, INDoNESIA, IRAN, lB.AQ, ITALY, JAPAN, KENYA,
UBEIUA, MEXICO, NEPAL, NIGER.JA, NEW ZEALAND, PAJCISTAN,
Pen.lPPJNES, POLAND, ROMANIA, RWANDA, SIEIUlA LEONE,
SPAIN, 'fuNISJA, TulucEY, UNION OP SovJET SoCJALIST REPUB-

153

LICS, UNITED KINGDOM OP GB.EAT BRITAIN AND NORTHEllN
IRELAND, UNITED STATES OF AMERICA, VENEZUELA, YUGOSLAVIA
and ZAMBIA.

3500 (XXX). Re9pect for human rights
in armed conflicts

The General Assembly,
Conscious that a better application of existing humanitarian rules relating to armed con,fticts and the development of further rules remains an urgent task in
order to reduce the suffering brought about by all such
conflicts,
Rec(!lling the successive resolutions adopted in the
p_reced_mg years by ~e United Nations relating to human
nghts m armed conflicts and the debates on this subject,
Noting the report of the Secretary-General on the
second session of the Diplomatic Conference on the
Reaffirmation and Development of International Humanitarian Law Applicable in Armed Conflicts, 13 held
at Geneva from 3 February to 18 April 1975,
Noting also the note by the Secretary-General en~itled "!fuman right~ in armed conflicts: protection of
Journalists engaged m dangerous missions in areas of
armed conflict", 14
Welcoming the substantial progress made at the second session of the Diplomatic Conference,
Noting that the Diplomatic Conference will continue
its consideration of the use of specific conventional
weapons, including any which may be deemed to be excessively injurious or to have indiscriminate effects and
its search for agreement, for humanitarian reason; on
possible rules prohibiting or restricting the use of ;uch
weapons,
1. Calls upon all parties to armed conflicts to acknowledge and to comply with their obligations under
the humanitarian instruments and to observe the internati?nal humanitarian rules which are applicable, in
particular the Hague Conventions of 1899 and 1907, 111
the Geneva Protocol of 1925 18 and the Geneva Conventions of 1949 ;17
2. Calls the attention of the Diplomatic Conference
on the Reaffirmation and Development of International
Humanitarian Law Applicable in Armed Conflicts, and
?f the Governments and organizations participating in
1t, to ,the need for measures to promote on a universal
basis the dissemination of and instruction in the rules
of in~emational humanitarian law applicable in armed
conflicts;
3. Urges all participants in ,the Diplomatic Conference to do their utmost to reach agreement on additional
rules which may help to alleviate the suffering brought
about by armed conflicts and to respect and protect
non<ombatants and civilian objects in such conflicts;
4. Takes note with appreciation of the decision of
the Diplomatic Conference on the protection of journalists engaged in dangerous professional missions in
areas of armed conflict, and of the intention of the
~onference t? complete its work on the subject during
its next session;
13 A/10195 and Corr.I and Add.I.
14 A/10147.

111 Carnegie Endowment for International Peace, Th• Ha.gw
Conventions and Declarations of 1899 and 1907 (New York,
Oxford University Press, 1915).
18 League of Natiom, Treaty Series, vol. XCIV, No. 2138,
p. 65.
17 United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 75, Noa. 970-973.

General Assembly-Thirtieth Session

154

5. Expresses its appreciation to the Swiss Federal
Council for convoking the third session of the Diplomatic Conference on the Reaffirmation and Development of International Humanitarian Law Applicable in
Armed Conflicts from 21 April to 11 June 197 6 and to
the International Committee of the Red Cross for convoking a second Conference of Government Experts
on Weapons That May Cause Unnecessary Suffering or
Have Indiscriminate Effects, to be held at Lugano from
28 January to 26 February 1976;
6. Requests the Secretary-General to report to the
General Assembly at its thirty-first session on relevant
developments concerning human rights in armed conflicts, in particular on the proceedings and results of the
1976 session of the Diplomatic Conference;
7. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of
its thirty-first session the item entitled "Respect for
human rights in armed conflicts".
2441 st plenary meeting
I 5 December 1975

3501 (XXX).

Implementation by States of the
provisions of the Vienna Convention on
Diplomatic Relations of 1961 and measures
to increase the number of parties to the
Convention

The General Assembly,
Recognizing the importance of normal diplomatic
relations for the maintenance of international peace and
security and for the development of friendly relations
and co-operation among States,
Emphasizing the need for observance by all States
of the principles and rules of international diplomatic
law for ensuring normal diplomatic relations,
Concerned at instances of violations of the rules of
diplomatic law and, in particular, of the provisions of
the Vienna Convention on Diplomatic Relations of
1961, 18
Noting further that not all States have yet become
parties to the Vienna Convention on Diplomatic Relations of 1961,
Recognizing the necessity to ascertain the advisability
of studying the question of the status of the diplomatic
courier in the light of the Vienna Convention on Diplomatic Relations of 1961,
l. Reaffirms the need for strict implementation by
States of the provisions of the Vienna Convention on
Diplomatic Relations of 1961 in the interest of maintaining normal relations between them, strengthening
international peace and security and developing international co-operation;
2. Deplores instances of violations of the rules of
international diplomatic law and, in particular, of the
provisions of the Vienna Convention on Diplomatic
Relations of 1961;
3. Urges States which have not yet done so to become parties to the Vienna Convention on Diplomatic
Relations of 1961 ;
4. Invites Member States to submit to the SecretaryGeneral their comments and observations on ways and
means to ensure the implementation of the provisions
of the Vienna Convention on Diplomatic Relations of
1961 as well as on the desirability of elaborating provisions concerning the status of the diplomatic courier;
1s Ibid., vol. SOO, No. 7310, p. 95.

5. Requests the Secretary-General to submit a report
on the comments and observations of Member States
to the General Assembly at its thirty-first session;
6. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of
its thirty-first session an item entitled "Implementation
by States of the provisions of the Vienna Convention
on Diplomatic· Relations of 1961 : report of -the Secretary-General".
2 441 st plenary meeting
15 December 1975

3502 (XXX).

United Nations Programme of
As1!istance in the Teaching, Study, Dissemination and Wider App~iation of International Law

The General Assembly,
Noting with appreciation the report of the SecretaryGeneral on the implementation of the United Nations
Programme of Assistance in the Teaching, Study, Dissemination and Wider Appreciation of International
Law 19 and the recommendations made to the SecretaryGeneral by the Advisory Committee on the United
Nations Programme of Assistance in the Teaching,
Study, Dissemination and Wider Appreciation of International Law, which are. contained in that report,
Considering that international law should occupy an
appropriate place in the teaching of legal disciplines at
all universities,
Noting with appreciation the efforts made by States
at the bilateral level to provide assistance in the teaching and study of international law,
Convinced, nevertheless, that States, international organizations and institutions should be encouraged to
give further support to the Programme and to increase
their activities to promote the teaching, study, dissemination and wider appreciation of international law,
in particular those activities which are of special benefit
to persons from developing countries,
Recalling that, in the conduct of the Programme, it
is desirable to use as far as possible the resources and
facilities made available by Member States, international organizations and others,
l. Authorizes the Secretary-General to carry out in
1976 and 1977 the activities specified in his report,
including the provision of:
(a) A minimum of fifteen fellowships in 1976 and
1977. at the request of Governments of developing
countries,

( b) Assistance in the form of a travel grant for one
participant from each developing country invited to the
regional activities to be organized in 1976 and 1977,
to be financed from provisions in the regular budget
and also voluntary financial contributions which would
be received as a result of the requests set out in paragraphs 7 and 8 below;
2. Expresses its appreciation to the Secretary-General for his constructive efforts to promote training and
assistance in international law within the framework of
the United Nations Programme of Assi9tance in the
Teaching, Study, Dissemination and Wider Appreciation of International Law in 1974 and 1975;
19 A/10332.
