S/2021/1022

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
8 December 2021
Original: English

Children and armed conflict in Colombia
Report of the Secretary-General
Summary
The present report, submitted pursuant to Security Council resolution 1612 (2005)
and subsequent resolutions, is the fifth report of the Secretary -General on children and
armed conflict in Colombia and covers the period from 1 July 2019 to 30 June 2021. In
the report, the Secretary-General addresses the effect of cycles of violence on children
in the country, highlighting trends and patterns with regard to the six grave violations
committed against boys and girls, and provides information, where available, on
perpetrators.
During the reporting period, the implementation of the Final Agreement for Ending
the Conflict and Building a Stable and Lasting Peace between the Government of
Colombia and the Fuerzas Armadas Revolucionarias de Colombia-Ejército del Pueblo
(FARC-EP), which put an end to a five-decade-long conflict and led to a substantial
decrease in the number of violations committed against children, continued to advance.
Over the same period, however, violence in conflict-affected areas has surged, including
as a result of clashes involving dissident FARC-EP groups, other armed groups and
Colombian security forces, gravely affecting the protection of children.
In the report, the Secretary-General highlights the efforts made by the Government
of Colombia to strengthen the framework to respond to, end and prevent grave violations
against children, including through prevention strategies. The report also contains
recommendations to all parties aimed at ending and preventing grave violations against
children and strengthening child protection in Colombia.

21-18400 (E)

110122

*2118400*

S/2021/1022

I. Introduction
1.
The present report, submitted pursuant to Security Council resolution 1612 (2005)
and subsequent resolutions on children and armed conflict, is the fifth report of the
Secretary-General on the situation of children affected by armed conflict in Colombia.
Covering the period from 1 July 2019 to 30 June 2021, it presents the trends and patterns
of grave violations committed against children since the previous report ( S/2019/1017)
and the adoption by the Working Group on Children and Armed Conflict of its
conclusions on children and armed conflict in Colombia ( S/AC.51/2020/5). In the
report, the Secretary-General outlines progress and challenges in addressing those
violations and provides specific recommendations to strengthen child protection in
Colombia. Where possible, parties to conflict responsible for grave violations were
identified. In that regard, in annex I to the most recent report of the Secretary -General
on children and armed conflict (A/75/873–S/2021/437), the Ejército de Liberación
Nacional (ELN) remained listed for the recruitment and use of chil dren as a party that
had not put in place measures to improve the protection of children.
2.
The information contained in the present report was documented and verified by
the United Nations country task force on monitoring and reporting in Colombia,
co-chaired by the Resident Coordinator and the United Nations Children’s Fund
(UNICEF). Conflict and violence, access restrictions and fears on the part of
communities with regard to reporting continued to pose serious challenges to the
verification of grave violations against children. Starting from March 2020, restrictions
related to the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic further exacerbated those
existing challenges. The information contained herein therefore does not represent the
full extent of the grave violations committed in Colombia during the reporting period,
and the actual number of violations is likely to be higher.

II. Overview of political and security developments
3.
During the period under review, Colombia continued to make progress i n the
implementation of the Final Agreement for Ending the Conflict and Building a Stable
and Lasting Peace (S/2017/272, annex II) between the Government of Colombia and the
Fuerzas Armadas Revolucionarias de Colombia-Ejército del Pueblo (FARC-EP), with
13,608 accredited 1 former FARC-EP combatants, including 3,139 women, participating
in the reintegration programme as at 13 September 2021. The Comprehensive System
of Truth, Justice, Reparation and Non-Repetition created under the peace agreement,
which includes the Special Jurisdiction for Peace, the Commission for the Clarification
of Truth, Coexistence and Non-Repetition (Truth Commission) and the Unit for the
Search of Persons Deemed as Missing in the context of and due to the conflict, continued
to make progress to guarantee the rights of victims, including children. Overall, violence
has decreased in the country since the signature of the peace agreement in 2016, which
has also had a positive impact on the lives of children. However, serious challenges
remained in the comprehensive implementation of the agreement, especially in terms of
security for former combatants, social leaders, human rights defenders and conflict affected communities.
4.
The reporting period was characterized by the continuing reconfiguration of armed
groups and expansion of their presence, in particular in rural and remote areas marked
by poverty and a limited presence of State authority, including in former FARC -EP
strongholds. That was compounded by disputes between armed groups seeking to
increase their territorial, social and illicit economic control. The situation posed serious
security and protection-related challenges for communities, including children, living
in those areas. In addition, the impacts of the COVID-19 pandemic further increased the
vulnerabilities of children to, and their risks of being affected by, grave violations.
__________________
1

2/14

Accreditation refers to the issuance of a certificate by the Office of the High Commis sioner for
Peace to certify that an individual had been part of FARC-EP.
V.21-18400

S/2021/1022

5.
The concentration of violence in some regions, including Antioquia, Cauca,
Caquetá, Chocó, Guaviare, Meta, Nariño, Norte de Santander, Putumayo and Valle del
Cauca Departments, has been the product of limited State presence, difficulties in
securing economic, social and cultural rights, illicit economies, the presence of armed
groups and high levels of poverty. Those factors remained a threat to the reintegration
process, transitional justice, the protection of civilians and peacebuilding. According to
the United Nations Verification Mission in Colombia, 286 former FARC -EP combatants
have been killed since the signing of the peace agreement, including young adults who
had been children at the time of their association with the group. Female former
combatants and children of former combatants faced additional risks of violence,
including sexual violence and recruitment. Furthermore, the Office of the United
Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights (OHCHR) verified the killing of two
boys among numerous cases of killings of human rights defenders, as well as several
child casualties during large-scale killings.
6.
Dissident FARC-EP groups and other armed groups – such as ELN, the
Autodefensas Gaitanistas de Colombia (AGC), also known as Clan del Golfo; the
Ejército Popular de Liberación (EPL), also known as Los Pelusos; and Los
Caparrapos; – have continued to clash among themselves and with Colombian security
forces and to perpetrate violence against the population.
7.
The increased presence of and social control by those armed groups in certain
areas, such as Antioquia, Chocó, Nariño and Norte de Santander Departments, led to a
surge in the number of people isolated as a result of the imposition of a state of
confinement and restrictions of movement, which limited their access to basic services
and goods. Armed groups controlled a wide range of aspe cts of the life of communities
under their influence, through threats, restriction of movement, check points and forced
illicit economic activities. Communities were pressured to sell land or to use it to
cultivate illicit crops, and their ability to gain access to basic services and education was
limited. Mobility restrictions due to the COVID-19 pandemic further exacerbated the
situation. According to the Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs, at least
122,954 people, including an estimated 35,657 children, had been subject to
confinements and movement restrictions during the reporting period, owing to the
presence of armed groups, clashes between those groups or with Colombian armed
forces and the presence of landmines. The number of people subject to confinements
and movement restrictions increased from 15,273 in the second half of 2019 to 73,789
in 2020. At least 33,892 people were subject to confinement in the first half of 2021, a
situation that affected mainly the communities in the Depa rtments of Antioquia, Chocó,
Nariño and Norte de Santander. Confinements and movement restrictions were imposed
beyond those departments, however, extending to rural communities in Risaralda
Department. Indigenous and Afro-Colombian communities were disproportionately
affected by those conflict dynamics.
8.
Forced displacement also remained of great concern, in particular for indigenous
and Afro-Colombian communities. According to the Office for the Coordination of
Humanitarian Affairs, at least 84,552 people, including an estimated 25,241 children,
were victims of mass displacements, which increased significantly over the reporting
period. Most displacements took place in the Departments of Antioquia, Cauca, Chocó,
Córdoba, Nariño, Norte de Santander and Valle del Cauca and had been due mainly to
clashes between armed groups or between armed groups and Colombian security forces
and to violence and homicides committed against social leaders and human rights
defenders. Population displacements also occurred in the rural communities in the
Departments of Bolívar and Huila for the first time since 2012 and 2010, respectively.
9.
Between July 2019 and June 2021, the Office of the Ombudsman of Colombia
issued 94 early warnings to prevent possible human rights vio lations in conflict-affected
regions. 2 In 82 of those warnings, the recruitment and use of children were among the
__________________
2

V.21-18400

See the dashboard on early warnings (in Spanish only) of the Office of the Ombudsman of
Colombia, available at https://alertastempranas.defensoria.gov.co/Alerta/Tablero .
3/14

S/2021/1022

risks identified. The Departments of Antioquia, Cauca, Chocó, Meta, Nariño, Norte de
Santander and Valle del Cauca were those with the most warnings.
10. Communities, civil society organizations and political actors continued to call
upon the Government and ELN to resume peace talks. The Government insisted that
talks were conditional upon ELN ceasing violent actions such as installing landmines,
recruiting children or kidnapping. ELN maintained its position that any such request
must be addressed at the negotiating table (S/2021/298). In March 2020, following the
Secretary-General’s appeal for a global ceasefire, ELN announced a one-month
unilateral ceasefire, starting on 1 April, to facilitate the response to the COVID-19
pandemic. Despite calls by international and local actors, ELN decided not to extend
the ceasefire beyond 30 April, stating that it had not been reciprocated by the
Government (see S/2020/603). Exploratory dialogues to resume peace talks have been
held, but without success to date.
11. Since April 2021, a national strike and widespread demonstrations have been
carried out with the support of various civil society actors and with significant
participation by young people. Demands were related to a wide range of issues, such as
a tax reform proposed by the Government, which was subsequently withdrawn on
2 May, health care, education, basic income and the implementation of the peace
agreement. Serious human rights violations were documented by the United Nations
during the protests, in particular with respect to the right to life and personal integrity,
including against youth and adolescents. Between 28 April and 16 June 2021, OHCHR
registered allegations of 56 deaths (54 civilians and 2 police officers) in the context of
the protests (S/2021/603). The death of a 17-year-old boy was also verified. In addition,
OHCHR received information on four cases of sexual violence against three girls and
one boy (two of them verified) and on cases of personal injuries against two girls and
two boys.
12. According to public data received from the Colombian migration authorities, more
than 1,729,000 refugees and migrants from the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela,
including 404,000 children, were living in Colombia as at 31 December 2020. 3 In
August 2019, the Government of Colombia extended the right to nationality to all
children at risk of statelessness born to Venezuelan parents between January 2015 and
September 2021. As at 4 July 2021, 68,486 children had been granted nationality,
according to the National Registry for Civil Status. In March 2021, the Government of
Colombia adopted a temporary statute for the protection of Venezuelan migrants, which
should lead to improved protection and greater access to basic social services for
Venezuelan children in situations of risk and vulnerability, including in the context of
armed conflict. It is estimated that some 400,000 children would benefit from the
temporary protection statute.
13. In March 2020, the first case of COVID-19 was identified in Colombia, which
resulted in nationwide movement restrictions and the halt of in -person learning in
schools. The COVID-19 pandemic exacerbated the vulnerabilities of children among
both Colombian and Venezuelan migrants and refugees and their risks of being affected
by grave violations. The closure of schools affected children in remote rural or poor
communities in particular, where the lack of computers and/or Internet connection
hampered distance learning. Children living in areas with a strong presence of armed
groups were therefore further exposed to the risks of recruitment and use. The
COVID-19-related socioeconomic crisis also had a negative impact on local economies
and family income. The urgent and greater needs among families relying on day -to-day
subsistence also increased the risks of the recruitment and use of children. The reduced
presence of State authority and humanitarian actors due to movement restrictions related
to the pandemic added further risks of grave violations. In some areas, armed groups
took advantage of the pandemic to expand their territorial presence and control over
communities.
__________________
3

4/14

Colombia, Ministry of Foreign Affairs, “Colombia termina el 2020 con un 2.35% menos de
migrantes venezolanos en su territorio”, Migración Colombia, 29 January 2021.
V.21-18400

S/2021/1022

III. Grave violations against children
14. Between 1 July 2019 and 30 June 2021, the country task force verified 383 grave
violations committed against 330 children (217 boys, 109 girls and 4 of unknown sex),
representing a decrease compared with the previou s report, in which 850 grave
violations were indicated as having been verified, but which covered a three-year period.
Although the annual average of verified grave violations from both reports show a
decrease, the number of grave violations remained steady during the current reporting
period, with 101 violations verified in the second half of 2019, 208 in 2020 and 74 in
the first half of 2021. Recruitment and use continued to be the most prevalent violation
verified, affecting 220 children, followed by killing and maiming (118), rape and other
forms of sexual violence (14) and abduction (10). In addition, the country task force
verified 8 attacks on schools and hospitals and 13 incidents of denial of humanitarian
access. A total of 30 children were victims of multiple violations, with recruitment and
use resulting from or leading to other violations in most such cases.
15. Dissident FARC-EP groups were the main perpetrators, with 141 violations, which
represents a change from the previous reporting period, during which ELN was the main
perpetrator. Others included ELN (64), AGC (29) and Los Caparrapos (24), while
unidentified armed groups were responsible for 104 violations. In addition, 19 grave
violations were attributed to the Colombian armed forces and 2 to the Colombian police
force. A majority of the violations occurred in the Department of Antioquia (90),
followed by the Departments of Cauca (58), Nariño (43), Arauca (39), Caquetá (30),
Chocó (28), Meta (22), Valle del Cauca, Putumayo and Norte de Sant ander (17 each),
Guaviare (9), Tolima (4), Huila (3), Amazonas (2) and Bolívar, Casanare, Córdoba and
Risaralda (1 each). This aligns with the breakdown set out for previous reporting period,
during which verified cases were concentrated mostly in the same departments.
16. Children from indigenous and Afro-Colombian communities remained
disproportionally affected by grave violations, with at least 50 violations against 43
indigenous and Afro-Colombian children verified. Those children lived in the areas th at
were most affected by conflict, which were generally also characterized by high levels
of poverty, a limited presence of State authority, illicit economies and the presence of
armed groups. They also faced great humanitarian needs, with their well -being severely
affected by the lack of access to basic health, education, water and sanitation services,
as well as by weather-related emergencies such as flooding.
17. At least eight Venezuelan children were verified as having been victims of grave
violations during the reporting period. Venezuelan child migrants and refugees were
especially vulnerable, as they transited through informal border crossings where armed
groups were present in considerable strength. Furthermore, the presence of
anti-personnel mines posed an additional hazard for the children. Other factors
representing risks to their protection included trafficking, difficulties in accessing
education and social services, poverty, child labour, their lack of legal status and their
lack of opportunities.
18. The documentation and verification of information continued to be a challenge,
owing to conditions of insecurity and fear on the part of communities and victims with
regard to reporting violations. The COVID-19 pandemic further limited monitoring and
reporting activities owing to movement restrictions, which added to pre -existing
security constraints hindering access to specific territories. However, the country task
force was able to continue most of its monitoring and verification of grave violat ion
activities through established networks. In that context, victims and communities
experienced additional difficulties in reporting information owing to a reduced field
presence of government and humanitarian actors, a lack of or distrust in remote
complaint mechanisms, weak access to communication networks and fears of reprisals
by armed groups with increased territorial and social control. Lastly, the identification
of armed groups responsible for grave violations remained complex, owing to their
reorganization and fragmentation, which led to the inability to attribute a high number
of violations to a specific armed group. Therefore, the data contained in the present
report does not represent the full extent of grave violations committed in Colombia.
V.21-18400

5/14

S/2021/1022

A.

Recruitment and use
19. The country task force verified the recruitment and use of 220 children (146 boys,
70 girls and 4 of unknown sex), with 65 children affected during the second half of
2019, 116 in 2020 and 39 in the first half of 2021. The m ain perpetrators were dissident
FARC-EP groups, responsible for the recruitment and use of 106 children, followed by
ELN (48), unidentified armed groups (31), AGC (18) and Los Caparrapos (16). One girl
was used by national armed forces as an informant.
20. The 220 children subjected to recruitment and use, including one Venezuelan girl,
were between the ages of 12 and 17 years, and 56 of them were under 15 years of age.
They were recruited and used in 15 departments, namely, Antioquia (58), Cauca (27),
Arauca (26), Meta (21), Caquetá (17), Chocó (16), Nariño (13), Putumayo and Valle del
Cauca (10 each), Norte de Santander (8), Guaviare (6), Tolima (4), Amazonas (2), Huila
and Casanare (1 each).
21. The recruitment and use of children often led to other grave violations, principally
killing and maiming, but also sexual violence and abduction. A total of 24 children were
verified to have been killed or maimed while associated with armed groups. For
instance, in March 2021, in Guaviare Department, a national ar med forces military
airstrike against a FARC-EP dissident group caused the death of several armed group
members, including a 16-year-old girl associated with the group. In another case, a
14-year-old girl was sexually abused during her association with a d issident FARC-EP
group in May 2020, in Caquetá Department.
22. Children were not only used in combat, but also assigned support roles, such as
informants, porters and traffickers. Adolescent boys often received military training by
armed groups to become combatants. Girls were also used in combat, in addition to as
informants or for sexual purposes. For example, in August 2019, during confrontations
between ELN and the national armed forces in Antioquia Department, a 15-year-old boy
and two 14-year-old girls associated with ELN were injured in combat.
23. Children were recruited through various methods, such as abduction, threats made
against their families and promises of protection, jobs, money or material benefit.
Insecurity, poverty, lack of access to basic services, being a school dropout, domestic
violence, lack of future opportunities or having a family member in an armed group
were also drivers of child recruitment. For instance, in January 2021, in Antioquia
Department, AGC recruited five indigenous children between the ages of 14 and 17
years, using promises of financial benefit. In Meta Department, in October 2020,
members of a dissident FARC-EP group recruited three 14-year-old boys and threatened
the community that they would recruit more children. In some cases, when communities
did not comply with the code of conduct imposed by armed groups, they recruited
children as a form of retaliation and in order to spread fear among the community. For
instance, in August 2020, in Arauca, ELN recruited and used six boys, between the ages
of 15 and 16 years, to forcibly work on a farm because the group considered that the
children had been using drugs and were not behaving according to the armed group’s
standards. The boys were released after a month, following pressure by their families
and community leaders. Some reports received from local communities also indicated
that armed groups allegedly forced children to consume drugs in order to create an
addiction and then use them in exchange for the substanc e. The number of complaints
of child recruitment made by families to authorities remained low, owing to fears of
reprisal, the lack of knowledge or trust in protection services, long distances or a lack
of budget to travel to urban centres to seek support. Challenges in monitoring cases of
child recruitment and use were more prominent during the COVID -19 pandemic.
24. Civilian-military activities continued to be conducted during the period under
review. In areas in which armed groups were present, social, development, cultural and
sports activities were carried out by the national armed forces, putting children at risk of
retaliation, solely as a result of interacting with the armed forces, and at risk of being used
in intelligence activities. Pursuant to article 41 (29) of Law 1098 of 2006 on childhood
and adolescence, the armed forces must abstain from using children in such activities.

6/14

V.21-18400

S/2021/1022

B.

Killing and maiming
25. The country task force verified that a total of 118 children (81 boys and 37 girls),
some as young as two years of age, were killed (78) and maimed (40) during the
reporting period, including 3 Venezuelans (2 boys and 1 girl). Of that total, 27 children
were killed or maimed in the second half of 2019, 67 in 2020 and 24 in the first half of
2021. Most child casualties were attributed to unidentified armed groups (56), followed
by dissident FARC-EP groups (26), national armed forces (13), ELN (10), AGC (8), Los
Caparrapos (3) and the national police (2).
26. The Department of Cauca accounted for the highest number of verified cases of
killing and maiming (28), followed by the Departments of Nariño (27), Antioquia (25),
Caquetá (8), Arauca, Putumayo and Norte de Santander (6 each), Chocó (4), Guaviare,
Valle del Cauca and Huila (2 each) and Bolívar and Córdoba (1 each).
27. Child casualties were the result of gunshot (76), anti-personnel landmines and
unexploded ordnance (33), aerial attacks (8) and cruel or inhuman treatment (1).
Children recruited and used by armed groups were killed and maimed during their
association (24), which underscored the dangers inherent to their association with
parties to the conflict. For example, in August 2019, seven children b etween the ages of
12 and 17 years associated with a FARC-EP dissident group were killed during the
bombing by the national armed forces of the armed group’s camp in Caquetá
Department.
28. Children were also targeted directly for alleged associations wit h opposing armed
groups. For example, in August 2020, in Nariño Department, elements of a dissident
FARC-EP group shot and killed four children (one boy and three girls), between the
ages of 15 and 17 years, who were accused of being collaborators for anot her armed
group operating in the area.
29. Colombia is one of the countries most affected by the presence of explosive
devices, which constituted a major cause of the killing and maiming of children during
the reporting period. The country task force verified 33 child casualties caused by
explosive devices, specifically, 19 anti-personnel landmines, 9 improvised explosive
devices and 5 unexploded ordnances. In February 2020, in Nariño Department, four
boys, between the ages of 12 and 17 years, were injured by the explosion of an
improvised explosive device that they had found and played with. In March 2020, in
Antioquia Department, a 12-year-old girl and a 17-year-old boy, both from an
indigenous community, were injured by a landmine and died on their way to the hospital.
Explosive devices also represented a risk for children recruited by armed groups. For
instance, in May 2020, in Antioquia, a 16-year-old girl associated with ELN lost both
hands when an anti-personnel mine that she was setting up exploded. Incidents took
place in rural areas with a presence of armed groups clashing over social, territorial and
illegal economic control. According to the information management system on activities
relating to anti-personnel mines of the Office of the High Commissioner for Peace, 46
children were victims of anti-personnel mines or unexploded ordnances, 6 of whom
died.

C.

Rape and other forms of sexual violence
30. The country task force verified that 14 children (2 boys and 12 girls, including a
Venezuelan girl) between the ages of 2 and 15 years, were victims of rape and other
forms of sexual violence in the second half of 2019 (2), in 2020 (9) and in the first half
of 2021 (3). The scale of sexual violence affecting children is believed to be
underreported, as documenting such violations remains a challenge, owing to survivors’
fear of reporting and of stigmatization, the lack of appropriate systems for care and
response from local and national institutions and access constraints faced by the country
task force for monitoring and reporting, as well as COVID-19-related restrictions.

V.21-18400

7/14

S/2021/1022

31. Verified cases were attributed to unidentified armed groups (five), national armed
forces (five), dissident FARC-EP groups (three) and ELN (one) and took place in the
Departments of Valle del Cauca (five), Nariño (three), Norte de Santander (two), and
Arauca, Caquetá, Risaralda and Guaviare (one each). For example, in June 2020, in
Risaralda department, a 12-year-old indigenous girl was sexually abused by six national
armed forces members. The soldiers were arrested, prosecuted and sentenced to time in
prison. The girl has been receiving assistance from the Colombian Family Welfare
Institute.
32. In some instances, survivors were forced to leave their homes for fear of
retaliation. For example, a 15-year-old girl was raped by an unidentified armed group.
She and her family moved to another area after receiving threats by the armed group. A
12-year-old girl who had been sexually abused by a member of a dissident FARC -EP
group fled her home with her family to prevent reprisals by the group.
33. The health emergency caused by the COVID-19 pandemic has increased
vulnerabilities and risk factors for survivors of sexual violence in areas affected by the
armed conflict, including in border areas. Movement restrictions led to increased
difficulties for survivors, their families and networks to set up protection and prevention
mechanisms and to gain access to referral pathways. The irregular situation of migrant
and refugee women and girls put them at greater risk, given their difficulties in gaining
access to protection services. The closure of the border between Colombia and the
Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela from March 2020 to June 2021 increased the risk of
sexual violence and trafficking in persons for Venezuelan migrants and refugees and
Colombian returnees from the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela, who turned to using
informal border crossings (trochas) controlled by armed groups.

D.

Attacks on schools and hospitals
34. Eight incidents of attacks against schools (six) and hospitals (two), including
protected persons in relation to schools and hospitals, were verified in 2020 (six) and in
the first half of 2021 (two). This decreasing trend could be explained by the fact th at
schools were closed during most of the period under review, reducing not only the risks
of attacks and of threats of attacks against schools and teachers, but also the avenues for
reporting them. Verified incidents were attributed to unidentified armed groups (five)
and AGC, ELN and dissident FARC-EP groups (one each) and occurred in the
Departments of Chocó (four), Cauca (two), Antioquia and Caquetá (one each). Most
attacks occurred in rural areas.
35. The six attacks on schools were attributed to unidentified armed groups (four) and
AGC and dissident FARC-EP groups (one each). Most incidents (five) involved attacks
on or threats directed at protected persons in relation to schools, which, in some cases,
led to the killing of teachers and the suspension of classes. For instance, in January
2020, in Chocó Department, an attack occurred during clashes between two unidentified
armed groups, leading to a school being damaged. As a result, the teachers of seven
schools left the area, and classes were suspended over several days for at least 153
students. In March 2021, 10 teachers of one municipality in Antioquia Department were
forced to flee after receiving threats from dissident FARC-EP groups because the
teachers were not natives of the area. That incident affected the education of 1,500
students.
36. Both attacks on hospitals occurred in 2020 and were attributed to ELN (one) and
an unidentified armed group (one), in Cauca and Caquetá Departments (one each). The
incidents involved threats against medical personnel (one) and shots fired at an
ambulance that was driving an injured patient (one).
Military use of schools
37. The use of schools for military purposes by armed forces and armed groups placed
students at risk and interfered with their education and with support for their protection.
The country task force verified the military use of four schools in the Departments of

8/14

V.21-18400

S/2021/1022

Arauca (three) and Caquetá (one) by national armed forces (three) and a dissident
FARC-EP group (one). The national armed forces were responsible for the military use
of three schools for periods of up to approximately two days. For example, in July 20 19,
national armed forces soldiers camped in a school in Arauca department for two days.
Members of a dissident FARC-EP group used a school in Caquetá Department in March
2020 for one day. The group imposed rules on students, such as a prohibition on boys’
wearing earrings and having long hair, and encouraged them to join their ranks.

E.

Abduction
38. The country task force verified the abduction of 10 children (7 boys and 3 girls)
in the second half of 2019 (3), in 2020 (2) and in the first half of 2021 (5). Most
violations were attributed to Los Caparrapos (five), followed by ELN (three) and
dissident FARC-EP groups (two), and occurred in the Departments of Antioquia (five),
Arauca (three) and Meta and Caquetá (one each).
39. The children were abducted for the purpose of recruitment and use (six), on
suspicion of being spies (three) or for unknown reasons (one). For example, in January
2020, in Meta Department, a 13-year-old girl was abducted for recruitment purposes by
a dissident FARC-EP group, while she was playing with other children in a community
house. At the time of writing, the girl remained associated with the group. In February
2021, in Antioquia Department, five boys between the ages of 15 and 17 years had been
travelling by road when armed members of Los Caparrapos forced them to join the
group. Four of them were released in March 2021, but one boy remained unaccounted
for at the time of writing.
40. Another reason behind the abduction of children was the suspicion or
identification of children as being alleged informants for another party. For example, in
December 2019, in Arauca Department, ELN released three children (one boy and two
girls) whom they had previously abducted, alleging that they were spies of the national
armed forces. The three children were handed over to the International Committee of
the Red Cross.

F.

Denial of humanitarian access
41. The country task force verified 13 incidents of denial of humanitarian access to
children in the second half of 2019 (4), in 2020 (8) and in the first half of 2021 (1).
Incidents were attributed to unidentified armed groups (seven), FARC -EP dissident
groups (three), AGC (two) and ELN (one) and took place in the Departments of Chocó
(four), Arauca (three), Caquetá (two) and Antioquia, Cauca, Norte de Santander and
Putumayo (one each).
42. Restrictions of movement, clashes and the presence of armed groups affected the
humanitarian access of children to basic services. In February 2020, in most areas of
Arauca Department, ELN announced an armed strike for three days, imposing
restrictions of movement on civilians and forcing the suspension of all activities,
including education and public transportation and the closure of local markets, which
resulted in local communities not having access to any means of subsistence. In July
and August 2019, unidentified armed groups imposed a state of confinement on several
communities in Chocó Department, restricting mobility and access to crops and
affecting the food security of families and children living in the area. As a result of that
incident, at least 1,222 children stopped attending classes. It was also reported that many
members of armed groups did not know about the objectives and mission of
humanitarian organizations and therefore did not respect their activities at the local
level, even during the COVID-19 pandemic, and imposed additional blockades,
checkpoints and access restrictions.

V.21-18400

9/14

S/2021/1022

IV. Release of children and programmatic response
43. The Colombian Family Welfare Institute continued to implement a specialized
programme for the protection and reintegration of children released from armed groups.
According to the Institute, a total of 323 children (228 boys and 95 girls) who had
previously been associated with residual organized armed groups (149), ELN (88),
criminal gangs (80) and EPL (6) were enrolled in the programme during the period under
review (87 children in the second half of 2019, 144 in 2020 and 92 in the first half of
2021).
44. Regarding the reintegration of children disengaged from FARC-EP in the
framework of the peace agreement, in 2020, the Office of the High Commissioner for
Peace recognized an additional 232 former FARC-EP combatants as having been
children at the time of the laying down of weapons. Those young adults have the right
to be included in the programme entitled “A different path of life” and to have access to
reparations under Law 1448 of 2011 on victims and land restitution. The total number
of children disengaged from FARC-EP, who by now have all reached the age of majority,
stood at 406 (217 boys and 189 girls) at the time of writing. Security guarantees
remained a concern for them. Since the signing of the agreement, four members of the
programme have been killed, three of them during the reporting period. In addition, the
payment of reparations to 30 members of the programme was still pending, and only 29
had received resources for income-generation projects. In May 2021, the technical
working group on children of the National Reintegration Council was reactivated, in
order to address challenges related to security and protection concerns, the
implementation of the “A different path of life” programme, including psychosocial
support, and the inclusion in the programme of the 232 individuals who were recognized
as eligible in 2020.

V. Progress in addressing grave violations against children
45. During the reporting period, further steps were taken by the Government to prevent
the recruitment and use of children. In November 2019, the Office of the Presidential
Counsellor for Human Rights and International Issues, through the Intersectoral
Commission for the Prevention of the Recruitment and Use of, and Sexual Violence
against, Children and Adolescents by Illegal Armed Groups and Organized Criminal
Groups, issued a new policy to prevent the recruitment and use of children and sexual
violence against them. In July 2020, the Commission approved a national plan of action
to implement the policy, and, in August 2020, launched a strategy entitled “Súmate por
mí” (Join Up for Me). The strategy is being implemented in 209 prioritized
municipalities and is aimed at providing technical assistance to local authorities in order
to foster protective environments for children at the local level, with the support of the
United Nations multi-partner trust fund, UNICEF, the International Organization for
Migration and the United States Agency for International Development. In January
2021, the Office of the Presidential Counsellor announced the start of a strategy for the
local implementation of the aforementioned policy. A total of 23 local advisers were
hired to ensure collaboration with local government institutions, both at departmental
and municipal levels. In March 2021, the Government announced the creation of a
special group and the launch of a “mega-operation” against the recruitment and use of
children and young people. The Government released a list of the 30 most wanted child
recruiters, announced the deployment of 2,200 police officers with the support of the
national armed forces to areas where risks of recruitment and use are higher and the
activation of 14 new recruitment prevention teams by the Colombian Family Welfare
Institute. In June 2021, the Government announced the launch of a training plan for over
250,000 military and police personnel on the promotion of and respect for children’s
rights.
46. In connection with the above-mentioned initiatives, in February 2021, the Office
of the Ombudsman launched a national strategy that consists of highlighting the risks

10/14

V.21-18400

S/2021/1022

of recruitment, providing support to victims and conducting research on child
recruitment dynamics.
47. Mine risk education was strengthened in Colombia during the period under review,
with the support of UNICEF and the Mine Action Service. According to the Office of
the High Commissioner for Peace, 39 national and international organizations were
accredited by the national mine action centre, through a strategy of quality management
aimed at developing capacities and compliance with national mine risk education
standards. A total of 14,632 mine risk education activities were conducted in high -risk
areas, with the participation of 227,598 people, including 101,611 children. In
November 2020, participants at the Meeting of the States Parties to the Convention on
the Prohibition of the Use, Stockpiling, Production and Transfer of Anti -Personnel
Mines and on Their Destruction agreed to grant the Government of Colombia its request
for an extension, to 31 December 2025, for completing the destruction of anti-personnel
mines in mined areas. Furthermore, according to Government sources, between July
2019 and June 2021, 2,964,019.21 m 2 of land were cleared, and 848 explosives devices
destroyed, by nine civilian humanitarian demining organizations.
48. Regarding the prevention of and response to conflict-related sexual violence, the
Victims’ Unit implemented strategies for the care of survivors, including psychosocial
care, and to facilitate the fulfilment of survivors’ rights to truth, justice and reparation. 4
In November 2020, the Government presented new guidelines to strengthen gender
equality and the empowerment of women in the Colombian armed forces and the police,
with a special emphasis on the prevention of sexual violence. Since February 2021, no
statutory limitations have been applicable to the crime of sexual violence against
children in Colombia. Investigations were also conducted with regard to cases of sexual
violence attributed to national armed forces, leading to prosecution. For instance, six
soldiers were arrested, prosecuted and sentenced to 16 years in prison, while another
soldier was sentenced to 8 years of imprisonment as an accessory to the fact, for the
rape of a 12-year-old indigenous girl in Risaralda Department in June 2020. The
Government reported that prosecutors on the case carried out more than 160
investigative activities that made it possible to establish the participation of the soldiers
in the violation.
49. The Special Jurisdiction for Peace made progress on case No. 007, which was
opened in March 2019 and which is focused on the recruitment and use of children and
other related violations affecting children, such as homicide, torture or sexual violence,
as a consequence of or in relation to their association with armed conflict. In September
2020, 15 former FARC-EP leaders appeared before the Special Jurisdiction. Some of
them acknowledged the presence of children in the ranks of FARC -EP, recognized that
sexual violence and forced abortions had been perpetrated and asked for forgiveness.
Others emphasized that the group did not have a policy of recruiting children and
claimed that it could not monitor the conduct of all units. In February 2021, the Special
Jurisdiction published child-focused guidelines for organizations and victims on how to
prepare and submit reports on violations against children in armed conflict. In February
2021, in a report submitted to the Special Jurisdiction, the Colombian Family Welfare
Institute pointed to 3,878 cases of children recruited and used by the former FARC -EP.
More than 18,000 individual cases of children recruited and used by the former
FARC-EP were identified, and, as at 30 June 2021, 274 victims had been accredited for
participation in the judicial proceedings of the case.
50. The Truth Commission promoted the participation of children through in -person
and virtual work sessions and dialogues conducted in several areas of the country, aimed
at listening to their voices and learning from their experiences and their perspectives on
the impact of armed conflict, as well as their recommendations for non -repetition.
Artistic activities were carried out and multimedia products built together with children,
with the objectives of sharing their experiences and their opinions about peace and
__________________
4

V.21-18400

The Victims’ Unit was created in January 2012, following the passing of Law 1448 of 2011 on
victims and land restitution, in which measures for the provision of attention, assistance and
reparation to the victims of the internal armed conflict are set out.
11/14

S/2021/1022

armed conflict. In November 2019, the Commission organized a national event for truth,
where child victims, and adults who had been victims during childhood, publicly shared
their testimonies about the impact of armed conflict on their lives. During the event,
members of the former FARC-EP, armed forces and paramilitary groups publicly
recognized their responsibilities and offered apologies. Child -friendly protocols and
tools were also developed with the support of UNICEF to collect children’s testimonies
on grave violations through individual interviews and focus groups. To date, the
Commission has documented the stories of more than 42,000 victims of armed conflict,
over 6,700 of whom had been affected during childho od. The final report of the
Commission, due in June 2022, will include a dedicated chapter on children, in which
it will highlight the grave violations and disproportionate impact of armed conflict on
children, as well as specific recommendations for non-repetition.
51. In December 2020, the national House of Representatives and the Senate approved
the extension of the Victims and Land Restitution Act until 2031, in order to allow for
the provision of reparations to the remaining 7 million victims of the a rmed conflict
who had not yet received any. According to the Victims’ Unit, more than 2.4 million
registered victims of the armed conflict are children who were affected by different
types of violations, such as forced displacement, abduction, killing, rec ruitment and use
and sexual violence.
52. The country task force continued to engage in dialogue and advocate with strategic
partners in Government, civil society and the international community with regard to
the prevention of and response to grave violations against children. Meetings between
the country task force and the Government were held to discuss the situation of children
affected by the armed conflict and to find ways to foster their protection. In October
2020, the country task force and the Group of Friends on Children and Armed Conflict
in Colombia, co-chaired by Canada and Sweden, held a dialogue with members of local
institutions and civil society in Putumayo Department on the risks of recruitment and
use of children due to the closure of schools, the social control of armed groups, the
presence of illicit economies and the limited presence of State authority in rural areas.
In November 2020, the country task force and the Embassy of Belgium jointly organized
a virtual event to foster dialogue and identify ways to implement the conclusions on
children and armed conflict in Colombia adopted in July 2020 by the Working Group
on Children and Armed Conflict. More than 80 high- and technical-level representatives
of the Government, the international community, civil society and United Nations
agencies participated in the event. They highlighted the need to strengthen the financial
and technical capacities of local authorities to implement the national policy and plan
of action to prevent recruitment and use of children and the need to strengthen local
child-friendly complaints and response mechanisms, among other issues. The country
task force also continued to strengthen the monitoring and reporting capacities of its
members and to extend the network of local monitors through capacity-building
sessions.

VI. Observations and recommendations
53. I reiterate my call upon all parties to abide by their respective obligations
under international human rights law and international humanitarian law and to
end and prevent all grave violations against children. I remain concerned about the
high number of cases of the recruitment and use of children by armed groups, in
particular by dissident FARC-EP groups and ELN. I urge all armed groups to
adopt and implement commitments to end this grave violation and release all
children present in their ranks immediately. I recall that children associated or
formerly associated with armed groups and forces should be treated primarily as
victims.
54. I welcome the progress that the Government of Colombia has made in
preventing and responding to grave violations against children. I commend the
advances made in the implementation of the “Súmate por mí” strategy to foster
protective environments for children at the local level and the start of a strategy to
12/14

V.21-18400

S/2021/1022

implement, at the local level, the policy of the Office of the Presidential Counsellor
for Human Rights to prevent the recruitment and use of children and sexual
violence against children. I encourage the Government to continue to prioritize
these prevention programmes and to ensure their sustainability through an
allocated budget and designated institutions, at both the national and local levels,
to ensure their coordination and implementation, in order to prevent new cases of
the recruitment and use of children. I encourage the strengthening of existing
institutions and programmes that prevent child recruitment, in particular in
vulnerable areas of the country where the presence of State authority is limited. I
also encourage the Government to strengthen the Intersectoral Commission for
Rapid Response to Early Warnings, so as to ensure that alerts issued by the Office
of the Ombudsman are addressed, in particular in relation to threats of violence
against children, the recruitment and use of children and other grave violations
affecting children. I further call on the Government to prevent the organization of
civilian-military activities with children.
55. I urge the Government of Colombia to continue to pursue its efforts aimed at
guaranteeing the effective reintegration of young adults who left the ranks of the
FARC-EP as children at the time of the laying down of weapons and are
participating in the programme “A different path of life”, including those
recognized in 2020, by facilitating their access to income-generating projects,
security guarantees, reparations and psychological support, while taking into
consideration age, gender and ethnicity in all programmes.
56. I reiterate my call on all parties to immediately cease the killing and maiming
of children and to take all necessary measures to protect children during military
operations, in line with the principle of precaution, and to avoid confrontations in
areas where civilians and children are present. I also reiterate my call on armed
groups to end, immediately and definitively, the use of indiscriminate explosive
devices that cause death or injury to children. Furthermore, I strongly encourage
the Government to continue, and to scale up, its demining and mine risk education
activities across the country.
57. Sexual violence against children remains a great concern in Colombia and I
reiterate my call upon all parties to the conflict to end this violation immediately. I
welcome the advances made by the Government’s Victims’ Unit in implementing
strategies for the care of survivors. I urge the Government to prioritize prevention
activities and to ensure that adequate programmes are available and accessible to
all survivors. I further appeal to the authorities to investigate, prosecute and
sanction anyone found responsible for sexual violence against children, as well as
all other grave violations against children. I welcome in this regard the
accountability measures taken with regard to cases of sexual violence against
children attributed to elements of the national armed forces.
58. Armed groups must both cease and prevent attacks on schools and hospitals,
and I urge all parties to the conflict to prevent the military use of such facilities. I
further call on the Government of Colombia to swiftly endorse and implement the
Safe Schools Declaration.
59. I commend the Comprehensive System of Truth, Justice, Reparation and
Non-Repetition for its efforts to ensure child participation in the transitional
justice processes and I welcome the advances made in terms of accountability, with
the progress made by the Special Jurisdiction for Peace in case No. 007, which is
focused on the recruitment and use of children and other related violations
affecting children as a consequence or in relation to their association with the
armed conflict. I also welcome the progress made by the Truth Commission and its
special focus on children. In that regard, I encourage the Government to continue
to support transitional justice institutions, through financial and technical
assistance, in order to guarantee that the rights of children to truth, justice,
reparation and non-repetition are fulfilled.

V.21-18400

13/14

S/2021/1022

60. Considering the linkages between displacement and grave violations against
children, I reiterate my call upon the Government to strengthen its programmes
and its institutional response with respect to the relocation and return of displaced
populations, to facilitate their access to basic services, including education and
health care, and to extend protection and prevention measures in communities
subject to a state of confinement owing to the presence of, and territorial control
by, armed groups.
61. I commend the parties for their continued commitment to the implementation
of the peace agreement and urge the Government to continue to pursue the vital
task of ensuring its comprehensive implementation in rural and remote areas so as
to ensure sustainable peace, reconciliation and the non-repetition of grave
violations against children.

14/14

V.21-18400
