S/2020/262

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
1 April 2020
Original: English

Letter dated 27 March 2020 from the Secretary-General addressed
to the President of the Security Council
I have the honour to transmit herewith the seventy -eighth monthly report of the
Director General of the Organisation for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons
(OPCW), submitted pursuant to paragraph 12 of Security Council resolution 2118
(2013) (see annex). The report covers the period from 24 February to 23 March 2020.
I note that, on 4 March, the OPCW Technical Secretariat held a briefing for the
States parties to the Convention on the Prohibition of t he Development, Production,
Stockpiling and Use of Chemical Weapons and on Their Destruction on the status of
its mandated activities in the Syrian Arab Republic pertaining to the full elimination
of the Syrian chemical weapons programme, which include the work of the
Declaration Assessment Team, the fact-finding mission and the Investigation and
Identification Team and the conduct of inspections, in accordance with OPCW
Executive Council decision EC-83/DEC.5.
In the light of the recent events related to the coronavirus disease (COVID-19)
outbreak, the OPCW Technical Secretariat informed the Syrian Arab Republic on
13 March that the OPCW Director General had decided to postpone all scheduled
deployments and missions of the Technical Secretariat, including m issions to take
place in the Syrian Arab Republic, until further notice. The Technical Secretariat will
keep the Syrian Arab Republic and States parties to the Chemical Weapons
Convention duly informed of the next developments related to this situation and
intends to resume its activities in the country in the near future.
The Declaration Assessment Team continues its efforts to clarify all outstanding
issues related to the initial declaration of the Syrian Arab Republic to OPCW. A report
on the work of the Team was submitted to the OPCW Executive Council at its ninetythird session, held from 10 to 13 March. I note that the twenty -third round of
consultations between the Team and the Syrian Arab Republic, initially planned to
begin on 15 March, will be postponed until further notice in view of the COVID-19
outbreak.
Pursuant to decision EC-M-43/DEC.1 on the destruction and verification of 12
declared chemical weapons production facilities, the OPCW Technical Secretariat has
been monitoring and maintaining the remote monitoring systems installed at four
sealed underground structures in the territory of the Syrian Arab Republic. The
activities related to that mandate will be rescheduled in accordance with the decision
of the OPCW Director General to postpone all deployments and missions until further
notice in view of the COVID-19 outbreak.

20-04994 (E)

030420

*2004994*

S/2020/262

The OPCW fact-finding mission continues to study all available information
related to allegations of use of chemical weapons in the Syrian Arab Republic and is
currently analysing the information collected from recent deployments. The mission
is planning further deployments and will report to the OPCW Executive Council on
the results of its work in due course.
I note that a progress report on the implementation of decisio n C-SS-4/DEC.3
was submitted to the OPCW Executive Council at its ninety -third session. The
Investigation and Identification Team is conducting its investigations, has contacted
States parties to the Chemical Weapons Convention requesting their cooperation and
is in the process of concluding its work on the first incidents under investigation.
As I have stated previously, the use of chemical weapons by anyone and
anywhere is intolerable, and impunity for their use is equally unacceptable. It is
imperative to identify and hold accountable all those who have used chemical
weapons. Unity in the Security Council is essential to achieve this urgent obligation.
(Signed) António Guterres

2/7

20-04994

S/2020/262

Annex
[Original: Arabic, Chinese, English, French, Russian and Spanish]
I have the honour to transmit to you my report entitled “Progress in the
elimination of the Syrian chemical weapons programme”, prepared in accordance
with the relevant provisions of OPCW Executive Council decision EC -M-33/DEC.1
and Security Council resolution 2118 (2013), both dated 27 September 2013, for
transmission to the Security Council (see enclosure). My report covers the period
from 24 February 2020 to 23 March 2020 and also covers th e reporting requirements
of Executive Council decision EC-M-34/DEC.1, dated 15 November 2013.
(Signed) Fernando Arias

20-04994

3/7

S/2020/262

Enclosure
[Original: Arabic, Chinese, English, French, Russian and Spanish]

Report by the Director General of the Organisation for the
Prohibition of Chemical Weapons
Progress in the elimination of the Syrian chemical
weapons programme
Background
1.
In accordance with subparagraph 2(f) of the decision by the Executive Council
(hereinafter “the Council”) at its Thirty-Third Meeting (EC-M-33/DEC.1, dated
27 September 2013), the Technical Secretariat (hereinafter “the Secretariat”) is to
report to the Council on a monthly basis regarding the implementation of that
decision. In accordance with paragraph 12 of United Nations Security Council
resolution 2118 (2013), the report by the Secretariat is also to be submitted to the
Security Council through the Secretary-General.
2.
The Council, at its Thirty-Fourth Meeting, adopted a decision entitled “Detailed
Requirements for the Destruction of Syrian Chemical Weapons and Syrian Chemical
Weapons Production Facilities” (EC-M-34/DEC.1, dated 15 November 2013). In
paragraph 22 of that decision, the Council decided that the Secretariat should report
on its implementation “in conjunction with its reporting required by subparagraph
2(f) of Council decision EC-M-33/DEC.1”.
3.
The Council, at its Forty-Eighth Meeting, adopted a decision entitled “Reports
of the OPCW Fact-Finding Mission in Syria” (EC-M-48/DEC.1, dated 4 February
2015) noting the Director-General’s intent to include reports of the OPCW Fact
Finding Mission in Syria (FFM), along with information on the Council’s discussion
thereof, as part of the monthly reporting pursuant to United Nations Security Council
resolution 2118 (2013). Similarly, the Council, at its Eighty-First Session, adopted a
decision entitled “Report by the Director-General Regarding the Declaration and
Related Submissions by the Syrian Arab Republic” (EC-81/DEC.4, dated 23 March
2016), noting the Director General’s intent to provide information on the
implementation of that decision.
4.
The Council, at its Eighty-Third Session, adopted a decision entitled “OPCWUnited Nations Joint Investigative Mechanism Reports on Chemical Weapons Use in
the Syrian Arab Republic” (EC-83/DEC.5, dated 11 November 2016). In
subparagraph 12(a) of that decision, the Council decided that the Director-General
shall “regularly inform the Council on the implementation of this decision and
incorporate information regarding the implementation of this decision into his
monthly reporting to the United Nations Security Council, through the United Nations
Secretary-General, regarding EC-M-33/DEC.1”.
5.
This, the seventy-eighth monthly report, is therefore submitted in accordance
with the aforementioned Council decisions and includes information relevant to the
period from 24 February to 23 March 2020.

Impact of the novel coronavirus disease (COVID-19)
6.
On 13 March 2020, the Secretariat informed the Syrian Arab Republic through
a note verbale that, in view of the recent events related to the COVID -19 outbreak,

4/7

20-04994

S/2020/262

and in line with measures announced by the Dutch authorities, inter alia, the Director
General had taken the decision to postpone all scheduled deployments and missions
of the Secretariat until further notice. This includes missions to take place in the
Syrian Arab Republic.
7.
The Secretariat will monitor the situation closely and will keep the Syr ian Arab
Republic and States Parties duly informed of the next developments related to this
unprecedented situation, and intends to resume its activities in the Syrian Arab
Republic in the near future.

Progress achieved by the Syrian Arab Republic in meeting the
requirements of Executive Council decisions EC-M-33/DEC.1
and EC-M-34/DEC.1
8.

Progress by the Syrian Arab Republic is as follows:
As stated in previous reports, the Secretariat has verified the destruction of all
27 chemical weapons production facilities (CWPFs) declared by the Syrian Arab
Republic.
On 18 March 2020, the Syrian Arab Republic submitted to the Council its
seventy-sixth monthly report (EC-94/P/NAT.1, dated 18 March 2020) regarding
activities on its territory related to the destruction of its chemical weapons and
CWPFs, as required by paragraph 19 of EC M 34/DEC.1.

Progress in the elimination of Syrian chemical weapons by States
Parties hosting destruction activities
9.
As stated in previous reports, all of the chemicals declared by the Syrian Arab
Republic that were removed from its territory in 2014 have been de stroyed.

Activities carried out by the Technical Secretariat with respect to
Executive Council decisions EC-81/DEC.4 and EC-83/DEC.5
10. The Declaration Assessment Team (DAT) continues its efforts to clarify all
outstanding issues regarding the initial declaration of the Syrian Arab Republic in
accordance with paragraph 3 of Council decision EC-81/DEC.4 and paragraph 6 of
Council decision EC-83/DEC.5.
11. The twenty-second round of consultations between the DAT and the Syrian Arab
Republic took place from 14 to 23 October 2019. These consultations built upon the
work carried out during the previous two rounds that had taken place, respectively, in
March and in April 2019. The outcomes of this deployment, together with further
information provided by the Syrian Arab Republic and/or collected by the DAT, as
well as the results of the analysis of information and samples obtained by the DAT
during the previous rounds of consultations, were reported to the Council at its
Ninety-Third Session in a document entitled “Report on the Work of the Declaration
Assessment Team” (EC-93/HP/DG.1, dated 6 March 2020).
12. The twenty-third round of consultations, initially planned to begin on 15 March
2020 in Damascus, will be rescheduled in accordance with the decision of the Director
General to postpone all planned deployments and missions until further notice in view
of the COVID-19 outbreak.

20-04994

5/7

S/2020/262

13. In accordance with paragraph 10 of Council decision EC-83/DEC.5, the
Secretariat continues to assess conditions for the con duct of inspections at the sites
identified by the OPCW-United Nations Joint Investigative Mechanism in its third
and fourth reports. Pursuant to paragraph 11 of Council decision EC -83/DEC.5, the
Secretariat conducted the sixth round of inspections from 6 to 11 November 2019.
The outcome of these inspections will be reported to the Council in due course.
14. With regard to the explanation provided in a note verbale by the Syrian Arab
Republic for the finding of a Schedule 2.B.04 chemical that was detected during the
third round of inspections at the Barzah facilities of the Scientific Studies and
Research Centre (SSRC), the Secretariat sent the Syrian authorities a note verbale on
20 February 2020 requesting additional information and proposing further acti vities
to clarify the explanation. The Syrian Arab Republic responded in a note verbale on
12 March 2020. The Secretariat will engage with the Syrian authorities in due course,
and the Council will be informed accordingly.

Other activities carried out by the Technical Secretariat with
respect to the Syrian Arab Republic
15. On 4 March 2020, the Secretariat provided States Parties with a comprehensive
briefing on the status of its mandated activities in the Syrian Arab Republic pertaining
to the full elimination of the Syrian chemical weapons programme, which are
comprised of the work of the DAT, the FFM, and the Investigation and Identification
Team (IIT), and the conduct of inspections pursuant to Council decision EC 83/DEC.5.
16. As at the cut-off date of this report, one OPCW staff member was deployed as
part of the OPCW Mission in the Syrian Arab Republic.
17. The United Nations Office for Project Services (UNOPS) continues to provide
support to the OPCW Mission in the Syrian Arab Republic in acco rdance with the
Tripartite Agreement concluded between the OPCW, UNOPS, and the Syrian Arab
Republic. This agreement facilitates the Secretariat’s mandated activities in the Syrian
Arab Republic pertaining to the full elimination of the Syrian chemical wea pons
programme, and to any subsequent decision or resolution of the relevant organs of the
OPCW or the United Nations, as well as any bilateral agreements concluded between
the OPCW and the Syrian Arab Republic.
18. Pursuant to EC-M-43/DEC.1 (dated 24 July 2014) regarding the destruction and
verification of 12 declared CWPFs, the Secretariat has been monitoring and
maintaining the remote monitoring systems installed at four sealed underground
structures on the territory of the Syrian Arab Republic. The activities related to this
mandate will be rescheduled in accordance with the decision of the Director-General
to postpone all planned deployments and missions until further notice in view of the
COVID-19 outbreak.

Activities carried out with respect to the OPCW Fact-Finding
Mission in Syria
19. Guided by Council decisions EC-M-48/DEC.1 and EC-M-50/DEC.1 (dated
4 February 2015 and 23 November 2015, respectively), as well as by United Nations
Security Council resolution 2209 (2015), the FFM continues to study all available
information relating to allegations of the use of chemical weapons in the Syrian Arab
Republic. The FFM is currently analysing information collected from recent

6/7

20-04994

S/2020/262

deployments, is planning further deployments, and will report to the Council on the
results of its work in due course.

Activities carried out by the Technical Secretariat with respect to
decision C-SS-4/DEC.3 of the Conference of the States Parties at
its Fourth Special Session related to the use of chemical weapons
in the Syrian Arab Republic
20. Decision C-SS-4/DEC.3 (dated 27 June 2018), adopted by the Conference of the
States Parties (hereinafter “the Conference”) at its Fourth Special Session, addresses,
inter alia, the use of chemical weapons in the Syrian Arab Republic.
21. Pursuant to paragraph 10 of C-SS-4/DEC.3, the Secretariat established the IIT
to identify the perpetrators of the use of chemical weapons in the Syrian Arab
Republic by identifying and reporting on all information potentially relevant to the
origin of those chemical weapons in those instances in which the FFM determines or
has determined that use or likely use occurred, and cases for which the OPCW United
Nations Joint Investigative Mechanism did not issue a report. The IIT is conducting
its investigations, has reached out to States Parties requesting their cooperation, and
is in the process of concluding its work on the first incidents under investigation.
22. Pursuant to paragraph 24 of decision C-SS-4/DEC.3, the Director-General
submitted to the Council at its Ninety-Third Session a report entitled “Progress in the
Implementation of Decision C-SS-4/DEC.3 on Addressing the Threat from Chemical
Weapons Use” (EC-93/DG.11, dated 24 February 2020).

Supplementary resources
23. The Trust Fund for Syria Missions was established in November 2015 to support
the FFM and other remaining activities, which presently include the work of the DAT
and IIT, and the biannual inspections of the SSRC. As at the cut-off date of this report,
total contributions to this fund stood at EUR 31.2 million. Contribution agreements
had been concluded with Australia, Canada, Chile, Denmark, Finland, France,
Germany, Luxembourg, Monaco, the Netherlands, New Zealand, Nor way, the
Republic of Korea, Slovenia, Sweden, Switzerland, the United Kingdom of Great
Britain and Northern Ireland, the United States of America, and the European Union.

Conclusion
24. The main focus of the future activities of the OPCW Mission in the Syrian Arab
Republic will be on the activities of the FFM; the implementation of Council
decisions EC-83/DEC.5 and EC-81/DEC.4, including declaration-related issues;
inspections at the Barzah and Jamrayah sites of the SSRC; and the implementation of
Conference decision C-SS-4/DEC.3.

20-04994

7/7
