A/58/PV.90

United Nations

General Assembly

Official Records

Fifty-eighth session

90

th plenary meeting
Thursday, 10 June 2004, 11.55 a.m.
New York

President:

The Hon. Julian R. Hunte . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

The meeting was called to order at 11.55 a.m.
Announcement regarding the results of the election
of the Chairmen of the Main Committees
The President: I should like to inform members
that the following representatives have been elected
Chairmen of the six Main Committees of the General
Assembly for its fifty-ninth session and are accordingly
members of the General Committee for that session:
First Committee, Mr. Luis Alfonso De Alba
(Mexico);
Special Political and Decolonization Committee
(Fourth Committee), Mr. Kyaw Tint Swe
(Myanmar);
Second Committee, Mr. Marco Balarezo (Peru);
Third Committee,
(Ukraine);

Mr.

Valery

Fifth Committee,
Zealand);

Mr.

Don

Sixth Committee,
(Morocco).

Mr.

Mohamed

Kuchinsky

MacKay

(New

Bennouna

I congratulate the Chairmen of the Main
Committees of the General Assembly for its fifty-ninth
session on their election.

(Saint Lucia)

Agenda item 6
Election of the Vice-Presidents of the
General Assembly
The President: In accordance with rule 30 of the
rules of procedure of the General Assembly, as
amended by resolution 56/509 of 8 July 2002, we shall
now proceed to the election of the Vice-Presidents of
the General Assembly for its fifty-ninth session.
All members of the General Assembly are
eligible in this election except those already
represented in the General Committee, namely, those
countries whose representatives have been elected to
the presidency of the General Assembly or to the
chairmanships of the Main Committees for the fiftyninth session.
In accordance with paragraphs 2 and 3 of the
annex to resolution 33/138 of 19 December 1978, the
21 Vice-Presidents of the General Assembly for its
fifty-ninth session shall be elected according to the
following pattern: five representatives from African
States; five representatives from Asian States; one
representative from an Eastern European State; three
representatives from Latin American and Caribbean
States; two representatives from Western European and
other States; and representatives of the five permanent
members of the Security Council.
In accordance with paragraph 16 of annex VI to
the rules of procedure, the election of the VicePresidents of the Assembly by secret ballot will be

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. Corrections should be submitted to the original
languages only. They should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature
of a member of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room
C-154A. Corrections will be issued after the end of the session in a consolidated corrigendum.

04-38376 (E)

*0438376*

A/58/PV.90

dispensed with when the number of candidates
corresponds to the number of seats to be filled. We
shall proceed accordingly.
I shall now read out the names of the endorsed
candidates.
African States: Algeria, Burkina Faso, Djibouti,
Ghana and Zambia.
Asian States: Bangladesh, the Islamic Republic of
Iran, Kazakhstan, the Syrian Arab Republic and
Uzbekistan.
Eastern European States: Azerbaijan.
Latin American and Caribbean States: Antigua
and Barbuda, El Salvador and Nicaragua.
Western European and other States: Australia and
Belgium.
Since the number of candidates corresponds to
the number of seats to be filled in each region, I
declare those candidates elected, in addition to the
representatives of the five permanent members of the
Security Council.
The following States have thus been elected to
vice-presidencies of the General Assembly for its fiftyninth session: Algeria, Antigua and Barbuda, Australia,
Azerbaijan, Bangladesh, Belgium, Burkina Faso,
China, Djibouti, El Salvador, France, Ghana, the
Islamic Republic of Iran, Kazakhstan, Nicaragua, the
Russian Federation, the Syrian Arab Republic, the
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland,
the United States of America, Uzbekistan and Zambia.
I wish to take this opportunity to congratulate the
States that have been elected Vice-Presidents of the
General Assembly for the fifty-ninth session.
With the Chairmen of the six Main Committees
and the 21 Vice-Presidents elected for the fifty-ninth
session of the General Assembly, the General
Committee of the General Assembly for the fifty-ninth
session has thus been fully constituted in accordance
with rule 38 of the rules of procedure.

Agenda item 169
International Year of Physics, 2005
Draft resolution (A/58/L.62)
The President: I call on the representative of
Lesotho to introduce draft resolution A/58/L.62.
Mr. Moleko (Lesotho): I have the honour to
speak on behalf of Brazil, France, Portugal, the
Principality of Monaco, Singapore, the United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland and my
own country, Lesotho, in order to introduce draft
resolution Á/58/L.62, entitled “International Year of
Physics, 2005”.
In 1905, Albert Einstein, then working at the
patent office in Bern, Switzerland, published several
scientific articles which profoundly influenced our
understanding of the universe we live in. He introduced
utterly revolutionary ideas on fundamental questions
such as the existence of atoms, the nature of light and
the concepts of time and space, energy and matter. He
thus opened the way to most of the twentieth-century
developments of physics.
Last year, at the initiative of the European
Society of Physics and the International Union of Pure
and Applied Physics, the General Conference of the
United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural
Organization (UNESCO) adapted a resolution
proclaiming 2005, the hundredth anniversary of those
great scientific achievements, the International Year of
physics. Furthermore, in that resolution, the States
members of UNESCO asked the General Assembly to
do the same.
The aim of the International Year goes beyond the
mere celebration of one of the greatest minds in
physics of the twentieth century. The Year will provide
the world with an opportunity for the largest possible
audience to acknowledge the progress and the
importance of this great field of science. One will
remember that, for example, transistors, computers,
lasers and magnetic resonance imagery are pure
products of recent decades of fundamental research in
physics laboratories, where tomorrow’s materials and
information technologies are worked out today.
We can stimulate the interest of young people to
pursue scientific careers and revive in them a taste for
the scientific approach: this must be a national as well

2

A/58/PV.90

as a worldwide endeavour. It is indeed essential to
understand that the twenty-first century will have an
increasing need for the concepts and the tools provided
by the physical sciences in finding solutions to major
problems that confront us, such as energy production,
environmental protection and even public health.
The international year of physics should also be
an occasion to begin a prospective debate on the great
need for scientific research in the twenty-first century.
The spectacular accomplishments of the past 10 years
towards the infinitely small of particles, the infinitely
large of the cosmos and the infinitely complex of the
states of matter bring fascinating prospects to science
as a whole. The history of the sciences teaches us to
remember and appreciate that there are always great
enigmas in the fundamental laws of the universe of
matter, of life as well as the human mind and that the
twenty-first century will undoubtedly bring about many
scientific surprises.
The debates will also have to relate to all the
social issues that accompany the practice of science in
general and of physics in particular. It is essential to
better evaluate its role in the general culture of
humankind. If one measures the impact of the physical
sciences on the development of new technologies, one
will undoubtedly recognise its importance for the
necessary progress of the developing countries. In this
respect, the ethical responsibilities of physicists are
enormous as well as challenging. The international
year of physics will allow all practitioners —
especially women, who are still largely excluded from
this field of research — to participate more actively in
its advancement. Political leaders will have to be
convinced of the paramount importance of research in
physics for the advancement of mankind. The spirit of
this celebration is thus directly linked to the
Millennium Development Goals.
Countries around the world are preparing special
events to celebrate the international year of physics
under the sponsorship of the United Nations
Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization
(UNESCO). The launching of the year will take place
at UNESCO headquarters in Paris from 13 to 15
January 2005.
Already, more than 60 countries in Africa, in
Asia, in the Pacific, in Latin America, in North
America, in Europe and in the Middle East have started
to establish their programmes for the celebrations.

These programmes are financed by public and
scientific institutions, as well as by private sponsors.
Some of the topics to be discussed are the promotion of
physics to populations, physics in teaching, physics as
the basis of many disciplines and of new scientific and
technical developments, the great challenges of the
twenty-first century, physics in developing countries
and physics for development, and women and physics.
If the General Assembly should declare 2005 the
international year of physics, it would strengthen the
scope of these celebrations and these discussions. It is
not often that physics or anything to do with physics is
discussed in this Hall. It is a privilege for me to
introduce this draft resolution for the Assembly’s
support and I would urge members to adopt it by
acclamation.
Finally, I want to announce that Croatia and Saint
Kitts and Nevis have joined the list of co-sponsors of
the draft resolution.
The President: The Assembly will now take a
decision on draft resolution A/58/L.62.
May I take it that the Assembly wishes to adopt
the draft resolution?
Draft resolution A/58/L.62
(resolution 58/293).

was

adopted

The President: May I take it that it is the wish of
the General Assembly to conclude its consideration of
agenda item 169?
It was so decided.
Agenda item 8 (continued)
Organization of work, adoption of the agenda and
allocation of items
Draft resolution (A/58/L.63)
The President: As indicated in the footnote to
document A/58/L.63, in order for the General
Assembly to take action on the draft resolution, it will
be necessary to reopen consideration of sub-item (d) of
agenda item 94, “Further implementation of the
Programme of Action for the Sustainable Development
of Small Island Developing States”.
May I take it that it is the wish of the General
Assembly to reopen consideration of sub-item (d) of
agenda item 94?

3

A/58/PV.90

It was so decided.
The President: Members will recall that, at its
second plenary meeting on 19 September 2003, the
General Assembly decided to allocate sub-item (d) of
agenda item 94 to the Second Committee.
In order for the General Assembly to take action
expeditiously on the draft resolution, may I take it that
it is the wish of the General Assembly to consider subitem (d) of agenda item 94 directly in plenary meeting?
It was so decided.
The President: May I further take it that the
Assembly agrees to proceed immediately to the
consideration of sub-item (d) of agenda item 94?
It was so decided.

(d) Further implementation of the Programme of
Action for the Sustainable Development of
Small Island Developing States
Draft resolution (A/58/L.63)
The President: The Assembly will now take a
decision on draft resolution A/58/L.63.
May I take it that the Assembly decides to adopt
the draft resolution?
Draft resolution A/58/L.63
(resolution 58/213 B).

Environment and sustainable development

4

adopted

The President: May I take it that it is the wish of
the General Assembly to conclude its consideration of
sub-item (d) of agenda item 94?
It was so decided.

Agenda item 94 (continued)

was

The meeting rose at 12.10 p.m.
