A/57/PV.20

United Nations

General Assembly

Official Records

Fifty-seventh session

20th plenary meeting
Friday, 27 September 2002, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Jan Kavan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (Czech Republic)

The meeting was called to order at 10.10 a.m.
Agenda item 20
Admission of new Members to the United Nations
(rule 136)
Application for admission (A/56/953)
Letter from the President of the Security
Council (A/57/258)
Draft resolution (A/57/L.3)
The President: I should like to invite the General
Assembly to consider, under item 20 of the agenda,
entitled “Admission of new Members to the United
Nations”, the positive recommendation by the Security
Council on the application for admission to
membership in the United Nations of the Democratic
Republic of Timor-Leste.
The Security Council has recommended the
admission of the Democratic Republic of Timor-Leste
to membership in the United Nations, as stated in
document A/57/258. In this connection, a draft
resolution has been submitted in document A/57/L.3.
I now would like to give the floor to the Prime
Minister of the Portuguese Republic, His Excellency
Mr. José Manuel Durão Barroso, to introduce draft
resolution A/57/L.3.

Mr. José Manuel Durão Barroso, Prime Minister
of the Portuguese Republic, was escorted to the
rostrum.
Mr. Durão Barroso (Portugal): Timor-Leste is a
triumph of the human spirit. It is also proof that
adversity can always be overcome and that, in the end,
justice prevails. As a Portuguese poet, Fernando
Pessoa, noted,
(spoke in Portuguese)
“Everything is worthwhile when the soul is not
small.”
(spoke in English)
The Timorese people have shown us that they are
true to the basic values we all believe in and that are
enshrined in the Charter of the United Nations. Today,
Timor-Leste is becoming a Member State of the United
Nations, although it must be said that the people of
Timor-Leste have long been with us.
Timor-Leste reminds us that the United Nations
Charter reaffirms our collective faith in fundamental
human rights, in the dignity and worth of the human
person, in the equal rights of men and women and of
nations large and small. To these ends, we have
committed ourselves to practice tolerance and live
together in peace with one another as good neighbours.
This is the way for a new Member State to deal with
the world at large and, in turn, for all of us to deal with
the new Member State of Timor-Leste. In looking at

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. Corrections should be submitted to the original
languages only. They should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature
of a member of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room
C-154. Corrections will be issued after the end of the session in a consolidated corrigendum.

02-61384 (E)

*0261384*

A/57/PV.20

you, people of Timor-Leste, we are looking at
ourselves.
Today, we are also paying a fitting tribute to the
work of the United Nations in Timor-Leste. This is a
success story. It is also proof that in situations of
conflict the United Nations can make a difference for
the better, provided it is fully supported by Member
States. It would only be fair to thank, in particular, the
Secretary-General, Mr. Kofi Annan, for his
determination and single-mindedness in pursuing the
right path — the path of freedom and peace. TimorLeste and the international community owe him a great
deal.
The fate of Timor-Leste is now in the hands of
the Timorese and their elected President, Xanana
Gusmão. I would like also to recognize the presence
among us of Prime Minister Mari Alkatiri, Foreign
Minister Jose Ramos-Horta and the Bishop of Dili,
Dom Ximenes Belo. This is truly an impressive
delegation. We have today in the General Assembly
three Nobel Peace Prize winners — including
Secretary-General Annan — and one Sakharov Prize
winner. No better tribute could be paid to the work of
the United Nations in Timor-Leste.
The new country still needs the support of the
international community. For Timor-Leste, joining the
United Nations is not the end of the road, since its very
existence as a democratic and potentially prosperous
State still depends on our collective solidarity.
International attention to Timor-Leste should not be
replaced by international indifference. Indeed, we must
now ensure that we do not lose the peace.

Brasilia summit, we have also been associated with in
the Community of Portuguese-speaking Countries.
Thousands of Portuguese have served in the United
Nations operations in Timor-Leste and in the bilateral
cooperation programmes that we began even before
independence. I can assure the Assembly that the
Portuguese people and the people of Timor-Leste are
much closer in terms of the affection that we feel than
our geographical distance would suggest. The
Portuguese poet, Camões, stated, “the whole world is
made of change”; but there is something that will
hardly ever change: the friendship that all Portuguese
feel for the people of Timor-Leste.
(spoke in English)
On behalf of the 135 sponsors, I have the honour
to introduce to the General Assembly the draft
resolution contained in document A/57/L.3 and to
recommend its adoption by consensus, thereby
welcoming by acclamation Timor-Leste as the newest
State Member of the United Nations.
Bem-vindo, Timor-Leste.
The President: Before proceeding to take action
on the draft resolution, I should like to announce that,
since the introduction of the draft resolution, the
following countries have become sponsors of A/57/L.3:
Armenia, Brunei Darussalam, Canada, Congo,
Djibouti, Grenada, Guinea-Bissau, Sao Tome and
Principe, Saudi Arabia, Tonga, Turkey and Zimbabwe.
May I take it that the General Assembly accepts
the recommendation of the Security Council and adopts
the draft resolution by acclamation?

I would now like to add a few words in
Portuguese.

The draft resolution was adopted (resolution
57/3).

(spoke in Portuguese; English text provided by the
delegation)

The President: I therefore declare the
Democratic Republic of Timor-Leste admitted to
membership in the United Nations.

I would like to express the great honour I feel in
representing the Portuguese people in a ceremony to
which we attach the deepest meaning. The values that
the Timorese embody are the same values that the
Portuguese defended for decades, in particular in this
General Assembly. It is therefore particularly
gratifying for us to have worked together with the
friendly nations of Australia and Indonesia on the draft
resolution that we are about to adopt.
Portugal will continue to lend a friendly hand to
Timor-Leste, a country with which, since the

2

I request the Chief of Protocol to escort the
delegation of the Democratic Republic of Timor-Leste
to its place in the General Assembly Hall.
The delegation of the Democratic Republic of
Timor-Leste was escorted to its place in the
General Assembly Hall.
The President: It is my great honour and
privilege to welcome, on behalf of the General

A/57/PV.20

Assembly, the Democratic Republic of Timor-Leste as
a new Member of the United Nations.
Only a few months ago — on 20 May 2002 — we
congratulated the first elected President of TimorLeste, His Excellency Xanana Gusmăo, and
participated in the celebration of the independence of
Timor-Leste. I was very happy to attend the
independence ceremony in person, and appreciated the
fact that I had the opportunity to have a short
conversation with the Minister of Foreign Affairs, His
Excellency Jose Ramos-Horta. As a former human
rights activist and a fighter for the independence of my
own country, I bow in respect and salute the courage
and determination of the President, the Minister of
Foreign Affairs and other East-Timorese whose
struggle brought about the success we can celebrate
today.
Timor-Leste is the first independent State and
nation to have emerged in the twenty-first century. We
have all watched with admiration how the people of
Timor-Leste progressed towards their independence.
We all remember the developments that led to the
country’s independence. It was not easy, but the
country and its people succeeded. I am very proud and
happy that the United Nations was an integral part of
that whole process.
Despite numerous difficulties and barriers, the
United Nations Mission in East Timor and the United
Nations Transitional Administration in East Timor,
confirmed that United Nations participation was the
right way to help ensure a smooth transition to the
status of an independent and sovereign State.
The peaceful transition process in Timor-Leste
was a prime example of the ability of the Security
Council and the United Nations to respond promptly
and decisively to pressing issues.
Timor-Leste’s independence, however, does not
mark the end of United Nations involvement. On the
contrary, it signals the beginning of an important new
phase to consolidate the achievements and to build on
them. The establishment of the United Nations Mission
of Support in East Timor is one of the examples of
such engagement.
The United Nations and its Member States should
be prepared to strengthen their support to the region
and to the Government of Timor-Leste. They should
help in addressing the many remaining issues that need

to be resolved. Timor-Leste will, for example, need a
fully functioning infrastructure to enable it to earn
sufficient revenue so as not to need to rely on
continuous aid in the future.
We wish the Democratic Republic of Timor-Leste
and its people peace, prosperity and every success in
their future and we warmly welcome Timor-Leste to
the United Nations.
I now call on the representative of Côte d’Ivoire
to speak on behalf of the Group of African States.
Mr. Djangone-Bi (Côte d’Ivoire) (spoke in
French): The Group of African States at the United
Nations fully appreciates the feelings of Timorese men
and women on this historic day. It could not do
otherwise, since most of the countries of our Group
have known the bitter taste of colonization and
undertaken national liberation struggles, along with the
joy of proclaiming hard-won political independence
and the pride and emotion of trading their territorial
status for that of independent State and member of the
family of sovereign countries within the United
Nations.
The African Group therefore salutes the courage
of the Timorese people who, despite the tremendous
obstacles they faced in their liberation struggle, have
remained resolute in their will to sunder the chains that
bound them to the yoke of colonization. Through me,
the African countries of the United Nations welcome
the delegation of Timor-Leste, led by Mr. Xanana
Gusmão, President of the Democratic Republic of
Timor-Leste, who is the very resolute embodiment of
his people’s desire for liberation. May he accept our
warm and brotherly congratulations on this
achievement.
The African Group also takes this opportunity to
commend the remarkable work of the United Nations,
and in particular that of Special Representative Sergio
Vieira de Mello, in the creation of the new State.
The African Group reaffirms its support for the
reconstruction and reconciliation efforts of the
international community on behalf of Timor-Leste. We
believe that, like a newborn child, that country must be
the focus of the attention of its development partners in
the international community. For its part, Africa is
prepared to lend its fraternal support and cooperation.
In that respect, we wish the new State peaceful

3

A/57/PV.20

coexistence with all its neighbours so that it may
devote itself fully to the country’s development.
In celebrating Timor-Leste’s entry into the great
United Nations family, the African Group would
remind everyone that we are in the Second
International Decade for the Eradication of
Colonialism and that there remain 16 non-selfgoverning territories on the list of territories still to be
decolonized. Let us therefore strive, like Timor-Leste,
to rid the world of colonialism in the twenty-first
century.
The President: I now call on the representative
of the Islamic Republic of Iran to speak on behalf of
the Group of Asian States.
Mr. Zarif (Islamic Republic of Iran): I am
honoured and privileged to speak today on behalf of
the Asian Group to welcome an Asian country to the
United Nations family. We are extremely pleased to
have among us the delegation of the Democratic
Republic of Timor-Leste, led by President Xanana
Gusmão. We offer our most sincere congratulations to
President Gusmão and through him to the people and
Government of East Timor on their country’s
admission today to the United Nations. It is a pleasant
moment for all of us to witness the independence of
Timor-Leste through the central political role of the
United Nations and the commendable cooperation and
support of its Member States.
Our Group is very much aware that there are
many pressing needs and priorities for the new nation
of East Timor. We are encouraged by the wisdom and
foresight of the leadership as well as the people of
Timor-Leste, who have adopted a forward-looking
attitude. We in the Asian Group welcome the excellent
and fast-growing relations between Timor-Leste and
other countries in the region, particularly Indonesia.
Undoubtedly, ongoing and timely international support
and cooperation are imperative to enable postindependence Timor-Leste to make quick and steady
progress.
Once again, I would like to express our best
wishes to the Democratic Republic of Timor-Leste on
this significant event and to wish the Government and
people of Timor-Leste peace, prosperity and a bright
future.

The President: I now call on the representative
of Ukraine to speak on behalf of the Group of Eastern
European States.
Mr. Kuchinsky (Ukraine): On behalf of the
Group of Eastern European States and my own country,
Ukraine, I have the honour and great pleasure to
congratulate the Democratic Republic of Timor-Leste
on its admission to the United Nations.
The attainment of independence by Timor-Leste
marked the culmination of a long process of selfdetermination and transition. On 20 May, history was
made in Dili as the Timorese celebrated the birth of
their country — the first independent nation of the new
millennium.
Great progress has been made over the past two
and a half years in establishing the foundations of the
State, in particular in the political and security spheres.
The Timorese has set an example through their
steadfast adherence to the core values of the United
Nations Charter, to reconciliation and to the creation of
democratic institutions aimed at safeguarding human
rights and values.
In May, all of us in the General Assembly
congratulated the East Timorese Government and
people on their attainment of independence. We paid
tribute to the leaders of Timor-Leste for their efforts in
achieving that goal.
The United Nations has played a crucial role in
restoring peace to that nation and in building a solid
basis for a democratic, viable and stable State. Let me
express our deepest appreciation to the SecretaryGeneral and his Special Representative, Sergio Vieira
de Mello, as well as to the Governments of Australia
and Indonesia, for their efforts to make this possible.
We commend the United Nations Transitional
Administration in East Timor for the important work it
has done to assist the people of Timor-Leste to develop
a sustainable social system. Their work constitutes a
vivid example of the Organization’s ability to tackle
the hardest tasks and achieve tangible results. The
unique challenges of the Timor-Leste transition have
also provided an opportunity for our Organization and
its Member States to put into practice new approaches
to peacekeeping and to post-conflict peace-building
and reconstruction.
Today’s historic occasion fills our hearts with
pride, dignity and joy. Let me welcome the Democratic

4

A/57/PV.20

Republic of Timor-Leste, congratulate the Group of
Asian States and wish the Government and the people
of Timor-Leste every success, and prosperity and
peace.

The President: I now give the floor to His
Excellency Mr. Gonçalo de Santa Clara Gomes, the
representative of Portugal, to speak on behalf of the
Western European and other States.

The President: I now give the floor to Her
Excellency Mrs. Irma Loemban Tobing-Klein,
Permanent Representative of Suriname, who will speak
on behalf of the Latin American and Caribbean States.

Mr. De Santa Clara Gomes (Portugal): It is for
me a great honour to address the Assembly as
Chairman of the Western European and other States
Group, upon the admission of Timor-Leste as a State
Member of the United Nations.

Mrs. Loemban Tobing-Klein (Suriname):
Especially today, on such a wonderful occasion — the
admittance of a new Member to the greatest family of
nations — we should extend peace and love to one
another and to the Government and the people of the
Democratic Republic of Timor-Leste in the light of the
peace message that the Secretary-General and the
President of the General Assembly presented to us last
Friday on the eve of 21 September, the International
Day of Peace, when we, the international community,
applauded the United Nations call for a global ceasefire
and non-violence.
On behalf of the Group of Latin American and
Caribbean States, I am very pleased to wholeheartedly
welcome the Democratic Republic of Timor-Leste as
the new, 191st State Member of the United Nations.
The East Timorese people fought a hard battle to gain
their independence. We can only suspect that, after
such a struggle, the people of Timor-Leste will work
even
harder
to
safeguard
their
democratic
independence and their human rights, for they know
what it means to strive for a nation in which justice,
democracy and human rights rule.
We also commend the international community,
in particular the Governments of Indonesia and
Portugal, the United Nations, the Secretary-General
and the United Nations administration in Timor-Leste,
for assisting Timor-Leste to become an independent
nation. The people of Timor-Leste have thus had an
excellent introduction to, and experience with, our
Organization and our family of nations, which work to
improve the life of each of our people and each of their
people, and to promote a life of dignity.
The Governments and the peoples of all countries
members of the Latin American and Caribbean Group
congratulate the Government, the people and the
President of Timor-Leste at this great milestone and
express the wish and the prayer that peace and love
may prevail every day, everywhere, under all
circumstances.

This meeting today is the culmination of a long
and difficult process through which the Timorese
people chose to be independent and to live according to
the principles that we in this Organization cherish the
most: democracy, the rule of law and respect for human
rights. I am sure that Timor-Leste’s membership in the
United Nations will contribute to the efforts of the
Organization to strengthen those principles around the
world.
Timorese involvement with the United Nation is
not new. We have all supported, we have all
participated in and we have all followed with intense
emotion the joint effort that the United Nations and the
Timorese have made to bring this new country into the
international community. The presence here today of a
distinguished delegation from Timor-Leste is evidence
of that country’s continued commitment to the United
Nations. The members of the Group of Western
European and other States look forward to working
closely with the Timorese authorities and their
representatives here.
I would like to conclude by paying a special
tribute to President Xanana Gusmão, Prime Minister
Mari Alkatiri, Foreign Minister José Ramos-Horta and
Bishop Ximenes Belo for their role in leading TimorLeste to independence.
I must also extend warm appreciation to the
Secretary-General for his personal engagement in the
process that led to this new membership. As the
Timorese flag is raised today, we will all have reason to
be proud.
The President: I now give the floor to His
Excellency Mr. James Cunningham, representative of
the United States of America, the host country.
Mr. Cunningham (United States of America):
Last May we celebrated the rise of the Timorese people
from the ashes of conflict and their creation of an
independent nation. Today we celebrate that nation’s

5

A/57/PV.20

accession to its rightful place in the meeting house of
mankind, the United Nations.
On behalf of the United States, it gives me great
pleasure to offer Timor-Leste a warm welcome to
United Nations membership. This day is made all the
more profound by the close and unique relationship
Timor-Leste has had with the United Nations. Through
the United Nations Transitional Administration in East
Timor and now the United Nations Mission of Support
in East Timor, the United Nations and its membership
have done much to help the Timorese people in their
hard-fought quest for freedom.
The United States is proud to have been able to
play a part in that success. United States assistance to
Timor-Leste stands at $25 million annually, and it is
one of our largest bilateral aid programmes in the
world on a per capita basis. In truth, Timor-Leste
would never have reached the milestone we mark today
without the tenacity and the spirit of its people. It is
those same great people who are now taking the reigns
of their new freedom and are working for a brighter
future.
We applaud the Timorese Government for its
efforts to build a nation that can stand on its own two
feet. We welcome its work towards a nation that enjoys
open, inclusive democracy, a market economy, a just
legal system and harmonious relations with its
neighbours. We encourage that work to continue.
Finally, let me reiterate the commitment of the
United States to close, cooperative relations with
Timor-Leste. We will be with you, the people of TimorLeste, as you forge your own future and as you carve
out your own place in the community of nations.
Welcome, friends.
The President: I give
representative of Australia.

the

floor

to

the

Mr. Dauth (Australia): As it is for the people of
East Timor today, it is an emotional moment here for
the people of Australia as well. On behalf of the
Government and the people of Australia, we want to
welcome Timor-Leste into the United Nations family.
It is a special honour for me today to have jointly
sponsored, with colleagues from Portugal and
Indonesia, resolution 57/3, which formalizes TimorLeste’s United Nations membership. That Timor-Leste
stands here today as a United Nations Member State is,
more than anything else, testament to the resolve,

6

strength and courage of the East Timorese people, and
it is a great pleasure for us all to see such an impressive
delegation from East Timor with us today. It points also
to the exceptional work of the United Nations and of
United-Nations-authorized missions. This has been a
great success story for the United Nations, and it is
fitting therefore that Timor-Leste should join the
Organization that was crucial in bringing stability,
order and renewed hope to its people.
Australia will continue to play a leading role in
the United Nations Mission of Support in East Timor
and as a bilateral friend and partner to Timor-Leste. We
appeal to others in the international community to
remain committed as well.
Australia and Timor-Leste are neighbours forever.
From our perspective, we will always be good
neighbours.
The President: I give
representative of Indonesia.

the

floor

to

the

Mr. Hidayat (Indonesia): Allow me to begin by
expressing our sincerest appreciation to you, Mr.
President, for convening this historic meeting of the
General Assembly to admit the Democratic Republic of
Timor-Leste as the 191st Member of the United
Nations. On this glorious occasion for the Government
and the people of the newborn State, we are deeply
honoured to share in their moment of joy. Indeed, the
presence of President Xanana Gusmão in our midst
today lends powerful expression to this momentous
occasion, as his country takes its rightful place among
the community of nations.
As Timor-Leste’s closest neighbour, Indonesia
would like to express its sincere congratulations to its
Government and its people. Indonesia is, of course,
proud to have been one the initiators, together with
Australia and Portugal, of the draft resolution to admit
East Timor as a Member of the United Nations.
Four months ago, on the eve of Timor-Leste’s
independence, President Megawati Soekarnoputri
visited Dili to help cement the new and promising
relationship between our two countries. Likewise, the
State visit of President Xanana Gusmão to Jakarta in
early July this year greatly helped strengthen that
growing bond. Since those two milestone visits, our
countries have embarked on a strong partnership,
which is evident in the increasing number of concrete
and mutually beneficial achievements. One such event

A/57/PV.20

that has greatly bolstered the new relationship is the
establishment of the Joint Commission, a forum for
discussing pertinent issues and searching for mutually
beneficial answers to issues of common interest.
In a similar vein, I see continuing progress in
such undertakings as my Government’s initiative to
hold the first ministerial meeting of the Southwest
Pacific Dialogue. That dialogue, which will take place
early next month, is designed to facilitate the
discussion of issues of common interest and concern to
Indonesia, Timor-Leste and four other friendly
countries on issues such as economic cooperation and
transnational crime, including terrorism and peoplesmuggling.
All those steps are part of a number of tangible
efforts to build stronger relationships bilaterally and
regionally between Indonesia and Timor-Leste, which
will augur well for the future. The courage of the
leaders and the peoples of both countries to step
forward to construct a future on the basis of those
objectives should be applauded. We are confident that
the international community cherishes the new and
forward-looking spirit of cooperation. However, we are
fully aware that our brothers and sisters in Timor-Leste
are facing daunting challenges, especially in the areas
of capacity-building, education, health and other basic
services, and, of course, poverty eradication. To that
end, Indonesia is ready to extend its collaboration,
including through South-South cooperation.
In conclusion, let me once again, on behalf of the
Government and people of Indonesia, express our
sincere congratulations and best wishes to the
Government and people of East Timor on this
auspicious occasion.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Brazil, who will speak on behalf of
the Community of Portuguese-Speaking Countries.
Mr. Fonseca (Brazil): I have the honour of
speaking on behalf of the Community of PortugueseSpeaking Countries (CPLP) to welcome Timor-Leste
into this Organization. Ours is a warm and
wholehearted welcome from countries that, beyond a
common language and culture, also share with TimorLeste a firm commitment to the principles of
democracy, liberty, justice, peace and universalism.
The country’s admission into the membership of
the United Nations represents another accomplishment

of the brave Timorese people in their long, heroic
struggle for self-determination. The accession of
Timor-Leste is one more accomplishment in the
success story that this Organization helped to bring
about. Barely five months ago, we were gathering in
the Security Council to celebrate its independence.
More recently, in July, Brazil had the honour of hosting
a summit of the Community of Portuguese-Speaking
Countries, in which our Community had the pleasure of
receiving Timor-Leste in our midst.
The admission of new Members is a special
moment for the Organization itself, a moment in which
we rekindle the wishes and hopes placed in the United
Nations as an effective instrument for the resolution of
challenges that lie ahead, especially those which, given
the global scope, can be addressed only through
multilateral channels. It is also a confirmation of the
universality of the values that brought us together and,
in that sense, the confirmation of our commitments to
these values.
In the case of Timor-Leste, though, this is
complemented by a feeling of accomplishment and of
having contributed to this Organization through the
very existence of the partner we now welcome into our
collective home. The critical role played by the United
Nations in the historic birth of an independent TimorLeste is a vivid example that the United Nations can
harness political will and resources — financial and
human resources — effectively, thus making a
difference in the lives of the most vulnerable.
The story of the independence of Timor-Leste
must serve as an inspiration for us to muster the will to
tackle the challenges that remain on the international
agenda. The remarkable achievement of independence
does not conclude the obligations of the international
community towards that country. The tasks and
responsibilities of the United Nations in Timor-Leste
are far from over. The success of the United Nations
Mission of Support in East Timor (UNMISET) will
require the same level of political commitment that
characterized the support of the United Nations
Transitional Administration in East Timor (UNTAET).
Timor-Leste is a developing country in need of
international assistance. In this context, it becomes
even more pressing to continue to bring in incomegenerating projects, maintain the flow of international
aid and create the conditions for sustainable
development.

7

A/57/PV.20

Within the means available, the member countries
of the Community of Portuguese-Speaking Countries
will continue to provide support for the rehabilitation,
reconstruction and development of Timor-Leste,
bearing in mind the need for financial, material and
technical assistance.
Before concluding, Sir, allow me to pay tribute to
my fellow countryman, Sergio Vieira de Mello, who,
while serving as the head of UNTAET, played a crucial
role on the road to Timor-Leste’s independence. Under
his competent guidance, an unprecedented success in
the history of the United Nations has been achieved.
A word of recognition and admiration also is due
to President Xanana Gusmão, a hero in the struggle for
independence, who has now been trusted with the task
of guiding Timor-Leste in its early steps as a full
member of the international community. We also want
to salute Prime Minister Alkatiri, Foreign Minister
Ramos-Horta and Bishop Belo, remarkable leaders of a
brave people.
Welcome, Timor-Leste.
(spoke in Portuguese)
Welcome, Timor-Leste.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Saint Lucia, Chairman of the Special
Committee on the Situation with regard to the
Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of
Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples.
Mr. Huntley (Saint Lucia): As Chair of the
Special Committee of 24 on decolonization, I have the
honour to welcome the Democratic Republic of TimorLeste to the membership of this Organization and to
convey the profound pleasure of the members of the
Committee in so doing.
On this day, momentous for the people of East
Timor, we cannot help but recall the years when their
representatives appeared time and again before the
Special Committee here in New York to present their
case for decolonization. We admire and respect the
resolve of the people of Timor-Leste in search of their
objective.
And so, today, as they are finally free to take their
seat as an independent State in the United Nations
family, we believe that, with similar purposefulness,
their contribution to our deliberations will enrich this
body.

8

In welcoming the newest nation into the halls of
the United Nations, we should not forget that TimorLeste is still in the infancy of its development and
nation-building. The international community has
played an important role in the long journey of the East
Timorese to full membership in the United Nations.
Both the international community and the United
Nations must now be a part of the process of the
development of the new nation and assist this process
by providing unremitting and generous support.
Helping Timor-Leste to stand on its own as a viable
economy is a debt that we owe its people.
Today is also a significant day for the members of
the Special Committee of 24, for it marks the
confirmation of the removal of one more territory from
its list of non-self-governing territories. The de-listing
of Timor-Leste has left 16 other non-self-governing
territories on the list of the Special Committee as
territories yet to exercise their right to selfdetermination. The majority of these are very small
islands, and because they are islands that are so small,
and so remote, we sense that the international
community prefers to remain indifferent to them.
Let us not let the special circumstances or the
fading of the glamour that marked the United Nations’
decolonization drive four decades ago obscure the right
to self-determination of these territories. SecretaryGeneral Kofi Annan reminded us earlier this year that
there should be no room for colonialism in the twentyfirst century and that all efforts should be made to
close this chapter of history once and for all.
I wish to take this opportunity, on behalf of the
Special Committee, to encourage all Administering
Powers to work hand in hand with the Special
Committee of 24 to attain this goal. In doing so,
however, we must remember that what must be of
cardinal importance is that the freely expressed wishes
and the interests of the people of those territories must
always be paramount in determining their future mode
of governance out of the three options prescribed by
the United Nations. To do otherwise would be to sow
the seeds of conflict.
Therefore, as we welcome Timor-Leste here
today, let us do so with a commitment renewed by the
joy of this occasion to ensure that within this Second
International Decade for the Eradication of
Colonialism, the peoples of the remaining non-selfgoverning territories shall also peacefully exercise their

A/57/PV.20

right to self-determination with the full support of the
international community.
And so I say again: congratulations and welcome,
Timor-Leste, welcome!
Address by Mr. Kay Rala Xanana Gusmão, President
of the Democratic Republic of Timor-Leste
The President: The Assembly will now hear an
address by His Excellency Mr. Kay Rala Xanana
Gusmão, President of the Democratic Republic of
Timor-Leste.
Mr. Kay Rala Xanana Gusmão, President of the
Democratic Republic of Timor-Leste, was
escorted into the General Assembly Hall.
The President: On behalf of the General
Assembly, I have the great pleasure to welcome to the
United Nations the President of the Democratic
Republic of Timor-Leste, His Excellency Mr. Kay Rala
Xanana Gusmão, and to invite him to address the
General Assembly.
President Gusmão (spoke in Portuguese;
English text furnished by the delegation): Since the
1960s, Timor-Leste had been on the list of non-selfgoverning territories, with the right to exercise selfdetermination and independence in accordance with its
people’s aspirations for freedom. Many countries have
in fact achieved their independence since that time.
The universal principles enshrined in the Charter
of the United Nations were the points of reference for
our actions, both as part of the resistance within the
country and during the long journey made with
confidence and determination by the Timorese people
side by side with the peoples of Angola, Brazil, Cape
Verde, Guinea-Bissau, Mozambique, Portugal and Sao
Tome and Principe, and with activists from all over the
world. Human rights and the fundamental right of
peoples to decide their own destinies are an expression
of the struggle for the emancipation of every human
being as an individual, as part of a society and, of
course, as a people — in this case, as the Timorese
people that we are proud to be.
In this great Hall of the peoples of the entire
world, where peoples are heard through their
representatives and where we had the privilege of
attending the Millennium Assembly, since 1975,
Timor-Leste has been present in minds and hearts, in
political debates, in geo-strategic discussions and in the

resolutions adopted. Timorese diplomats — led by the
guerrilla of diplomacy, the Nobel Peace Prize laureate
Mr. Jose Ramos-Horta — heads of State or
Government, the representatives of friendly nations and
of organizations of international solidarity worked
tirelessly as they roamed the corridors of this home of
the community of nations. During the terms of office of
Kurt Waldheim, Javier Pérez de Cuellar, Boutros
Boutros-Ghali and Kofi Annan, the Security Council,
the Special Committee of 24, the Commission on
Human Rights and others have kept their doors open to
listen to the voice of the people of Timor-Leste.
Secretary-General Kofi Annan decisively took
into his hands not only the suffering but, above all, the
aspirations of our people. People such as Francesc
Vendrell and Tamrat Samuel, who worked on the
question of Timor-Leste from the outset, as well as,
subsequently, Ambassador Jamsheed Marker, deserve
our appreciation along with other staff members of this
institution. They exemplified dedication and promoted
dialogue in the search for a solution. The outcome of
that effort to defend the Charter and the freedom of
peoples was the Agreement of 5 May 1999.
It is often said that it is important to start a
process because doing so entails defining intentions
and objectives. But, particularly in a struggle, the true
value of action and work is found in the results. The
popular consultation carried out by the United Nations
Mission in East Timor (UNAMET) under the
leadership of Ian Martin was the first democratic and
conscientious act of our people. First, it was
conscientious because it was conducted in a totally
adverse and uncontrollable climate. Secondly, it was
conscientious because it revealed to the world the
courage of the people of Timor-Leste. And, lastly, it
was conscientious because our people rejected
violence, the idea of conflict between brothers and the
notion of civil war.
Our people struggled for their freedom for more
than two decades. The long and difficult struggle
attained its objectives, and the people of Timor-Leste
were not overly concerned by the use of violence and
the perpetuation of the conflict. The day of liberation,
30 August 1999, was the day of democracy. Since that
day, the United Nations Transitional Administration in
East Timor, led by Mr. Sergio Vieira de Mello, has
made every effort to strengthen the democratic
awareness of our people as the basis for genuine
independence. As a consequence, on 30 August 2001

9

A/57/PV.20

the first elections were held for the Constituent
Assembly, with presidential elections held in April
2002.
The presence of the Secretary-General and of
more than 90 official delegations from around the
world — including the current President of the General
Assembly, Mr. Jan Kavan, who at the time was the
Deputy Prime Minister and Minister for Foreign
Affairs of the Czech Republic — made 20 May 2002 a
memorable day in our history. The United Nations and
the international community at large did justice to the
international principles and the universal values that
uphold the existence of nations and peoples by
recognizing their inalienable right to self-determination
and national independence.
We feel greatly honoured and moved by the
statesmanship shown by Portugal, Indonesia and
Australia in jointly proposing the draft resolution that
has admitted us as the 191st Member of the United
Nations.
I have the privilege today of representing before
the General Assembly a small people of great dignity
and extraordinary historic bravery who are driven by a
total commitment to the present and filled with great
confidence for the future. Present among us as our
special guest is our most beloved brother, Nobel Peace
Prize laureate Ximenes Belo. Despite his wish to be
here today to share this moment with us, our dear
friend Basilio do Nascimento had to remain in our
country out of his sense of responsibility.
I represent a people who have already defined
their vision for development for the next 20 years. That
vision expresses their most profound aspirations with
regard to the eradication of poverty and illiteracy, the
achievement of better standards of living — to which
every citizen has a right — and their own involvement
in the development process. We are aware of the fact
that there will be no economic or social development in
our country if we do not establish the most elementary
bases of democracy. The role of women and a strong
civil society are essential to ensuring that participatory
democracy at the level of local Government guarantee
both social justice and the rights of citizens.
More than just coming here as the head of State,
the honour I feel stems from representing the courage
of the women of my country, the high spirits aroused
by the sacrifice of our men, the determination of our
young people and the smiles of the children of the

10

“crocodile nation”. According to our legend, today we
have been transformed. We tread firmly on our land
and sail safely through our sea, for we have been
recognized as a sovereign and independent nation and
as a member of the international community.
Having emerged from decades of struggle for our
independence and 20 years of suffering, what our
people most yearn for now is peace and stability. Only
a tolerant and just society can create a climate of muchneeded stability, and only a tolerant and just society
will know how to love peace.
Timor-Leste expresses its concern over the
increasing violence in the Middle East. We will not
point fingers or attempt to identify culprits. We prefer
to believe that a solution exists and that a resolution
can be found to this conflict, which has already shed so
much blood and taken so many lives. The Palestinian
people
have
a
right
to
self-determination,
independence, peace and dignity. We believe that it is
neither moral nor ethical to deny the right to freedom,
peace and dignity to this extraordinary people.
Timor-Leste and the State of Israel have
established diplomatic relations at the ambassadorial
level and will explore forms of mutually beneficial
cooperation. Timor-Leste declares itself ready to
recognize the State of Palestine and to establish
diplomatic relations at ambassadorial level with the
legitimate authorities of the Palestinian people.
Western Sahara is yet another entity that is
regrettably excluded from most major international
forums. Timor-Leste shares with our Saharawi brothers
a remarkable amount of history. The inalienable right
of the Saharawi people to self-determination was
recognized by the United Nations eight years before
that of Timor-Leste. Yet, while the case of Timor-Leste
is now seen as a United Nations success story, that of
Western Sahara continues to be stalled by successive
obstacles. At this moment, when we are reaffirming our
freedom and independence, we urge the resumption of
the United Nations plan to hold a referendum on selfdetermination in Western Sahara. We can put an end to
this unjust situation only if a fair, free and democratic
consultation is held, such as that which took place in
Timor-Leste.
The people of Timor-Leste also express their
support for the peace process in Afghanistan and, in
particular, for President Hamid Karzai, and we extend
our wishes for success at this challenging time.

A/57/PV.20

Recently, Timor-Leste attended the third Summit
of African Caribbean Pacific (ACP) heads of State or
Government, held in Fiji. This made us more aware of
our need to actively participate in groups of developing
countries that share common problems and similar
advantages and backgrounds. There is much we can
learn from and exchange with subregional partners
within a group such as the ACP.
Regardless of our relationship with the Pacific,
we are geographically close to South-East Asia and
also feel proud of being part of that region. Over the
past couple of years, we have intensified our contacts
in the region. Today, we are pleased to testify to the
committed work and unwavering commitment of our
Asian brothers in the rebuilding of Timor-Leste, as
well as with respect to the requests for peacekeeping
forces and for various professional personnel made by
the successive United Nations missions deployed in our
country.
We recently participated in the Association of
Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN) ministerial meeting
held in Brunei, and will continue to participate as
invited observers in the organization’s initiatives.
Last July, we became a full member of the
Community of Portuguese-Speaking Countries, a group
of countries that share a common language, history and
culture which contributed to the shaping of our
resistance identity. That is also a family of nations to
which we are bound by ties of affection.
We join the world in its concerns at intolerance
between cultures and religions and at the systematic
use of violence, which cannot but breed
misunderstanding and hatred, further distancing
peoples and constraining dialogue.
We speak out, with the rest of the world, on the
war on terrorism. Despite the enormous demands of
our independence process and the developing nature of
our country, we will not ease our vigilance and
determination in uprooting the extremism and
radicalism that promote or contribute to terror against
innocents. Timor-Leste will never be a sanctuary for
those who terrorize innocent civilians, whether on
behalf of religion or ideology, or in any other guise.
We join the rest of the world in its commitment to
fight against people-smuggling and the trafficking of
arms and drugs. Transnational networks focusing on
such repugnant activities have particularly affected our

region. We will not permit our territory or our
exclusive economic zone to be used to perpetuate the
grief caused by the ambition of a few who hide behind
profits made out of the misery of so many.
We join the rest of the world in its commitment to
adopt comprehensive policies on the democratization
of societies, the respect for civic and political rights,
the need for good governance and the involvement of
civil society, and on the adoption of stern policies
against corruption. We join the rest of the world in its
concern for the misery, hunger and disease in
developing countries, which affect more than half of
the planet’s population.
There must be a steadfast commitment by the
developing countries to adopt the correct policies to
fight poverty. However, other important factors must be
taken into account. We join those calling on the rich
countries of the North to increase their contribution to
overseas development assistance to at least 0.7 per cent
of their gross national product. We join those calling
for writing off the debt of the poor countries as an
unavoidable measure. We join those calling for
rescheduling the debt of the most heavily indebted
countries, and investing part of the debt in education
and public health. We join those calling for greater
access to the markets of the rich countries, through the
lifting of trade barriers and the easing and
simplification of customs rules and regulations.
The European Union “everything but guns”
cooperation policy is an example that should be
followed by other rich countries. But the policy on
agricultural subsidies has placed poorer countries at a
great disadvantage and has left them in continued
poverty. We, the poorest country in Asia, now also face
the daunting challenge of globalization.
We have adopted a policy of reconciliation among
all Timorese, based on justice. Nevertheless, to honour
justice, our effort is focused on the eradication of all
feelings of hatred and revenge, because sound
reconciliation will come about only when there is
greater social justice in Timorese society.
Our destiny is to live in peace. This means that
we must, from the outset, lay the foundations of a new
society where harmony, tolerance and solidarity prevail
in the mind and spirit of every citizen. We are aware
that we will be serving the interests of our people only
if we honour our international commitments by signing
the relevant conventions and treaties which not only

11

A/57/PV.20

safeguard our sovereignty and our interests but also
respect the sovereignty and interests of other peoples
and States, particularly those of our region. I refer in
particular to the Convention Against Torture, the
Convention on the Rights of the Child, the Convention
relating to the Status of Refugees and those on the use
of chemical weapons, nuclear weapons and landmines.
As the people of the first new country of the
millennium, and given the historic process leading to
independence, the Maubere people are committed to
social and economic development, to strengthening
their culture and traditions and to being actively
engaged in a policy of dialogue, cooperation and
friendship with all the other peoples of the world. The
people of Timor-Leste firmly believe in a future where
world peace will reign. The people of Timor-Leste are
convinced that peace has a price. That price is the
freedom of people, tolerance among societies of
different cultures and beliefs, and cooperation and
friendship between peoples.
International Day of Peace, 21 September, was
the dream come true of one man, and it shook the
conscience of today’s world, where humanity lives side
by side with insecurity. We believe that peace is the
most sacred objective of humanity. We urge all human
beings — from the largest urban centres to remote
farms and plantations, from social and professional
organizations, artists and athletes to civil society and
business people, from groups in conflict to politicians
and cabinet members — to concentrate, together,
greater energy on the need for peace in the world.
I wish to put forward a proposal to declare a
World Peace Week, to be observed from 21 to
27 September each year. During that week, debates,
conferences and workshops to discuss peace would be
held throughout the world. Peace would no longer be a
theoretical concept, but would rather be an issue for indepth reflection on relevant themes such as poverty,
democracy, human rights and justice. Thus, individuals
would truly comprehend that genuine peace can emerge
only from the peace within each citizen.
In conclusion, I wish to pay tribute to my people.
The international community,
politicians and
academics often speak of our country as a United
Nations success story. The commitment of the
international community — namely, the United Nations
and its bodies the General Assembly and the Security
Council — is unquestioned. That collective success is

12

equally due to the role and the engagement of the
United Nations specialized agencies, of the World
Bank, of the International Monetary Fund and of the
Asian Development Bank, as well as of the hundreds of
United Nations Volunteers and international nongovernmental organizations, in particular during the
emergency and humanitarian relief periods. Today, we
wish to express our recognition of, and our profound
gratitude for, their commitment and their continued
action in my country.
At the core of that success were, above all, our
people. By refusing to go down the path of violence,
even when provoked; by exercising their rights in a
democratic and civic-minded manner, even if it meant
risking their own lives; and by looking to the future
with hope for the certainty of freedom, our people
proved to the world that they were worthy of respect,
and thus gained credibility and the admiration of all.
We owe the success to which all were committed to the
people of Timor-Leste.
The President: On behalf of the General
Assembly, I wish to thank the President of the
Democratic Republic of Timor-Leste for the statement
he has just made.
Mr. Kay Rala Zanana Gusmão, President of the
Republic of Timor-Leste, was escorted from the
General Assembly Hall.
The President: I should like to inform Member
States that the flag of the Democratic Republic of
Timor-Leste will be raised at a ceremony that will take
place in front of the delegates’ entrance immediately
following the adjournment of this meeting.
Agenda item 117
Scale of assessments for the apportionment of the
expenses of the United Nations
Report of the Fifth Committee (A/57/429)
The President: If there is no proposal under rule
66 of the rules of procedure, I shall take it that the
General Assembly decides not to discuss the report of
the Fifth Committee that is before the Assembly today.
It was so decided.
The President: Statements will therefore be
limited to explanations of vote.

A/57/PV.20

The positions of delegations regarding the
recommendation of the Fifth Committee have been
made clear in the Committee and are reflected in the
relevant official records.
May I remind members that, under paragraph 7 of
decision 34/401, the General Assembly agreed that
“When the same draft resolution is considered in
a Main Committee and in plenary meeting, a
delegation should, as far as possible, explain its
vote only once, that is, either in the Committee or
in plenary meeting, unless that delegation’s vote
in plenary meeting is different from its vote in the
Committee.”
May I remind delegations that, also in accordance
with General Assembly decision 34/401, explanations
of vote are limited to 10 minutes.
Before we begin to take action on the
recommendation contained in the report of the Fifth
Committee, I should like to advise representatives that
we are going to proceed to take a decision in the same
manner as was done in the Fifth Committee.
The Assembly will now take a decision on the
draft resolution recommended by the Fifth Committee
in paragraph 7 of its report.
The Fifth Committee adopted the draft resolution
without a vote. May I take it that the Assembly wishes
to do likewise?
The draft resolution was adopted (resolution
57/4).
The President: The Assembly has thus
concluded this stage of its consideration of agenda item
117.
Agenda item 15

and Singapore. Those five States cannot be re-elected.
Their names, therefore, should not appear on the ballot
papers.
Apart from the five permanent members, the
Security Council will include in the year 2003 the
following States: Bulgaria, Cameroon, Guinea, Mexico
and the Syrian Arab Republic. The names of those
States, therefore, should also not appear on the ballot
papers.
Of the five non-permanent members that will
remain in office in the year 2003, three are from Africa
and Asia, one is from Eastern Europe and one is from
Latin America and the Caribbean.
Consequently, pursuant to paragraph 3 of General
Assembly resolution 1991 A (XVIII) of 17 December
1963, the five non-permanent members should be
elected according to the following pattern: two from
Africa and Asia, one from Latin America and the
Caribbean and two from Western Europe and other
States. The ballot papers reflect that pattern.
In accordance with established practice, there is
an understanding to the effect that, of the two States to
be elected from Africa and Asia, one should be from
Africa and one from Asia.
I should like to inform the Assembly that those
candidates, their number not exceeding the number of
seats to be filled, that receive the greatest number of
votes and a two-thirds majority of those present and
voting will be declared elected.
In the case of a tie vote for a remaining seat, there
will be a restricted ballot limited to those candidates
that have obtained an equal number of votes.
May I take it that the General Assembly agrees to
that procedure?
It was so decided.

Elections to fill vacancies in principal organs
(a) Election of five non-permanent members of the
Security Council
The President: The General Assembly will now
proceed to the election of five non-permanent members
of the Security Council to replace those members
whose term of office expires on 31 December 2002.
The five outgoing non-permanent members are
the following: Colombia, Ireland, Mauritius, Norway

The President: In accordance with rule 92 of the
rules of procedure, the election shall be held by secret
ballot and there shall be no nominations.
Regarding candidatures, I have been informed by
the Chairmen of the respective regional groups of the
following.
For the two vacant seats from among the African
and Asian States, there are two endorsed candidates:
Angola and Pakistan.

13

A/57/PV.20

For the vacant seat from among the Latin
American and Caribbean States, there is one endorsed
candidate: Chile.

The President: The result of the voting is as
follows:

For the two vacant seats from among the Western
European and other States, there are two endorsed
candidates: Germany and Spain.

183
0
183
1
182
122

In accordance with rule 92 of the rules of
procedure, we shall proceed now to the election by
secret ballot.
Before we begin the voting process, I should like
to remind members that, pursuant to rule 88 of the
rules of procedure of the General Assembly, no
representative shall interrupt the voting except on a
point of order on the actual conduct of the voting.
We shall now begin the voting process.
Ballot papers marked “A”, “B” and “C” will now
be distributed. I request representatives to use only
those ballot papers that have been distributed.
May I ask representatives to write on the ballot
papers marked “A”, for the African and Asian States,
the names of the two States for which they wish to
vote; on the ballot papers marked “B”, for the Latin
American and Caribbean States, the name of the one
State for which they wish to vote; and on the ballot
papers marked “C”, for the Western European and
other States, the names of the two States for which they
wish to vote.
A ballot paper containing more names from the
relevant region than the number of seats assigned to it
will be declared invalid. Names of Member States on a
ballot paper which do not belong to that region will not
be counted.
At the invitation of the President, Mr. Luke
Sookocheff (Canada), Mr. José Sosa (Dominican
Republic), Mr. Kai Sauer (Finland), Mr. Gebhard
Kandanga (Namibia), Mr. Faisal Al-Athba
(Qatar) and Mr. Pavlo Orel (Ukraine) acted as
tellers.
A vote was taken by secret ballot.
I now suspend the meeting for thirty minutes.
The meeting was suspended at 11.40 a.m. and
resumed at 12.25 p.m.

14

Group A — African and Asian States
Number of ballot papers:
Number of invalid ballots:
Number of valid ballots:
Abstentions:
Number of members voting:
Required two-thirds majority:
Number of votes obtained:
Angola
Pakistan
India

181
172
1

Group B — Latin American and Caribbean States
Number of ballot papers:
183
Number of invalid ballots:
0
Number of valid ballots:
183
Abstentions:
5
Number of members voting:
178
Required two-thirds majority:
119
Number of votes obtained:
Chile
178
Group C — Western European and other States
Number of ballot papers:
183
Number of invalid ballots:
0
Number of valid ballots:
183
Abstentions
0
Number of members voting:
183
Required two-thirds majority:
122
Number of votes obtained:
Germany
180
Spain
180
Having obtained the required two-thirds majority,
the following States were elected members of the
Security Council for a two-year term beginning 1
January 2003: Angola, Chile, Germany, Pakistan
and Spain.
The President: I congratulate the States that have
been elected members of the Security Council.
I would also like to thank the tellers for their
assistance in the election.
We have thus concluded our consideration of subitem (a) of agenda item 15.

A/57/PV.20

Programme of work
The President: I should like to draw the attention
of the General Assembly to document A/INF/57/3,
which contains a tentative programme of work and
schedule of plenary meetings for the period from
27 September to 10 December 2002 and which has
been distributed in the Hall.
I should also like to remind members that the list
of speakers for items listed in document A/INF/57/3

are open. Furthermore, I should like to announce that
the General Committee shall meet on Friday,
4 October, at 9.15 a.m., to consider a request for the
inclusion of an additional item in the agenda of the
fifty-seventh session which is contained in document
A/57/232.
I will, in due course, keep the Assembly informed
of any other additions or changes to the programme of
work.
The meeting rose at 12.30 p.m.

15
