158

General Assembly-Thirty-fifth Session
----

---

---- - - - - -

rendering all necessary assistance to Saint Lucia in its efforts to strengthen and develop its national economy,
Noting the recent attainment of independence by
Saint Lucia,
Mindful of the report of the Secretary-General on assistance to Antigua, St. Kitts-Nevis-Anguilla, Saint
Lucia and Saint Vincent, 220
Bearing in mind that Saint Lucia requires the continued attention and assistance of the United Nations in
the achievement by its people of its development objectives,
Recalling resolution 111 (V) of 3 June I 979 of the
United Nations Conference on Trade and Development, 221
in which specific action in a number of identified areas
was urged in respect of island developing countries,
Emphasizing the special problems faced by Saint
Lucia with regard to territorial size, geographical location, highly limited internal markets and limited economic resources, as well as the serious adverse effects of
recent world-wide economic and financial problems,
Gravely concerned at the recent damage incurred by
Saint Lucia as a result of hurricane "Allen", which
created immeasurable economic hardship,
I. Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General
on assistance to Antigua, St. Kitts-Nevis-Anguilla, Saint
Lucia and Saint Vincent;
2. Expresses its gratitude for the support that Member States and agencies of the United Nations have
given during this emergency, which aided the people of
Saint Lucia in their reconstruction and rehabilitation efforts;
3. Emphasizes the urgency of rendering all necessary
assistance to Saint Lucia in its efforts to develop and
strengthen its economy, with particular reference to the
sectoral redevelopment of its infrastructure, consistent
with insulation from disasters of this nature;
4. Urges the specialized agencies and other organizations within the United Nations system, in particular the United Nations Development Programme
and international financial institutions, as well as aid
donors, to continue to increase and intensify their assistance to Saint Lucia within their respective spheres of
competence;
5. Requests the Secretary-General to mobilize the
financial, technical and economic assistance of the international community, in particular that of the developed countries and the appropriate organizations of the
United Nations system, with a view to helping to meet
the short-term and long-term development needs of
Saint Lucia;
6. Further requests the Secretary-General to submit
to the General Assembly at its thirty-sixth session an
analytical report on the implementation of the present
resolution.
84th plenary meeting
5 December 1980
35/102.

Assistance to Dominica

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 34/19 of9 November 1979, in
which it expressed deep concern at the magnitude of the
220

A/35/499.
See Proceedings of the United Nations Conference on Trade and
Development; Fifth Session, vol. I, Report and Annexes (United
Nations publication, Sales No. E.79.11.D.14), part one, sect. A.
221

--

-------- -

-------

damage caused in Dominica by hurricanes "David" and
"Frederic" and urged Governments of Member States
and international organizations to provide with the utmost urgency assistance for the rehabilitation, reconstruction and development of Dominica,
Recalling also resolution 418 (PLEN.13) adopted on
19 October J979 by the Committee of the Whole of the
Economic Commission for Latin America in respect of
assistance to Dominica, 222
Concerned that in 1980 Dominica has been struck by
hurricane "Allen", which has aggravated an already
serious situation in the country,
Bearing in mind the report of the Secretary-General on
assistance to Dominica, m
I. Expresses its appreciation for the assistance
provided so far to Dominica by various States and
regional and international organizations;
2. Urges Governments of Member States and international organizations to continue to provide, with the
utmost urgency, the assistance called for in resolution
418 ( PLEN .13) of the Committee of the Whole of the
Economic Commission for Latin America for the
rehabilitation, reconstruction and development of
Dominica;
3. Requests the Secretary-General to continue to
keep the Economic and Social Council and the General
Assembly informed of the results achieved in the implementation of the present resolution.
84th plenary meetinl(
5 December 1980

35/103.

Assistance to Uganda 224

The General Assembly.
Recalling its resolution 34/122 of 14 December 1979,
in which it, inter alia, expressed its deep concern at the
tragic loss of life, widespread destruction of property
and s.!vere damage to the economic and social infrastructure of Uganda and urgently appealed to the international community to contribute generously to the
reconstruction, rehabilitation and development needs of
the country,
Reaffirming the urgent need for international action
to assist the Government of Uganda in its efforts for
national reconstruction, rehabilitation and development and for resettling the large numbers of returning
refugees and displaced persons into the permanent
fabric of society,
Recognizing that Uganda is not only land-locked but
also one of the least developed and most seriously affected countries,
Having examined the report of the Secretary-General
of 26 September 1980w submitted in response to General Assembly resolution 34/122,
Noting with concern that severe drought has destroyed
the livelihood of several hundred thousand people and
that urgent assistance is required for the rehabilitation
of essential community facilities and services in the affected areas,
Noting the appeals of the Secretary-General and the
United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees for
emergency humanitarian assistance to Uganda,
'" See E/CEPAL/G.1105, sect. IV.
'" A/35/445 ~rid Corr. I.
"'See also sect. X.B.3, decision 35/423.
"' A/35/489.

V.

159

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Second Committee

Noting further that the Secretary-General has _appointed the Resident Representative of the Umted
Nations Development Programme at Kampala to serve
also as Special Representative for Emergency Relief
Operations,
Recalling the donors' meeting on assistance to
Uganda, held in Paris from 6 to 8 November I 979 under
the auspices of the World Bank,
l. Expresses its appreciation to the SecretaryGeneral for the steps he has taken to mobilize assistance for Uganda;
2. Further expresses its appreciation to those States
and organizations which have provided assistance to
Uganda;
3. Requests the Secretary-General to dispatch a mission to Uganda to consult with the Government on its
most urgent reconstruction, rehabilitation and development needs and to communicate the report of that mission to the international community;
4. Further requests the Secretary-General to ensure
that adequate financial and budgetary arrangements are
made for the organization of an effective international
programme of assistance to Uganda and for the
mobilization of international assistance:
5. Urgently renews its appeal to all Member States.
specialized agencies and other organizations of the
United Nations system and international economic and
financial institutions to contribute generously, through
bilateral or multilateral channels, to the reconstruction,
rehabilitation and development needs of Uganda and to
its emergency requirements:
6. Urges Member States and international economic
and financial institutions once again to respond generously to the appeal made at the donors' meeting in Paris:
7. Renews its appeal to the international community
to contribute to the special account which was established at United Nations Headquarters for the purpose
of facilitating the channelling of contributions to
Uganda;
8. Invites the appropriate organizations and programmes of the United Nations system-in particular the United Nations Conference on Trade and Development, the United Nations Industrial Development
Organization, the United Nations Children's Fund, the
United Nations Development Programme, the World
Food Programme, the International Fund for Agricultural Development, the International Labour Organisation, the Food and Agriculture Organization of the
United Nations, the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization, the World Health
Organization and the World Bank-to maintain and
increase their current and future programmes of assistance to Uganda, to co-operate closely with the
Secretary-General in organizing an effective international
programme of assistance and to report periodically to
him on the steps they have taken and the resources they
have made available to assist that country:
9. Invites the United Nations Conference on Trade
and Development, the United Nations Industrial Development Organization, the United Nations Children's
Fund, the United Nations Development Programme,
the World Food Programme, the International Fund
for Agricultural Development, the International Labour Organisation, the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations, the United Nations
Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization, the
World Health Organization and the World Bank to

bring to the attention of their governing bodies, for their
consideration, the special needs of Uganda and to report
the decisions of those bodies to the Secretary-General by
15 August 1981;
10. Requests the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees to continue his humanitarian assistance programmes in Uganda;
11. Requests the Secretary-General:
(a) To continue his efforts to mobilize the necessary
resources for an effective programme of financial. technical and material assistance to Uganda;
(b) To keep the situation in Uganda under constant
review, to maintain close contact with Member States,
regional and other intergovernmental organizations, the
specialized agencies and international financial institutions concerned and to apprise the Economic and Social
Council, at its second regular session of 1981, of the current status of the special economic assistance programme for Uganda:
(c) To arrange for a review of the economic situation of Uganda and the progress made in organizing and
implementing the special economic assistance programme for that country in time for the matter to be
considered by the General Assembly at its thirty-sixth
session.

84th plenary meeting
5 December 1980

35/104.

Assistance to Cape Verde 12 •

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 33/127 of 19 December 1978,
in which it made an appeal to the international community to provide generous and immediate assistance to
the development programme recommended in the report of the Secretary-General on the mission which he
sent to Cape Verde in response to General Assembly resolution 32/99 of 13 December I977, m and requested the
Secretary-General, inter alia, to mobilize the necessary
resources for an effective programme of financial, technical and material assistance to Cape Verde,
Recalling also that in its resolutions 31 / 17 of 24 November 1976 and 32/99 of 13 December 1977 it noted
with concern the grave economic situation existing in
Cape Verde as a result of a severe and prolonged
drought, the total lack of infrastructure for development and other social and economic strains on the
economy of the country,
Recalling further its resolution 34 / 16 of 9 November
1979 concerning measures to be taken to implement the
medium-term and long-term recovery and rehabilitation programme in the drought-stricken countries of the
Sahelian region,
Noting that Cape Verde is classified by the United
Nations as a least developed country as well as a most
seriously affected country, and is a member of the Permanent Inter-State Committee on Drought Control in
the Sahe!,
Recalling its resolution S-1 I /4 of 15 September 1980
on measures to meet the critical situation in the least developed countries,
Bearing in mind resolution 122 (V) of 3 June 1979 of
the United Nations Conference on Trade and Develop,,, -\<\3;167undCorr I.
