S/PV.9296

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-eighth year

9296th meeting

Tuesday, 28 March 2023, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Nyusi. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Mozambique)

Members:

Albania . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Brazil. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ecuador. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Gabon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ghana . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Japan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Malta. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Switzerland . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Arab Emirates . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Hoxha
Mr. Bicalho Cozendey
Mr. Liu Yuxi
Mr. Montalvo Sosa
Mr. De Rivière
Ms. Raponda
Mr. Akufo-Addo
Mr. Ishikane
Ms. Gatt
Mr. Nebenzia
Mr. Berset
Mr. Al Nahyan
Mr. Kariuki
Mrs. Thomas-Greenfield

Agenda
Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts
Countering terrorism and preventing violent extremism conducive to terrorism
by strengthening cooperation between the United Nations and regional
organizations and mechanisms
Letter dated 24 February 2023 from the Permanent Representative of Mozambique
to the United Nations addressed to the Secretary-General (S/2023/147)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of
the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room AB-0601
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

23-08792 (E)
*2308792*

S/PV.9296

Threats Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

I now give the floor to the Secretary-General, His
Excellency Mr. António Guterres.

The meeting was called to order at 10.05 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Threats to international peace and security caused
by terrorist acts
Countering terrorism and preventing
violent extremism conducive to terrorism
by strengthening cooperation between the
United Nations and regional organizations and
mechanisms
Letter dated 24 February 2023 from the
Permanent Representative of Mozambique
to the United Nations addressed to the
Secretary-General (S/2023/147)
The President: I would like to warmly welcome
the Secretary-General, His Excellency Mr. António
Guterres. I also wish to wholeheartedly thank the Heads
of State, ministers and other high-level representatives
for honouring this meeting with their attendance.
Their presence today underscores the importance of
the subject matter under discussion and attests to their
valuable support for Mozambique’s efforts to rally the
international community in defeating terrorism.
In accordance with rule 37 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the representative
of Rwanda to participate in this meeting.
On behalf of the Council, I welcome His Excellency
Mr. Vincent Biruta, Minister for Foreign Affairs of
Rwanda.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite His Excellency
Mr. Azali Assoumani, President of Comoros and
Chairperson of the African Union, to participate in
this meeting.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I wish to draw the attention of Council members
to document S/2023/147, which contains the text of a
letter dated 24 February 2023 from the Permanent
Representative of Mozambique to the United Nations
addressed to the Secretary-General, transmitting a
concept note on the item under consideration.
2/23

28/03/2023

The Secretary-General (spoke in Portuguese;
English statement provided by the Secretariat):
I commend the Government of Mozambique for
convening this timely debate.
(spoke in English)
Terrorism is the root cause and the result of many
of the problems under the consideration of the Security
Council. Terrorism tightens its grip by seeking out
and exploiting weaknesses and instability in political,
economic and security systems; by preying on the
fears and vulnerabilities of people facing grinding
poverty, hunger and famine; by exploiting inequalities
and social exclusion to aggravate tensions; by trading
in the timeless evils of prejudice and discrimination,
targeting specific groups, cultures, religions and
ethnicities; by engaging in criminal activities, such
as money-laundering and illegal mining, as well as
the trafficking of arms, drugs, precious minerals,
antiquities and human beings; by promoting lies, hatred
and disinformation in cyberspace; by keeping women
and girls under a constant cloud of intimidation, as well
as outright sexual and gender-based violence; and by
flouting or ignoring the rule of law, from international
human rights law, international humanitarian law,
international refugee law and other international norms
and standards to the values embedded in the Charter of
the United Nations.
No age, no culture, no religion, no nationality and
no region is immune. But the situation in Africa is
especially concerning. Despair, poverty, hunger, a lack
of basic services, unemployment and unconstitutional
changes in Government continue to lay fertile ground
for the creeping expansion of terrorist groups to infect
new parts of the continent.
I am deeply concerned by the gains that terrorist
groups are making in the Sahel and elsewhere.
Community by community, they are extending their
reach. The trail of terror is widening, with fighters,
funds and weapons increasingly flowing between
regions and across the continent and with new alliances
being forged with organized crime and piracy groups.
The online world provides a global platform for
spreading violent ideologies even further.
Just as terrorism drives people apart, countering it
can bring countries together. We see that across Africa,
23-08792

28/03/2023

S/PV.9296

Threats Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

which is home to a number of regional counter-terrorism
initiatives, from the joint efforts in the Sahel, the Lake
Chad basin, Mozambique and beyond to the renewed
determination of African leaders to tackle that evolving
threat, as seen at the recent Extraordinary Summit of
the African Union on terrorism and unconstitutional
changes of Government.
The United Nations stands with Africa to end
the scourge. That includes the Security Council’s
policy guidance, technical assistance and support for
sanctions regimes. It includes the Counter-Terrorism
Committee’s 65 assessment visits to ensure compliance
with Security Council requirements, which resulted in
thousands of actionable recommendations to Member
States to improve responses. It includes our work,
through the Global Counter-Terrorism Coordination
Compact, to bring together diverse United Nations
agencies, Member States, regional parliaments and civil
society to support joint efforts across the continent.
Above all, it includes our ongoing close collaboration
with the African Union and regional and subregional
African organizations.
We are delivering tailored assistance to African
Member States, including in the areas of prevention, legal
assistance, investigations, prosecutions, reintegration,
rehabilitation and human rights protection. With
Nigeria, we are co-organizing the upcoming African
Counter-Terrorism Summit. We are strengthening our
work together on important peace initiatives, such as
the Independent High-Level Panel on Security and
Development in the Sahel. We are tirelessly advocating
for a new generation of robust peace enforcement
missions and counter-terrorism operations, led by the
African Union, with a Security Council mandate under
Chapter VII and with guaranteed, predictable funding,
namely, through assessed contributions. I urge Member
States to support that vital work.
(spoke in French)
The eighth review of the United Nations Global
Counter-Terrorism Strategy in June, co-facilitated by
Canada and Tunisia, will be a critical opportunity to
strengthen our work in that area and find new ways to
more effectively tackle the structural conditions that
create fertile ground for terrorism. The review will also
be an opportunity to recall that human rights should be
at the centre of our efforts.
Terrorism represents the denial, and even the
destruction, of human rights. We will therefore

never succeed in the fight against that scourge if we
perpetuate that denial and destruction. Evidence shows
that counter-terrorism efforts that are focused solely
on security rather than human rights can inadvertently
increase marginalization and exclusion and further
exacerbate the situation. The New Agenda for Peace sets
out a holistic and comprehensive approach to building
more peaceful and stable societies, in which terror and
violent extremism have no place, through prevention,
by addressing the economic and social conditions that
can lead to terrorism in the first place, and through
inclusion, by ensuring that counter-terrorism strategies
reflect the lived experiences of all communities and
constituencies, particularly minorities, women and
young people, and by always placing human rights and
the rule of law at the core of all our work.
(spoke in English)
At every step, we commit to upholding the essential
rights and dignity of terrorism’s victims and survivors
by supporting and helping to heal those who have been
harmed and displaced. It is in their names and in the
memory of those who were killed by terrorism and
violent extremism that we will continue our work to
end the scourge once and for all.
I thank the Security Council and all Member States
for standing with us in such essential efforts in Africa
and beyond.
The President: I thank the Secretary-General for
his briefing.
I now give
Mr. Assoumani.

the

floor

to

His

Excellency

President Assoumani (spoke in French): At
the outset, I would like to warmly congratulate you,
Mr. President, on having assumed the presidency of the
Security Council for the month of March. I am convinced
that your enlightened leadership will enable us to move
forward as we look for appropriate solutions to the
many challenges facing the international community,
particularly with regard to peace and security. I am
therefore happy to address this high-level Security
Council debate on a complex issue that requires a
strong and comprehensive response. I would like to
thank you, my brother, President of Mozambique, for
your kind invitation.
One could rightly ponder on the relevance of the
link between terrorism and violent extremism, as
those phenomena seem to fuel each other, resulting

23-087923/23

S/PV.9296

Threats Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

in families displaced from countries and the delayed
development of our States. With regard to terrorism,
I would like to recall that that phenomenon has raged
for a long time. It is since the Libyan crisis in 2011 that
it has really exploded, in particular in Africa. That
crisis encouraged the arrival in the Sahel of thousands
of foreign fighters and mercenaries. It led to the
establishment of terrorist organizations in Africa and
the uncontrolled circulation of weapons. And that is
how terrorism gradually expanded in Africa. From the
north to the south and the east to the west, the terrorist
contagion continues to grow in almost all parts of
Africa. I will therefore spare no effort to ensure that
the African Union Master Roadmap of Practical Steps
to Silence the Guns in Africa by 2030, which I have
had the honour of managing since February, becomes
a reality.
Africa remains confronted by the continued
disturbing incidence of terrorism, which has negative
socioeconomic and political effects on the countries
and regions concerned, as well as the continent as a
whole. That is why the African Union’s sixteenth
Extraordinary Summit on terrorism, held in Malabo
in May 2022, focused on the disturbing link between
terrorism and violent extremism, on the one hand, and
the advent of unconstitutional changes of Government
in Africa, on the other. The Summit underlined the
need for an urgent response to the threats posed by
terrorism, whose consequences the Security Council
has been seized of for several years. For its part, the
African Union has already taken on initiatives in that
regard, including the establishment of its Ministerial
Committee on Counter Terrorism to support member
States and regional economic communities in
implementing the Summit’s conclusions.
The continent is also continuing to make great
strides in addressing its various security challenges,
including through the deployment of major
peacekeeping operations. Examples of that include the
outstanding achievements made in Somalia through the
African Union Mission in Somalia and, subsequently,
the African Union Transition Mission in Somalia, in
addition to the achievements of the Multinational Joint
Task Force in the Lake Chad basin. The success of those
missions has helped to reduce violence, contain terrorist
groups and protect the affected populations. The recent
deployment of the Southern African Development
Community Mission in Mozambique, as well as the
decision of the East African Community to deploy a
4/23

28/03/2023

force in the eastern Democratic Republic of the Congo,
largely encouraged and supported by the African Union
and the United Nations, deserve to be commended.
The ongoing security challenges, which greatly
compromise our quest for sustainable development,
require sustained and renewed efforts within the
relevant regional and continental frameworks in a
collective momentum for peace, security and stability
on the continent. To that end, the sharing of relevant
information and intelligence and the coordination
of operations is essential to consolidate our gains in
preventing and combating terrorism and other crossborder threats. That is why the African Union has put in
place regional frameworks, such as its enhanced security
cooperation process and the Nouakchott process. We
are also ensuring the operationalization of the African
Peace and Security Architecture in the Sahel-Sahara
region and the Djibouti process at the continent level,
as well as that of other regional fusion and liaison
centres and units, such as the Accra Initiative. Some of
those frameworks are currently having positive impacts
but still require renewed commitment and support.
And the United Nations and the African Union, as key
instruments, have the ability to leverage those tools to
combat terrorism and violent extremism.
One of the factors contributing to the continued
spread of terrorism is the lack of attention given to
primarily preventive approaches. I therefore urge the
Council to redouble its efforts by strengthening United
Nations-African Union collaboration in prevention,
which is less costly in the long run. The United Nations
Plan of Action to Prevent Violent Extremism, if
provided with the necessary resources, would make a
significant impact. In that regard, it is also important
to highlight the planned African Union-United Nations
Development Programme Africa Facility to Support
Inclusive Transitions (AFSIT) to support States in
political transitions in order to build resilient local and
national institutions. I therefore recommend the use
of those platforms and call on partners to support the
effective launch of that strategic project. On behalf of
the African Union, I would like to assure the Council of
our commitment to sparing no effort to support member
States in achieving our common goal of preventing the
spread and threat of terrorism and combating it on the
continent by further strengthening collaboration with
the United Nations.
In conclusion, I would like to emphasize two
important points in the fight against this scourge.
23-08792

28/03/2023

Threats Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

First, we must ensure the mobilization of the
necessary funds for preventing and combating terrorism
and ensure predictable, flexible and sustained funding
for African Union peacekeeping operations, which
are also intended to combat terrorism and violent
extremism. Prevention is also important, and we need
to focus on it more than we currently are. The Plan
of Action to Prevent Violent Extremism needs more
concerted and decentralized implementation. Innovative
programmes such as the AFSIT programme, co-funded
by the African Union-United Nations Development
Programme, should be strongly encouraged and
financially supported. Establishing regional counterterrorism centres to support national efforts to prevent
and combat terrorism is a crucially important component
of that. Those centres will help strengthen national,
regional and continent-wide protective measures and
ensure inter-regional cooperation and coordination in
the prevention and detection of terrorist threats, as well
as in combating terrorist acts, including in ports and
at sea.

S/PV.9296

to reiterate our deepest gratitude to all States Members
of the United Nations for the trust they have bestowed
on us. I extend my singular appreciation to SecretaryGeneral António Guterres for his commitment to
strengthening multilateralism, in particular the
international peace and security agenda — the tenets
upon which the Organization was established.
On 1 March this year, as a non-permanent member
of the Security Council for the 2023–2024 term, the
Republic of Mozambique assumed the monthly rotating
presidency. Among various themes, Mozambique
elected for a signature event an in-depth debate on
countering terrorism and preventing violent extremism.
It is our understanding that, like climate change,
terrorism is one of the serious threats to the security of
our countries.

(spoke in Portuguese; English text provided by the
delegation)

Under the current circumstances, terrorism
represents the predominant face of the scourge of
war that the United Nations aimed to eliminate from
its inception, through the changes it brought about in
different economic, geographic and social contexts.
Countering terrorism continues to pose a challenge to
consolidating the spirit of solidarity among peoples
and States, due to its transnational nature and its
unpredictability in relation to the locations and times in
which it occurs and the targets it strikes. The expansion
of terrorism is a significant threat and is driven by
factors that vary from one context to another. On the
one hand, radicalization is based on identity variables
that are fuelled by intolerance, and on the other
hand, the manipulation of socioeconomic factors has
accelerated recruitment by terrorist groups, particularly
among young people. The association of terrorism with
transnational organized crime has contributed to the
survival and spread of terrorist groups. In the context
of the African continent, such groups have generally
resorted to trafficking in mineral resources, in
particular gemstones, as well as to trafficking in illicit
drugs, in order to fund their activities through moneylaundering. Such financial resources derived from
illicit activities sustain the seduction and recruitment
of young people to join their groups.

I begin my statement before this organ of the United
Nations — the Security Council — by welcoming
and thanking all those who have honoured today’s
meeting with their presence. On behalf of the Republic
of Mozambique, the Mozambican people and myself
personally, I greet all members of the Security Council.
Since this is my first statement before the Council, I wish

Although terrorism is a global threat, the situation
in Africa is more critical. The 2022 Global Terrorism
Index shows that approximately 48 per cent of
terrorism-related deaths occur in Africa, with the Sahel
region being the new epicentre of terrorist attacks. At
the level of continental Africa, terrorist groups have
acted with more frequency in North Africa, the Sahel,

Time is not on our side. We need to combat poverty
and exclusion through a successful policy that includes
capacity-building and ensuring equal opportunities, as
well as boosting employment for young people, who are
often the preferred targets of extremists. We need to dry
up the sources of terrorist financing through hard-line
legislation that enables the freezing of funds belonging
to suspected terrorists or those who have been listed
nationally or internationally. Above all, we need to
take more comprehensive, stronger, coordinated,
innovative, timely, sustainable and supportive actions
if we want to eradicate that scourge and in turn achieve
the African Union’s Agenda 2063 for harmonious and
sustainable development.
The President: I thank Mr. Assoumani for
his briefing.
I shall now make a statement in my capacity as the
President of the Republic of Mozambique.

23-087925/23

S/PV.9296

Threats Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

28/03/2023

Central Africa, the Horn of Africa, East Africa and
Southern Africa. In the Southern Africa region, the
Republic of Mozambique has been the direct target of
terrorist attacks since October 2017. Those acts have
caused death and destruction and slowed down the
development agenda for the welfare of our peoples.
Violent extremism conducive to terrorism is also
sustained by a number of different approaches and
narratives. As mentioned earlier, the exploitation of
the development challenges faced by the majority of
African countries, in particular with respect to youth
employment rates, makes communities vulnerable
to the phenomenon of terrorism. By proposing this
theme, we aim to provide the Security Council with a
moment for reflection, including on how to improve the
cooperation framework among the United Nations, the
African Union and African subregional organizations
in the context of countering terrorism. The lessons
gathered from such reflection could be useful and could
be applied in other regions of the world that are affected
by the phenomenon.

(SADC), the Economic Community of West African
States and the Intergovernmental Authority on
Development, have accumulated relevant experience
over the years on matters of conflict resolution. That
experience has contributed to the implementation of
the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development and
the African Union’s Agenda 2063 with respect to the
objective of silencing the guns in Africa. For example, a
SADC mission was established in Mozambique with an
important military component that has been engaged in
fighting terrorism in Cabo Delgado province since July
2021. That shows how the approach of African solutions
to African problems is not merely pan-Africanist
discourse or an empty narrative but rather a principle
that seeks to capitalize on local experiences and local
specificities in finding solutions. For Mozambique,
that experience is vested with added value, as we are
currently fighting terrorism by combining SADC’s
regional multilateral efforts with the bilateral efforts of
Mozambique and Rwanda. Together, we are successfully
fighting terrorism.

The Republic of Mozambique commends the
efforts of the United Nations, through its CounterTerrorism Committee, in coordinating Member States’
efforts to fight terrorism, in particular by monitoring
the implementation of its Global Counter-Terrorism
Strategy and resolution 1373 (2001), on counterterrorism, and prevention measures. The Republic
of Mozambique also underscores the importance of
the Delhi Declaration, which reaffirms the collective
efforts of States through a zero-tolerance approach to
terrorism. With regard to the multilateral approach
underlined in a number of relevant documents, regional
mechanisms are an option that should be seriously
considered in countering terrorism. In addition,
the Charter of the United Nations, in Chapter VIII,
Articles 52 to 54, provides an appropriate framework
for collaboration and the sharing of responsibilities
among the United Nations and regional and subregional
mechanisms in the area of international peacekeeping
and security.

Instead of the large investments that have been
made globally over many years for the benefit of some
countries, including African countries, we propose
the consideration of the model I have described. It is
simple to monitor, allows for easy communication
and has achieved success very quickly. Therefore,
as I mentioned, Mozambique has been engaged in
countering terrorism with some success thanks to
the combination of internal efforts and support from
partners — including SADC, through its mission in
Mozambique, and Rwanda — which have invested
their scarce resources to the detriment of the social
and economic development agenda. We therefore call
for more support to be given to Mozambique and those
countries so that terrorism can be eradicated from our
country and the region.

Moreover, institutional collaboration between the
United Nations and regional organizations has been
referenced in various Security Council resolutions that
emphasize the importance of international cooperation
in countering terrorism, as well as the role that regional
organizations can play in that regard. African countries,
the African Union and regional organizations, such
as the Southern African Development Community
6/23

Before I conclude my remarks, which are
intended to share our vision, and basing our views
on lessons learned in the African context, as well as
on our understanding of the international structure of
terrorism and violent extremism, Mozambique would
like to humbly propose that the eighth review of the
Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy, scheduled for
July, take into consideration the following. We need
to establish a common mechanism aimed at promoting
community resilience, which prevents the violent
extremism that can lead to terrorism. That could be
translated into the establishment of a fund to strengthen
23-08792

28/03/2023

Threats Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

local sustainable development initiatives promoting
projects that can generate jobs for young people,
especially in Africa and the Middle East. In addition,
we would like to propose that the following policies
and strategies be considered when coordinating with
various multilateral mechanisms.
The first is strengthening cooperation among
the Security Council, the African Union Peace and
Security Council and regional blocs in order to stop the
spread and consolidation of terrorism on the African
continent. The second is prioritizing support for
regional solutions arising from security pacts, as well
as duly scrutinized bilateral mechanisms. The third
is using information- and technology-sharing to build
capacities for protecting critical infrastructure in areas
where interests overlap, such as inter-State borders.
The fourth is coordinating priorities among various
geopolitical regions, such as the West, Africa and the
Middle East, while taking into account the spectrum
of terrorism. The fifth is promoting a holistic approach
that combines security, judicial and socioeconomic
interventions in order to address fragile social factors
that can often be seen as root causes of terrorism. The
sixth is improving instruments and methods that will
help us to distinguish between the types and modus
operandi of terrorists in particular geographic regions
so that we avoid trying to counter terrorism with global
solutions alone.
In conclusion, I would like to make an appeal. The
high indebtedness of many low- and middle-income
developing countries not only reduces their ability to
finance essential services and their economies, including
responding effectively to the impacts of various shocks
arising from climate change and human-made crises, it
also makes them increasingly vulnerable to extremism,
terrorism and other violent conflicts. In a recent study,
the United Nations Development Programme estimated
that 52 countries of that group, representing almost
40 per cent of the world’s poor, are faced with that
situation. In order to help them emerge from that crisis,
we call on the international community to restructure
their debts and facilitate access to affordable funding
for high-risk countries. To that end, the international
financial system must be transformed by reforming the
multilateral financial institutions.

S/PV.9296

I shall now give the floor to the other members of
the Council who wish to make statements.
I call on the President of the Swiss Confederation.
President Berset (spoke in French): First of all, I
would like to thank you, Mr. President, for convening
today’s debate on such an important subject. I also
thank the Secretary-General and the President of
Comoros and Chairperson of the African Union for
their briefings.
Despite the continuing efforts of the Council and
the tireless commitment of international and regional
organizations, terrorism persists. It is a serious threat
to peace and security. It is also a threat that is everchanging and adapts, if we can put it that way, to
contexts that are themselves undergoing constant
change. I believe that the Secretary-General reiterated
in his most recent report on the threat posed by Da’esh
(S/2023/76) that terrorism and violent extremism find
fertile ground in which to reproduce in today’s conflicts
and instability of every kind. In those contexts, it is
perhaps much easier for them to recruit, spread their
hateful ideologies and incite violence, and while we can
see that the risk exists everywhere, recently the trend
has been manifesting itself in an alarming manner on
the African continent.
You spoke about the situation in Cabo Delgado,
Mr. President, which is still a source of concern for
your country. I was able to see the situation for myself
when I visited your country in February, and I thank
you once again for the opportunity to accompany
you on a trip to northern Mozambique and see the
situation on the ground. We can see that new terrorist
groups are emerging. We also see that existing armed
groups are joining organizations that the United
Nations has designated as terrorist, and that those
threats continue to claim lives, tear societies apart and
destabilize economies.

(spoke in English)

What can we do to change that? We must break that
cycle of violence. How do we do that? We know what is
needed — the rule of law and preventive efforts, as the
President of Comoros and Chairperson of the African
Union particularly emphasized just now, as well as
partnerships and inclusion. We must first ensure full
respect for international law, especially international
humanitarian law, human rights law and refugee law.

I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.

What does respecting the rule of law mean? First,
it means that counter-terrorism operations cannot be

23-087927/23

S/PV.9296

Threats Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

used as a pretext for violating rules protecting civilians
or removing political opponents. It also means that we
must ensure that humanitarian aid reaches every person
in need, without delay or hindrance. Lastly, it also means
considering children associated with terrorist groups
as victims. Switzerland supported the United Nations
Office on Drugs and Crime in developing a manual
containing guidance for policymakers and practitioners
on the psychosocial assessment of children associated
with criminal and armed groups, and it is a dimension
that I believe is particularly important in discussions
on the subject.
Peace, security and prosperity are the best
antidotes to ideologies that incite terrorism or violent
extremism. That is why we must address the current
and future global challenges without delay. In other
words, we must address all challenges that create
and perpetuate instability. And having mentioned the
issue of children, which I especially wanted to raise in
today’s debate, I would also like to address the problem
caused by climate change in that context. Extreme
weather and desertification fuel disputes and conflict
and trigger migration flows that are often uncontrolled.
They can exacerbate conflicts and be exploited by
terrorist and violent extremist groups. I mention it
here because Switzerland has been working with the
United Nations Institute for Disarmament Research and
the United Nations University on a project that shows
the relationship between climate-related livelihood
challenges and recruitment by armed groups in the
Lake Chad basin. It would be good to bear that in mind.
The problems are linked in such a way that they
fuel one another. That is also why I wanted to talk
about climate change. As President Nyusi just said, our
response must be global. It also has to be comprehensive.
We cannot solve the problem by addressing only a
small, isolated part of it. We have to look at the whole
picture, which is what we are committed to doing. In
that context, I also believe that the United Nations
Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy and its four pillars,
which I mentioned earlier, will provide a package of
measures that, if implemented in a balanced manner,
will afford us an excellent tool for moving forward
together. The Strategy is also emblematic of our unity.
In that regard, President Nyusi has just given us some
pointers and food for thought in terms of its upcoming
eighth review. I believe that one such key point is the
fact that, for every review to date, we have been able
to find consensus and move forward with consensus.
8/23

28/03/2023

I believe that finding such consensus is one of the best
ways for us to respond to those who seek to divide us,
and we should strive to build on it during the current
eighth review.
All of that must be done in collaboration, and
we must not forget that regional and subregional
organizations are particularly important for ensuring
our understanding of the dynamics on the ground. We
must therefore encourage closer cooperation with them,
better coordinate initiatives in this area and underline
that we must commit to addressing the root causes
of the problem. We must not view a given problem
as only a purely military or security issue; it must be
considered holistically. In that regard, and given the
great importance of prevention, as the President of the
Comoros mentioned earlier, Switzerland has developed
a training programme on prevention, together with the
member States of the African Union and in partnership
with the African Centre for Studies and Research on
Terrorism. And I can only reiterate the importance
of prevention.
In conclusion, partnerships, inclusivity and the
rule of law are all absolutely key elements in the fight
against violent extremism and terrorism. In that regard,
we must ensure that women, young people and civil
society are acknowledged as actors to bring about
change and peace, while always maintaining full respect
for international law, since to do otherwise would be a
betrayal of our own values and we would thereby risk
losing the trust of our populations, which — let us
never forget — is imperative for sustainably preventing
terrorism from taking root.
The President: I now call on the Vice-President
of Gabon.
Ms. Raponda (Gabon) (spoke in French): I speak
to members on behalf of the President of the Gabonese
Republic, Mr. Ali Bongo Ondimba. I would like to
commend Mozambique on taking the initiative of
convening this important debate on the threat that
terrorist acts continue to pose to international peace
and security. I thank the Secretary-General for his
commitment to the fight against terrorism, and I also
thank the President of Comoros and Chairperson of the
African Union for his informative briefing.
The year 2022 was particularly deadly in
Africa, owing to terrorist attacks. Between January
and September 2022, 1,093 terrorist attacks were
perpetrated on the African continent, resulting in 7,816
23-08792

28/03/2023

Threats Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

deaths and 1,772 injured persons. According to the
statistics provided by the African Centre for Studies
and Research on Terrorism, each of the five regions of
the continent has had to contend with casualties among
their civilian population, security forces and officials.
The ability of Da’esh to obtain resources that enable it to
acquire stocks of small arms and light weapons, which
fuel instability and violence on the African continent,
is of particular concern, especially in the Sahel region,
the Lake Chad basin, including the Great Lakes region,
and Southern Africa.
The most recent report of the Secretary-General
(S/2023/76) notes the relationship between the
structural difficulties experienced by some countries
at the security, social and economic levels, especially
in Africa, and the dangerous progression of Da’esh
activities. In that regard, the many challenges posed by
terrorist movements to international peace and security
require continued vigilance, and above all strengthened
cooperation in order to increase the resilience of fragile
States, especially in countering the new information
technologies used by Da’esh to expand its criminal
activities. That is imperative, as terrorist groups
continue to establish their presence in regions in which
State authority and capacity are inadequate. I take this
opportunity to reaffirm the commitments that we made
in the Delhi Declaration on countering the use of new
and emerging technologies for terrorist purposes, as well
as the need to implement its relevant recommendations.
Terrorist networks are in a state of constant mutation
and are resistant to the efforts of the international
community. They clearly pose a transnational and
formidable threat that no Government or organization
can combat alone. Concerted action at the international,
national and regional levels is vital. Governments
increasingly feel the pressure of their people, who are
fed up with their growing insecurity, especially as more
political and economic measures increasingly seem to
fall short of meeting the urgent need and resolve to
fight the scourge of terrorism. It is a war that strains
the limited capacities of States and destabilizes entire
regions. On 28 May 2022, the Heads of State and
Government of the African Union adopted an important
declaration in Malabo, in which they reaffirmed their
commitment to combating all forms of terrorism and
extremist violence on the continent. African leaders
have also adopted a number of regional counterterrorism initiatives, including that of the Joint Force
Group of Five for the Sahel and the Accra Initiative.

S/PV.9296

We must ensure that the current polarization in the
world is not allowed to weaken multilateralism, which
could provide a dangerous benefit for terrorist groupings
and their affiliates. We must above all prioritize a
comprehensive approach in our fight that takes into
account the precarious socioeconomic conditions that
can turn many disillusioned young people into easy
targets for radicalization and recruitment by terrorist
organizations. I would like to stress the urgency
of taking a three-pronged approach. First, we must
adopt a zero-tolerance approach against all forms and
manifestations of terrorism and extremist violence.
Secondly, we must base our action on strict adherence
to international law and respect for the rule of law
and relevant international instruments and protocols.
Thirdly, we must prevent our work from becoming
politicized in any way.
We must pursue and strengthen our cooperation
through information-sharing, the training of security
and intelligence personnel, and providing support for
operations to weaken terrorist groups. Our response to
terrorism must be coherent, by combining a military
approach with long-term actions that aim to address
governance deficits. Above all, our response must
be comprehensive and not fragmented so as to not
fuel the interests of terrorist groups who exploit
systemic weaknesses to create a breeding ground for
violence. Among such weaknesses we would highlight
humanitarian crises, which are becoming increasingly
complex, owing to the unintended effects of climate
change, which are correlated with growing poverty,
inherent inequalities and recurring political and
socioeconomic crises.
We must therefore centre our collective action
against terrorism on dealing appropriately with the
socioeconomic challenges of the affected countries, in
particular the education and training of young people,
the strengthening of the authority of States, in particular
fragile States, and the improvement of living conditions,
including for disadvantaged populations. We must also
ensure that we eliminate the sources of funding for
terrorist networks through strengthened partnerships in
terms of intelligence on online monetary transactions
and the illicit exploitation of natural resources.
The United Nations must redouble its efforts,
increase the means it has at its disposal and resolutely
support initiatives and operations to support peace, in
particular African initiatives. We must present a united

23-087929/23

S/PV.9296

Threats Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

front against terrorism, and everyone everywhere must
be fully committed to it.
For Gabon, whose Head of State, Ali Bongo
Ondimba, is the current President of the Economic
Community of Central African States, the international
community’s efforts must be based on regional and
subregional organizations, which know best the
situation on the ground. However, they can be effective
only if they have adequate and predictable financial
resources. We must give those organizations the tools
they need to strengthen their resilience.
In conclusion, I would like to stress that the
international community must be more determined and
united in the face of the scale of the terrorist threat and
terrorism. Just one weak link can undermine our entire
security chain. In the light of that reality, our solidarity
and the inclusive nature of our action must be in line
with our interdependence as links of the same chain
of humankind.
The President: I now call on the President of the
Republic of Ghana.
President Akufo-Addo: I would like, first of all,
to commend you, Mr. President, for your leadership of
the Security Council at a time when the global order
is being buffeted by severe headwinds. I applaud the
Secretary-General António Guterres for his thoughtprovoking address on this very important subject, as
I do the President of the Comoros and the Chairperson
of the African Union, His Excellency Mr. Azali
Assoumani, for providing a valuable perspective on
the matter.
The Security Council is familiar with the
devastating consequences that terrorism and violent
extremism have had on humankind. The international
order is under threat as a result of the destabilizing
actions being carried out by terrorist groups all over
the world. The unsettling uncertainty of where the next
attack will occur, the number of lives to be disrupted,
lost or displaced, the annexing of national territories
and the wrecking of economies are repercussions of that
fight, except that this war has neither fixed boundaries
nor an end date.
For a significant number of people in Africa, the
threat to their peace is their daily reality. We are thus
gravely concerned by the steady transformation of
Africa into an arena for violent extremism and terrorism.
10/23

28/03/2023

The most recent report of the Secretary-General
on the threat posed by Da’esh to the international
community (S/2023/76), which was released in
February, as well as the 2022 Global Terrorism Index
and the 2022 report of the African Centre for the Study
and Research on Terrorism, all speak about an increase
in the incidence of terrorism and violent extremism
across Africa with an attendant evolution in their
modes of operation. Indeed, data on casualties on the
continent is particularly sobering. It is for those reasons
that Ghana reaffirms its condemnation of all acts of
extremism and terrorism and urges the civilized world
to do the same. Our common humankind and existence
depend on it.
We see in the Sahel the reinforcement of the
presence of Islamic State affiliates. Boko Haram
continues to carry out assassinations, kidnappings and
large-scale acts of violence against civilian populations
in Nigeria, Cameroon, Chad and the Niger. Those acts
have been ongoing for more than a decade. In Somalia,
Al-Qaida-affiliated Al-Shabaab is under pressure,
but not defeated; in Cabo Delgado, Mozambique, the
Islamic State in Iraq and the Sham (ISIS), the Islamic
State and Al-Shabaab elements are being contained by
the Government with the support of Southern African
Development Community (SADC) forces and Rwanda;
and in the eastern Democratic Republic of the Congo,
ISIS-affiliated Allied Democratic Forces and others
continue to destabilize the populations.
Over the course of the past few years, there
have been a number of initiatives and advancement
at the global and regional levels to combat terrorism
and violent extremism. We have proven through
our combined efforts that we are able to cooperate
with one another in order to enhance our capacity to
combat the threat posed by terrorism in all its guises
and manifestations, and as a serious crime that has no
justification, regardless of its motivation or origin.
The Charter of the United Nations placed regional
collaboration at the heart of the Organization’s mandate.
Our founders were wise enough to see that in today’s
complicated and fast-evolving world, there is no single
organization that can guarantee peace, stability and
growth on its own. It requires partnership across all
levels, from the local to the regional and to the global.
The effectiveness of the United Nations now more than
ever rests on a cooperation that is both deeper and more
robust with regional organizations.
23-08792

28/03/2023

Threats Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

In the light of that, I will highlight a few points.
First, the rise of violent extremism and terrorism
underscores the urgent need for a collective response.
No country, regardless of its might, is immune from
the scourge of terrorism and violent extremism, nor can
one country alone respond effectively to such threats.
In a rapidly changing world, enhanced cooperation
among the United Nations and continental and regional
organizations is needed to combat those emerging
threats to international peace and security. The
partnership, outlined in Chapter VIII of the Charter
of the United Nations, has always been an important
factor in preserving international peace and security
and reinforcing our shared aspirations for global peace
and security.
Secondly, in Africa, we have decided to fill the
void by addressing the limitations that United Nations
peacekeeping efforts and national capacities have in
dealing with the menace of transnational terrorist
threats. In order to combat insurgencies in their
respective regions, African regional organizations,
such as SADC and the Economic Community of West
African States, have developed their unique operations,
which include both military and diplomatic initiatives.
The Accra Initiative, which groups together Ghana,
Côte d’Ivoire, Togo, Benin, Mali and Burkina Faso and
hopefully soon Nigeria, is one such self-help security
and intelligence mechanism designed to assist in the
fight against terrorism.
Yet capacity limitations and a lack of financial
resources have become significant obstacles in the
fight against terrorists. Previous experiences with
peacekeeping in Africa have shown us the difficulties
in delivering ambitious but underresourced mandates.
Defeating terrorist organizations and armed groups
should be the Council’s primary focus when addressing
the security challenges currently facing Africa.
Thirdly, bolstering cooperation and collaboration
between the United Nations and continental and
regional organizations should leverage existing
strengths in order to enhance the development of a
preventive approach, based on regional early-warning
mechanisms. Efforts in conflict prevention and
mediation have demonstrated how working together
increases our powers of persuasion to press parties to
make peace and defuse tensions in localities.
Fourthly, it is important that partnerships with
regional organizations be based on mutual respect

S/PV.9296

and do not attempt to impose preferred approaches on
unique regional circumstances. Where that is forced
through, it can only be detrimental to the work of
regional organizations and the global effort to defeat
terrorism. Indeed, our collective security demands that
we find the will to act collaboratively and decisively,
in line with the respective mandates, in order to
defeat terrorism and violent extremism in Africa. The
activities of the United Nations, the African Union and
other regional organizations, such as the Economic
Community of West African States and the Accra
Initiative, should complement each other.
It is important that we reinforce the capacity of
regional organizations for early warning and conflict
prevention. That requires that we enhance cooperation
in the areas of intelligence, logistics, capabilities,
training and deployment, as well as innovative
financing arrangements, for the highest impact projects
on our continents with the quickest turnaround results,
for peoples’ lives and for sustainable development.
Finally, let me place on record my gratitude for
your leadership, Mr. President, during this high-level
meeting, which has established further the urgency
needed to enhance cooperation between the United
Nations and regional organizations in a meaningful way.
The President: I now call on the Permanent
Representative of the United States of America and
member of President Biden’s Cabinet.
Mrs. Thomas-Greenfield (United States of
America): I want to thank Mozambique and particularly
President Nyusi for convening this high-level debate
on strengthening counter-terrorism efforts in Africa.
I also thank Secretary-General Guterres and President
Assoumani, Chairperson of the African Union (AU) for
their briefings today. I want to welcome all of our highlevel visitors who are present with us today.
I was grateful for the warm welcome I received
during my visit to Maputo in January. In my meetings
with Foreign Minister Macamo Dlhovo, we had a
chance to discuss a host of shared priorities, including
regional security, climate change and women and peace
and security issues, as well as terrorism. I also had the
chance to meet with students and women entrepreneurs
and environmental activists. Their limitless potential
was very inspiring, and the work that they are doing is
so important because, after all, we know that change
comes from engaging citizens. We also know that our
partnership with civil society leaders will help us to

23-0879211/23

S/PV.9296

Threats Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

meet the complex challenges we face. And right now,
we face a host of challenges, especially when it comes
to the dramatic rise in terrorism in Africa. We condemn
all acts of terrorism and are committed to fighting and
supporting efforts to defeat terrorists wherever they are.
Today I want to outline my country’s commitment
to countering this great threat and discuss the critical
role that the United Nations and respect for human
rights play in this fight.
On the first day of the United States-Africa Leaders
Summit, in December, Secretary of State Blinken
co-chaired the Peace, Security and Governance Forum.
At the Forum, the Presidents of the Niger, Somalia
and Mozambique discussed how good governance,
peacebuilding, international partnerships and inclusive
development support peace and security.
Our commitment to peace and security across Africa
is unwavering. The United States has provided nearly
$8 billion in security sector assistance since fiscal year
2019. And last Friday, President Biden transmitted to the
United States Congress a 10-year plan for implementing
the United States Strategy to Prevent Conflict and
Promote Stability, including in partnership with
Mozambique. Other partners in Africa include Libya
and coastal West African countries — Ghana, Benin,
Côte d’Ivoire, Guinea and Togo. Those plans represent
our commitment to a whole-of-Government approach
to peacebuilding and supporting our partners’ progress
towards a more peaceful future. As we work towards
that peaceful future, I want to stress the importance of
incorporating the views of civil society, women, youth,
victims of terrorism, community leaders, activists and
the private sector. Taking a whole-of-society approach
is the most productive and sustainable way to counter
terrorism and violent extremism.
Today I also want to acknowledge African-led
security efforts and pay tribute to the sacrifices that AU
personnel have made in support of peace and security
on the continent. One example, of course, that we heard
about today is the Southern African Development
Community mission in Mozambique, which has
helped make security gains and has improved access
for humanitarian assistance, exhibiting how African
leadership for African problems can lead to solutions.
We are proud to provide essential support to regional
leadership initiatives across Africa and to troop- and
police-contributing countries. We remain committed to
exploring ways to further support AU peace operations
12/23

28/03/2023

and look forward to engaging constructively in the
upcoming discussions on the Secretary-General’s
report on the next steps to implement resolutions 2320
(2016) and 2378 (2017). As the eighth review of the
United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy is
under way in the General Assembly, we call for unity
of purpose.
As the Council has reaffirmed in many resolutions,
the promotion and protection of human rights and the
rule of law are essential components of countering
terrorism. Effective counter-terrorism measures and the
protection of human rights are not conflicting goals, but
complementary and mutually enforcing. When Member
States use counter-terrorism as a pretext to silence
political dissent or interfere with the activities of civil
society, they only promote radicalization to violence.
And let us be clear, the human rights abuses committed
by private paramilitary organizations on the continent
stoke grievances that enable terrorist recruitment and
activities. We know that actors like the Kremlin-backed
Wagner Group undermine peace, plain and simple.
In conclusion, the United States calls on the
Council to use all the tools at its disposal to advance
peace and security and fight terrorism in Africa and
internationally. Let us unlock the full potential of the
United Nations and of the African continent as we work
to build a more peaceful and secure future for all.
Mr. Al Nahyan (United Arab Emirates): I would
like to thank Mozambique for organizing this valuable
discussion today and you personally, Mr. President,
for presiding over this meeting. Mozambique has had
to endure these threats, specifically in Cabo Delgado,
where the Southern African Development Community
mission has been present since July 2021. Your initiative
to hold this meeting, Sir, speaks to the urgency of
addressing terrorism and its transnational dimensions
effectively. I would also like to thank His Excellency
Mr. Azali Assoumani, President of Comoros and
Chairperson of the African Union, as well as SecretaryGeneral Guterres, for their valuable insights.
The last time I was in this Chamber I spoke about
the corrosive nature of terrorism and extremism in
the world (see S/PV.9188). The newest edition of the
annual Global Terrorism Index demonstrates just how
corrosive these threats remain. In 2022, Terrorists
killed a greater number of people on average per attack
than the year before, and sub-Saharan Africa recorded
the largest increase in terrorism deaths globally.
23-08792

28/03/2023

Threats Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

Terrorism is a complex and, above all, contextspecific phenomenon. The United Arab Emirates
therefore believes that regional counter-terrorism
initiatives play an integral part in supporting Member
States in combating this scourge. It is the responsibility
of the Security Council to maintain international peace
and security, though it must do more to adequately
support African-led efforts in the fight against
terrorism. Today I wish to share three recommendations
on this front.
First, siloes should be broken down even further
when it comes to the terrorism challenge. Often
transnational in nature, the threats of terrorism and
extremism do not respect borders because extremism
specifically undermines the social fabric within and
across communities. This is a fundamental threat to
resilience and peaceful coexistence. It is also a root
cause of terrorism.
Accordingly, African initiatives that seek to counter
extremism must be supported if we want to prevent
terrorism from taking hold. African-led initiatives are
by no means starting from scratch with this transactional
approach; both regional and subregional actors have
been sharing data and intelligence on terrorist and
extremist threats. We have already seen this at work,
with mechanisms such as the Nouakchott process, the
Accra Initiative and the Committee of Intelligence and
Security Services of Africa. Each one is proof positive
that greater integration, information-sharing and joint
assessments lead to better strategies and improved
policy coherence.
But we must go further. We look forward to the
counter-terrorism summit that will be co-hosted by
Nigeria and the United Nations Office of CounterTerrorism in Abuja this October. This summit will
be an excellent opportunity to showcase how closer
regional cooperation can address the growing terrorism
threat in Africa.
Secondly, counter-terrorism solutions should look
beyond the military lens. The root causes of terrorism
and extremism are multifaceted. Good governance,
sustainable development, securing basic services and
the wholesale rejection of intolerance will contribute
to addressing the challenge. A two-pronged approach
must be the way forward. First, adequate prevention
demands the development and implementation of
counter-terrorism strategies from the ground up,
where community actors, religious leaders, women

S/PV.9296

and youth are part and parcel of the solution. Secondly,
it is important for the international community to
support States affected by terrorism and extremism
to develop strong institutions that effectively prevent
and counter these acts in accordance with international
law. Developing more resilient institutions goes a long
way towards inspiring the trust and confidence of
the population.
The ousting of terrorist groups where they exert
control over territory is not enough. It must go hand in
hand with supporting States to regain and retain control
of those areas. When this succeeds, it is imperative to
fill the socioeconomic gaps left in society before they
can be re-exploited by terrorist groups. Providing an
alternative route for the future — access to education
and eventually the job market — is one way. With
respect to this element, we take note of and welcome
the proposal you have just put to us, Mr. President, on
the need for the establishment of a common mechanism
for community resilience to counter extremism,
particularly in relation to youth in Africa and the
Middle East.
Thirdly, we must follow the lead of African
stakeholders. Too often the Security Council has
appealed for action that fell on deaf ears because it
failed to adjust to the nuances of the realities on the
ground. Or the Council has expressed overall support
without the means — political and financial —to
actually make a difference. This disconnect is an
obstacle to evaluating the “what”, the “how” and the
“when” of effective counter-terrorism responses.
Governments in Africa are making strides in the fight
against groups and individual actors that are persistent
and remain a destabilizing force in many countries.
African stakeholders possess the knowledge and the
experience. The time to listen and to support them in
this endeavour is long overdue.
It is critical for the Security Council to heed
the message that Deputy Secretary-General Amina
Mohammed delivered in this Chamber last November
(see S/PV.9188). Against the backdrop of numerous
regional initiatives countering terrorism in Africa,
she stressed that those arrangements require
full support and a durable commitment from the
international community.
In conclusion, the African people plagued by
terrorism deserve the freedom to live in peace and
prosperity. The United Arab Emirates reaffirms its

23-0879213/23

S/PV.9296

Threats Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

full support for all regional and international efforts
aimed at combatting terrorism and extremism, most
importantly, those guided by African actors themselves.
Mr. Bicalho Cozendey (Brazil): At the outset,
Mr. President, I would like to say that I am proud to
participate in today’s debate under your presidency of
the Security Council. Mozambique calls our attention to
the important contribution of regional and subregional
organizations in the fight against terrorism and in the
maintenance of international peace and security in
general. I would also like to thank Secretary-General
António Guterres and Mr. Azali Assoumani, President
of Comoros and Chairperson of the African Union, as
well as the eminent persons who preceded me, for their
insightful remarks.
The United Nations Charter attaches special
relevance to the role that regional and subregional
organizations can play in the maintenance of
international peace and security and the peaceful
settlement of disputes. Article 53 allows the Security
Council to resort to regional arrangements for
enforcement action under its authority. This option
favours the configuration of tailor-made solutions that
take into consideration local realities, as so many before
me have expressed.
In the same vein, the Security Council has
acknowledged in a number of resolutions how such
mechanisms may be critical in preventing and defusing
tensions and in countering such menaces to our collective
security as international terrorism. This is particularly
relevant given that we should not expect that terrorism
can be fought by a one-size-fits-all approach that does
not reflect the actual ethnic, religious, political and
socioeconomic realities of the countries involved.
Recently, the Security Council addressed the
increase of terrorism in the African continent (see
S/PV.9257). This trend is indeed very worrisome. The
rise of terrorism and violent extremism conducive to
terrorism seriously hampers hard-won gains in terms
of development and stability. It also aggravates existing
conflicts, with significant repercussions for the peace
and security of the whole continent, including by
adding an additional challenge for United Nations
peacekeeping missions in fulfilling their mandates.
Facing this enormous challenge, Africa has
given remarkable examples of how regional and
subregional mechanisms can address the threat
posed by terrorist groups. The Southern African
14/23

28/03/2023

Development Community Mission in Mozambique has
achieved significant results in countering terrorism in
Cabo Delgado. The African Union Transition Mission
in Somalia has been working on reducing Al-Shabaab’s
capacities. The Accra Initiative may further contribute
to containing the spillover of terrorism from the Sahel
to neighbouring regions. The Multinational Joint Task
Force’s counter-terrorist operations may also provide
an important contribution to peace and security in the
Lake Chad basin region. We hope that the Joint Force
of the Group of Five for the Sahel will overcome its
current challenges, since its actions are also relevant
to countering terrorism in the region and preventing it
from spreading to its neighbourhood.
Our counter-terrorism efforts will never be enough
if we do not address the root causes of terrorism and
violent extremism conducive to terrorism, such as
prolonged unresolved conflicts, the failure to enforce
the rule of law, human rights violations, ethnic, national
and religious discrimination, political exclusion,
socioeconomic marginalization and unemployment.
In that regard, we emphasize the importance of the
work of the relevant United Nations bodies in supporting
activities to foster economic development and social
justice, in full respect for national sovereignty, with
the aim of reducing inequalities and the sentiment of
injustice that can arise from local and global disparities.
The most recent United Nations Development
Programme report on extremism in Africa, which
deals with recruitment and disengagement, shows
that economic incentives, such as opportunities for
employment, are important drivers that pull individuals
towards that kind of activity. The report makes it
clear that we must move away from exclusively
security-driven responses and adopt developmentbased approaches.
According to the report, investments in
peacebuilding yield a positive return, estimated at a
ratio of 16 to 1. That means that for every $1 invested in
peacebuilding, $16 could be saved in the cost of conflict
and violent extremism conducive to terrorism.
With its representative composition and bridging
mandate, the Peacebuilding Commission (PBC) is well
placed to promote coherence among the relevant actors
within the United Nations system, mobilize regional
organizations and international financial institutions
and foster South-South and triangular cooperation
arrangements in support of national capacities. By
23-08792

28/03/2023

Threats Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

enabling capacity-building, the PBC can also support
Member States in countering terrorism. I would add
that to the list of suggestions that you, Mr. President,
presented.
Finally, we would like to underscore that counterterrorism is effective only if it is carried out in strict
compliance with international law, including the Charter
of the United Nations, international human rights
law, international humanitarian law and international
refugee law.
Brazil reiterates its condemnation of terrorism in
all its forms and manifestations. The repudiation of
terrorism is enshrined in the Brazilian Constitution as
a guiding principle of our international relations. Our
foreign policy also highly values the role of regional
and subregional organizations in securing a safer and
more peaceful world. We must not hesitate to support
them in combating terrorism.
Mr. Liu Yuxi (China) (spoke in Chinese): I thank
the Republic of Mozambique for having convened this
important meeting. I welcome you, Mr. President,
presiding over this debate. I also thank SecretaryGeneral Guterres and the Chairperson of the African
Union, President Assoumani of the Comoros, for
their briefings.
Terrorist activities are currently increasing
and spreading around the world. Regional terrorist
organizations in Africa, such as Boko Haram, the
Lord’s Resistance Army and Al-Shabaab, are colluding
with Da’esh and Al-Qaida to cause unrest, and regional
hotspots remain volatile. There is still a great deal of
work to do in order to eradicate the terrorist threat.
The international community must respond to the
urgent needs and aspirations of African countries and
work jointly to help them to address the most pressing
challenges and the root causes of terrorism.
First, we must build an international consensus
with regard to counter-terrorism. Terrorism is a
common challenge for humankind. The fight against
terrorism is not about one country or one region. Given
the complex and interrelated security challenges,
President Xi Jinping proposed the Global Security
Initiative, stressing that we must remain committed
to maintaining security in both traditional and
non-traditional areas and work together to seek longterm solutions. In the Initiative’s concept paper, China
further calls for strengthening the role of the United
Nations as the central coordinator in the global fight

S/PV.9296

against terrorism and for supporting the international
community in fully implementing the General Assembly
and Security Council counter-terrorism resolutions and
the United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy.
In the context of this year’s eighth review of the United
Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy, we must
take stock of past experience, coordinate our actions to
promote cooperation and strengthen the global united
front against terrorism.
Secondly, we should enhance Africa’s ability
to safeguard peace independently. Africa is at the
forefront of international counter-terrorism efforts.
Many African countries, including Mozambique, have
made tireless efforts to that end. The Security Council
is duty-bound to support Africa in its fight against
terrorism. The international community should further
strengthen international counter-terrorism cooperation
with Africa, push for global resources to be weighted
further towards African countries and increase
support in terms of funding, equipment, intelligence
and logistical supplies so that African countries may
genuinely have the capability to maintain their own
security and stability. The arms embargoes imposed
by the Security Council on the Sudan, South Sudan
and other countries have had a negative impact on the
security capacity-building of the countries concerned
and should be adjusted or lifted in a timely manner.
Thirdly, we must eliminate the breeding grounds
for terrorism. The reasons for terrorism are complex,
and the root causes are primarily development issues.
President Xi Jinping proposed the Global Development
Initiative, which focuses on resolving the issue of
unequal and inadequate development among and within
countries and jointly fostering a global development
community with a shared future. The Initiative
particularly highlights aligning the Belt and Road
Initiative, Agenda 2063 of the African Union (AU)
and the New Partnership for Africa’s Development
with the United Nations 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development and on synchronizing the capacity of
the relevant multilateral cooperation mechanisms to
achieve common development. Africa has an unlimited
potential for development and has a promising future
ahead of it. China calls on the international community
to increasingly listen to the voice of African countries,
prioritize the development agenda, take practical steps
to support Africa in eliminating poverty and achieving
sustainable development and help African countries to
fully eradicate the terrorist threat.

23-0879215/23

S/PV.9296

Threats Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

Fourthly, we should strengthen cooperation between
the United Nations and African regional organizations.
Without peace in Africa, there will be no security in the
world. The United Nations must work closely with the
AU and subregional organizations in Africa in response
to the security challenges there. China welcomes the
Secretary-General’s proposal to provide financial
support to AU-led peace operations, which merits the
Security Council’s careful consideration. The Security
Council should make full use of the annual consultation
mechanism with the AU Peace and Security Council
to coordinate and build synergies regarding counterterrorism issues in Africa. African countries look to
United Nations peacekeeping operations for support
in counter-terrorism efforts. The Secretariat should
pay great attention to their expectation and better
align peacekeeping operations with the needs of
African countries on the premise of upholding the goals
and mandates of peacekeeping operations.
China and Africa are good friends, good partners
and good brothers. China has always been a staunch
supporter of peace and security in Africa. China will
continue to uphold the principles of sincerity, real
results, amity and good faith and the approach of
pursuing the greater good and shared interests proposed
by President Xi Jinping. China will fully implement the
peace and security programme announced at the eighth
Ministerial Conference of the Forum on China-Africa
Cooperation. We will deliver free military assistance
to the AU and regional countries. Through the United
Nations peace and development trust fund, we will
help African countries to develop counter-terrorism
plans and provide funds for counter-terrorism capacitybuilding projects in Africa. China and Africa jointly
launched an initiative on partnership for Africa’s
development in the Security Council, providing a strong
impetus for Africa’s development. We will, through the
implementation of the Global Security Initiative and
the Global Development Initiative, work with Africa
to build a high-level China-Africa community with a
shared future and make a greater contribution to lasting
peace and sustainable development in Africa.
Mr. Kariuki (United Kingdom): I thank you,
Mr. President, for convening today’s meeting, consistent
with your personal leadership on peace and stability
to drive the implementation of the Maputo Accord for
Peace and National Reconciliation. The coordinated
response to the conflict in northern Mozambique
that you secured, Sir, demonstrates the importance of
16/23

28/03/2023

regional collaboration to stem the spread of terrorism.
I also thank the Secretary-General and President
Assoumani, Chairperson of the African Union, for their
briefings. I welcome the presence of all the high-level
participants in this meeting.
As we have heard, the terrorist threat is increasingly
transnational and opportunistic, exploiting existing
tensions in society. The international community’s
response therefore needs to make the most of all our
expertise and capacity, adapted to different regional
contexts as necessary. Let me highlight three priorities.
First, the United Kingdom is committed to regional
security and intelligence cooperation on the continent
of Africa and around the world. We encourage
collaboration among the United Nations, the African
Union (AU) and regional economic communities,
including in mission settings. As with United Nationsand AU-led operations, missions led by regional
economic communities must have robust compliance
and accountability measures, not least to ensure that
they do not fuel the terrorists’ own narratives. We
recognize the challenges of resourcing and sustaining
such operations and look forward to constructive
discussions about how that could be improved following
the Secretary-General’s upcoming report on United
Nations-AU financing.
Secondly, as we work to cut off the funding of
terrorism, we encourage greater use of United Nations
sanctions regimes on the continent of Africa while
also ensuring the continued delivery of humanitarian
assistance to States responding to crises. We deeply
value our cooperation with regional partners on the
Al-Shabaab sanctions regime, which we have used to
continue tightening the knot on Al-Shabaab, including
through sponsoring the designation of individuals
associated with that group.
Thirdly, we welcome and endorse calls for counterterrorism efforts to be holistic, not just militaryfocused. As we review the United Nations Global
Counter-Terrorism Strategy, we are clear that efforts to
counter terrorism and violent extremism must uphold
the protection of human rights, the inclusion of civil
society and the meaningful participation of women in
order to be effective. The United Kingdom is working
closely with partners across Africa to strengthen
security cooperation. In Kenya, for example, the
United Kingdom funded the establishment of the
Anti-Terrorism Police Unit’s headquarters in Mombasa,
23-08792

28/03/2023

Threats Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

as part of our investment of $8.6 million annually to
support Kenya’s counter-terrorism efforts. We also
worked with national and county Governments, as
well as civil society and communities to reduce the
vulnerability of 800 Kenyans at risk of radicalization.
In areas of instability, the Wagner Group is part
of the problem, not the solution. For example, in Mali
and the Central African Republic, we cannot ignore the
destabilizing role of the Wagner Group as they exploit
conflict and governance deficits to suck resources out
of Africa where they are sorely needed, contributing to
environments in which terrorism can thrive.
Finally, we look forward to the African counterterrorism summit, to be held in Abuja in October, as
a chance to strengthen further our cooperation on this
important subject.
Mr. Ishikane (Japan): I would like to express
my appreciation to you, Mr. President, for convening
today’s important debate, and I thank the SecretaryGeneral and President Azali Assoumani for their
comprehensive briefings.
Addressing terrorism and violent extremism is one
of Japan’s top priorities. Regrettably, terrorism remains
a significant threat to international peace and security,
including in Africa. We would like to emphasize
the following three crucial elements: African-led
initiatives, countering terrorist financing, and a human
security perspective.
First, it is imperative to promote African-led
counter-terrorism efforts. Japan welcomes regional
efforts such as the Accra Initiative, the Economic
Community of West African States Conflict Prevention
Framework and the Southern African Development
Community Mission in Mozambique. Effective counterterrorism efforts require capacity-building assistance
from the international community to law-enforcement
and security authorities. Japan is committed to
supporting the African-led efforts under the new
approach for peace and stability in Africa launched at
the seventh Tokyo International Conference on African
Development, for example, by strengthening local
administration capacities in the Group of Five for the
Sahel and neighbouring countries.
Secondly, the international community must unite
in combating terrorist financing. In the region, it is
alarming that the illicit trade in natural resources,
including wildlife, has become a source of funding for

S/PV.9296

terrorists and armed groups. There are also growing
concerns about the misuse of new and emerging
technologies. Those challenges should be addressed in
a coordinated manner in accordance with the relevant
resolutions. Japan is firmly committed to tackling
those threats in collaboration with the international
community, while actively participating in discussions
through the Financial Action Task Force on the
formulation of international standards.
Thirdly, addressing root causes such as poverty and
inequality is indispensable in the fight against terrorism.
Japan believes that it is now more important than ever
to take a human security approach to protect and
empower people and promote the cross-cutting, holistic
and coordinated handling of all the challenges we face,
thereby leaving no one behind. All our efforts in critical
sectors such as health, education and environment
sectors, as well as investing in people, are aimed at
building a resilient and sustainable society where
human security is ensured, thereby reducing people’s
vulnerability to terrorism and violent extremism. We
emphasize the importance for all Member States to
consider a human security perspective in their counterterrorism measures.
Japan will constructively engage in the upcoming
eighth review of the Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy.
As the terrorism threat in Africa intensifies, it is crucial
to emphasize the need for the promotion of the rule of
law, human rights, gender mainstreaming, maritime
security and a whole-of-Government and whole-ofsociety approach, as underscored in the previous review
resolutions. The rule of law, in particular, is a vital
principle for implementing effective counter-terrorism
measures. As a committed partner in the global fight
against terrorism, Japan will continue to cooperate
with the United Nations, regional organizations and all
Member States to ensure peace, stability and prosperity
across the African continent and beyond.
Mr. De Rivière (France) (spoke in French): First
of all, I would like to thank you, Mr. President, for
convening today’s meeting. I also thank the SecretaryGeneral for his briefing and welcome the presence
of the Chairperson of the African Union here among
us today.
Terrorism continues to pose a serious threat to
international peace and security. Terrorist groups such
as Da’esh and Al-Qaida, as well as their affiliates,
remain the most acute threat, particularly on the

23-0879217/23

S/PV.9296

Threats Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

African continent, where they are spreading throughout
Western, Central and Southern Africa. That threat
continues to reconfigure itself and grow, including, for
example, in the Sahel, where terrorist groups continue
to expand towards the Gulf of Guinea. We must
therefore maintain our efforts to address that scourge. I
will highlight five priorities in that regard.
The first issue concerns our means. Terrorism in
Africa is a threat not just to the region but to international
peace and security as a whole. France therefore calls on
the Council to resume discussions on the financing of
African peace operations on the basis of the common
position adopted in Addis Ababa.
Secondly, France and the European Union
are determined to continue and strengthen their
partnerships with African States and African regional
organizations. The European Union makes an essential
contribution to peace and stability in Africa. France
continues to mobilize against terrorism — alongside
its partners, at their request and according to their
needs — in line with a global and renewed approach,
as President Macron indicated just a month ago. That
approach is being translated into concrete actions. The
International Counter-Terrorism Academy in Abidjan,
which is the result of a common goal and joint efforts
by Côte d’Ivoire and France, with the political support
of the African Union and the Economic Community of
West African States, is now going international.
Thirdly, we must defend a resolutely multilateral
approach. United Nations instruments, from panels of
experts to sanctions regimes, are essential. The CounterTerrorism Executive Directorate is contributing to
a better understanding of the threat in Africa and to
robust capacity-building, notably through the Office of
Counter-Terrorism, to which the European Union is the
third-largest contributor.
Fourthly, we must help build community resilience
in conjunction with the States of the region. It is about
addressing the socioeconomic factors that contribute
to terrorist recruitment. It is about addressing the
fundamental challenges posed by climate change, the
links between terrorism and trafficking in resources
and all other crimes that affect the environment. It
is also about combating terrorist propaganda on the
Internet, which is often based on misinformation and
targets young people in particular.
Fifthly, in order to be fully effective, our fight
against terrorism must be part of a global response
18/23

28/03/2023

that includes joint initiatives for development,
strengthening governance and the rule of law and the
fight against corruption.
Offers of pseudo-security made by certain private
military companies and their State sponsors are the
opposite of the partner-friendly approach I have just
described. They are counterproductive in the fight
against terrorism and are focused on the economic
goal of accumulating wealth through the capture of
natural resources, to the detriment of the sovereignty of
African States and populations that are victims of welldocumented abuses. That is why France encourages
the African Union to modernize and implement the
instruments that the Organization of African Unity
put in place in 1977 to combat mercenary activities.
France will continue to work for the implementation
of that global approach while respecting human rights,
fundamental freedoms and multilateralism.
Mr. Hoxha (Albania): I would like to thank the
Mozambican presidency for bringing this matter to the
Council’s attention and you, Sir, for presiding over this
meeting. I thank the Secretary-General and President
Assoumani for their important remarks.
Despite undeniable successes and continued and
sustained efforts, terrorism remains an acute threat to
international peace and security. In particular, reports
of terrorist activities increasing and spreading across
the African continent are a matter of deep concern. In
2022 alone, sub-Saharan Africa counted for more than
48 per cent of deaths caused by terrorism worldwide,
while the Sahel has become home to the world’s fastest
growing and deadliest terrorist groups. Boko Haram
alone has displaced more than 3.4 million civilians
across the region. Wherever terrorism has left its
deadly footprint, it has put the brakes on development
and prosperity, with destabilizing effects that ripple
through many areas across the continent and beyond.
While terrorism is currently wreaking havoc in
Africa, that does not mean that it is exclusively an
African problem. What we are dealing with is a global
problem that requires continued global attention and a
global response that is coordinated and cooperative. We
applaud the great resilience that Governments across
the African continent have shown in dealing with
terrible forms of terrorism, including coordinated and
systematic attacks, with devastating consequences for
local communities. We support the initiatives taken by
the African Union and believe that coordination and
23-08792

28/03/2023

Threats Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

cooperation remain vital. Only a robust, comprehensive
and inclusive approach based on the rule of law
will help not only to fight terrorism but to provide
a clear alternative to terrorist networks and their
treacherous appeal.
Experience has shown that in fighting terrorism
there are no quick fixes with patchy solutions. The
deployment of private military companies and other
mercenaries is therefore not the solution. Most often
they create adverse effects and become part of the
problem themselves. Fighting lawlessness with more
lawlessness is a misconception and will only make
matters worse.
The fact is that in order to successfully fight
terrorism, we have to deal with the root causes.
That requires good and responsive governance. It
requires laws and the rule of law and professional and
independent justice. It requires responding to people’s
needs, including by eliminating poverty and ensuring
basic services, which help to dislodge terrorists’
local foothold. It requires responding to legitimate
grievances, as well as investing in and protecting values
based on rights for all, including national minorities.
It needs transnational cooperation through transparent
and coordinated strategies, not by relying on merchants
of death who pretend to protect life in Africa while
destroying it with impunity.
We note with appreciation that over the past two
decades the United Nations has expanded and deepened
its engagement in counter-terrorism. Yet the pervasive
nature of terrorism and its changing tactics call for
stronger regulations and a normative framework to
maintain and consolidate gains and to preserve shared
norms and universal values against the worst of
enemies. In order to fight terrorism effectively, we need
an inclusive, multilateral and principled approach. Let
me highlight three key aspects.
First, prevention must be at the heart of our
collective efforts in the fight against terrorism. The use
of force to eradicate terrorism is unavoidable, but it can
never be enough on its own, and it cannot be the only
tool. Ideology cannot be countered by weapons alone,
however powerful and effective the use of force may
appear to be. It is necessary to deal with the grievances
and multiple deprivations that allow people to fall prey
in large numbers to the hateful and violent ideology of
terrorism. We should heed the Secretary-General’s call
in his New Agenda for Peace, which recognizes the root

S/PV.9296

causes of terrorism and a structured, comprehensive
strategy to address them.
Secondly, we should always keep in mind the
mobile nature of terrorist organizations. Even when
they are perceived as eliminated in one place, they will
pop up in another, more vulnerable environment, such
as neighbouring countries or regions, which explains
why only a small percentage of terrorist groups have
ever been suppressed through military force alone. In
the same vein, the fight against terrorism must follow
the law in all circumstances. It cannot be conducted
at the expense of basic rights, because that will be
counterproductive and ultimately self-defeating.
Thirdly, we need a multilateral counter-terrorism
strategy that is fit for the digital age. Our fight against
terrorism must involve new methods and technologies
applied in cyberspace, where cyberattacks can produce
equally devastating consequences in the real world, as
has been demonstrated more than once.
In conclusion, I want to reiterate that it is through
continued collective action — by building trust and
resilience, ensuring sustainable development and the
rule of law, protecting human rights and acting in an
inclusive and gender-sensitive manner — that we will be
able to successfully fight terrorism in all its forms and
manifestations wherever it occurs, making terrorists
and their ideology less appealing to vulnerable people
and those in need. Albania supports the eighth review
of the Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy and looks
forward to meaningful discussions in that process. We
must build on the best and most successful examples
and lessons learned to find new and effective solutions
to eradicate terrorism everywhere.
Mr. Nebenzia (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We are pleased to be welcoming you as
you preside over our meeting today, Mr. President.
I would like to thank the Secretary-General and
President Assoumani for their briefings. We also
thank Mozambique for organizing today’s debate
on the pressing problem of combating terrorism and
extremism, with a focus on the complexities of the
African continent.
I would like to stress that the Russian Federation
fully supports African countries in the fight against
international terrorism. In that struggle we have always
advocated respect for the purposes and principles of
the Charter of the United Nations in their entirety,
recognition of the primary role of States and their relevant

23-0879219/23

S/PV.9296

Threats Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

authorities, the inadmissibility of any justification of
terrorism and the duty to ensure criminal liability for
terrorists and their accomplices. The United Nations
should continue to play a central and coordinating role
with respect to counter-terrorism cooperation, with due
respect for the norms and principles of international
law. We are opposed to concepts of any kind that allow
for interference in the internal affairs of other States
on a pretext of combating terrorism, in the guise of
preventing manifestations of violent extremism or
by manipulating the issue of fighting terrorism and
extremism for political purposes. We see the Shanghai
Cooperation Organization’s 2017 Convention on
Countering Extremism as an alternative that provides
a robust legal foundation for strengthening inter-State
cooperation in the area. Its concept is aimed not only
at uncompromisingly combating any manifestations
of terrorism and extremism but at preventing and
pre-empting them. It is essentially the first international
counter-extremism treaty of its kind and is open for
accession by all interested States.
We agree that greater attention must be paid to
identifying and eradicating the root causes of terrorism.
However, in that context, not everything can be reduced
to socioeconomic problems and corruption, which do
not always reflect the reality or the traditional sources
of radicalization.
Terrorism in the Sahel became an avalanche after
the West’s unforgivable military intervention in Libya,
which destabilized the entire region and had ripple
effects as far as the coastal States of West Africa. And
yet not only could the foreign contingents that ended up
on the territory of a number of countries of the Sahel
not reverse the situation, it got much worse while they
were there. Attempts to justify those developments as
the result of religious, ethnic or social conflicts amount
to the same kind of manipulation that the colonial
Powers have wielded for decades. We can only welcome
the growing awareness among African States of the
real sources of the threats and the quest for effective
regional mechanisms to counter them. Strengthening
national security structures and genuine cooperation
with neighbours are key to combating terrorism
successfully. We see outside forces attempting to sow
division among States in the region, claiming that some
countries are worthy of assistance in fighting terrorism
and others are not. They say they will fight only as far
as the border, and that after that countries are on their
20/23

28/03/2023

own. That is how terrorists are being pushed into Mali
and Burkina Faso, a tactic we consider unacceptable.
Our delegation is seriously concerned about the
ongoing mass redeployment of fighters to African
countries. It is important to prevent terrorists, especially
the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant, from gaining
a foothold in the region and creating a new caliphate
2.0. The Russian Federation supports the initiatives
of African States to combat the terrorist threat and
violent extremism and appreciates the measures they
have taken to establish counter-terrorist cooperation
within the context of subregional organizations. We
call for further strengthening the potential of regional
organizations, especially the African Union, that are
capable of implementing comprehensive counterterrorism strategies and serving as platforms for sharing
information, experience and best practices.
We should also give high priority to the education
and training of law-enforcement and judicial officials
in countering today’s challenges and threats both
multilaterally and bilaterally. Russia will continue to
provide practical assistance in that area. Specialist
programmes and technical assistance projects,
especially within the United Nations Office of CounterTerrorism, represent the best way to make optimal use
of United Nations resources. The joint project funded
by the Russian Federation and led by the United Nations
Office of Counter-Terrorism and the United Nations
Office on Drugs and Crime on strengthening States’
capacity to combat illicit arms trafficking is a good
example. It is aimed at increasing the effectiveness
of criminal justice in preventing and stopping illicit
trafficking in small arms and light weapons, as well as
preventing their transfer to terrorist groups. The project
includes thematic seminars and refresher courses for
representatives of Government agencies responsible for
combating illicit arms trafficking and terrorism. This
year the project’s technical assistance is to be expanded
to countries on the African continent.
We believe that it is important to once again remind
the Council of the potential of the Counter-Terrorism
Committee, within whose framework it will be vital
to pay greater attention to African States and make
assessment visits to them a priority. We would like to
stress that the recommendations in the Committee’s
country reports not only facilitate the implementation
of the relevant Security Council counter-terrorism
resolutions but also help attract technical assistance and
23-08792

28/03/2023

Threats Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

make it more targeted and tailored to States’ specific
circumstances and needs.
The issue of the cooperation between Russia and
countries of the African continent has been touched
on today. I would like to point out that countries of
Africa have every right to decide with whom and how
to cooperate. It is the failures of Western States that
have obliged African countries to turn to those that
can make a genuine contribution to the fight against
terrorism on their continent. We are all aware that
against the background of some of the West’s operations
in Africa supposedly aimed at combating terrorism, the
terrorist threat in West Africa and the Sahel has simply
continued to grow.
The Russian Federation will continue to work
with reliable partners in Asia, Africa and Latin
America on counter-terrorism issues. We remain open
to cooperating with all interested parties. We believe
that the global nature of terrorism issues demands a
comprehensive approach and concerted efforts on the
part of the entire international community.
Ms. Gatt (Malta): At the outset I thank you,
Mr. President, and your country, Mozambique, for
organizing today’s important high-level debate. I also
thank the Secretary-General for his briefing and the
President of Comoros and Chairperson of the African
Union (AU) for his insightful remarks.
It is undeniable that terrorism constitutes a great
threat to international peace and security. The deeply
worrisome activities we see around the world are
testament to that and a clear indication that there is
still considerable work to be done by the international
community in the area. Terrorist activity and violence
continue to increase in Africa, with the Sahel alone
accounting for 43 per cent of total terrorism-related
deaths globally in 2022, and the situation in other
regions of Africa is also very concerning. Notably, many
terrorist groups operating on the African continent,
including Al-Qaida and Da’esh affiliates such as
Al-Shabaab and Boko Haram, are conducting attacks
and expanding the scope of their operations across
national borders, undermining security in the region.
Malta welcomes the increased engagement between
the United Nations and the African Union on peace and
security issues in Africa in recent years and underlines
once again the value of regional organizations in
bringing their unique knowledge and perspectives to
the table. We will continue to support the strengthening

S/PV.9296

of such cooperation in the area of counter-terrorism,
where ongoing regional and subregional counterterrorism initiatives include the African Union
Transition Mission in Somalia, the Group of Five for
the Sahel and the Accra Initiative.
For United Nations efforts to be truly effective,
they must address transnational terrorist threats in
a more holistic manner by working with the African
Union and African subregional organizations, including
the Economic Community of West African States, the
Intergovernmental Authority on Development and the
Southern African Development Community. In that
regard, Malta recognizes the need for predictable and
sustainable financing for United Nations-authorized,
AU-led peace support operations. We look forward to
discussing the Secretary-General’s upcoming report on
the issue. We also welcome the work of the Independent
High-Level Panel on Security and Development in
the Sahel. We hope that the Panel’s recommendations
will pave the way for some long-awaited progress on
strengthening international and regional cooperation
in addressing the region’s multifaceted challenges,
including military coups. However, we must be clear
that regional responses cannot be solely securitydriven. Comprehensive regional approaches must also
address humanitarian, development and social needs
to prevent recruitment among vulnerable populations,
including disaffected youth.
Malta supports a preventive approach that tackles
the root causes of terrorism. They include conflict,
governance and accountability deficits, lack of
development, poverty, lack of access to education,
climate change and human rights abuses. By engaging
with regional and subregional organizations, the
United Nations can ensure that its efforts to counter
terrorism and prevent violent extremism are contextsensitive and grounded in local realities. In addition,
the latest research by the United Nations Development
Programme on extremism in Africa reveals that human
rights violations perpetrated by State actors are the main
triggers that drive individuals to join violent extremist
groups. Malta underscores the fact that regional
efforts to counter terrorism must always comply with
international law, in particular international human
rights law and international humanitarian law.
Counter-terrorism measures must be genderresponsive, ensure the participation of women and
young people and include meaningful engagement
with civil society and local communities. Malta would

23-0879221/23

S/PV.9296

Threats Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

also like to highlight the valuable contribution by the
Common Security and Defence Policy missions of
the European Union to strengthening the security and
justice sectors and supporting our partners in Africa.
An additional mission was established in Mozambique
in January 2022.
Lastly, as an active participant in this year’s review
of the Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy, Malta
stands ready to engage with African partners on ways
to address the terrorist threat more effectively on the
continent. We also hope that the African counterterrorism summit, to be convened by the Office of
Counter-Terrorism and Nigeria later this year, will mark
a turning point in strengthening regional cooperation in
addressing the evolving threat of terrorism in Africa.
Mr. Montalvo Sosa (Ecuador) (spoke in Spanish):
I join others in welcoming you to the Security Council,
Mr. President. I also thank Mozambique for convening
this high-level debate on an issue that Ecuador considers
extremely important. And we are grateful for the
informative briefings by Secretary-General António
Guterres and Mr. Assoumani, President of Comoros
and Chairperson of the African Union.
As Chapter VIII of the Charter of the United
Nations and many General Assembly and Security
Council resolutions acknowledge, cooperation between
the United Nations and regional organizations and
mechanisms has a fundamental role to play in the
maintenance of international peace and security. That
cooperation is even more important in countering the
threat posed by terrorism, as that scourge’s transnational
nature makes a coordinated and comprehensive
response on the part of the international community
imperative. Ecuador supports the measures that the
United Nations has taken to strengthen that cooperation
through entities such as the Office of Counter-Terrorism
and the Executive Directorate of the Counter-Terrorism
Committee. On example of that cooperation is the
African summit on counter-terrorism to be held in
Abuja this year. We also acknowledge the reasons why
the fight against terrorism is high both on the agenda of
the African Union and its Peace and Security Council
and at the subregional level. We commend the efforts
made to improve security through initiatives such as
the African Union Transition Mission in Somalia, the
Joint Force of the Group of Five for the Sahel and the
Southern African Development Community Mission
in Mozambique. As I said, Ecuador believes that
cooperation between the United Nations and regional
22/23

28/03/2023

and subregional organizations is vital to overcoming
the challenges posed by the global issue of terrorism
and should be focused on four areas.
First, we must strengthen mechanisms to police the
financing of terrorism and its links to organized crime,
which is a priority for Ecuador as a non-permanent
member of the Security Council. That includes efforts
involving financial information-sharing, capacitybuilding, sectoral risk assessment, the development
of an appropriate legal framework and other priority
issues identified by the Financial Action Task Force,
whose work we acknowledge.
Secondly, the experience and technical capabilities
of the United Nations should be used as primary inputs
for enabling regional and subregional organizations to
react adequately to the growing threat posed by the use
of new and emerging technologies for terrorist purposes.
Thirdly, and from a prevention perspective, this
cooperation can help establish more meaningful
democratic institutions through measures that
contribute to the strengthening of independent and
professional judicial systems and more transparent and
credible electoral processes.
Lastly, the creation of regional and subregional
strategies for combating terrorism should be promoted
according to the model in Central Asia, which has
adopted a joint plan of action on the implementation
of the Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy. The
eighth review of the Strategy will provide us with an
opportunity to give renewed impetus and a new direction
to cooperation between the United Nations and regional
bodies in the fight against terrorism. It is a useful
tool for ensuring that the counter-terrorism responses
of regional organizations reflect all its elements,
especially respect for human rights and international
law and the inclusion of a gender perspective that takes
into account women’s vulnerabilities in the context of
terrorist attacks, and at the same time ensures their
participation in decision-making processes.
In conclusion, we reiterate that the fight against
terrorism can never be limited to a military response,
but must include a development approach at its core — or
undertaken in a holistic vision, in the words of the
Vice-President of Gabon and other representatives here
today. We cannot ignore the fact that factors such as
inequality, unemployment and a lack of opportunities
spawn radicalism and violent extremism. Consequently,
while using their own policies and national plans to
23-08792

28/03/2023

Threats Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

guide them, developing countries require the support
and cooperation of the international community to
achieve the Sustainable Development Goals enshrined
in the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development.
The President: I now call on the Minister for
Foreign Affairs and International Cooperation
of Rwanda.
Mr. Biruta (Rwanda): On behalf of President
Kagame, I would like to begin by thanking you,
Mr. President, for the invitation to speak before the
Security Council today. I also thank the briefers,
especially the Secretary-General and the President of
Comoros and Chairperson of the African Union.
In Africa, terrorism and violent extremism are
spreading at an alarming rate. That is a threat to everyone
everywhere. Traditional peacekeeping missions alone
have not proved effective enough to address the global
challenge. With the support of the Security Council, we
need more robust and pragmatic approaches, tailored
to local contexts. Bilateral and regional interventions
merit our attention. Under our bilateral mechanisms
and at the request of both Governments, Rwanda
has deployed troops to Mozambique and the Central
African Republic. While that approach is quick and
effective, it needs sustainable funding to create a solid

S/PV.9296

base from which multilateral forces can take over. The
assistance measure recently provided under the African
Peace Facility of the European Union in support
of the deployment of the Rwanda Defence Force to
Mozambique has been critical in ensuring that such
bilateral interventions can be financially sustained. An
effective cooperation framework between the United
Nations and regional mechanisms should also prioritize
post-conflict reconstruction, working hand in hand
with communities.
Ultimately, it is national unity and good governance
that create the conditions for lasting peace. We have
learned that from our own country’s tragic history. It
is not enough for issues pertaining to our continent to
constitute a significant portion of the Security Council’s
agenda. The representation of African countries on the
Security Council is also critical. If we are to ensure
the continuity of discussions such as these and take full
ownership of our development, Africa cannot be left out
of decision-making processes. I would like to commend
the significant progress made in strengthening the
partnership between the United Nations and the African
Union. We still have a long way to go, but together we
will achieve much more.
The meeting rose at 12.25 p.m.

23-0879223/23
