A/61/833–S/2007/179

United Nations

General Assembly
Security Council

Distr.: General
30 March 2007
Original: English

General Assembly
Sixty-first session
Agenda item 108 (e)
Cooperation between the United Nations and regional
and other organizations: cooperation between the
United Nations and the Caribbean Community

Security Council
Sixty-second year

Identical letters dated 29 March 2007 from the Secretary-General
to the President of the General Assembly and the President of the
Security Council
I have the honour to transmit to you herewith the text of the joint statement
adopted by the participants in the Fourth General Meeting of the United Nations
system and the Caribbean Community (CARICOM) and its associated institutions,
which was held at CARICOM headquarters in Turkeyen, Greater Georgetown,
Guyana, on 25 and 26 January 2007 (see annex).
I should be grateful if you would arrange for this letter and its annex to be
circulated as a document of the Security Council in response to resolution 1631
(2005). I also request that the joint statement be circulated as a document of the
General Assembly under agenda item 108 (e).
(Signed) Ban Ki-moon

07-29112 (E) 040407

*0729112*

A/61/833
S/2007/179

Annex
Joint statement of the Fourth General Meeting of representatives
of the Caribbean Community and the United Nations system
25 and 26 January 2007, Turkeyen, Greater Georgetown, Guyana
1.
The Fourth General Meeting of the United Nations system and the Caribbean
Community (CARICOM) Secretariat and its associated institutions was convened at
the CARICOM Secretariat in Guyana on 25 and 26 January 2007. The United
Nations delegation was led by the representative of the Secretary-General, Jomo
Kwame Sundaram, Assistant Secretary-General for Economic Development in the
Department of Economic and Social Affairs. The delegation of the Caribbean
Community was led by Ambassador Lolita Applewhaite, Deputy Secretary-General.
Both heads of delegation co-chaired the plenary sessions of the meeting, which
enjoyed wide participation of representatives of CARICOM and its associated
institutions, and of representatives of the United Nations system. Edwin Carrington,
Secretary-General of CARICOM, participated in the closing session of the meeting.
2.
The Deputy Secretary-General of CARICOM made an opening statement. The
representative of the United Nations Secretary-General read a message from Ban
Ki-moon, Secretary-General of the United Nations.
3.
Deputy Secretary-General Applewhaite provided the meeting with a
comprehensive update on the region’s success thus far towards the construction and
implementation of the CARICOM Single Market and Economy with a view to
effectively and creatively fulfilling its ultimate mandate of improving the standard
of living and quality of life of the peoples of the Caribbean Community through
sustainable development. She highlighted the challenges faced in pursuit of this
objective, within the context of a global economic environment adversely impacted
by globalization and trade liberalization.
4.
Detailing the status of implementation of the CARICOM Single Market and
Economy, she emphasized that the construct and modus operandi of the CARICOM
Single Market and Economy reflect the Community’s approach to integration as an
interdisciplinary exercise, with such issues as poverty reduction, food security,
agriculture, environment, information and communication technology, culture,
gender, security and governance being treated systematically as cross-cutting themes
rather than development objectives in themselves; an integrated approach critical to
the sustainable development of the small, vulnerable States of the Caribbean. She
expressed appreciation to the United Nations for its continued support to the
Community, particularly to Haiti and to Grenada following Hurricane Ivan.
5.
The message of the United Nations Secretary-General reiterated the strong
commitment of the United Nations system to support CARICOM in its efforts to
pursue regional economic and social development and tackle pressing issues such as
transnational crime and HIV/AIDS. The United Nations system’s ongoing effort to
address the special development needs of the region, particularly in the context of
the Barbados Programme of Action and the Mauritius Strategy for the Further
Implementation of the Programme of Action for the Sustainable Development of
Small Island Developing States, was underscored.
6.
The CARICOM side also shared its thoughts on the development paradigm of
the region with regard to economic and social development and governance.

2

07-29112

A/61/833
S/2007/179

7.
The representative of the United Nations Secretary-General identified
strengthening the institutional framework of support at both the regional and
national levels to advance the development objectives of the Caribbean Community
as the fundamental objective of CARICOM-United Nations cooperation. He urged
the meeting to adopt a practical and realistic approach towards the development of
those priorities identified by the region which could be meaningfully undertaken
with United Nations support.
8.
The meeting received detailed CARICOM presentations outlining strategic
objectives for the coming biennium, covering the following areas:
(a) Implementation of the CARICOM Single Market and development of the
framework for the Single Economy;
(b)

Institutional development and strengthening of the Community;

(c)

Advancing human and social development;

(d) Enhancing the strategic position of CARICOM within the hemispheric
and global environment;
(e)

Strengthening governance and security within the Community;

(f)

Information and communication technology for development;

(g) Implementation of the Mauritius Strategy for the Fourth Implementation
of the Programme of Action for the Sustainable Development of Small Island
Developing States;
(h)

Resource mobilization.

9.
Bilateral and multilateral consultations among representatives of CARICOM
and its associated institutions and United Nations system representatives were held,
providing the opportunity for the development and exploration of ongoing and
potential areas of cooperation within the framework of the programme priorities
identified.
10. The meeting welcomed the major accomplishments of the Community in
deepening the process of regional integration, including progress in the
implementation of the CARICOM Single Market and Economy, and publication by
CARICOM of the Caribbean Trade and Investment Report, 2005. The meeting also
acknowledged progress at the regional and national levels in addressing a range of
social challenges including children and youth, population, reproductive health,
ageing, migration, and efforts at gender mainstreaming. The need for support to
enhance public education, particularly within the context of facilitating
implementation of the CARICOM Single Market and Economy and for campaigns
promoting control of non-communicable diseases was underscored. The United
Nations system reiterated its commitment of continued support for CARICOM
efforts in these areas.
11. The meeting acknowledged that much has been accomplished towards
deepening the cooperation between CARICOM and the United Nations, and it
welcomed the degree of substantive and technical support provided by the United
Nations system to the Caribbean Community, including its member States and
associated institutions.

07-29112

3

A/61/833
S/2007/179

12. The meeting took note of the region’s agenda for creating decent work for all
and in addressing all of the attendant challenges in the area of labour productivity
and workers rights, and expressed appreciation for the contribution of the United
Nations system in the provision of tangible support towards achieving this agenda.
13. The meeting welcomed the reaffirmation of United Nations support for the
strengthening of governance, and for the region’s efforts to combat transnational
crime, particularly in building the region’s capacity to implement legal and political
instruments related to the eradication of the illicit trade in small arms and light
weapons as well as to non-proliferation of weapons of mass destruction. Given the
ongoing threat to the security of the region posed by narco-trafficking, the meeting
took note of CARICOM concern at the recent closure of the United Nations Office
on Drugs and Crime in the region.
14. The meeting also noted with concern the continuing negative impact of the
HIV/AIDS epidemic on the region but recorded positive developments in the
CARICOM-United Nations partnership in this area, resulting in an increased
awareness and public education on the disease and action at the level of national and
regional strategic planning, and in the exchange of information and provision of
technical advice.
15. The United Nations system took particular note of the focus and new emphasis
of CARICOM on non-communicable diseases and the regional summit scheduled
for later in 2007.
16. Progress through joint efforts to address the full and effective implementation
of the Barbados Programme of Action and the Mauritius Strategy for its further
implementation was acknowledged. The meeting stressed the need to move
expeditiously to the practical implementation of the Mauritius Strategy at the
regional, subregional and national levels. The importance of agricultural
development and food security received close attention in CARICOM — United
Nations collaboration. In this context, the meeting welcomed progress made in the
Jagdeo Initiative, which has the support of several United Nations and CARICOM
partners.
17. Support for the strengthening of the Community’s resilience through disaster
management, preparedness and environmental sustainability was a high priority for
follow-up action. Since effective implementation of a comprehensive disaster
management strategy is demanding a multidisciplinary approach, the United Nations
system reaffirmed its commitment of the widest participation in a collective
approach to address this challenge, in collaboration with CARICOM and its
associated institutions.
18. CARICOM and the United Nations agreed to jointly pursue the full and
effective implementation of the 2005 World Summit Outcome on the review of
progress in the implementation of the Millennium Development Goals, since this
document accurately reflects the thinking of the international community with
respect to international cooperation for development on which the follow-up for
collaboration between CARICOM and the United Nations should be based.
19. The contribution of both CARICOM and the United Nations, through
MINUSTAH, in bringing a greater degree of political and social stability to Haiti,
and the readmission of Haiti to the Councils of the Community was welcomed. Both
sides reaffirmed their commitment to supporting that country in its efforts to achieve

4

07-29112

A/61/833
S/2007/179

sustainable economic development and enhanced social and political stability. The
United Nations encouraged CARICOM to become a partner in the integrated
mission in Haiti.
20. The United Nations received the requests of CARICOM for support in training
and capacity-building, ICT development, research, analysis and advisory services to
support informed decision-making and policy formulation, as well as public
education at national and regional levels. The meeting agreed that this should be an
area for active, system-wide follow-up.
21. The meeting concluded that attention be given to the establishment of an
appropriate regional programmatic framework for the pursuit of follow-up and
coordination of the priority areas for collaboration. It was also agreed that a
mechanism for indicating specific areas of cooperation to monitor and measure
progress in implementation should be designed and implemented.
22. The meeting recognized the importance of addressing the development
challenges facing CARICOM member States, both at the national and regional
levels, and of the commitments and agreements entered into by them at the
international level. It also recognized that these obligations impose a heavy burden
on limited national and regional resources. It was agreed that CARICOM and the
United Nations would examine ways in which support could be coherently provided
to CARICOM, its member States and associated institutions in meeting these
obligations, ensuring national and regional ownership of both process and outcome.
23. It was agreed that the United Nations would host the next meeting in 2008 to
evaluate progress made in their cooperation, at a date and venue to be determined.
24. It was also agreed that the report on the meeting would be finalized shortly and
circulated to all participants.

07-29112

5
