V.

------------

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Second f'ommitkr

in the context of the commitments entered into by the
United Nations Conference on Trade and Development
at its fifth session;
(b) Developed countries which have not yet done so
should take steps as quickly as possible to apply the
conclusions approved under section A of Trade and
Development Board resolution 165 (S-IX) of 11 March

1978;237
(c) Provision of financial assistance on favourable
terms, inter alia, to meet their food deficit and agricultural development requirements;
(d) Industrialization efforts should receive a due
share of the resources transferred to those countries,
taking into account their development priorities;
3. Notes that the International Monetary Fnnd is
studying the possibility of establishing an interest subsidy for the Supplementary Financing Facility, that the
Development Committee has requested the Executive
Board of the Fund to give attention to developing ways
and means of lowering the interest costs of the Supplementary Financing Facility and that the Fund has recently extended the maturities of drawings on the
Extended Financing Facility, and invites the Fund to
give consideration to proposals in those areas;
4. Invites the International Monetary Fund to take
into account, within the context of its financing facilities
and guidelines, the adverse balance-of-payments effects
caused by the rise in the food import bills of those countries which may be most seriously affected by the current
economic crisis;
5. Invites the multilateral development and financial
institutions to give special attention to the development
and immediate balance-of-payments needs of those countries which may be most seriously affected by the current
economic crisis; in that context, appropriate bodies in
the International Monetary Fund and the World Bank
are invited to continue to consider within their respective
fields of competence the relevant proposals contained in
the Outline for a Programme of Action on International
Monetary Reform adopted by the Group of Seventyseven at its ministerial meeting held at Belgrade on
29 September 1979.288

109th plenary meeting
19 December 1979

34/218.

United Nations Conference on Science and
Technology for Development

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 3201 (S-VI) and 3202 (S-VI)
of 1 May 1974, containing the Declaration and the
Programme of Action on the Establishment of a New
International Economic Order, which give prominence
to the role of science and technology in promoting the
development of developing countries,
Recalling also its resolutions 3362 (S-VII) of 16 September 1975, 31/184 of 21 December 1976, 32/115 of
15 December 1977 and 33/ 192 of 29 January 1979 and
Economic and Social Council resolutions 1897 (LVII)
of 1 August 1974, 2028 (LXI) of 4 August 1976, 2123
(LXIII) of 4 August 1977 and 1978/70 of 4 August
1978, concerning the convening and preparation of the
287 Official

Records of the General Assembly, Thirty-third
Session, Supplement No. 15 (A/33/15 and Corr.l), vol. I, part
two, annex I.
2 8& See A/C.2/34/13.

153

United Nations Conference on Science and Technology
for Development.
Recalli11g further 11~ resolutions 32/ 197 of 20 December 1977 and 33/202 of 29 Januarv 1979 on the
restructuring of the economic and social sectors of the
United Nations syskm.
Conl'inccd of the paramount need for and importance
of the application of ~rience and technology to development in establi~hing c1 new international economic order,
Remgni,~inR that pl.'ace, security and national independence are important factors for ensuring the effective
utili7ation ;md further drvdopment of science and technology for all countnt·"'· m particular for the developing
countries, and that effective measures in the field of real
disarn1ament would increase the possibilities of reallocation of w,ources now being used for military purposes to
economic and social development, particularly for the
benefit of the developing countries.
Emphasizing the urgent need to develop and strengthen
the scientific and technological capacities of the developing countries in order to enable them to apply science
and technology to their own development, with a view
to the elimination of existing inequalities between developing and developed countries in science and
technology,
Recognizing that concerted and su<,tained efforts must
be made by all sections of the international community
in order to achieve the goal of strengthening the endogenous scientific and technological capacities of the developing countries,
Further recognizing the role of the intergovernmental
organizations and non-governmental organizations in the
implementation of scientific and technological development programmes,
Conscious that deliberate and urgent steps are needed
in order to achieve the target of reconstructing the existing pattern of international scientific and technological
relations,
Affirming the central role of the United Nations in the
promotion of science and technology for development
and the need to strengthen that role through, inter alia,
new institutional arrangements and additional and substantially increased financial re~ources,
Reaffirming the need to strengthen the role of the
United Nations sy~tem in the field of science and technology through, inter alia, new institutional arrangements and new substantial resources in addition to those
which currently exist,
Recognizing the need for adopting effective means of
utilizing new science and technology for overcoming
obstacles to development and also the role to be played
by science and technology in the development strategies
for the future,
Taking note of the report adopted by the United Nations Conference on Science and Technology for Development on 31 August 1979, 2 ' 9
Noting with satisfaction the agreements reached at the
United Nations Conference on Science and Technology
for Development as contained in the report adopted by
the Conference, 2 ' 9
Rf'cognizinR the important role of Governments in the
execution of the Virnna Programme of Action on Science and Technology for Development, 2 • 0 adopted by
2a 9 Report of the U11itetl Natinn~ Co11ference on Science and
Technology for Development, Vien11a, 20-31 August 1979
(United Nations publication, Sales No. E.79.1.21 and corrigenda).
240 Ibid .. chap Vll

General Assembly-Thirty-fourth Session

154

the Conference, and in the implementation of scientific
and technological programmes within the framework of
national development programmes,
Expressing regret that no decisions were taken on
certain important questions,
Taking note of the report of the Secretary-General on
the United Nations Conference on Science and Technology for Development,2•1
I
VIENNA PROGRAMME OF ACTION ON SCIENCE AND
TECHNOLOGY FOR DEVELOPMENT

1. Expresses its appreciation and thanks to the Government and people of Austria for the excellent facilities
and g€lnerous hospitality provided for the United Nations
Conference on Science and Technology for Development, held at Vienna from 20 to 31 August 1979;
2. Endorses the Vienna Programme of Action on
Science and Technology for Development;2•0
3. Urges all Governments to take effective action for
the implementation of the Vienna Programme of Action;
4. Requests organs, organizations and bodies of the
United Nations system and other intergovernmental
organizations to comply with the recommendations set
forth in the Vienna Programme of Action;
5. Invites all concerned scientific and technical
organizations to be guided by the provisions of the
Vienna Programme of Action;
6. Fully supports resolution 2, entitled "Women,
science and technology", adopted by the Conference on
31 August 1979; 2 • 2

II
INTERGOVERNMENTAL COMMITTEE ON SCIENCE
AND TECHNOLOGY FOR DEVELOPMENT

I. Decides to establish an Intergovernmental Committee on Science and Technology for Development; 2 • 3
2. Endorses the recommendation of the Conference
that representation of Member States in the Committee
should be at a high level;
3. Decides that the Committee shall be open to the
participation of all States as full members, shall meet
once a year and shall submit its reports and recommendations to the General Assembly through the Economic
and Social Council, which may transmit to the Assembly
such comments on the report as it may deem necessary,
particularly with regard to co-ordination;
4. Invites all States to participate actively in the
Committee and to make an effective contribution to
its work;
5. Decides that the Committee shall assist the General Assembly, inter alia, in the following functions:
(a) Formulating policy guidelines for the harmonization of policies of the organs, organizations and bodies
of the United Nations system in regard to scientific and
technological activities, on the basis of the Vienna Programme of Action and with a view to contributing to the
establishment of a new international economic order;
m A/34/587 and Add.1 and 2.
the United Nations Conference on Science
and Technology for Development, Vienna, 20-31 August 1979
(United Nations publication, Sales No. E.79.1.21 and corrigenda), chap. VI, sect. A.
Ha At the same time, the General Assembly recommends to
the Economic and Social Council that its Committee on Science
and Technology for Development should cease to exist.
2 ' 2 See Report of

(b) Promoting the improvement of linkages between
the organs, organizations and bodies of the United Nations system, with a view to ensuring the co-or~inated
244
implementation of the Vienna Programme of Achon;
(c) Identifying priorities for activities within the
Vienna Programme of Action with a view to facilitating
operational planning at the national, subregional, regional, interregional and international levels;
(d) Preparing an operational plan for carrying out
the Vienna Programme of Action;
(e) Monitoring the activities and programmes related to science and technology within the organs, organizations and bodies of the United Nations system;
(f) Promoting the optimum mobilization of resources in order to enable the organs, organizations and
bodies of the United Nations system to carry out the
activities of the Vienna Programme of Action;
(g) Initiating arrangements for the early identification and assessment of new scientific and technological
developments which may adversely affect the development process as well as those which may have specific
and potential importance for that process and for
strengthening the scientific and technological capacities
of the developing countries;
(h) Providing directives and policy-making guidance
to the United Nations Financing System for Science and
Technology for Development, as described in section
VI below;
6. Decides that the Committee shall, as an exception, hold a one-week additional session early in 1980
to consider, inter alia, organizational matters and other
issues of a particularly urgent nature and shall hold its
regular session in the second quarter of 1980;
7. Requests the Committee to establish working
procedures and mechanisms necessary for the effective
discharge of its responsibilities and to report thereon to
the General Assembly at its thirty-fifth session through
the Economic and Social Council;
8. Decides that the Committee shall establish procedures and mechanisms which will ensure it adequate
and effective provision of scientific and technical expert
advice, shall consider in this connexion modifying the
terms of reference of the Advisory Committee on the
Application of Science and Technology to Development
so that the latter will be able to provide, upon the request of the Committee, all necessary assistance and
advice, and shall report thereon to the General Assembly
through the Economic and Social Council;
9. Invites the Economic and Social Council to take
the necessary action, in the light of recommendations
that may be made by the Committee, regarding the
Advisory Committee on the Application of Science and
Technology to Development;
10. Decides to refer those issues on which agreement was not reached at the Conference to the Committee, so that it may decide, at its earliest convenience,
what further action, including procedural action, may be
required, taking into account the relevant decision of
the Conference;
11. Invites all organs, organizations and bodies of
the United Nations system, including the regional commissions, the SiJecialized agencies and the International
Atomic Energy Agency, in accordance with practices
established in the light of the relevant resolutions of the
244 The Committee for Programme and Co-ordination and
the Administrative Committee on Co-ordination should assist
the Intergovernmental Committee, at its request, in accordance
with their terms of reference.

v.

Resohdlom adopted o■ die npom of tlle Second Committee

General Assembly and the relationship agree~ents, to
participate actively in the work of the Co1DD11ttee a_t a
high level, preferably at the level of heads of secretanat;
12. Invites all appropriate intergovernmental organizations, non-governmental organizations and other
concerned organizations to participate in the work of the
Committee according to procedures established by the
Committee;

III
CENTRE FOR SCIENCE AND
TECHNOLOGY FOR DEVELOPMENT

1. Requests the Secretary-General to establish, as a
new 1 organizationally distinct entity, a Centre for Science
and Technology for Development within the United Nations Secretariat;
2. Decides that the Centre will be located at United
Nations Headquarters and will be headed by an Assistant Secretary-General, who shall be responsible to and
report directly to the Director-General for Development
and International Economic Co-operation as envisaged
in paragraph 64 (b) of the annex to General ~ssembly
resolution 32/197 and paragraph 5 (c) of section IV of
Assembly resolution 33/202;
3. Decides also that the Centre shall assist the
Director-General in fulfilling the responsibilities assigned to him in the Vienna Programme of Action,
particularly in providing the necessary substantive support to the Intergovernmental Committee on Science and
Technology for Development and in co-ordinating activities at the secretariat level related to science and technology within the United Nations system;
4. Decides further that in the performance of those
responsibilities the Centre should maintain close cooperation with all the relevant entities of the United
Nations; 2' 5
5. Decides to allocate all the necessary resources
from the United Nations regular budget to the Centre,
drawing to the fullest extent possible on resources already existing within the United Nations, and to abolish
the Office for Science and Technology, redeploying immediately most of its posts and budgetary resources to
the Centre, and decides further that the Committee
should determine at the earliest possible time whether
such resources should be strengthened;
6. Agrees to review the above arrangements, including the level of the head of the Centre, at its thirty-sixth
session;
IV
CO-ORDINATION WITHIN THE UNITED NATIONS SYSTEM

1. Decides that the Director-General for Development and International Economic Co-operation shall be
responsible for exercising over-all co-ordination in
science and technology, at the secretariat level, within
the United Nations system;
2. Requests the organizations of the United Nations
system, through, inter alia, the mechanisms of the Administrative Committee on Co-ordination·, to offer their
full and effective co-operation and assistance to the
Director-General in discharging his responsibilities in
this field;
245 These are, inter alia, the United Nations Development
Programme, the Department of International Economic and
Social Affairs and the Department of Technical Co-operation
for Development.
-

155

3. Further decides to entrust to the Director-General
the responsibility of co-ordinating the contributions of
the organs, organizations and bodies of the United Nations, as well as of the specialized agencies and the
International Atomic Energy Agency, to the work of the
Intergovernmental Committee on Science and Technology for Development;
4. Calls upon all organs, organizations and bodies
of the United Nations system to co-operate with the
Director-General in the accomplishment of his over-all
co-ordination tasks;
5. Requests all organs, organizations and bodies of
the United Nations system to take the necessary steps to
implement the recommendations addressed to them in
paragraphs 90 to 99 and 104 to 108 of the Vienna Programme of Action; 2 ' 0
V
STUDY OF SYSTEM-WIDE EFFICIENCY

Requests the Secretary-General to prepare a basic
study of the activities, mandates and working methods
of all the various organs, organizations and bodies of the
United Nations system in the field of science and technology for development and to examine the possibilities
of improving the efficiency of the system in that field; a
preliminary report on this study should be submitted to
the Intergovernmental Committee on Science and Technology for Development at its first substantive session in
1980, and a final study, including proposals, should be
submitted to it at its 1981 session; the Committee should
make preliminary recommendations to the General Assembly at its thirty-fifth session and final proposals to the
Assembly at its thirty-sixth session;
VI
GLOBAL FINANCIAL ARRANGEMENTS

1. Decides to establish a United Nations Financing
System for Science and Technology for Development
(hereinafter referred to as the Financing System);
A.

Objectives

2. Decides that the Financing System shall finance a
broad range of activities intended to strengthen the
endogenous scientific and technological capacities of the
developing countries, in particular to assist in the implementation of the measures envisaged in the Vienna Programme of Action, those activities to be complementary
to bilateral and multilateral programmes for science and
technology and supportive of the national efforts of the
developing countnes in the field of science and technology, and decides that the Financing System shall be
a vehicle for the mobilization, co-ordination, channelling
and disbursement of financial resources;
B.

Resources of the Financing System

3. Agrees that, in determining the nature and level
of the resources of the Financing System, the following
considerations should be taken into account:
(a) Asymmetry of the technological capacity between developed and developing countries;
(b) Need for predictability and continuous flow of
financial resources;
(c) Need for substantial resources in addition to
those which currently exist within the United Nations
system;

General Assembly-Thirty-fourth Session

156

(d) Need for untied external resources for the
scientific and technological development of the developing countries;

C. Other financial resources
4. Decides that the Financing System may enter into
arrangements with international, regional and other
public and private financial institutions with a view to
the generation and channelling of additional resources to
the developing countries for scientific and technological
activities, including research and development, and the
commercialization and acquisition of technology;
5. Decides also that the resources to be derived from
those arrangements should be supplementary to the
Financing System's own resources; such resources could
be provided by:
(a) International and regional financial institutions;
(b) Public and private banks of national, regional
and international types;
(c) Public and private corporations;
(d) Other public and private financial institutions;
6. Decides that, in addition, the Financing System
may use other resources, such as:
(a) Resources that may accrue from concrete progress on all J?easu:es towards general and complete
disarmament, mcludmg the urgent implementation of the
already agreed disarmament measures;
"' (b) ~esources that may accrue from the proposed
mternahonal labour compensatory facility" related to
the reverse transfer of technology;2• 0

D.

Allocation of resources for the interim and longterm arrangements of the Financing System
7. Decides further that the resources available shall
be allocated to the various activities identified in the
Vienna Programme of Action, including national, subregional, regional and interregional activities; in the context of the decisions on interim arrangements adopted by
the General Assembly at its thirty-fourth session and
th?se o_n long-t~rm arrangements to be adopted at the
thu-ty-sixth session, the Intergovernmental Committee
on Science and Technology for Development shall establish guidelines for the allocation and distribution of resources for building up the endogenous scientific and
technological capacities of the developing countries;
those guidelines should be within the framework of the
priorities of the developing countries, at the national,
subregional, regional and international levels, for implementing in particular different types of projects and programmes of direct relevance to the developing countries,
taking into account, inter alia, the need to take special
measures to meet the urgent and specific problems of the
least developed, land-locked, island and most seriously
affected developing countries and the need to overcome
poverty and to accelerate the development of the developing countries as well as other criteria to be adopted
by the Committee; additional criteria for the allocation
of resources should provide, inter alia, for a part of the
resources to be applied to high-risk research and development projects in science and technology at the
national, subregional, regional and interregional levels
and to provide support for the developing countries in
obtaining financial resources from other sources;
"'8. Decides, in view of the above considerations, as
fouows:
246 See E/1978/92, paras.

100-104.

Long-term arrangements of the Financing System to start
in January 1982
(a) The directing and policy-making body of the
Financing System shall be the Intergovernmental Committee on Science and Technology for Development,
which shall, taking into consideration the results of the
study described in subparagraph (b) below, define the
guiding principles, general economic provisions, forms
of operation and general procedures for the formulation,
submission, consideration and approval of programmes
and projects, and shall submit to the General Assembly
recommendations regarding the appropriate structure
for the executive body of the Financing System;
(b) An intergovernmental grol/-p of experts, composed of twenty-seven members, shall be elected, on the
basis of equitable geographical distribution and the need
for an appropriate range of expertise, by the Committee
at its first substantive session in 1980, which will be held
at United Nations Headquarters; with the support of the
Director-General for Development and International
Economic Co-operation, the group of experts shall undertake a prompt and thorough study of all relevant
arrangements for the operation of the Financing System;
the terms of reference shall be as follows:
(i) The study will make an assessment of the requirements for additional funding for scientific
and technological activities in developing countries and of potential sources of funding;
(ii) The study will include an inventory of existing
multilateral and bilateral programmes for providing financial support for such activities;
(iii) The _study will review alternative proposals, includmg all the proposals put to the United Nations Conference on Science and Technology
for Development by the Group of Seventyseven2•1 for generating requisite additional
funds for scientific and technological development activities on a long-term basis and for the
disbursement and control of those funds, as well
as those for institutional arrangements, and
make recommendations thereon;
(c)_ !he intergovernmental group of experts shall
submit its final report to the Committee for its considerati~n so that. the latter may, through the Economic
and Social Council, make appropriate recommendations
to the General Assembly at its thirty-sixth session;
Interim arrangements of the Financing System
(d) Pending the establishment of the long-term arrangements for the Financing System, a United Nations
Interin:i Fund for Science and_ Techi:iology for Development 1s hereby created, which will be sustained by
voluntary contributions; the General Assembly agrees
that the target for voluntary contributions for the twoyear period 1980-1981 should be no less than $250
million; during the interim period, to the extent that such
funds are fully committed and taking fully into account
the needs of the developing countries, the $250 million
figure will be reviewed by the Committee with the aim of
raising additional resources for the Interim Fund;
(e) The Interim Fund, which shall have an identifiable and separate basis, shall be administered by the
United Nations Development Programme under the
policy ~idelines established in th_e a~nex to the present
resolution and also under the gu1delmes established by
the Committee when it starts its meetings; the SecretaryGeneral is requested to convene a pledging conference
247 A/CONF.81/L.1, paras. A.22, A.38, A.SO, A.59, B.26
and C.20-C.27.

V.

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Second Committee

not later than March 1980; the General Assembly shall
provide the Administrator of the United Nations Development Programme with the necessary resources for
the initial preparatory responsibility until the Interim
Fund is in operation;
9. Decides that the establishment of interim arrangements should not prejudice the ultimate decisions with
regard to long-term arrangements;
10. Decides also that the Interim Fund shall be administered and managed in accordance with the provisions of the annex to the present resolution, and urges
that the necessary arrangements be made to ensure that
it becomes operational at the earliest possible time;
11. Urges all Member States, in particular the developed countries, to contribute generously so that the
agreed upon target of $250 million for the Interim Fund
may be met.
1 I 0th plenary meeting
19 December 1979
ANNEX
Initial prospectus for the United Nations Interim Fund for
Science and Technology for Development
CONTENTS
Section

I.

II.
III.
IV.
V.
VI.
VII.
VIII.
IX.

Paragraphs

Interim Fund ....................... .
Purpose of the Interim Fund .......... .
Ge~eral p_ri~~iples ................... .
Basic act1v1hes ..................... .
Participation in the Interim Fund ..... .
General operational provisions ......... .
Resources of the Interim Fund ......... .
Organization and management ......... .
Procedures ......................... .

I.

1
2
3
4

5
6-10
11-17
18-30
31-56

INTERIM FUND

1. The United Nations Interim Fund for Science and Technology for Development (hereinafter referred to as the Interim
Fund), established by the General Assembly under resolution
34/218 of 19 December 1979, shall operate as an identifiable
and separate fund and as an organ of the Assembly in accordance with the provisions set forth below.

II.

PURPOSE OF THE INTERIM FUND

2. Subject to the provisions of paragraphs 32 to 52 below,
the aims and objectives of the Interim Fund and the purposes
for which its resources shall be used are to provide technical
and capital assistance to Governments and organizations in accordance with the provisions of paragraph 8 below, for activities
intended to promote the objectives of and implement the measures recommended in the Vienna Programme of Action on
Science and Technology for Development, 24 8 as set out in
section I thereof, entitled "Strengthening the scientific and technological capacities of the developing countries", and section II
entitled "Restructuring the existing pattern of international scientific and technological relations", as endorsed by the General
Assembly and as an integral part of the establishment of the
new international economic order, inter alia:
(a) To strengthen the endogenous scientific and technological capacities of the developing countries;
(b) To promote the strengthening of international co-operation in the field of science and technology for development by
inter alia:
'
(i) Promoting co-operative arrangements through which
developed countries may more effectively support and
facilitate the internal efforts of developing countries to

-----

248 See Report of the United Nations Conference on Science
and. Techno.logy for. Deyelopment, Vienna, 20-31 August 1979
(United Nations pubhcat1on, Sales No. E.79.I.21 and corrigenda),
chap. VII.

157

achieve development through the establishment and
strengthening of their scientific and technological capacities;
(ii) Supporting co-operation among developing countries at
the subregional, regional and interregional levels;
(c) Pending the coming into operation of the United Nations
Financing System for Science and Technology for Development. to support, promote and initiate if appropriate during the
interim period the activities necessary to prepare for future
efforts to strengthen the scientific and technological capacities
of the developing countries.
Ill.

GENERAL PRINCIPLES

3. The Interim Fund shall operate in accordance with the
following principles:
(a) The provision of assistance shall be in conformity with
the purposes and principles of the Charter of the United Nations and within the framework of the priorities of the recipient
developing countries:
(b) The assistance furnished by the Interim Fund shall not
be a means of foreign economic and political interference in the
internal affairs of the country or countries concerned and shall
not be accompanied by any conditions of a political nature;
(c) The resources available to the Interim Fund shall be
used to support projects and programmes of the developing
countries at the national, subregional, regional and interregional
levels, taking due account of the need to ensure adequate linkages between institutions at the national. subregional. regional
and interregional levels and between the latter and the productive sectors of the country or region concerned, and taking into
account, inter a/ia, the need to take special measures to meet the
urgent and specific problems of the least developed, landlocked, island and most seriously affected developing countries
and the need to overcome poverty and to accelerate the development of the developing countries as well as other criteria to
be adopted by the Intergovernmental Committee on Science
and Technology for Development;
(d) Due account shall be taken, in the use of the resources
of the Interim Fund, of the need for an appropriate balance
between activities to meet the urgent needs of the developing
countries for assistance in the field of science and technology
and activities to lay the basis for a sustained effort, over the
next decade. to build up and strengthen the scientific and technological capacities of the developing countries, including cooperative undertaking~ in the field of science and technology for
development;
(e) The assistance furnished by the Interim Fund to individual countries shall be provided in response to the requests
of the Governments concerned;
(f) For intercountry projects and programmes, the assistance
furnished by the Interim Fund shall be provided in response to
requirements as defined by the countries concerned, taking due
account of paragraph~ 80 and 81 of the Vienna Programme of
Action;
(g/ Subject to the provisions of subparagraphs (e) and (/)
above, the activities supported by the Interim Fund shall be coordinated with, and should not duplicate activities of, bilateral
and multilateral programmes for science and technology, including those of the entities of the United Nations system;
(h) Assistance from the Interim Fund shall be provided in a
flexible manner, and due account shall be taken, in the management of the Interim Fund, of the need to promote innovative
approaches and accelerated procedures so as to be fully responsive to the Vienna Programme of Action over the interim period;
(i) The resources of the Interim Fund may be used to provide assistance, capital and technical, to promote international
collaboration in the field of science and technology;
(j) The Interim Fund shall actively promote effective investment and other follow-up to its activities, and shall assist
the developing countries in obtaining financial resources for
scientific and technological activities from other sources;
(k) Measures shall be taken to ensure that the relevant expertise existing in the United Nations system and in the developed and developing countries should be made available in the
identification, formulation, appraisal, execution and evaluation
of the projects and programmes supported by the Interim Fund.

General Assembly-Thirty-fourth Seaton

158
IV.

BASIC ACTIVITIES

4. Within the limits of the resources prospectively available
and of the interim period envisaged, the assistance furnished by
the Interim Fund in accordance with the provisions of paragraph
8 below shall support a broad range of activities envisaged in
the Vienna Programme of Action to strengthen the scientific
and technological capacities of the developing countries and
likely to contribute to the restructuring of the existing pattern
of international scientific and technological relations, including,
inter alia, the creation and/or strengthening of policy-making
capacity for scientific and technological matters; the review of,
and international exchange of experience and information on,
issues related to science and technology for development; the
establishment of appropriate legal, administrative, fiscal and
institutional machinery and the services required to carry out
the process of scientific and technological development; the establishment and strengthening of national capacities for the
assessment, selection, acquisition and adaptation of foreign
technology and expertise; the monitoring of future scientific
and technological activities to assess their impact, including
negative impact, on the developing countries; the preparation
of action programmes to strengthen the scientific and technological capacities of developing countries both individually and
on a co-operative basis; the establishment and improvement of
national, subregional, regional and global information centres,
networks and systems to meet, particularly, the needs of developing countries; the establishment of global and interregional
projects in science and technology for development; the education and training of the human resources required at all levels
to generate and implement scientific and technological development policies, plans, programmes and projects; the promotion
of basic and applied research; application and pilot testing and
the diffusion of innovative technology; the promotion, through
the application of science and technology, of the use of natural
resources for national, subregional and regional development;
the facilitation of the transfer of technology from developed to
developing countries; the promotion of activities related to the
socio-cultural implications of science and technology for development; the undertaking of a limited number of high-risk, highpotential, research and development projects; the undertaking
of international co-operation projects in research, development
and application, and in training in relation to problems of particular importance to developing countries in the field of science
and technology.
V.

PARTICIPATION IN THE INTERIM FUND

5. Participation in the Interim Fund shall be open to all
States.
VJ.

(j) Support to improve both the access of the developing
countries to scientific and technical information and their ability
to use it in the process of development;
(k) Mobilization of additional resources of all kinds to support or follow up the activities of developing countries in the
field of science and technology for development;
(I) Such other and further assistance as may, in the opinion
of the Intergovernmental Committee on Science and Technology
for Development, be considered consistent with the objectives
of the Interim Fund, taking into account the form of assistance
requested by Governments.
7. The assistance referred to in paragraph 6 above to be
furnished by the Interim Fund from its resources shall be on a
grant basis. In the light of experience of the operations of the
Interim Fund, the Committee shall provide policy guidelines on
whether any capital assistance extended by the Fund shall be
on a loan or a refundable basis.

B.

Eligibility

8.

Assistance from the Interim Fund may be furnished:
(a) To the Governments of all States or groups of States;
(b) To organizations eligible for assistance from the United
Nations Development Programme, in accordance with the objectives of the Vienna Programme of Action;
(c) To other organizations which may be deemed by the
Committee to be eligible for assistance in accordance with the
objectives of the Vienna Programme of Action;
(d) At the request of a Government or Governments of such
States:
(i) To an entity having public or private juridical personality within the territory of such States, including, inter
alia, existing or new research institutes which are engaged in basic or applied scientific and technological
research for development;
(ii) To regional or subregional governmental organizations
having juridical personalities.
C.

General responsibilities of recipients

9. The recipient Governments, organizations and institutions
referred to in paragraph 8 above should ensure that the assistance furnished by the Interim Fund is used in an effective
manner and in accordance with the purposes for which it is
approved.
10. Recipient Governments, organizations and institutions
shall maintain the records required by the Interim Fund in connexion with the administration of its assistance.

GENERAL OPERATIONAL PROVISIONS

A. Forms of co-operation
6. In pursuance of its objectives, the Interim Fund may
provide assistance, as appropriate, to projects or programmes in
fields such as those mentioned in paragraph 4 above, at the
country and intercountry level, through, inter alia, one or a
combination of several of the following:
(a) Services of experts and consultants, including operational
personnel;
(b) Provision of equipment or supplies;
(c) Scholarships and fellowships or other arrangements
under which candidates from developing countries may study
or receive training within other developing countries or in
developed countries;
(d) Assistance for research, development and the testing of
products and processes and for pilot production;'
(e) Support for basic and applied research, including support for the creation, adaptation or application of technology
in developing countries;
(!) Support for the strengthening of existing and the creation of new research institutes;
(g) Support for activities conducive to the acquisition of
scientific potential and of operative technology and know-how;
(h) Survey pilot projects, technical tests, experiments and
research;
(i) Support for the dissemination of the results of research
and development and pilot projects both within and among
developing countries;

VII.

RESOURCES OF THE INTERIM FUND

11. The resources of the Interim Fund shall consist of voluntary contributions from Governments. The Interim Fund
shall also be empowered to receive contributions from international organizations, both governmental and non-governmental,
and from other private sources. No limitation may be imposed
by such donors on the use of donations in a specific recipient
country, by a specific agency or for a specific project. Furthermore, while contributions may be accepted on an annual basis,
it is desirable, in view of the two years' duration of the Interim
Fund, that contributions should be pledged or indicated for
two years. Contributions in kind may _be accepted by the Interim
Fund where the Administrator considers it appropriate to accept
them.
12. Contributions pledged to the Interim Fund shall be payable as early as possible; every effort should be made to pay
within six months following the pledge.
13. Cash contributions shall be made in convertible currencies or in currency readily usable by the Interim Fund.
14. To ensure that the multilateral character of the Interim
Fund shall be strictly respected, no contributing country shall
receive special treatment with respect to its contribution nor
shall negotiations for the use of its currency take place between
contributing and receiving countries.
15. Taking into account the financial situation of the country concerned, recipient Governments shall normally be expected to finance a considerable part of the local currency cost
of projects.

V.

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Second Committee

16. Trust funds may be established for specific purposes
consistent with the policies, aims and activities of the Interim
Fund.

17. Assistance provided by the Interim Fund will be intended, inter alia, to broaden the financial means available to
strengthen the scientific and technological capacities of the
developing countries. For this purpose, the Interim Fund may
enter into joint financing arrangements with multilateral, bilateral, public or private sources to support projects approved
by it.
VIII.

ORGANIZATION AND MANAGEMENT

18. The organization and management of the Interim Fund
are designed to ensure maximum efficiency in the use of its
resources.
A.

Intergovernmental arrangements

19. The policy guidelines for the Interim Fund were established by the General Assembly at its thirty-fourth session;
guidelines will also be established by the Intergovernmental
Committee on Science and Technology for Development when
it starts its meetings. The Committee will review, as a separate
item of its agenda, the policies and progress of the Interim
Fund and will provide the necessary directives and guidance.
In this connexion, the Administrator, in consultation with the
Director-General for Development and International Economic
Co-operation, shall, during the interim period, submit to the
Committee annual reports on the implementation of those
policies. He shall also report annually to the Committee on the
progress of the operations of the Interim Fund.
20. The Administrator shall sul:,mit, during the interim
period, annual reports to the Governing Council of the United
Nations Development Programme on the operations and management of the Interim Fund.
21. The Committee shall, in turn, review the reports referred to above on the progress and performance of the Interim
Fund and shall make its report to the General Assembly
through the Economic and Social Council.
B.

Administrator

22. The Interim Fund shall be administered by the Administrator of the United Nations Development Programme,
who shall exercise his functions under the policy guidance of
the General Assembly and the Committee and under the operational management of the Governing Council of the United
Nations Development Programme. The Administrator shall
have over-all responsibility and be accountable for all phases
and aspects of the operations of the Interim Fund. He shall
establish clear lines of responsibility for the direction of the
Interim Fund. The Administrator shall appoint the staff for the
Interim Fund, on the delegation of authority by the SecretaryGeneral and in accordance with the Staff Regulations of the
United Nations adopted by the Assembly. The selection of the
staff and consultants shall be made in accordance with the
relevant provisions of the Charter of the United Nations. The
Administrator shall have authority on behalf of the Interim
Fund to enter into contracts and agreements with Governments,
organizations and persons.
C.

Staff and other administrative matters

23. The General Assembly shall provide the Administrator
with the necessary resources for the initial preparatory responsibility until the Interim Fund is in operation.
24. The administrative expenses of the lntt!rim Fund, once
it becomes operational, will be met from its own resources.
25. The Interim Fund will operate with the minimum staff
required to perform the functions assigned to it by the General
Assembly. Its staff shall be assembled as expeditiously as possible and commensurate with its resources and volume of operations for the interim period.
26. In the operations of the Interim Fund, the Administrator
will use, to the extent feasible, the capacities, including human
resources, available within the United Nations Development
Programme and in other entities of the United Nations system.

D.

159

Co-operation with organizations of the
United Nations system

27. The Interim Fund shall establish and maintain close
and continuous working relationships with the organizations of
the United Nations system, in particular the Centre for Science
and Technology for Development, the specialized agencies and
other United Nations entities concerned, including the regional
commissions, in order to give full expression to the Vienna
Programme of Action.
28. The Administrator shall take measures to ensure the involvement, as appropriate, of the specialized agencies and
United Nations entities concerned in the identification, formulation, appraisal, execution and evaluation of projects.
E.

Use of consultants

29. The Administrator should use the expertise available in
the United Nations system, in so far as that would minimize
consultancy expenses. The Administrator may also obtain the
services of expert consultants and consulting organizations to advise him on the activities of the Interim Fund, the cost to be
charged to the Fund. It should be ensured to the maximum
extent practicable that those services would be obtained from
the developing countries.
30. Subject to the provisions of subsection D above, the
Administrator, within the limits of the resources available from
the Programme Reserve described in paragraph 52 below, may
finance, upon the request of Governments, the provision of
expert advice and support for the examination and preparation
of projects at the formulation stage. Such resources should be
recouped by the Programme Reserve as part of the costs of the
project or projects which may result from that preparation.
IX.
A.

PROCEDURES

Formulation of requests

31. The Administrator shall prescribe the form, content and
procedures for requests for assistance from the Interim Fund.
32. Requests shall include all relevant information on the
intended use of and benefits expected to be derived from the
assistance of the Interim Fund together with statements of the
part of the costs which the Governments themselves would be
ready to bear.
33. In the formulation and appraisal of projects, the resident
representative of the United Nations Development Programme
will provide co-ordination at the field level, until such time as
the United Nations resident co-ordinator has been appointed,
taking into account the provisions of paragraph 28 above.
B.

Methodology for the formulation and
implementation of projects

34. The formulation and implementation of projects at the
country level should be done with the full participation of the
authorities of the country concerned and in accordance with the
relevant recommendation of the Vienna Programme of Action.
35. The formulation and implementation of projects at the
intercountry level should be guided by the principles set forth
in paragraphs 80 and 81 of the Vienna Programme of Action.
C.

Appraisal and approval of requests

36. In considering requests for assistance, pending the
guidelines and/or principles to be established by the Intergovernmental Committee on Science and Technology for Development, the Administrator shall be guided by the general principles
set out in section III above.
37. The Administrator shall submit for approval to the
Governing Council of the United Nations Development Programme projects to be supported by the Interim Fund resources
in the amount of $2 million or above on the basis of policy
guidelines established by the Committee. Until such time as the
Committee adopts additional policy guidelines, the Administrator should follow the policy guidelines set forth in General
Assembly resolution 34/218 and the annex thereto.
38. The Administrator shall submit to the Committee at its
first regular session proposals on methods for the approval of
projects to be adopted by the Governing Council of the United
Nations Development Programme.

General Assembly-Thirty-fourth Session

160

39. Subject to the prov1S1ons of paragraph 8 above, the
Administrator shall be authorized to approve projects to be
supported by the Interim Fund below the amount of $2 million
and shall report in each case to the Governing Council of the
United Nations Development Programme.
40. The Governing Council of the United Nations Development Programme shall take final decisions on the projects and
programmes recommended by the Administrator in accordance
with the provisions of paragraph 37 above, in the light of the
guidelines established by the General Assembly and the Committee and of the directives which will be established by the
Committee, and shall authorize the Administrator to conclude
the appropriate agreements.

D.

Execution of projects

41. Projects shall be executed through the channels and
arrangements already established for the execution of projects
by the United Nations system. Special attention shall be paid to
the need to make maximum use of government executing arrangements and national expertise.
42. The Administrator shall apply the existing basic agreements between the United Nations Development Programme
and the participating and executing agencies, in those cases
where they have been so designated, as the basis for carrying
out projects and programmes, subject to whatever modifications
may be mutually agreed upon in the light of the special characteristics of the Interim Fund.
43. Bearing in mind the provisions of paragraph 28 above
and, when necessary, in order to ensure the maximum effectiveness of the assistance furnished by the Interim Fund or to increase its capacity, and with due regard to the cost factor,
increased use may appropriately be made of suitable services
obtained from governmental and non-governmental institutions
and firms, in agreement with the recipient Government concerned and in accordance with the applicable financial rules and
regulations. Maximum use should be made of national institutions and firms within the recipient countries.
44. With the approval of the Government or Governments
concerned in each case, non-governmental institutions and organizations within the recipient countries may execute projects
supported by the Interim Fund.
45. Arrangements for the execution of projects shall be subject to the approval of the requesting Government or Governments and shall be specified in the project document. Such arrangements shall contain provisions regarding costs which the
requesting Government will assume and those facilities and
services which it will provide.
46. Emphasis shall be placed, in the execution of projects,
on technical co-operation among developing countries.
47. The Administrator shall make appropriate arrangements
to monitor and evaluate the progress and results of projects and
programmes supported by the resources of the Interim Fund
and shall report to the Governing Council of the United Nations
Development Programme and to the Committee on their status.

E. Relations between Governments and the Interim Fund
48. Each Government shall designate to the Administrator
an appropriate channel for its relations with the Interim Fund.
The Interim Fund shall use only the official channel designated
by each Government for the submission of requests.
49. In regard to the operations of the Interim Fund, the
existing basic agreements between Governments and the United

Nations Development Programme shall apply, subject to such
modifications as may be called for having regard to the special
characteristics of the Interim Fund and subject to the concurrence of the Governments concerned. In particular, the privileges
and immunities accorded to the staff of the Interim Fund shall
be identical to those accorded to the staff of the United Nations
Development Programme.
F. Financial arrangements
50. The financial rules and regulations governing the Interim
Fund shall be those of the Financial Regulations and Rules of
the United Nations Development Programme. Any amendments
which may be necessary to take account of the special requirements of the Interim Fund's operation shall be drafted by the
Administrator and submitted for consideration to the Governing Council of the United Nations Development Programme,
which shall report accordingly to the Committee and the General Assembly.
51. The Administrator will take such steps as are necessary
to ensure separate accounting and financial management of the
operations of the Interim Fund, while using the existing services
of the United Nations Development Programme to the maximum possible extent.

52. The Interim Fund shall be authorized to establish a
Programme Reserve by earmarking 2 per cent of the total annual contributions. Such a Programme Reserve shall be used
by the Administrator at his discretion for purposes consistent
with the Vienna Programme of Action and with the guidelines
established by the General Assembly and the Committee, to ensure the flexibility and innovative capacity of the Interim Fund
and its ability to provide catalytic support. The Administrator
shall ensure the utilization of such a reserve fund and shall report to the Governing Council of the United Nations Development Programme and to the Committee on his decisions and
on the results achieved.
53. The Administrator shall not at any time enter into commitments which shall exceed the usable resources of the Interim
Fund. Nor shall he incur any liabilities on behalf of the Interim
Fund which shall result in a charge against the general resources of the United Nations Development Programme.
G.

Period of the Interim Fund

54. In accordance with the decisions adopted by the General Assembly in its resolution 34/218 and the outcome of the
Pledging Conference, the Administrator shall determine the
date at which the Interim Fund becomes operational and shall
report accordingly to the Committee.
55. Time being of the essence, given the limited period of
the Interim Fund, the Administrator submitted to the General
Assembly at its thirty-fourth session for approval proposals for
staffing and other administrative resources required both for the
preparatory period and for the full period to the end of 1981.2< 9
56. Taking into account the interim nature of the Fund, the
General Assembly shall decide at its thirty-sixth session, on the
recommendation of the Committee, on the arrangements to be
made for an effective transition between the operations of the
Interim Fund and the long-term arrangements for the United
Nations Financing System for Science and Technology for
Development to be determined by the Assembly.
249

See A/34/587 I Add.2.
