S/PV.9198

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-seventh year

9198th meeting

Tuesday, 22 November 2022, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Agyeman. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Ghana)

Members:

Albania . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Brazil. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Gabon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
India . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ireland. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kenya. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Mexico. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Norway . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Arab Emirates . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Spasse
Mr. De Almeida Filho
Mr. Geng Shuang
Mr. Olmedo
Mrs. Ngyema Ndong
Mr. Raguttahalli
Ms. Moran
Mr. Kiboino
Mr. Cisneros Chávez
Ms. Juul
Mr. Kuzmin
Mrs. Nusseibeh
Ms. Jacobs
Mr. Mills

Agenda
Peace and security in Africa
Report of the Secretary-General on the situation of piracy and armed robbery at
sea in the Gulf of Guinea and its underlying causes (S/2022/818)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

22-70586 (E)
*2270586*

S/PV.9198

Peace and security in Africa

pointed out that it is still too early to draw definitive
conclusions as to a long-term decline in this singular
threat to stability in the Gulf of Guinea.

The meeting was called to order at 10.05 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda

(spoke in English)

The agenda was adopted.
Peace and security in Africa
Report of the Secretary-General on the
situation of piracy and armed robbery at sea
in the Gulf of Guinea and its underlying causes
(S/2022/818)
The President: In accordance with rule 37 of the
Council’s provisional rules of procedure, I invite the
representatives of Germany and Nigeria to participate
in this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite His Excellency
Mr. Silvio Gonzato, Chargé d’affaires of the Delegation
of the European Union to the United Nations, to
participate in this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the following
briefers to participate in this meeting: Ms. Martha Ama
Akyaa Pobee, Assistant Secretary-General for Africa in
the Departments of Political and Peacebuilding Affairs
and Peace Operations; Ms. Ghada Fathi Waly, Executive
Director, United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime;
Her Excellency Mrs. Florentina Adenike Ukonga,
Executive Secretary, Gulf of Guinea Commission;
and Commander Nura Abdullahi Yakubu, Maritime
Planning Officer, African Union Commission.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I wish to draw the attention of Council members
to document S/2022/818, which contains the report of
the Secretary-General on the situation of piracy and
armed robbery at sea in the Gulf of Guinea and its
underlying causes.
I now give the floor to Ms. Pobee.
Ms. Pobee (spoke in French): I thank the Security
Council for giving me this opportunity to present the
report of the Secretary-General on the situation of
piracy and armed robbery at sea in the Gulf of Guinea
and its underlying causes (S/2022/818). Since the end
of the reporting period covered by the report, cases of
piracy and armed robbery at sea in the Gulf of Guinea
continued to decrease. Nevertheless, it should be
2/24

22/11/2022

The steady decline in instances of piracy and
armed robbery at sea, which began around April 2021,
is the result of concerted efforts by national authorities,
who bear the primary responsibility for countering
piracy and armed robbery at sea in the region, with
the support of regional and international partners.
Increased naval patrols by coastal States of the Gulf
of Guinea and the regular deployment of naval assets
by international partners have together successfully
served as a deterrent. Enhanced regional coordination
and the convictions for piracy and maritime crimes
in Nigeria and Togo in 2021 are important factors in
bringing about this positive development.
However, piracy in the Gulf of Guinea morphed
over the past decade. Pirate groups are adapting to
changing dynamics, both at sea and in coastal areas. In
that respect, the recent decrease in instances of piracy
may in part be attributable to the shift by criminal
networks to other forms of maritime and riverine crime,
such as oil bunkering and theft, which they likely view
as both less risky and more profitable. It is therefore
imperative that States in the Gulf of Guinea and regional
structures, such as the Economic Community of Central
African States (ECCAS), the Economic Community
of West African States (ECOWAS) and the Gulf of
Guinea Commission, supported by the international
community, enhance and accelerate their efforts to
establish a stable and secure maritime environment in
the Gulf by fully operationalizing the maritime security
architecture set out in the Code of Conduct Concerning
the Repression of Piracy, Armed Robbery against
Ships and Illicit Maritime Activity in West and Central
Africa. At the same time, the underlying causes, such
as youth unemployment and inadequate access to public
services, which render coastal communities vulnerable
to being drawn into illicit and criminal activities, must
also be addressed.
I welcome the recent meeting of the Heads of State
and Government of the Gulf of Guinea Commission
held on 13 October to review the progress made in
addressing regional maritime challenges. In addition,
I would like to note the election of Ghana’s President,
Mr. Nana Akufo-Addo, as the rotating President of the
Gulf of Guinea Commission, succeeding his Nigerian
counterpart, President Muhammadu Buhari. I would
22-70586

22/11/2022

Peace and security in Africa

also like to take note of the ongoing preparations for the
first maritime conference of the Economic Community
of Central African States on the theme of the governance
and security of the ECCAS maritime space and the
development of a sustainable blue economy in Central
Africa. The conference, which is scheduled to take
place in Kinshasa before the end of the year, is intended
to develop strategies for maritime governance, security
and safety and the development of a sustainable blue
economy in the ECCAS space.
As we approach the tenth anniversary of the
signing of the Yaoundé Code of Conduct in 2023, the
Gulf of Guinea States have continued to demonstrate
their commitment to the full operationalization of
the Yaoundé Architecture for maritime security. An
important milestone was reached on 26 October this
year with the signing of a headquarters agreement by
the Commission of the Economic Community of West
African States and the Government of Cabo Verde
for the establishment of the Multinational Maritime
Coordination Centre (MMCC) for zone G, comprising
Cabo Verde, the Gambia, Guinea-Bissau, Mali and
Senegal. Indeed, once the Maritime Coordination
Centre becomes functional, it will complete the
operationalization of the Yaoundé Architecture in
the ECOWAS maritime domain. The MMCC zone
E, in Cotonou, and the MMCC zone F, in Accra, are
already active.
Another important event in the period since
the Secretary-General’s report was issued is the
multinational maritime exercise Grand African Nemo
2022, which was jointly organized by the Interregional
Coordination Centre in Yaoundé and the French navy
from 11 to 18 October. The exercise covered a wide area,
stretching from Senegal to Angola, and involved 17 of
the 19 countries bordering the Gulf of Guinea, as well as
eight international partners. Participants were trained
to tackle illegal fishing, piracy, marine pollution, illegal
trafficking and rescue at sea. The exercise included two
real cases relating to the relocation of a boat suspected
of drug trafficking and the rendering of assistance to a
fishing vessel in distress.
The United Nations system continues to provide the
necessary political and technical assistance to the Gulf
of Guinea States in their efforts to fully implement the
Yaoundé Architecture. On 15 September, the United
Nations Office for West Africa and the Sahel held a
workshop on maritime insecurity in the Gulf of Guinea.
An important outcome of the workshop was a call to the

S/PV.9198

Member States concerned to adopt the required legal
frameworks to criminalize piracy. The United Nations
Office on Drugs and Crime and the International
Maritime Organization continued to provide assistance
to the Gulf of Guinea States towards the ratification
of the relevant maritime security instruments and their
incorporation into national legislation.
At present, there is no firm evidence to suggest
any potential or possible linkages between terrorists
and pirate groups, However, addressing the underlying
social, economic and environmental challenges faced
by communities in the region will ultimately serve to
contain both threats. In that respect, the United Nations
system continues to strengthen its collaboration with
international financial institutions towards supporting
the region in effectively addressing the underlying
causes of fragility and insecurity. In Côte d’Ivoire, for
instance, since early 2022, the United Nations and the
World Bank have deepened their cooperation through
shared analysis, the alignment of strategic priorities
and joint advocacy with the Government in an effort to
enhance the coherence of efforts and better address key
drivers of fragility, such as poverty and unequal access
to basic services.
I would like to underscore that, in order to
effectively eradicate the menace posed by piracy and
armed robbery at sea in the Gulf of Guinea, national
stakeholders, regional structures and the international
community must work in close collaboration to address
the underlying social, economic and environmental
challenges that underpin the recruitment of individuals
into maritime crime networks. That requires a
holistic and long-term approach, in line with the
Sustainable Development Goals and the 2030 Agenda
for Sustainable Development, to address poverty, the
lack of alternative livelihoods, youth unemployment
and underemployment. Inclusive strategies would need
to be underpinned by sex-disaggregated data on the
impact of maritime crime on women, girls, men and
boys. The development of the Gulf of Guinea’s blue
economy provides further opportunities for sustainable
economic growth for littoral communities. Effective
national and regional strategies to tackle governance
and security challenges, especially those bordering
on illicit financial flows and illegal and unregulated
fishing, will be critical.
In conclusion, I want to highlight that, while
the Yaoundé Architecture for maritime security has
been functioning with increased efficiency, several

22-705863/24

S/PV.9198

Peace and security in Africa

significant challenges continue to impede its full
operationalization. One key challenge is the lack of
predictable and sustainable financing. The forthcoming
tenth anniversary of the Yaoundé Code of Conduct
provides an opportunity to the signatory States,
together with ECCAS, ECOWAS and the Gulf of Guinea
Commission, to comprehensively assess the status of
implementation of the maritime security architecture.
That assessment will help to identify priority areas for
support and develop a strategic outlook and road map
for the next decade to complete the operationalization
of the Yaoundé Architecture. While the Gulf of Guinea
States bear the primary responsibility for countering
piracy and armed robbery at sea in the region, Security
Council support for that process and its outcome will
be invaluable. The United Nations entities, including
through the United Nations Regional Office for Central
Africa and the United Nations Regional Office for
West Africa and the Sahel, stand ready to provide the
necessary political and technical assistance to the Gulf
of Guinea States in that endeavour.
The President: I thank Ms. Pobee for her briefing.
I now give the floor to Ms. Waly.
Ms. Waly: I thank you, Mr. President, for giving
me the opportunity to brief the Security Council today.
I would like to begin by commending the Council
for adopting resolution 2634 (2022) in May and for its
continued attention to the threat posed by piracy and
organized crime at sea, particularly in the Gulf of
Guinea. That attention and action have come at the right
time. The threat of piracy costs the region lives, stability
and more than $1.9 billion in financial losses every year.
The report of the Secretary-General (S/2022/818) being
presented today represents a moment of opportunity in
our fight against that threat.
The substantial decrease this year in piracy
incidents in the Gulf of Guinea, and in victims of such
incidents, particularly of kidnappings for ransom, is
a welcome result of many years of work, including in
the context of the Yaoundé Architecture for maritime
security, as the speaker before me described. At sea,
there are more naval patrols and stronger cooperation
between regional navies, backed by navies from outside
the region that have deployed assets, creating a more
secure maritime environment. On land, a greater focus
on criminal justice has resulted in stronger measures,
including the first-ever piracy convictions in the
region, in Togo and Nigeria. However, it is too soon
4/24

22/11/2022

to declare victory. We need instead to capitalize on
the momentum and create a sustainable framework to
protect the Gulf of Guinea from pirate groups and any
criminal activity they may engage in. As we approach
the tenth anniversary of the Yaoundé Architecture next
year, there is a real chance to dedicate more attention,
resources and action in support of maritime security
and the rule of law in the Gulf of Guinea.
First, we need to help Member States in the region
to continue developing their capacities and legal
frameworks for combating piracy. Domestic laws
must criminalize piracy and enable its prosecution in
every country in the Gulf of Guinea. We should help
them enact such legislation and address the significant
legislative gaps that remain in many countries. At the
same time, it will be vital to continue building detection
and interdiction capacities for law enforcement. That
includes training in visit, board, search and seizure
procedures, as well as improved maritime domain
awareness, and technical and logistical support to
facilitate joint maritime patrols. And pirates must be
held accountable at the end of that process.
We must improve investigation and prosecution
capacities in order to give enforcement efforts teeth
and reach a legal completion for every case pursued.
The milestone convictions achieved last year in Nigeria
and Togo prove that it is possible, and the adoption
this year of the Economic Community of West African
States (ECOWAS) Supplementary Act, on the handover
of piracy suspects, is an important landmark that will
pave the way for more prosecutions. The United Nations
Office on Drugs and Crime (UNODC) was proud to
support both of those groundbreaking achievements.
We continue to assist countries in the region with legal
reforms aimed at enabling them to prosecute piracy,
including Gabon, where the adoption of a revised
penal code is planned for next month. UNODC is also
training naval law enforcement across the region,
helping maritime agencies improve cooperation and
providing technical assistance to the key institutions of
the Yaoundé Architecture.
Secondly, we must be agile and adaptable in
responding to shifting trends and emerging threats
related to piracy in the Gulf of Guinea. The criminal
profits gained from kidnapping-for-ransom piracy
remain limited compared to other organized crimes,
with about $4 million paid annually in ransom in order to
get abducted seafarers released. New UNODC research
suggests that pirate groups in the Gulf of Guinea
22-70586

22/11/2022

Peace and security in Africa

S/PV.9198

may be moving instead into more lucrative maritime
crimes, such as oil bunkering, theft and smuggling.
Law enforcement in the region needs support against
a wide range of illicit maritime activities and related
crimes. They include various forms of trafficking and
illegal oil refining, as well as illegal, unregulated and
unreported fishing. We must prevent the threat from
simply taking a different form. In order to close down
options for criminals at sea, we suggest considering
the possibility of developing a regional framework to
expand cooperation against illicit maritime activities.
A useful example to consider is the Agreement
concerning Cooperation in Suppressing Illicit Maritime
and Air Trafficking in Narcotic Drugs and Psychotropic
Substances in the Caribbean Area, the Treaty of San
José, applicable in the Caribbean basin.

Niger delta region of Nigeria, an approach we hope to
replicate in other coastal communities.

There is also a growing spillover of terrorism
from the Sahel into the Gulf of Guinea, as evidenced
by the rising number of terrorist attacks, particularly
in Benin, Togo and Côte d’Ivoire. While there is no
concrete evidence to suggest links between terrorists
in the Sahel and pirates in the Gulf of Guinea, we must
remain vigilant against the possibility of terrorist groups
linking up with criminal enterprises at the coast and
undermining security gains in the region. UNODC is
supporting coastal countries in strengthening criminal
justice systems and law-enforcement cooperation and
improving prevention measures.

The President: I thank Ms. Waly for her briefing.

Thirdly, and crucially, we need to address
the root causes of piracy in the Gulf of Guinea by
working with communities and creating better living
conditions. Coastal communities in the region are the
most vulnerable to the impact of piracy and maritime
crime, and they also face the difficult conditions
that drive those illicit activities, such as poverty and
youth unemployment. Environmental degradation
and biodiversity loss are further affecting lives and
livelihoods, fuelled by climate change and made worse
by illegal fishing. Criminals at sea must be stopped
and held accountable, but in order to ensure a truly
sustainable response, due attention must be paid to the
people who may become such criminals, along with the
factors that drive them to it and the people most affected.
We must pursue community-based crime-prevention
strategies and engage with at-risk and marginalized
young people to help them cultivate personal and
social skills, prevent risky behaviours and grant them
opportunities. UNODC is supporting the development
of community-based crime-prevention strategies in the

As we look to capitalize on present successes, we
must celebrate the 10-year anniversary of the Yaoundé
Architecture next year by pursuing more ambitious,
comprehensive and sustainable responses. In order
to do that, we need sufficient funding and sustained
political attention, and we will count on the help and
commitment of the Security Council in that regard.
I would also like to join Ms. Pobee in calling for
addressing the challenges she mentioned in her briefing.
UNODC will continue to work with Member States in
the Gulf of Guinea, as well as with the Gulf of Guinea
Commission, the Economic Community of Central
African States, ECOWAS and our partners across the
United Nations, for safer waters and safer shores.
I now give the floor to Mrs. Ukonga.
Mrs. Ukonga: Let me begin by expressing the
Gulf of Guinea Commission’s (GGC) appreciation
to you, Mr. President, for inviting to me here today.
I would also like to commend the current Chair of
the GGC, President Akufo-Addo of Ghana, for his
commitment and strong determination to working with
his colleagues to make the Gulf of Guinea region a zone
of peace and security.
My briefing today is totally different from the
one I gave in this very Chamber about 10 years ago,
in October 2011 (see S/PV.6633), when concerns about
the issue of piracy were first relayed not only to the
countries of the Gulf of Guinea region but to the
Security Council as well. I would like to recall the
Council’s timely intervention in that regard in adopting
resolutions 2018 (2011) of October 2011 and 2039 (2012)
of 29 February 2012, urging the States of the region
and the subregional organizations of the Economic
Community of West African States (ECOWAS), the
Economic Community of Central African States
(ECCAS) and the GGC to cooperate and collaborate in
order to confront this menace.
With the assistance of the United Nations Regional
Office for Central Africa and the United Nations
Office for West Africa and the Sahel, the Summit of
Heads of State and Government of ECCAS, ECOWAS
and the GGC was held in Yaoundé on 25 June 2013.
The Summit led to the signing of a memorandum
of understanding between ECOWAS, ECCAS and
GGC and the adoption of the Yaoundé Code of

22-705865/24

S/PV.9198

Peace and security in Africa

Conduct and Declaration, launching the Yaoundé
Architecture for maritime security and safety in the
Gulf of Guinea region. That includes the multinational
maritime coordination centres (MMCCs) of zones D
and A; the Regional Coordination Centre for Maritime
Security in Central Africa established by ECCAS in
2009; the MMCCs of zones E, F and G established by
ECOWAS in 2014; and the Interregional Coordination
Centre for the Implementation of the Regional Strategy
for Maritime Safety and Security in Central and West
Africa, which was established by ECOWAS, ECCAS
and GGC in 2014.
That commitment has been amply demonstrated in
both actions and words, and the Gulf of Guinea region
is gradually losing its unenvious position of replacing
the east coast of Africa, off Somalia, in piracy attacks
and other maritime crimes.
What is responsible for that decline in maritime
piracy? The political will of Governments of the region
to take responsibility for securing their maritime
domain has increased. There has been better funding
of the navies and other security agencies of the region,
for the acquisition of assets and other requirements.
There has been an increase in and stronger advocacy
by regional organizations, such as ECOWAS, ECCAS
and GGC, for States to take primary responsibility
for the maintenance of peace, security and safety in
their maritime domain, and a greater collaboration
and mutualization of naval assets by the navies and
other maritime security and safety agencies of the
States of the region. There has been better training and
joint international maritime exercises of the navies as
organized by the United States of America, France, the
United Kingdom and Brazil, among others. That also
leads to confidence-building among the personnel.
There has been a more impactful collaboration
between the States of the region and other States
outside the region for the sponsorship of programmes,
a review of legal texts and prosecution of offenders.
In that connection, we wish to acknowledge the great
assistance of the United Nations Office on Drugs and
Crime in those efforts at the national, multinational
and regional levels. Laws have been enacted within
the States to prosecute offenders of piracy and other
crimes at sea, which has acted as a credible deterrent
to would-be offenders, such as the Suppression of
Piracy and Other Maritime Offences Act of 2019
promulgated by the Republic of Nigeria. The European
Union’s Coordinated Maritime Presences concept was
6/24

22/11/2022

also launched, in January 2021, stationing frigates for
patrols on the edges of the exclusive economic zones of
the region.
All those measures have led to the considerable
decrease in piracy acts in the Gulf of Guinea region.
It is not, however, time to rest on our oars. There are
other crimes that are ongoing in the region, and which
do not have visible effects on international maritime
trade and shipping, but which have a more forceful
impact on the well-being of the coastal populations
and the economic well-being of the Governments of
the region.
We have illegal, unreported and unregulated fishing
(IUU fishing). Those who spoke before me referred to
that. IUU fishing deprives the coastal communities
of their means of food and livelihood. It also creates
hunger, underemployment and unemployment among
the coastal populations and pushes them to join criminal
gangs, with promises of quick and fantastic rewards
for illegal activities, or to embark on Mediterranean
crossings into Europe at the risk of their lives. IUU
fishing also deprives the Governments of the region of
tremendous revenue.
Oil theft has also increased, especially in the
Niger Delta area of Nigeria, with devastating effects
on government earnings, as almost 40 to 50 per cent
of exploited crude oil is stolen by both local and
international collaborators and their accomplices.
The environment is being polluted by unacceptable
methods of exploitation of hydrocarbon resources
and pipeline vandalism. That leads to damage of the
environment: no fishing, no drinkable or usable water
and no farming. There is trafficking in arms and
persons and illegal immigration.
There are also other factors affecting the coastal
populations: erosion of the coastline and flooding
of coastal cities due to climate change. Governance
challenges are also a factor, as well as a lack of basic
amenities and facilities, schools, hospitals, electricity
and roads.
What must we continue to do to maintain our
level of peace and security? To maintain and increase
the level of calm, peace and security that have so
far been achieved, the States of the region, regional
organizations and international organizations have to
intensify their efforts to continue the actions that have
produced those heart-warming results. Criminality at
22-70586

22/11/2022

Peace and security in Africa

sea begins on land — hence there is a need to maintain
actions on land to discourage criminality at sea.
At the national level, the populations’ basic
needs have to be considered and provided for. Health
facilities, potable water, electricity and education
facilities have to be provided by the Government at all
levels of governance. And other stakeholders who are
also doing legitimate business in the region should also
supplement government efforts.
The conditions for employment for both youth and
adults have to be created and maintained to discourage
them from being attracted to criminality for their
survival. The provision of assets for the national navies
and other maritime security and safety agencies and
the coming into operation of the national maritime
operational centres have to be continued.
At the regional level, there should be continued
advocacy for more sustainable collaboration and
cooperation among the navies and other maritime
security agencies; the mutualization of assets for
effective monitoring, surveillance and deterrent
activities in the maritime domain of the region; and
the provision of —. Adequate funding should be
provided for the Interregional Coordination Centre,
the Multinational Maritime Coordination Centres and
the regional maritime coordination centres for their
functioning and programmes. There are also plans for
the establishment of a combined naval task force of the
navies of the region for more effective intervention,
if necessary.

S/PV.9198

The President: I thank Mrs. Ukonga for her
briefing. Her remarks will also be circulated to make
up for the breaks in the briefing.
I now give the floor to Mr. Yakubu.
Mr. Yakubu: As the Security Council is aware, the
maritime environment remains a veritable source of
economic sustenance to most littoral nations — hence
the need for countries to ensure maximum security of
the maritime environment for their economic prosperity.
However, over the years, the maritime environment
around the Horn of Africa and the Gulf of Guinea has
become insecure owing to several maritime crimes,
particularly sea piracy and sea robbery.
The Gulf of Guinea is endowed with maritime
resources and is a strategic hub for global trade, linking
Africa and many parts of the world, including Europe
and North and South America. It may be considered
the linchpin for the success of the African Continental
Free Trade Area. However, the region’s tremendous
resources have been inundated with maritime security
challenges, and legal frameworks to prosecute maritime
offenders are absent or weak.

At the international level, the African Union, United
Nations agencies and other international stakeholders
should provide assistance for mutually beneficial
collaboration between them and the Governments of
the region, as well as between them and the coastal
populations. Moreover, naval assets should be provided
bilaterally, multilaterally or regionally, together with
hands-on training on the use of such assets.

As a consequence of those challenges, the Gulf of
Guinea was labelled the world’s hotspot for maritime
crimes, as it became famous for being the world’s most
dangerous and insecure waters owing to persistent
maritime piracy, poaching, sea robbery and other
related offences. In 2020 the region recorded the highest
number of kidnappings, with approximately 130 crew
members kidnapped, representing about 95 per cent
of global kidnappings at sea. Those concerns, among
others, strengthened the resolve of Ghana and Norway
to initiate negotiations to renew and mobilize greater
support for regional and national efforts to tackle
the highlighted challenges. That led to the adoption
of resolution 2634 (2022). I am pleased to be able to
say that the number of kidnappings has drastically
decreased in the past two years, which can be attributed
to the concerted efforts of nations in the Gulf of Guinea
and the assistance of the international community.

In conclusion, if those efforts are continued,
increased and sustainable, piracy and other criminal
activities will be a thing of the past in the region.
The GGC, as an integral part of providing a solution
in the process of securing the maritime space of that
region, wishes to reiterate its availability, readiness
and firm commitment to join all efforts to preserve and
consolidate the gains of the past years.

Furthermore, addressing maritime security in
Africa received some attention during the thirteenth
Ordinary Session of the Assembly of Heads of State
and Government of the African Union (AU), where
the Assembly expressed its concern about mounting
insecurity in the African maritime domain. The
Assembly strongly condemned the illegal activities and
undertook to develop a comprehensive and coherent

22-705867/24

S/PV.9198

Peace and security in Africa

strategy to address African geostrategic maritime
challenges and opportunities. In that regard, the
fifteenth Ordinary Session of the Assembly of Heads of
State and Government of the African Union formulated
an African Integrated Maritime Strategy for the
management of the continent’s maritime domain. Other
documents that assisted include the Yaoundé Code
of Conduct.
The Code of Conduct has continued to be a legal
instrument for maritime security in the Gulf of Guinea.
Since its adoption it has been focused on the repression
of piracy, robbery at sea and illicit maritime activities in
West and Central Africa. The framework has continued
to improve on its key pillars of information-sharing,
interdiction, prosecution and support to victims of
transnational organized crime in the maritime domain.
The prospect of information-sharing among countries in
the Gulf of Guinea was brought to bear in the successful
interception of two hijacked tankers, MT Maximus and,
more recently, Hailufeng II. That incident highlights
the potential of effective maritime information-sharing
capacity for maritime operations.
Another important aspect to look at when examining
maritime security in the Gulf of Guinea is joint training
and exercises. Exercises such as African Partnership
Station, Obangame Express and Grand African NEMO
have remained instructive in tackling maritime threats,
including piracy, in the Gulf of Guinea. In that regard,
the AU, as part of its efforts to improve the capacity
of African navies, will conduct Amani Africa III as a
continental maritime exercise sometime early next year.
It will be aimed at enhancing continental and regional
maritime cooperation with the objective of creating a
stable maritime environment for continued economic
prosperity on the continent at large. Additionally, it is
also believed that the operationalization of the maritime
coordination zone within the context of the Yaoundé
Code of Conduct has the potential to continually
improve interoperability and communications within
the maritime domain.
Let me say a few words about the efforts of the
European Union Coordinated Maritime Presences in
the Gulf of Guinea. The European Union implemented
its pilot Coordinated Maritime Presences concept
in 2022. The concept emphasizes the zones already
defined by the Yaoundé Architecture. Currently, five
members of the European Union are participating in the
Coordinated Maritime Presences with naval assets and
aiming to maintain at least one asset in the region.
8/24

22/11/2022

On a final note, I would also like to buttress the
efforts of the previous speaker, who spoke about the
maritime task force proposed by some States in the
Gulf of Guinea. The commitment of some countries in
the Gulf of Guinea to establishing a combined maritime
task force for the Gulf of Guinea is based on their
common desire to address current security fragilities,
stabilize the region to facilitate trade and realize their
full development potential. It also acknowledges the
need for those countries to take responsibility for
the current situation with respect to their obligations
under regional, continental and international law
and conventions. The maritime security task force
proposed for the Gulf of Guinea will serve as a
regional multilateral mechanism for the deterrence of
crimes, rapid intervention and operational responses
to maritime security threats and law enforcement, in
order to give practical expression to the African Union
Peace and Security Council’s Communiqué 1012. The
Communiqué called on the African Union Commission
to address certain issues in collaboration with the
existing Yaoundé Architecture for maritime security
structures, the regional economic communities and the
regional mechanisms for conflict prevention, conflict
management and conflict resolution. In a nutshell, what
is needed to address these issues is the reinforcement of
legal frameworks in the Gulf of Guinea, an increased
presence at sea and continued collaboration and
coordination in training and operations.
The President: I thank Mr. Yakubu for his briefing.
I shall now give the floor to those members of the
Council who wish to make statements.
Ms. Juul (Norway): We thank the briefers for
their important insights, and we also appreciate the
recommendations provided by the Peacebuilding
Commission (PBC), which underline the importance of
collaboration between the Council and the PBC.
We thank Ghana and all our colleagues for their
close cooperation on this very important issue, and
particularly on resolution 2634 (2022), the first in
10 years on maritime security in the Gulf of Guinea,
which was adopted earlier this year. Resolution 2634
(2022) is a strong call to action. The subsequent report
of the Secretary-General (S/2022/818) confirmed the
devastating effect of maritime insecurity on the stability
and economy of Africa and on the safety of seafarers.
As a maritime nation, Norway knows the importance of
safe waters for trade and socioeconomic development.
In addition to stopping pirates and armed robbers,
22-70586

22/11/2022

Peace and security in Africa

putting an end to illegal, unreported and unregulated
fishing is also key to a sustainable blue economy. In
that regard, let me reiterate how crucial it is to ensure
that all activities at sea are carried out in accordance
with the United Nations Convention on the Law of the
Sea, which sets out the legal framework for all ocean
activities globally.
We are encouraged by the recent positive progress
on improving maritime security in the Gulf of Guinea.
Acts of piracy and armed robberies at sea in the Gulf
have halved, from 27 cases during the first three
quarters of 2021 to 13 this year. We strongly commend
the countries of the region for their firm leadership in
making that happen. That includes Nigeria’s Deep Blue
project, as well as the enactment by several countries
in the Gulf of Guinea of laws enabling the prosecution
of pirates. We commend Council members Gabon and
Ghana for leading the way by implementing important
new regulations and laws. The Economic Community
of West African States, the Economic Community
of Central African States, the United Nations
Office for West Africa and the Sahel and the United
Nations Regional Office for Central Africa have also
signalled renewed efforts aimed at maritime security.
In addition, we are happy to see that international
partners are responding to the Council’s call to action.
We particularly thank the Group of Seven Group of
Friends of the Gulf of Guinea, chaired by Côte d’Ivoire
and Germany.
Despite recent progress, both politically and
practically, it is time to step up our efforts even further.
Now is the time to end the menace of maritime insecurity
in the Gulf of Guinea. As the Secretary-General notes
in his report, the forthcoming tenth anniversary of the
Yaoundé Architecture offers an opportunity to take
stock and outline a strategic vision for the next decade.
In so doing, we should keep in mind the underlying root
causes so that all our progress remains in place. As was
also mentioned in the PBC recommendations, a critical
factor is not to forget about opportunities for youth, so
that they do not get lured or pushed into piracy or other
forms of crime.
Together with Ghana and other regional and
global leaders, Norway will continue its support for
maritime security in the Gulf of Guinea, both during
and after our term on the Security Council. We pledge
to continue support for capacity-building through the
United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime. We are
further discussing with ECOWAS how we can support

S/PV.9198

its efforts. We will also continue to contribute through
the Group of Seven++ Friends of the Gulf of Guinea,
including at its meeting in Abidjan at the beginning of
next month. We stand ready to contribute to making
next year’s Yaoundé+10 anniversary a meaningful and
implementation-focused success.
Mrs. Ngyema Ndong (Gabon) (spoke in French): I
would like to thank Assistant Secretary-General Martha
Pobee for her detailed briefing on the United Nations
fight against piracy in the Gulf of Guinea. It is always
a pleasure for us to hear her speak in French in this
forum. I would also like to thank the Executive Director
of the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime,
Ms. Ghada Fathy Waly, the Executive Secretary of the
Gulf of Guinea Commission, Ambassador Florentina
Adenike Ukonga, and the Maritime Planning Officer
of the African Union Commission, Commander Nura
Abdullahi Yakubu, for their important briefings.
Since signing the Yaoundé Code of Conduct in
2013 the States of the Gulf of Guinea have been facing
major security challenges that have increased with the
rise of violent extremism, terrorism and intercommunal
clashes. While piracy activities focused in recent years
on boarding and attacking oil tankers, we have observed
a shift in criminal activities, which are now centred
on kidnapping for ransom, which has seen dramatic
growth since 2016.
For a long time, my country, Gabon, was relatively
spared, but in recent years it has been the victim of acts
of piracy characterized by hostage-taking, sometimes
with fatal outcomes. This notable increase in piracy
activities should draw the attention of the Security
Council to the need to strengthen the technical and
material capacities of and financial support for State
members of the Economic Community of Central
Africa States (ECCAS) and the Economic Community
of West African States (ECOWAS). This is the only
way that our response to the threat posed by pirates can
be effective and coordinated and bring desired results
in these two regional economic communities.
Reduced livelihoods in coastal communities in the
Gulf of Guinea, owing to the climate crisis as well as
pollution from oil and gas extraction by multinational
companies, facilitate the recruitment of populations by
pirate and terrorist networks. Climate and security have
a direct link, which is seen in the increase of insecurity
in our populations. This is clearly perceptible in Africa,
and in the Gulf of Guinea, in particular. Today the Gulf
of Guinea is considered one of the most dangerous

22-705869/24

S/PV.9198

Peace and security in Africa

22/11/2022

maritime areas in the world, where ship hijackings,
crew kidnappings for ransom and cargo thefts thrive.

framework aimed at preventing and repressing acts of
piracy and armed robbery at sea is necessary.

Aware of these challenges, many measures have been
taken by the States of the region to strengthen maritime
security. In particular, there has been an increase in the
number of convictions for piracy, an expansion in naval
patrols, better regional cooperation and the deployment
of international navies, and the implementation of the
Yaoundé Code of Conduct. These regional efforts have
led to a decrease in the number of incidents, from 81
in 2020 to 34 in 2021, according to data provided by
the International Maritime Bureau. These significant
results are the reflection of strengthened cooperation
among all regional stakeholders and international
partners. My country welcomes the major role played
by regional organizations, including ECCAS, ECOWAS
and the Gulf of Guinea Commission, in the resolution
and prevention of piracy and other maritime crimes.

In addition, we call for accession to and ratification
of the various international and regional mechanisms,
in particular the Yaoundé mechanism, for a more
effective implementation of the provisions contained
therein. Furthermore, we encourage all countries
in the region to continue their efforts to address the
underlying causes of maritime insecurity in the Gulf
of Guinea by taking into consideration the social,
economic and environmental challenges. The links
between Sahel-based terrorist groups and piracy in the
Gulf of Guinea must also be examined, so that rapid,
adequate and effective responses commensurate with
the organizational and devastating capabilities of these
increasingly well-organized entities can be made.

Despite these notable advances, maritime
insecurity in the Gulf of Guinea, as demonstrated
by the attack last April by pirates 260 nautical miles
off the coast of Ghana, remains a constant threat that
deserves the full vigilance of the Security Council. My
country strongly condemns all of these illegal maritime
activities and calls on actors at sea to comply with the
provisions of international maritime law, resolutions
of the Security Council, in particular resolution 2634
(2022), on acts of piracy and armed robbery committed
in the Gulf of Guinea, and the domestic maritime law of
the States concerned. In this regard, Gabon echoes the
call by the African Union Peace and Security Council
for countries in the region to implement national,
regional and continental maritime-security strategies
and frameworks and to develop integrated strategies to
address threats in the maritime domain. This insecurity
undermines the development of the coastal economies
of the region, whose countries face significant direct,
indirect and opportunity costs associated with the
presence of piracy and armed robbery, while also
affecting the shipping industry.
The question of how these criminal groups are
financed should also be of concern. Reliable studies
show that pirate groups earn approximately $5 million
in direct income per year from theft and hostage-taking.
Sharing information and strengthening judicial
cooperation between States, particularly in terms of
criminal prosecutions, must be a priority in fighting
maritime piracy. To this end, a harmonized legal
10/24

We hope that the celebration in 2023 of the
tenth anniversary of the Yaoundé Code of Conduct
concerning the Repression of Piracy, Armed Robbery
against Ships, and Illicit Maritime Activity in West and
Central Africa will be a new opportunity to examine
the situation of maritime piracy in the Gulf of Guinea.
It is indeed important that the Council continue to
address this important challenge to international peace
and security.
I would like to conclude by reaffirming our
commitment to fighting maritime piracy in the Gulf of
Guinea and commend the unfailing efforts of all actors
involved in this fight.
Mr. Raguttahalli (India): At the outset, I thank
Assistant Secretary-General Martha Pobee, Executive
Director of the United Nations Office on Drugs and
Crime, Ms. Ghada Fathi Waly, Executive Secretary
of the Gulf of Guinea Commission, Ambassador
Florentina Adenike Ukonga, and African Union
Commission Maritime Planning Officer, Commander
Nura Abdullahi Yakubu, for their respective briefings.
The problem of maritime piracy is as old as the
history of maritime navigation. However, with the
rapid growth in international trade through maritime
navigation, the growth of piracy over the past two
decades has been unprecedented.
Piracy is not only a threat to the freedom of
maritime navigation, but also has destabilizing effects
on global and regional trade and security. The negative
humanitarian impact of that threat on seafarers, who
are the lifeline of maritime shipping, can no longer be
ignored. The menace of piracy can be defeated only
22-70586

22/11/2022

Peace and security in Africa

through effective cooperation and the implementation
of legal frameworks on maritime security at both
regional and international levels.
Maritime security has been one of the key priorities
for India in the Security Council. During India’s
presidency of the Council last year, our Prime Minister
presided over a meeting on maritime security, during
which the Council adopted a presidential statement
(S/PRST/2021/15), the first Council document on the
issue of maritime security. The salience of that issue
was further highlighted through the adoption, in May,
of resolution 2634 (2022), on piracy and armed robbery
at sea in the Gulf of Guinea — a crucial initiative by
Ghana and Norway.
In that context, we welcome the Secretary-General’s
report (S/2022/818) on this issue, which contains many
useful recommendations. The report notes the decrease
in piracy incidents in the Gulf of Guinea, which is
underpinned by several factors, including the positive
impact of piracy-related convictions in the countries of
the region, as well as the deterrent effects of increased
naval patrols by the Nigerian navy, aided by better
regional cooperation. However, it is important that we
not lower our guard against piracy in Gulf of Guinea
and continue to take robust anti-piracy measures.
The report notes the growing risk of the terrorist
threat spilling over from the central Sahel towards
the Gulf of Guinea, as demonstrated by the terrorist
attacks against Government forces in Benin and Togo
since 2021. We need to continue to look out for links
among extremist, terrorist and pirate groups in the Gulf
of Guinea, as those links form a lethal nexus with the
potential to reverse the recent anti-piracy gains in Gulf
of Guinea.
The low conviction rates in piracy cases remain a
cause of concern, despite the two recent convictions
in Togo and Nigeria. We welcome those convictions,
but much more needs to be done to check the impunity
of pirates.
The United Nations Convention on the Law of the
Sea (UNCLOS) remains the main legal framework for
addressing piracy in the Gulf of Guinea. We encourage
the countries of the region to take steps to enact
legislation for criminalizing piracy to the full extent,
as indicated in the report and as set out in UNCLOS,
in order to achieve the effective suppression of piracy
in the region.

S/PV.9198

The Yaoundé Architecture has played a significant
role in enhancing regional cooperation. However, the
zonal, subregional and interregional coordination
arrangements face several challenges, such as a lack
of predictable and sustainable financing, adequate
expertise, equipment and logistical support and timely
information-sharing. The international community
needs to enhance its support to the countries of the
region and regional architectures in order to overcome
those bottlenecks.
We commend the efforts of Ghana in prioritizing
the issue during its chairmanship of the Economic
Community of West African States (ECOWAS).
We welcome the recent adoption of the ECOWAS
Supplementary Act on the Conditions of Transfer of
Persons Suspected of Having Committed Acts of Piracy
and their Associated Property and/or Evidence.
India has been engaged with the countries of the
region, particularly in the Gulf of Guinea, on maritime
matters, including through the deployment of navy
patrols, as well as on developing the anti-piracy
capacities of the countries in the region. As mentioned
in the present report, the Indian navy was deployed in
the Gulf of Guinea for a month, starting on 4 September,
thereby contributing to efforts to counter piracy and
armed robbery, as well as to training and awareness
workshops in the region. The Information Fusion
Centre — Indian Ocean Region, located near Delhi,
India, is integrated with the Yaoundé Architecture
through a third-country liaison officer stationed there,
and it continues to effectively contribute to maritime
domain awareness in the area.
In conclusion, India will continue to support all
national, regional and international efforts to strengthen
maritime security, including in the Gulf of Guinea, in
consultation with the countries of the region.
Ms. Jacobs (United Kingdom): The United
Kingdom welcomes this briefing on the findings of
the Secretary-General’s report on piracy and armed
robbery in the Gulf of Guinea (S/2022/818), and thanks
all our briefers today. We also welcome the advisory
note of the Peacebuilding Commission.
I would like to make three brief points today.
First, the United Kingdom is pleased to note
the decline in incidents and the strength of regional
cooperation in tackling the issue. We are proud of our
own collaboration with partners in order to promote
security and stability — from putting the issue at the

22-7058611/24

S/PV.9198

Peace and security in Africa

heart of our Group of Seven presidency to the naval
visit by HMS Trent to defer attacks on maritime trade.
Secondly, as the Secretary-General’s report notes,
the drivers of piracy are complex and multifaceted. We
encourage a continued focus on the impact of poverty,
youth unemployment and environmental degradation
on criminal activity. Engagement is needed at all levels,
including community-based responses, and the United
Kingdom will continue to work closely with partners
in support of a holistic approach in the Gulf of Guinea.
Finally, we reiterate the importance of all efforts to
tackle piracy and armed robbery, complying with the
United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea, which
is the legal framework within which all activities in the
ocean and seas are carried out, and aligning closely
with the provisions of the Yaoundé Code of Conduct.
Mr. Mills (United States of America): I thank
our briefers for their insightful and informative
presentations to the Security Council.
The United States is committed to the international
navigation, security and sustainable development of the
Gulf of Guinea and countries of the region, and indeed,
the entire Atlantic Ocean basin. Maritime security
in the Gulf of Guinea is essential to maintaining
an Atlantic Ocean that provides for the safety and
prosperity of Atlantic nations and those that depend
on its waters for their livelihoods. The United States
reaffirms its commitment to assisting States of the
region to counter piracy and armed robbery at sea and
to hold perpetrators, facilitators and key figures of
criminal networks accountable, as well as to address
other related destabilizing and illicit activities in the
Gulf of Guinea.
We concur with our briefers that, through the
collaborative efforts of many nations, including
through piracy convictions in Nigeria and Togo and the
leadership of the Nigerian navy, the frequency of such
incidents has dramatically decreased. However, we note
that less than one third of the Gulf of Guinea countries
have enacted legislation to criminalize piracy, as set
out in the United Nations Convention on the Law of
the Sea.
We cannot let down our guard against all threats
to maritime security. Challenges such as piracy, the
illegal, unreported and unregulated engagement
in fishing, transnational organized crime, climate
change and environmental degradation all pose a
threat to livelihoods, as we have heard. Maritime
12/24

22/11/2022

drug trafficking, for example, has far-reaching and
devastating consequences for the citizens of Atlantic
Ocean and beyond.
We take note, from the Secretary-General’s report
(S/2022/818), that pirate groups have also shifted
activity and are now operating in West and Central
Africa. The United States has pledged to increase our
collaboration and coordination with nations across the
Atlantic, as we all share similar concerns about our
shared resource. Our naval forces in Africa conduct
training and exercises throughout the Gulf of Guinea
with our African partners, but also with counterparts
from Brazil, Portugal and other allies. Increasingly,
we see climate resilience and sustainable economies
as important elements of maritime security, and we
therefore remain committed to working with our African
partners to address climate change, food insecurity
and other factors that are further fuelling recruitment
by criminal piracy and terrorist groups alike. To that
end, we commend the actions of Benin, Ghana, Nigeria
and Togo, with the assistance of UNODC, to develop
harmonized standard operating procedures on matters
such as evidence collection at sea and chain of custody.
The United States also commends the efforts of
regional and subregional organizations, namely the
African Union, the Economic Community of Central
African States, the Economic Community of West
African States, the Gulf of Guinea Commission,
and their partners in their coordination to enhance
cooperation on maritime security and to further
operationalize the Yaoundé Architecture. The
United States welcomes the progress made by States
bordering the Gulf of Guinea in their implementation
of the Yaoundé Architecture on maritime security and
welcomes further efforts to support the Architecture as
it nears its tenth anniversary.
Finally, we are active members of the Group of
Seven (G-7) Group of Friends of the Gulf of Guinea,
serving as co-Chair in 2020. We commend the work
of the current co-Chairs, Côte d’Ivoire and Germany,
and we look forward to the G-7 Group of Friends of
the Gulf of Guinea plenary meeting to be held on 1 and
2 December in Abidjan, Côte d’Ivoire.
Mr. Olmedo (France) (spoke in French): I thank all
the briefers for their presentations.
France commends Ghana and Norway for their
efforts to mobilize the international community on the
issue of maritime security in the Gulf of Guinea, which
22-70586

22/11/2022

Peace and security in Africa

is a strategic area not only for the coastal countries, but
also for their landlocked neighbours, which are equally
dependent on access to the sea. We also welcome the
adoption of resolution 2634 (2022), negotiated by Ghana
and Norway. We call on all Member States and the
regional and international organizations to implement
all the recommendations contained in that text.
I would like to make two points.
First, we welcome the significant decline in acts
of piracy in the Gulf of Guinea, as attested to in the
report of the Secretary-General (S/2022/818). France
calls for all efforts contributing to that result to be
pursued and strengthened. Here I wish to refer, first and
foremost, to the actions of the countries in the region,
on both the security and the legal and judicial fronts, to
criminalize acts of piracy and conduct investigations
and prosecutions. I also refer to the cooperation
frameworks that have been put in place, starting with
the Yaoundé Architecture, which we must continue to
operationalize and support.Finally, I wish to highlight
the support provided by the international community,
the United Nations and its agencies, including the
United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime.
As the Secretary-General’s report reminds us, the
European Union is the only partner to deploy a sustained
and coordinated maritime presence in support of the
States of the Gulf of Guinea, and we are proud of that.
France is proud to participate in that effort. Moreover,
we are taking action on a bilateral basis, in particular
in Côte d’Ivoire and Gabon. In Gabon, for example,
French personnel and French ships regularly conduct
trainings and exercises with their Gabonese partners.
Secondly, the Security Council must remain
mobilized and continue to closely follow maritime
security issues in the Gulf of Guinea. The issue is, in
fact, far from being limited to piracy. The report of
the Secretary-General underlines the links between
piracy, climate change and illegal fishing, which call
for a broad approach, including by addressing issues
related to development, support for local communities
and the preservation of ecosystems. We must also
remain attentive to the links between organized crime
and terrorism.
France calls for the African Union, the Economic
Community of West African States, the Economic
Community of Central African States, the Gulf of
Guinea Commission, the Group of Five for the Sahel
and the Accra Initiative to continue in their efforts to

S/PV.9198

implement regional security initiatives. France will
remain committed to supporting those efforts and
continuing its coordination work with all partners
in the region. We will advocate for regional efforts
to benefit from sustainable funding, including from
United Nations assessed contributions.
We will also continue to provide operational
support at the request of the countries concerned. In
Côte d’Ivoire, for example, our initiatives include the
Franco-Ivorian International Academy for the Fight
Against Terrorism and the Interregional Maritime
Security Institute in Abidjan.
Mr. Spasse (Albania): I extend my thanks to
Assistant Secretary-General Pobee, Executive Director
Waly, Executive Secretary Ukonga and Commander
Yakubu for their briefings.
As the tenth anniversary of the Yaoundé Code of
Conduct approaches, Albania attaches great importance
to this discussion, which can provide us with an
opportunity to reaffirm our commitments, recognize
the progress achieved and think about the future.
Resolution 2634 (2022), adopted in March, marked an
important step in drawing the Council’s attention to
maritime security. We must sustain that momentum.
We strongly commend the recent decrease in
piracy and armed robbery incidents at sea in the Gulf
of Guinea, which can be attributed to national, regional
and international initiatives. However, despite that
progress, criminality continues to be of concern, with
ongoing activity, not only of piracy and armed robbery,
but also the kidnapping of seafarers, illegal fishing,
trafficking and transnational organized crime. Those
illicit activities thrive on a lack of governance and
State presence and weak institutions, subsequently
undermining the economic development of the
entire region.
Albania fully supports the Yaoundé Architecture,
through which important gains have been achieved in
the Gulf of Guinea. Nevertheless, we are concerned
that the framework lacks the necessary resources and
ownership to maximize its potential. Further work is
required to ensure appropriate political direction, as
well as adequate legal and operational support. We
encourage the intraregional cooperation between the
Economic Community of Central African States,
the Economic Community of West African States
and the Gulf of Guinea Commission to strengthen

22-7058613/24

S/PV.9198

Peace and security in Africa

maritime security and to fully operationalize the
Yaoundé Architecture.
It is concerning that many States in the region have
yet to adopt the necessary legislation to criminalize
piracy and armed robbery under their domestic laws.
In that regard, we call on the countries in the Gulf of
Guinea to take the necessary measures and ensure that
perpetrators are held accountable. Strengthening the
rule of law must be a priority.
As the Secretary-General has highlighted, it is
only through a multifaceted approach that we can
tackle the root causes of piracy and maritime crime
in the Gulf of Guinea, which are depriving local
communities of their livelihoods. We stress the need
for national, regional and international efforts to focus
on addressing the underlying social, economic and
environmental challenges while creating opportunities
for women and young people. Furthermore, we must
curb the growing insecurity in the region, counter illicit
activities and dismantle criminal networks, which use
existing vulnerabilities to expand their scope. Regional
and international collaboration is essential to prevent
the flow of revenues generated by piracy and armed
robbery at sea from contributing to the financing of
terrorism in the wider region.
Finally, the success of the Yaoundé Architecture
is dependent on stakeholders’ action and engagement.
It is only through greater cooperation between the
countries of the region, the relevant organizations, the
international community and the private sector that we
can effectively reduce and prevent the threat at sea and
on shore.
Mr. De Almeida Filho (Brazil): I would like to
start by thanking Assistant Secretary-General Pobee,
Ms. Waly, Ambassador Ukonga and Commander
Yakubu for their important and informative briefings.
I also welcome the participation in the meeting
of the delegations of Germany, Nigeria and the
European Union.
Brazil has been paying attention to the international
security implications of piracy and armed robbery in
the Gulf of Guinea. As a member of the South Atlantic
Peace and Cooperation Zone, it is our priority to
strengthen the ongoing counter-piracy efforts in the
region and to prevent the spread of piracy. We are
working towards the goal of making the South Atlantic
a zone of peace. We are pleased to see that the report
(S/2022/818) outlines a decrease, since April 2021, in
14/24

22/11/2022

instances of piracy and armed robbery in the region.
That trend results from a series of factors, including the
deterrent effects of increased naval patrols.
It is our understanding that the States of the
Gulf of Guinea are taking the lead and bearing the
primary responsibility for countering piracy and armed
robbery in the region. We commend them for their
ongoing efforts, particularly their concerted action
in operationalizing the Yaoundé Architecture, which
is central to countering piracy in the Gulf of Guinea,
as it brings together key regional actors such as the
Economic Community of Central African States, the
Economic Community of West African States and the
Gulf of Guinea Commission. We also note that the tenth
anniversary of the Yaoundé Architecture next year
will provide an opportunity for assessing the progress
made and challenges ahead when it comes to enhancing
counter-piracy activity in the region.
Enhancing the modalities for cooperation and
naval capacity-building will be key to supporting the
efforts of the region to address that complex challenge.
As a member of the Group of Seven Group of Friends
of the Gulf of Guinea, Brazil stands ready to continue
supporting the countries in the region through a
wide range of cooperation initiatives and joint naval
operations. We would like to highlight the approach
taken by Operation Guinex, led by the Brazilian navy,
which goes beyond the scope of a patrolling mission and
includes joint exercises and training activities together
with our partners in the Gulf of Guinea. During this
year’s exercises, Brazil sent its União frigate in June, at
the request of its local partners, in order to make up for
the fact that no other foreign ship would be patrolling
the region. In addition to Operation Guinex and bilateral
training programmes, Brazil is also a participant in the
Obangame Express and Grand African NEMO joint
maritime exercises.
Brazil appreciates that the report thoroughly
addresses the underlying causes of piracy and armed
robbery in the region, as well as any possible or
potential linkages with terrorism in West and Central
Africa and the Sahel. We note the fact that to date there
is no evidence of any operational, organizational or
ideological links between terrorism and pirate groups
in the Gulf of Guinea. We concur with the report’s
findings that there are multidimensional factors
that contribute to piracy and armed robbery, such as
widespread poverty and high underemployment and
unemployment rates. We also acknowledge that those
22-70586

22/11/2022

Peace and security in Africa

underlying causes may become part of a vicious cycle,
as the effects of piracy and armed robbery in the Gulf
of Guinea have caused significant financial hardship to
the whole region, mainly due to disruptions to shipping,
trade, transportation and Government revenues. The
costs of piracy and armed robbery at sea in the Gulf of
Guinea steal resources that could otherwise be used for
the development of the region.
With regard to references to climate change,
Brazil would like to stress that increasing the means of
implementation are of the utmost importance, including
in the context of the United Nations Framework
Convention on Climate Change and the 2030 Agenda
for Sustainable Development.
To conclude, as this year has marked the fortieth
anniversary of the adoption of the United Nations
Convention on the Law of the Sea (UNCLOS), Brazil
would like to reaffirm its full commitment to the
objectives, purposes and principles enshrined in the
Convention. It is clear to us that UNCLOS sets out
the legal framework within which all activities in
the oceans and seas must be carried out, including
countering piracy and armed robbery at sea. It is
therefore important that the Gulf of Guinea States
continue their efforts to ensure that their domestic and
regional legal frameworks are in line with UNCLOS.
Mr. Kuzmin (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): At the outset, my thanks go to all of our
briefers today for their very valuable information and
useful contributions.
During the reporting period, the number of pirate
attacks and robberies on ships in the Gulf of Guinea has
slightly decreased. At the same time, however, the root
causes of those issues have not yet been eliminated,
and therefore the risks associated with the security of
international shipping, including of kidnappings for
ransom, unfortunately remain.
We appreciate the efforts of the United Nations
Office on Drugs and Crime to provide technical
assistance to the States of the Gulf of Guinea, including
through the Global Maritime Crime Programme Fund.
We believe that building the capacities of coastal States
and their ability to suppress and counter acts of piracy
and armed robbery at sea is the key to success, and
we are actively participating in that important work.
During the reporting period, Russia’s contributions
to the Fund were used to provide targeted technical
assistance to Equatorial Guinea, Gabon, Ghana and

S/PV.9198

Nigeria. The focus of our efforts has been to improve
the combat capabilities of the maritime security forces
of those States to ensure the sustainable stabilization of
the situation in the waters of the Gulf of Guinea.
In the light of the regional specificities of piracy
and robbery at sea, we continue to advocate the
establishment of a specialized entity under the auspices
of the United Nations that would be responsible for
addressing the entire spectrum of issues related to
combating maritime crime. With that I would like to
end my brief statement.
Mrs. Nusseibeh (United Arab Emirates): I would
like to thank Ghana for convening today’s meeting on
this important topic, as well as all the briefers for their
invaluable insights.
The United Arab Emirates welcomes the ongoing
international cooperation countering piracy and
armed robbery at sea in the Gulf of Guinea. We are
encouraged by the progress achieved in stabilizing
one of the most important maritime zones in Africa.
Over the past year, particularly since April 2021, there
has been a substantial decline in the number of piracy
incidents and crew kidnappings at sea in the Gulf of
Guinea — from 123 cases of piracy and armed robbery
at sea in 2020, the number dropped to 45 in 2021.
The downward trend has continued in 2022, with
the International Maritime Organization reporting just
13 incidents of piracy and armed robbery in the first
six months of the year. That is a significant decline,
showing that international, regional and national
efforts can improve the maritime security landscape in
the Gulf of Guinea. But we must also recognize that the
drop in the piracy threat may also be due to a shift in
the focus of the criminal groups active in the region, as
Ms. Pobee mentioned in her briefing.
Piracy remains a serious problem, however, and
should therefore concern us all. The combined financial
loss caused by instances of piracy in the Gulf of Guinea
is estimated to be almost $2 billion a year, in addition to
the indirect financial damage to coastal communities.
As we approach the tenth anniversary of the Yaoundé
Code of Conduct next year, we commend the signatories
to the Code of Conduct for advancing the framework in
order to curb threats to freedom of navigation, protect
the safety of the people in the region and promote trade
exports and the economic growth of the coastal States.
To protect the gains made so far and remain united
on this issue, the Security Council should continue

22-7058615/24

S/PV.9198

Peace and security in Africa

to support the implementation of resolution 2634
(2022), which was spearheaded by Ghana and Norway,
including by coordinating with other stakeholders, such
as the Peacebuilding Commission and all the relevant
United Nations agencies.
Combating piracy and armed robbery at sea in the
Gulf of Guinea is undoubtedly a long-term endeavour
that requires joint action among affected coastal States,
regional organizations and international partners. The
United Arab Emirates would like to stress three points
with regard to the impacts of piracy in the Gulf of
Guinea and its root causes so that we can better inform
our policy response.
First, as has been repeated here today, we know
that behind the threats to maritime security in the Gulf
of Guinea lurks a wide range of criminal activities.
Such activities include the smuggling of weapons
and trafficking in natural resources, both of which
are increasingly being used to the benefit of crossborder terrorist groups. The United Arab Emirates is
alarmed by reports that terrorist groups in the Sahel are
increasingly threatening the countries along the Gulf
of Guinea. We are also deeply concerned about the
risk of the spread of extremism throughout the region
and its short- and long-term destabilizing effects on
communities. The United Arab Emirates believes that
the burden of confronting terrorism cannot, and should
not, be borne by any single country or region alone. We
therefore support, and will continue to support, coastal
West African countries in their efforts to counter
terrorism. We particularly thank Ghana for its strong
and forward-looking leadership in that regard.
Secondly, I would like to further emphasize the
importance of regional anti-piracy efforts. Regional
leaders are best placed not only to understand the threats
posed by piracy, but also to alert neighbouring States to
piracy activity, so that early prevention initiatives can
be put in place. They are also best placed to provide
important contexts for community-based prevention
efforts, which are critical to combating criminal and
terrorist activities and recruitment. I would add that
those community-based efforts must take into account
the unique challenges that women and girls face in
such environments.
Thirdly, to find a sustainable solution to the
problem of piracy and armed robbery at sea, we must
address its root causes. We believe that one of the
critical challenges that contributes to such problems is
climate change. The coastal belt off the Gulf of Guinea
16/24

22/11/2022

is low-lying and vulnerable to sea-level rise, which,
coupled with the continued environmental degradation
in the Niger delta and other climate-related disruptions,
exacerbates fragilities in the region and causes coastal
communities to face the loss of fishing stocks and
agricultural opportunities. That, in turn, leads to the loss
of livelihoods, increasing poverty and instability. Such
an environment is highly vulnerable to exploitation by
pirate groups, which draw desperate communities into
criminal activities as a means of survival. Anti-piracy
solutions in the Gulf of Guinea must therefore include
measures that help to improve regional collaboration on
climate change and the climate resilience of the most
exposed communities.
We again thank Ghana for spotlighting this matter
on the Council’s agenda, and we reiterate the support of
the United Arab Emirates for all efforts towards peace,
stability and prosperity in that region.
Ms. Moran (Ireland): Let me extend our thanks
to our briefers for their very insightful inputs this
morning. I also thank the Secretary-General for his
report (S/2022/818). It is rare that, as the Security
Council, we meet to welcome positive developments.
We very much welcome that, as well as the decrease
in instances of piracy and armed robbery at sea in the
Gulf of Guinea.
Ireland commends the ongoing work of the coastal
States of the Gulf of Guinea, the co-penholders on
resolution 2634 (2022) — Ghana and Norway — the
African Union and key partners, including the European
Union (EU), which took effective steps to address the
issue of piracy and maritime security. The success of
the ongoing regional and multinational efforts towards
suppressing maritime crime is underpinned by a series
of factors, including the positive impact of piracy
convictions and the deterrent effects of increased naval
patrols. That is coupled with improved cooperation
through the Yaoundé Architecture, which has optimized
maritime cooperation across the Gulf of Guinea.
In addition, the EU continues to support regional
efforts to address the many challenges of maritime
security, including by ensuring the implementation of
an EU strategy and action plan, which contribute to
the strengthening of the capacity of coastal States in
the region.
A common response to the threat of piracy and
armed robbery at sea is the hiring of private military
and security companies to provide maritime security.
22-70586

22/11/2022

Peace and security in Africa

That elevates the risk of human rights violations. Ireland
stresses that, while suppressing the menace of piracy is
an important priority, it must be done in accordance
with international law, including international human
rights law.
Now is the time to maintain the momentum and
build on the gains made. Ireland encourages increased
cooperation and coordination among initiatives at the
national, regional, and international levels to continue
to address maritime insecurity in the Gulf of Guinea.
However, the long-term success of the various
initiatives in turning the tide is not guaranteed,
neither are the gains of last year sustainable, without
addressing the underlying causes of piracy and armed
robbery. The Secretary-General’s report notes that the
drivers of piracy activity are complex, often impacted
by the evolving dynamics on land. They include
multidimensional factors, such as widespread poverty,
high unemployment, inadequate access to public
services, security threats, legal and jurisdictional
deficiencies and corruption. Climate change and other
environmental threats are also significant factors.
Indeed, their links with security, including maritime
security, are increasingly evident. In that context,
criminal activities, including maritime piracy and
armed robbery at sea, are all too often perceived as a
means of survival.
Our response to those drivers must be
multidimensional. It is only by adopting a
comprehensive, holistic and inclusive solution to the
underlying causes that we can sustainably address the
problem. Ireland stresses that those solutions must
address the socioeconomic challenges of the region
and create economic opportunities, including for
women and the young people of coastal communities.
That should include the full implementation of the
Sustainable Development Goals.
Ireland wishes to reaffirm that the United Nations
Convention on the Law of the Sea (UNCLOS) sets out
the legal framework within which all activities in the
oceans and seas must be carried out. That includes
countering piracy and armed robbery at sea. UNCLOS
requires all States to cooperate to the fullest extent
possible in the repression of piracy. It is clear that some
States are falling short in that regard, thereby hindering
the effective suppression of piracy in the Gulf of
Guinea. In particular, it is regrettable that less than
a third of the Gulf of Guinea countries have enacted
legislation that criminalizes piracy to the full extent set

S/PV.9198

out in UNCLOS. Ensuring full respect for UNCLOS
is critical, as it lays down rules for the mutual benefit
of all States. The free and peaceful use of the seas and
oceans is vital to us all.
Mr. Kiboino (Kenya): I thank you, Mr. President,
for convening this important meeting. I also thank all
our briefers for their insights and perspectives. We take
note of the Secretary-General’s report (S/2022/818), as
presented by Assistant Secretary-General Martha Pobee.
Piracy, armed robbery and transnational organized
crime at sea pose a grave threat to international
navigation and the security and sustainable development
of both coastal and hinterland areas, including
landlocked countries. Kenya strongly condemns such
acts wherever they are perpetrated. Those threats are
acute in the Gulf of Guinea, which has been labelled the
world’s hotspot for piracy. Despite the reported decline
in piracy incidents in the Gulf of Guinea, the region
accounted for all the kidnappings at sea worldwide
in 2021.
Besides, the threat of piracy, especially in the Gulf
of Guinea, is made existential by its links, or potential
links, to terrorist groups, armed groups and criminal
networks. Kenya therefore welcomed the adoption of
resolution 2634 (2022), the negotiations of which were
led by Ghana and Norway. The resolution reaffirms that
addressing piracy and armed robbery at sea is important
to both the regional economy and stability and the
safety of seafarers. As we reflect on the utility of that
and other instruments in combating piracy in the Gulf
of Guinea, I wish to underscore five pertinent points.
First, Kenya believes that the solution to the
menace of piracy in the Gulf of Guinea lies in
undertaking a comprehensive approach to addressing
the root causes. Such an approach dovetails with the
African Union’s integrated maritime strategy, the aim
of which is to foster increased wealth creation from
Africa’s oceans and seas by developing a sustainable,
thriving blue economy in a secure and environmentally
sustainable manner.
Support for coastal countries to patrol their sea
waters is good, but it is not enough. Those countries
need to be supported to invest in safe and sustainable
blue economies in order to tackle poverty and
underdevelopment. In that vein, it is important that
coastal States have the ability to manage the sustainable
exploitation of their natural resources, both at sea and
on land, for the benefit of their own economies. That

22-7058617/24

S/PV.9198

Peace and security in Africa

22/11/2022

requires resilient institutions, effective regulatory
frameworks and strong political will.

supports the advisory note issued by the Peacebuilding
Commission on this subject.

Secondly, training and capacity-building are
crucial. Kenya commends initiatives such as the Global
Maritime Crime Programme of the United Nations
Office on Drugs and Crime (UNODC), which promotes
capacity-building to address and eradicate crimes
committed at sea, including acts of piracy. We advocate
for increased technical and capacity-building support
for the countries of the region through both multilateral
and bilateral arrangements.

Mr. Geng Shuang (China) (spoke in Chinese): I
thank the briefers for their briefings.

Thirdly, commitment to an integrated strategy
for maritime security based on existing regional
mechanisms for combating piracy and armed robbery at
sea is critical. We commend the countries in the region
for their cooperation, particularly through the Yaoundé
Code of Conduct, under which regional centres have
been established for information-sharing and pooling
resources. We call for international support to fill
funding gaps and ensure the full operationalization of
that regional framework.
Fourthly, as we have learned from our experience
in dealing with piracy off the coast of Somalia and
elsewhere, it is vital for the necessary national and
legal frameworks to be in place in order to ensure the
effective prosecution of those directly and indirectly
involved in piracy. We encourage countries in the
region that have not yet done so to institute and enforce
laws that criminalize piracy and armed robbery at sea
in their domestic laws, in line with resolution 2634
(2022). The assistance of UNODC to countries in the
region is appreciated and further encouraged.
Fifthly, we commend the countries of the region
for their leadership in contributing to reducing the
number of reported cases of piracy and armed robberies
at sea in the Gulf of Guinea. Notable examples of that
include Nigeria’s Integrated National Security and
Waterways Protection Infrastructure, also known as
the Deep Blue Project, as well as the implementation
of new regulations and laws by Ghana and Gabon. We
advocate for closer cooperation among the countries
of the region through the sharing of best practices and
expertise, coordination and synergy of action.
In conclusion, Kenya reiterates that a comprehensive
plan that gives full consideration to the root causes of
the issue, including the need for social reintegration and
job creation, will be the most effective way to tackle
this threat. In that regard, Kenya welcomes and fully
18/24

The Gulf of Guinea is an important international
waterway and energy resource base. The maintenance
of security and stability in the Gulf of Guinea is of
great significance for regional and global peace and
development. Since last year, thanks to the joint efforts
of the countries of the region and the international
community, the maritime security environment in the
Gulf of Guinea has improved, and incidents of piracy
have been in visible decline. At the same time, piracy
continues to frequent the region and still seriously
affects the peace and development of coastal countries
and their landlocked neighbours. The international
community should continue to strengthen coordination
and cooperation and take timely and effective measures
in order to jointly safeguard the security and stability
in the Gulf of Guinea and the region as a whole. I would
like to make the following three points.
First, we should further strengthen regional
cooperation and international coordination and build
synergies to safeguard maritime security in the Gulf of
Guinea. Piracy is cross-sea and cross-border organized
crime. It moves about and is hard to locate. Only by
strengthening coordination and cooperation can we
effectively combat piracy. We are pleased to see that the
navies of various countries of the region have increased
their input and made positive efforts to prevent and
combat piracy.
Some progress has also been made in regional
maritime law enforcement cooperation. Anti-piracy
operations involve a country’s internal affairs, such
as national sovereignty, domestic legislation and law
enforcement for security. On the premise of respecting
the sovereignty and leadership of coastal States, the
international community should support all the parties
concerned in fully implementing the Yaoundé Code of
Conduct and support regional organizations such as
the Economic Community of West African States, the
Economic Community of Central African States and the
Gulf of Guinea Commission in playing a leading role
in enhancing the capacity and efficiency of the fight
against piracy. At the same time, it is also necessary
to guard against and curb the spread of terrorist forces
from the Sahel to the Gulf of Guinea.
22-70586

22/11/2022

Peace and security in Africa

Secondly, we should further leverage the advantages
and the role of United Nations agencies in providing
guidance and support in the fight against piracy. In May,
the Security Council unanimously adopted resolution
2634 (2022), on combating piracy in the Gulf of Guinea,
setting out provisions and making arrangements for
combating piracy, strengthening anti-piracy legislation,
formulating a sound maritime security strategy and
deepening international and regional cooperation. The
international community should jointly implement that
resolution and provide assistance to coastal countries
and regional organizations in information-sharing,
exchanges of experience, technical assistance and
capacity-building. Agencies such as the United Nations
Office for West Africa and the Sahel, the United
Nations Regional Office for Central Africa, the United
Nations Office on Drugs and Crime, the International
Maritime Organization and INTERPOL should fully
leverage their professional advantages, help coastal
countries strengthen the building of regional anti-piracy
mechanisms, carry out training for maritime security
forces and improve joint law enforcement, maritime
monitoring and other operational capabilities.
Thirdly, we should further clarify the “development
first” concept and gradually tackle the root causes
of piracy. The report of the Secretary-General
(S/2022/818) shows that 242 million people in the Gulf
of Guinea live below the poverty line. Those grave
socioeconomic development and livelihood issues in
some coastal countries are a significant underlying
cause of the problem of piracy. Regarding the rich and
concentrated energy resources and the great potential
for development in the Gulf of Guinea, the key lies in
translating the advantages of natural endowments into
a driving force for development, job opportunities and
well-being in coastal countries.
The marine economy in the Gulf of Guinea has
great prospects, but development and investment are
clearly inadequate. The international community
should adapt measures to local conditions, increase
assistance to coastal countries in port construction,
aquaculture and fishing, support the development of
the marine economy in the Gulf of Guinea, engage in
international cooperation, rationally develop and utilize
marine resources, help regional countries achieve the
2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development as soon
as possible and completely eliminate the underlying
causes that are the breeding ground for piracy.

S/PV.9198

China has always actively participated in
international cooperation in combating piracy in the
Gulf of Guinea. In recent years, Chinese naval convoys
have been invited to conduct joint anti-piracy drills with
the navies of Nigeria, Cameroon and other countries
and have provided anti-piracy material and equipment
assistance to coastal countries. In May, the Chinese
military held its first symposium on the security
situation in the Gulf of Guinea, in which China, the
coastal countries and the Interregional Coordination
Centre for the Implementation of the Regional Strategy
for Maritime Safety and Security in Central and West
Africa held in-depth discussions on the theme of
maritime security in the Gulf of Guinea and reached
many important consensuses.
Going forward, China will continue to carry out
counterpart exchanges with coastal countries in the
fields of maritime security, policing, military affairs
and other fields and promote practical cooperation
in detection, early warning, joint cruising, drill and
training exercises and equipment assistance in order to
play an active role in and make greater contributions
to the maintenance of maritime security in the Gulf
of Guinea.
Mr. Cisneros Chávez (Mexico) (spoke in Spanish):
I thank all the participants for their interesting
briefings. I take note of the advisory note transmitted
by the Peacebuilding Commission with regard to the
matter we are addressing today.
As we have seen, almost 10 years since the adoption
of the Yaoundé Code of Conduct, the fight against
piracy in the Gulf of Guinea has yielded very positive
results. Mexico welcomes the national efforts and
regional strategies that have allowed us to significantly
decrease the piracy incidents in the area. It is now
essential to maintain and expand the commitment and
coordination deployed so far to entrench the progress
achieved and respond to the new security challenges
faced by the coastal States of the Gulf of Guinea. I will
focus on three issues.
First, Mexico has noted that the prosecution and
punishment of those involved in acts of piracy has played
a key role in decreasing the number of piracy incidents.
Therefore, it is important that States, in particular
those in the region, continue to work on adapting their
national legal frameworks. Among other issues, that
means codifying the crime of piracy, which is subject
to the regime of universal jurisdiction, as established
by the United Nations Convention on the Law of the

22-7058619/24

S/PV.9198

Peace and security in Africa

Sea (UNCLOS). We reiterate that UNCLOS is the legal
framework within which all activities conducted on the
seas and oceans should be regulated.
The report of the Secretary-General (S/2022/818)
shows that the rule of law and accountability — essential
elements of good governance — are effective tools for
combating piracy and should be used to respond to
other forms of violence that threaten regional stability.
Secondly, with regard to security trends, we are
also concerned about the spread of terrorism from the
central Sahel to the Gulf of Guinea. The recent attacks
in Togo and Benin are a warning sign that requires our
attention. The international community should support
the efforts of the countries of the region to counter
the spread of terrorism and other criminal activities.
We hope that the Accra Initiative will receive political
support and sufficient material means to translate it
into measures that can curb the tide of violence.
Another trend that demands a timely response
is the shift of piracy cases from the Gulf of Guinea
States that are members of the Economic Community
of West African States to those that are members of
the Economic Community of Central African States.
We should intensify the exchange of best practices
and cooperation between those two subregional
organizations to extend the results to all coastal States
of the Gulf of Guinea. The Interregional Coordination
Centre is an example of what can be done in that area.
Member countries should also continue to
strengthen the architecture based on the Yaoundé Code
of Conduct. We urge the United Nations Office for
West Africa and the Sahel, the United Nations Regional
Office for Central Africa and the United Nations Office
on Drugs and Crime to support that work.
Thirdly, a comprehensive response to security
challenges requires public policies aimed at reducing
poverty and inequality in the region. The population
living in the Gulf of Guinea area needs development
strategies that allow them to prosper through legal
activities. That will make them less vulnerable to
recruitment by criminal groups and to radicalization.
As we have seen, the consequences of climate
change have a direct impact on the livelihoods of
coastal communities. International cooperation is
key to mitigating those effects and strengthening the
resilience of those communities.
20/24

22/11/2022

The President: I shall now make a statement in my
capacity as the representative of Ghana.
At the outset, I would like to thank Assistant
Secretary-General Martha Ama Akyaa Pobee and
Executive Director of the United Nations Office
on Drugs and Crime Ghada Fathi Waly for their
briefings, which complement the Secretary-General’s
report (S/2022/818) on the situation of piracy in the
Gulf of Guinea. I also thank Ambassador Florentina
Adenike Ukonga, Executive Secretary of the Gulf of
Guinea Commission, and Commander Nura Abdullahi
Yakubu, Maritime Planning Officer of the African
Union Commission, for their additional perspectives.
We furthermore thank the Peacebuilding Commission
(PBC) for its advisory note issued for today’s meeting.
Since 2012, the Security Council has been an
important enabler of global solidarity for combating
piracy and armed robbery in the Gulf of Guinea region.
The adoption of resolution 2039 (2012) in February
2012 ignited the actions that today reflect the maritime
security architecture of the Gulf of Guinea. We therefore
believe that the adoption of resolution 2634 (2022) last
May was an important reaffirmation of the Council’s
commitment to strengthening maritime security in
the region as the member States of the Gulf of Guinea
prepare for the tenth anniversary of the Yaoundé Code
of Conduct.
The indications from the International Maritime
Bureau continue to show the Gulf of Guinea as the
region with the worst record for piracy, despite the
recorded decline in piracy incidents from 123 in 2020
to 45 in 2021 and a further drop to 13 between January
and June this year.
We also recognize the persisting challenges relating
to inadequate staffing of the maritime coordination
centres under the Yaoundé Architecture, the lack of
appropriate equipment and logistical support by national
navies, as well as the sometimes ineffective exchange
of information among participating countries. It is in
that context that we consider it important to sustain an
international policy focus on the security of the Gulf
of Guinea through support for national and regional
actions. The progress achieved and the momentum
gained in the fight against piracy since April of last
year should be built upon, not decreased.
In this statement, we intend to highlight three main
points: first, the need to strengthen the institutional
framework; secondly, the need to address the underlying
22-70586

22/11/2022

Peace and security in Africa

drivers of piracy and armed robbery at sea; and thirdly,
the need to enhance partnerships.
On the question of institutional frameworks,
regional and continental blueprints such as the Yaoundé
Architecture and the 2050 Africa Integrated Maritime
Strategy, as well as the 2016 Charter on Maritime
Security and Safety and Development in Africa,
otherwise known as the Lomé Charter, have proven
critical in mobilizing national actions to combat piracy
and armed robbery at sea in the region. Their further
implementation, however, is hampered by operational,
logistical, funding, technical and capacity-building
gaps. For example, the lack of adequate material and
logistical resources has delayed the establishment of the
Multinational Maritime Coordination Centres (MMCCs)
in both zones E and F, as well as the operationalization
of the MMCCs in aones A and G, under the Economic
Community of Central African States and the Economic
Community of West African States, respectively. In
addition, fewer than one third of Member States have
enacted legislation that criminalizes piracy to the full
extent set out in the United Nations Convention on the
Law of the Sea. It is therefore important that those gaps
be addressed to ensure effective institutions that can
respond to the piracy menace.
With regard to the underlying drivers of piracy in
the region, we note the increasing levels of poverty, high
underemployment and unemployment, especially among
the region’s youth, inadequate access to public services
and other aggravating factors, such as climate change
and the disproportionate impact of illegal, unreported
and unregulated fishing in the region. We advocate a
multidimensional and whole-of-society approach in
resolving such drivers, while involving the private
sector, civil society and donor partners. We encourage
the integration of gender and youth perspectives into
maritime security strategies and welcome interventions
aimed at strengthening national efforts in building
climate resilience and the protection of fishing areas
of affected communities. We acknowledge the PBC’s
intervening role in that regard and welcome its call on
the private sector, including oil and mining companies,
to enhance their corporate social responsibility, as well
as technical assistance and community-based support
to vulnerable communities.
On the matter of enhanced partnerships, it is
important that Member States in the region be supported
in, among others, formulating their respective national
maritime strategies and implementation plans and

S/PV.9198

strengthening the investigative capacities of their
maritime law enforcement agencies. We commend the
United Nations and its agencies, such as the United
Nations Office on Drugs and Crime, the International
Maritime Organization and the Office of CounterTerrorism, as well as regional partners and friendly
countries, for their cooperation with regional initiatives
and encourage more of such efforts.
We recognize the invaluable support, in realizing
a safer maritime space in the region, of bilateral and
multilateral partners, such as the European Union, the
Group of Seven Group of Friends of the Gulf of Guinea,
currently co-chaired by Germany and Côte d’Ivoire,
and the Share Awareness and De-confliction group of
the Gulf of Guinea Maritime Collaboration Forum.
Lastly, although the report did not identify empirical
evidence of links between pirates and extremist groups,
we advocate for coordinated efforts aimed at curtailing
any potential linkages among extremist, terrorist and
pirate groups.
At the national level, the Government of Ghana
remains resolute in its commitment to implementing its
obligations under regional and multilateral instruments
aimed at combating the menace of piracy. We encourage
other Member States to do same. The upcoming
tenth anniversary of the Yaoundé Architecture
provides us with a unique opportunity to leverage the
recommendations of the Secretary-General’s report
towards enhancing the effective operationalization of
the Yaoundé Architecture, including its codification.
The direct and indirect costs of piracy and armed
robbery in the Gulf of Guinea is too high for us not
to succeed.
I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.
I give the floor to Mr. Gonzato.
Mr. Gonzato: I have the honour to deliver this
statement on behalf of the European Union (EU).
As we approach the tenth anniversary of the
Yaoundé Architecture, we welcome today’s discussion
in the Security Council and commend Ghana for its
leadership on the issue. I want to thank the briefers for
their valuable presentations and Ghana and Norway
for steering the successful adoption of resolution 2634
(2022) on maritime security in the Gulf of Guinea
earlier this year, which, in turn, led to the SecretaryGeneral’s report (S/2022/818).

22-7058621/24

S/PV.9198

Peace and security in Africa

The problem of piracy and armed robbery in the
Gulf of Guinea has wide-ranging repercussions beyond
the countries and the people living in the Gulf. That is
why the problem is a global one that concerns us all.
We hope that the increased attention paid to the Gulf
of Guinea will give new impetus to the implementation
of the Yaoundé Code of Conduct and lead to closer
regional cooperation.
The Secretary-General’s report highlights the
enormous costs of piracy in the Gulf of Guinea.
The estimate of $1.9 billion per year in direct and
indirect costs gives us a concrete figure of the level
of resources that should have gone into development
and benefited communities. The combined costs
of anti-piracy measures, fiscal revenue loss, direct
damage to the shipping industry, higher insurance
premiums and lower trade volumes pose a threat to the
whole region. We should also consider the enormous
cost of illegal, unreported and unregulated (IUU)
fishing, amounting to $1.6 billion a year. IUU also
poses a serious environmental threat to fish stocks and
future livelihoods.
Other serious threats to maritime security are the
trafficking in narcotics, arms and human beings, oil
bunkering and petro-piracy. There is a need to better
understand the links between those crimes, which also
take place on land, and piracy and armed robbery at sea.
While tackling piracy and armed robbery at sea requires
a hands-on security approach, we must also tackle the
root causes of piracy on land. That is also shown by
the fact that as instances of piracy have decreased, we
have seen an increase in certain illegal activities on
land, such as oil bunkering. Those problems need to
be addressed through an integrated approach that takes
into account the need for economic development and
strengthened governance in the region.
The European Union adopted a strategy for the
Gulf of Guinea back in 2014, which we recently
updated. The approach taken is comprehensive and
reflects the European Union’s long-lasting engagement
at all levels — the need to address socioeconomic
development, institutional and legal frameworks, as
well as defence and security aspects.
We have a number of tools to tackle piracy in the
Gulf of Guinea. First of all, while it may seem obvious,
we should mention the United Nations Convention on
the Law of the Sea, the constitution for the oceans.
It has guided every aspect of maritime affairs and
set out a balance of rights and duties over the past
22/24

22/11/2022

40 years, reflecting customary international law. It
is the fundamental pillar for ocean governance, as it
establishes the overarching legal framework within
which all activities in oceans and seas must be carried
out. It is of strategic importance as the basis for
national, regional and global action and cooperation in
the marine sector.
Secondly, the Yaoundé Code of Conduct, which
was signed in 2013, is the main regional framework for
promoting cooperation around maritime security in the
Gulf of Guinea. The European Union actively supports
individual member States and regional organizations,
such as the Economic Community of West African
States (ECOWAS), the Economic Community of Central
African States and the Gulf of Guinea Commission, in
implementing the Code of Conduct.
Thirdly, the increased naval presence in the Gulf
of Guinea has proven successful in tackling piracy.
We commend the efforts of Nigeria in that respect,
recognizing the positive impact that the Deep Blue
Project has had on suppressing piracy. In 2021, the
European Union launched the Coordinated Maritime
Presences in the Gulf of Guinea, meaning that the
naval presence of at least one EU member State is
guaranteed at any time and can be coordinated with
regional and country bodies. The European Union
is also considering an assistance measure under the
European Peace Facility to support military actors in
some coastal States.
Fourthly, there is a need to strengthen legal
frameworks and institutional capacities in the region.
The European Union commends those countries that
have already introduced legislation that allows the
prosecution of suspected pirates and urges others
to follow suit. The European Union has a number of
projects aimed at strengthening the institutional, legal
and operational capacities in West or Central Africa,
representing a total amount of €80 million.
We also commend the agreement reached by
ECOWAS members on the Supplementary Act on the
Conditions of Transfer of Persons Suspected of Having
Committed Acts of Piracy and their Associated Property
and/or Evidence. We will continue to support the legal
reform that is ongoing in several coastal States of West
and Central Africa. The European Union supports
the Global Maritime Crime Programme of the United
Nations Office on Drugs and Crime with €5.9 million,
which contributes to strengthening the prosecution and
22-70586

22/11/2022

Peace and security in Africa

adjudication of maritime crimes, as well as to driving
legal reforms in the countries of the Gulf of Guinea.
Finally, let me assure the Council that the European
Union remains committed to supporting the countries
of the Gulf of Guinea in their efforts to strengthen
maritime security, based on the Gulf of Guinea Strategy
and Action Plan. We especially look forward to working
together on further strengthening the Yaoundé Code of
Conduct as it celebrates its tenth anniversary in 2023.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Germany.
Ms. Leendertse (Germany): I would like to thank
the presidency of Ghana for the opportunity to speak in
the Security Council today.
Ghana and Norway have been instrumental in
advancing the crucial issue of maritime security in the
Gulf of Guinea in the Council. At the end of May, the
Security Council unanimously adopted resolution 2634
(2022). We have heard about the progress since then
from today’s briefers, and I would like to thank them
for their insightful remarks.
I have the honour to speak today as one of the two
current co-Chairs, together with Côte d’Ivoire, of the
Group of Seven Group of Friends of the Gulf of Guinea,
a multilateral coalition of countries of the region and
international partners. Together, they support the
Yaoundé Architecture and the implementation of
the Yaoundé Code of Conduct. Many member States
represented here today are part of that coalition, which
has supported the Economic Community of West
African States, the Economic Community of Central
African States and the Gulf of Guinea Commission
since 2013 in their endeavour to strengthen regional
cooperation to combat piracy and other illegal activities
at sea.
The Friends of the Gulf of Guinea are happy to
respond to the Council’s call for action on maritime
security. During the last plenary meeting, held in Berlin
in July, we agreed to contribute to the implementation of
resolution 2634 (2022). During the meeting in Abidjan
next week, we will deepen that dialogue.
A recent and important milestone in our joint
efforts is the support to the Multinational Maritime
Coordination Centre in Cabo Verde, the most recent
element in the network of subregional coordination
and information-sharing centres. Germany is more
than happy to continue its co-chairmanship of the

S/PV.9198

Group in 2023, as we would like to support the current
momentum, deepen sustainability and foster the
aforementioned positive results.
In view of the upcoming tenth anniversary of
the Yaoundé Code of Conduct and Architecture next
year, the Friends of the Gulf of Guinea will focus their
efforts on codification, making the Code of Conduct
legally binding. Thanks to the strong ownership of the
countries and organizations of the region, we are very
confident that additional progress will be achieved
by next summer in the fields of regional governance,
operational cooperation and the harmonization of
legal frameworks for maritime operations and the
prosecution of piracy. The G7++ Friends of the Gulf of
Guinea will support this process by providing technical
assistance, training and access to financing, in close
and structured collaboration with other international
and regional formats, such as the European Union
Coordinated Maritime Presences, Shared Awareness
and Deconfliction Initiative and the Atlantic Centre in
the Azores.
I will now make a few more short remarks in my
national capacity. Germany realizes the relevance of
combating piracy and strengthening maritime security
to ensure the continued stability of the region. We
will remain engaged, multilaterally and bilaterally, in
supporting the countries of the Gulf of Guinea.
In addition to support for a robust and sustained
regional response to the immediate risks and dangers
posed by piracy and other illegal activities at sea,
we also need to invest more efforts and funds in the
prevention of such actitivities and in mitigating their
effects. The root causes leading to piracy can, for
example, be addressed through investments in the
blue economy, creating livelihoods and economic
opportunities in local coastal communities. Mitigation
can be achieved by environmental protection and
conservation. In this context, I would like to welcome
the Peacebuilding Commission’s letter of advice to the
Council on maritime security.
It is important to note the concrete progress in
combating piracy and strengthening maritime security
in view of the wider threats to the security and stability
of the region caused by terrorist groups. Germany is
committed to playing its part, in close cooperation with
all its partners.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Nigeria.

22-7058623/24

S/PV.9198

Peace and security in Africa

Mr. Nze (Nigeria): I would like to thank the
delegation of Ghana for organizing today’s briefing
on this very important topic. We thank the SecretaryGeneral for his report on piracy in the Gulf of Guinea
(S/2022/818) pursuant to resolution 2634 (2022) and
through the good work of both Ghana and Norway.
We appreciate the useful contribution made by the
Executive Director of the United Nations Office on
Drugs and Crime, Ms. Ghada Fathi Waly. We also want
to thank the Executive Secretary of Gulf of Guinea
Commission, Ambassador Florentina Adenike Ukonga,
and Maritime Planning Officer of the African Union
Commission, Commander Nura Abdullahi Yakubu, for
their briefings.
Nigeria recognizes the importance of preserving
peace, security and stability in the Gulf of Guinea
for the benefit of global peace. We are committed to
improving the effectiveness of our responses to tackling
the threat of piracy in the Gulf of Guinea and prioritize
the fulfilment of obligations under the Yaoundé Code
of Conduct and Architecture, which remains the most
viable international cooperation and instrument to
tackle piracy and other crimes at sea in the region.
Within the framework of theF Deep Blue Project,
we have invested over $195 million in establishing an
integrated national security and waterways-protection
infrastructure, which includes maritime-security
platforms. That helps us to respond rapidly to piracy,
robbery, kidnapping, oil theft, smuggling, illegal
trafficking of drugs and persons and other crimes within
Nigeria’s territorial waters and the exclusive economic
zone. Furthermore, under Nigeria’s Suppression of
Piracy and Other Maritime Offences Act of 2019, we
have been able to successfully hold perpetrators of acts
of piracy and armed robbery at sea accountable for
their crimes.
As noted by the Secretary-General in his report,
the increases in our naval presence and criminal
prosecutions have fast become deterrents to piracy
in the region and are contributing positively to the
current decrease in the rate of acts of piracy and armed
robberies in the Gulf of Guinea. We seek to amplify
these efforts through local shipbuilding to guarantee
fleet availability so as to effectively carry out more
inter-navy cooperation under the Yaoundé Architecture.

24/24

22/11/2022

It is important to state that reinforcing the
sovereignty of national waters within the Gulf of
Guinea and protecting an important source of food for
the population are vital. Accordingly, enhancing naval
capacity and presence will help the region address the
issue of illegal, unreported and unregulated fishing,
which has been adversely affecting the livelihoods and
opportunities of the local population in the numerous
coastal communities. International partners must
continue to assist States of the Gulf of Guinea with
technical and material support to address this crime and
help them develop their sustainable blue economies.
At the regional level, collaboration among
maritime stakeholders is imperative for the effective
implementation of the Yaoundé Code of Conduct. Along
with Cameroon, Nigeria co-chairs the Gulf of Guinea
Maritime Collaboration Forum, which was established
as a framework complementary to the Interregional
Coordination Centre for Maritime Safety and Security
in the Gulf of Guinea in Yaoundé to enhance the
exchange information and cooperation at sea and
promote synergy between naval ships of countries of
the region and those of international partners. The
maritime industry understands this.
Nigeria
appreciates
the
contributions
of
international partners and commercial maritime actors
in improving safety and security in the Gulf of Guinea.
We commend the United Nations Office on Drugs and
Crime and the Group of Seven++ Friends of the Gulf
of Guinea for their commitment and support for the
regional architecture so that it can find solutions to
maritime-security challenges in the Gulf of Guinea.
Ahead of the tenth anniversary of the Yaoundé Code
of Conduct in 2023, Nigeria pledges its unwavering
commitment to its full operationalization and will work
with our neighbours to enhance regional cooperation on
maritime security in the Gulf of Guinea. Domestically,
we will continue to make considerable efforts to
address the root causes and drivers of piracy. We call
on internal partners to explore and make meaningful
technical and other future contributions towards the
implementation of the Yaoundé Code of Conduct as
well as to build the capacity of the States of the Gulf
of Guinea to effectively combat and prevent piracy and
other security challenges facing the region.
The meeting rose at 12.15 p.m.

22-70586
