S/PV.8339

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-third year

8339th meeting

Tuesday, 4 September 2018, 11.45 a.m.
New York

President:

Mrs. Haley. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(United States of America)

Members:

Bolivia (Plurinational State of). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Côte d’Ivoire . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Equatorial Guinea. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ethiopia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kazakhstan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kuwait. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Netherlands. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Peru. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Poland . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Sweden . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 

Mr. Llorentty Solíz
Mr. Yao Shaojun
Mr. Ipo
Mr. Ndong Mba
Ms. Guadey
Mr. Michon
Mr. Temenov
Mr. Alotaibi
Ms. Samson
Mr. Meza-Cuadra
Ms. Wronecka
Mr. Polyanskiy
Mr. Orrenius Skau
Mr. Allen

Agenda
Implementation of the note by the President of the Security Council (S/2017/507)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

18-27503 (E)
*1827503*

S/PV.8339

Implementation of the note by the President of the Security Council (S/2017/507)

The meeting was called to order at 11.55 a.m.
Expression of thanks to the outgoing President
The President: As this is the first public meeting
of the Security Council for the month of September, I
should like to take this opportunity to pay tribute, on
behalf of the Council, to Her Excellency Ambassador
Karen Pierce, Permanent Representative of the United
Kingdom, for her service as President of the Council
during the month of August. I speak for all members
in thanking not only Karen but also Jonathan and the
entire delegation on a job well done.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Implementation of the note by the President of the
Security Council (S/2017/507)
The President: The Security Council will now
begin its consideration of the item on its agenda.
I shall now make a statement in my capacity as the
representative of the United States.
All Security Council members should have
the provisional programme of work, which was
circulated. I have always believed in transparency and
that everything we do should be in the open. I know
from the breakfast meeting this morning that there
were some concerns, or issues, with the provisional
programme of work. I felt that, rather than explaining it
to one another, members could each openly say, in their
national capacity, whether there are any issues with
the provisional programme of work, or whether we can
continue by consensus. I wanted to at least allow each
delegation to say it in its own voice instead of having
it said on its behalf. I hope that this will be the start of
continued transparency. I think we have come a long
way in the past couple of years in terms of making
sure all Council meetings are open meetings. During
the United States presidency, every meeting will be an
open meeting. We hope that all members will respect
that and consider continuing that policy during their
presidency as well.
I now resume my functions as President of the Council.
I shall now give the floor to those members of the
Council who wish to make statements.
2/7

04/09/2018

Mr. Llorentty Solíz (Plurinational State of Bolivia)
(spoke in Spanish): I wish to join you, Madam President,
in congratulating and thanking the delegation of the
United Kingdom for its work during its presidency of
the Security Council last month. I wish you, Madam
President, and your team every success in your work on
behalf of the entire Council.
I thank you for your team’s work for the drafting
of the provisional programme of work. I see that we
have a rather broad agenda covering many topics this
month. Some of them are related to my region. Others
include Haiti, the adoption of a draft resolution and
the possibility of expanding the mandate of the United
Nations Verification Mission in Colombia, as well as the
issue of South Sudan and the proposal of the presidency
of convening a meeting during the high-level week to
discuss the situation in Iran, among many others.
We agree with a majority of the chosen topics but,
as we have expressed throughout the drafting of the
provisional programme of work, we believe that the
desired meeting under the item of cooperation between
the United Nations and regional and subregional
organizations in the maintenance of international peace
and security with regard to the situation in Nicaragua
should not be addressed within the Security Council
primarily because, as we have expressed on other items,
the situation in Nicaragua does not constitute a threat
to international peace and security. We believe that it
is important for the Security Council to clearly adhere
to what is stated in the Charter of the United Nations,
which is that its primary responsibility is to maintain
international peace and security. We support the policy
of the Secretary-General with regard to preventive
diplomacy, but preventive diplomacy must be used
within a framework of respect for the sovereignty and
territorial integrity of all States Members of the United
Nations and where all States are on an equal footing.
Furthermore, as we have said clearly in the past,
the work being done by regional and subregional
organizations is very important, but the Security
Council should limit its efforts to addressing cases that
represent a threat to international peace and security.
The United Nations system is broad. It is not limited to
the Security Council. If there is a situation related to
human rights, we have the Human Rights Council, and
the membership as a whole elects the members of the
Human Rights Council. The same goes for other topics
that are, of course, important.
18-27503

04/09/2018

Implementation of the note by the President of the Security Council (S/2017/507)

I should also say that we will be leaving the Security
Council in a few weeks, and we are concerned about
the possibility that we are giving the Security Council
more power than the Charter of the United Nations
itself entrusts to it. That would weaken the multilateral
system and empower an organ that, as we have said
many times before, is not democratic or transparent and
in many cases does not represent the interests of the
entire membership.
Mr. Polyanskiy (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): I too would like to join in congratulating our
British colleagues on their presidency in August. They
had a difficult job and nonetheless handled it well. I
also wish you and your team every success, Madam
President. This too will be a complicated month. You
effectively lose a week to the general debate, but I
think with our collective efforts we can make headway
and discuss genuinely important issues pertaining to
international peace and security.
In that context, I wish to endorse my Bolivian
colleague’s statement, which I felt made a very
compelling and persuasive argument. There is no
question that the Security Council should focus on
issues that pose a threat to international peace and
security, and in that regard, we see no such threat
from the situation in Nicaragua. Furthermore, we fear
that putting this item on the agenda of the Security
Council will only undermine the efforts being made
in Nicaragua to resolve the situation, and which of
course we fully support. Our hope is that you, Madam
President, will heed our views and that we can continue
to work together as a team and achieve success in areas
where we can make genuine progress.
I also want to note that we understand and are
familiar with the previously mentioned plans to hold
a high-level meeting on 26 September. We assume
that the discussion will take place in the context of the
implementation of resolution 2231 (2015). In our view,
the subject of Iran can be discussed only within that
framework. In particular, we very much hope that the
aspects linked to the withdrawal of the United States
from the Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action will
be discussed.
Mr. Yao Shaojun (China) (spoke in Chinese): I
would first like to congratulate you, Madam President,
on your assumption of the presidency of the Security
Council in September. We know this is a difficult

S/PV. 8339

month and we wish you luck. We also thank the United
Kingdom for presiding over the Council in August.
China is of the view that the situation in Nicaragua
does not constitute a threat to international peace and
security. We support the position of Bolivia and Russia
and do not believe that it is necessary for the Security
Council to get involved.
Mr. Meza-Cuadra (Peru) (spoke in Spanish): I
too would like to begin by congratulating you, Madam
President, and your delegation on your assumption of
the presidency. Peru wishes you every success and
extends the support of its delegation to you. We also
congratulate the United Kingdom on its very successful
presidency and the professional way in which it led
our deliberations.
I would also like to say that we fully support you,
Madam President, on the provisional programme of
work you presented for this month. We agree with you
about the importance of many of the meetings you have
planned. With regard to the meeting on the maintenance
of peace in particular, we want to emphasize that we
also think that the issue of the link between corruption
and peace and security is a new theme, but we would
like to hear more details about how it is being planned.
With regard to the issue of Nicaragua, we would
like to point out that if this issue is presented as it
appears in the provisional programme of work, in the
framework of Chapter VIII of the Charter of the United
Nations, that is, with regard to cooperation between
the United Nations and regional organizations, there is
a very specific article, Article 54, which says that the
United Nations should be kept informed of everything
being done in regional organizations with regard to the
maintenance of international peace and security. We
believe that in that sense the meeting would be pertinent
and we would be ready to support it. We believe what
has been said at various points with regard to the theme
of preventive diplomacy is very important. That applies
perfectly in this case, because there are Security Council
resolutions that specifically and emphatically point out
that serious abuses and violations of international law,
human rights and international humanitarian rights can
be an early indication of a simmering conflict. In that
sense, based on the merits of preventive diplomacy, we
would agree to holding such a meeting.
Mr. Allen (United Kingdom): Let me join others
in congratulating you, Madam President, on assuming
the presidency of the Security Council. I would like to

18-275033/7

S/PV.8339

Implementation of the note by the President of the Security Council (S/2017/507)

say straight out that we support the ambition you have
shown, Madam, in your provisional programme of
work, and we are very happy with it. As all of us tend to
do during our presidencies, I note that the United States
has proposed a thematic debate, this one on corruption
and conflict, which I think will be very interesting for
us to consider. We support it completely on that.
The main focus of our conversation today has
been on Nicaragua, where we have seen many lives
lost and increased refugee claims in the region. The
United Kingdom, as part of its presidency, hosted an
open debate last week (see S/PV.8334) on mediation
and the importance of that element of the agenda in our
preventive toolbox. I therefore think it is right that as
a Council we are considering those issues and thinking
about how we can support countries in the region.
The representative of Peru mentioned the regional
dimension. I would also like to point to Article 34 of
the Charter of the United Nations, which states very
clearly that the Security Council may investigate any
dispute or situation that might lead to international
friction or give rise to a dispute, in order to determine
whether the continuation of the dispute or situation is
likely to endanger the maintenance of international
peace and security. It is therefore clear to me that this
is a proper subject for debate. The United Kingdom
supports the United States fully, and I would encourage
our colleagues in the Council to agree to having those
discussions and a debate. That is what we are here for. I
would also encourage the Government of Nicaragua to
come to that meeting in a constructive spirit and focus
on its vision for an inclusive and mediated solution.
Ms. Wronecka (Poland): I should like to begin
by congratulating you, Madam, on your country’s
assumption of the presidency for the month of
September. I wish you good luck and full success in
your endeavours. Allow me also to mention how much
we appreciated the efforts and professionalism of the
British presidency.
With regard to the work of the Council for this
month, we support your proposal this morning. We
welcome it and appreciate the fact that you are will
organize two main events, on corruption and security,
as well as others on peacekeeping.
Turning to the question of Nicaragua, Poland
appreciates the fact that the meeting will take place
under the agenda item “Cooperation between the United
Nations and regional and subregional organizations”. I
4/7

04/09/2018

concur with the remarks of my Peruvian colleague. It is
important that this discussion have added value.
Mr. Michon (France) (spoke in French): We wish
you every success, Madam President, in your country’s
presidency in September, which is never an easy
month as it coincides with the plenary session of the
General Assembly.
With regard to the provisional programme of work
that you presented to us this morning, we wish to note
our full support for the programme, including the
consideration of the situation in Nicaragua under the
agenda item “Cooperation between the United Nations
and regional and subregional organizations”, which will
allow the Council to engage in an exercise of preventive
diplomacy, as provided for by its mandate.
Mr. Temenov (Kazakhstan): First of all, we would
like to join you, Madam President, in commending
the British presidency for its exemplary stewardship
of the Council’s work in August. The delegation of
Kazakhstan would like to congratulate the United States
on its assumption of the presidency of the Security
Council for the month of September, which will be
busy indeed, coinciding as it does with the opening of
start of the new session of the General Assembly and
the general debate.
We commend the United States for its wellstructured provisional programme of work for
September, with which we agree in general. However,
we would like to note our reservations regarding the
inclusion of the Nicaraguan issue in the provisional
programme of work.
Finally, Madam President, would like to wish you
and your able team every success during the month
of September.
Ms. Samson (Netherlands): Allow me to wish you
and your team, Madam President, the best of luck for
your presidency this month, which starts off in a very
interesting and transparent way. Allow me also to thank
the United Kingdom and its delegation for an exemplary
presidency during the month of August.
We thank the United States presidency for
proposing its provisional programme of work,
which we support. It includes some very important
discussions, including on corruption and peacekeeping
operations, and we look forward to discussing under
your guidance a number of pertinent issues, including
from a preventive perspective, such as the situation in
18-27503

04/09/2018

Implementation of the note by the President of the Security Council (S/2017/507)

Nicaragua. We therefore reiterate our support for the
provisional programme of work and look forward to the
month of September.
Mr. Ipo (Côte d’Ivoire) (spoke in French): At the
outset, we would like to wish you, Madam President,
and your team every success during your presidency
of the Security Council. We also commend the
United Kingdom for its exemplary presidency and
its constructive approach in guiding the work of the
Council during the month of August.
My delegation expresses its full support for the
provisional programme of work proposed by the United
States, including the briefing on Nicaragua in the light
of the developing crisis in that country and its impact in
the region in the context of preventive diplomacy.
In conclusion, we look forward to a rich and
constructive month of September under the presidency
of your country, Madam President.
Mr. Ndong Mba (Equatorial Guinea) (spoke
in Spanish): At the outset, I should like to offer my
sincere congratulations to the United Kingdom for
its exemplary presidency during what was for many
a month of vacation. Despite that fact, it managed to
attain very positive outcomes through rich debates
guided by its programme of work.
We also congratulate the United States on assuming
the presidency for the month of September, which is no
easy task. We express out satisfaction with the approach
it has adopted, whereby almost all meetings will be held
in an open modality, allowing the broader members to
be informed as to the content of our discussions. Despite
this being a very busy month due to the preparations
for the holding of the seventy-third session of the
General Assembly, I am convinced that this provisional
programme of work will provide for a month of very
positive outcomes in the Security Council.
With respect to Nicaragua, as we said this morning,
while we regret the prevailing domestic situation in that
Latin American country and call on the Government
of Nicaragua to spare no effort in seeking a solution to
this domestic problem, our Government is of the view
that the situation does not as yet merit discussion in
the Security Council. At present, the Organization of
American States and the United Nations Secretariat
could dedicate efforts, together with the Government of
Nicaragua, to find a solution to the situation. As things
stand, it does not constitute a threat to international

S/PV. 8339

peace and security, and we are therefore of the view
that this matter remains the purview of the joint
preventive diplomacy of the Secretary-General and the
Organization of American States. We will continue to
monitor the situation closely.
Mr. Alotaibi (Kuwait) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I would like to congratulate your country,
Madam President, on assuming the presidency of the
Security Council for this month, and wish you success.
As we mentioned during the breakfast meeting, your
tasks will not be easy, but we have full trust that you
and your team will be able to accomplish them.
I would also like to thank the delegation of the
United Kingdom for its outstanding presidency of the
Council during the month of August.
As Chair of the Working Group on Documentation
and Other Procedural Questions, I am very pleased that
you have decided that the meetings will be open. This
is unusual from a permanent Member State. Member
States usually permanent prefer closed meetings,
so your move is truly unprecedented on the part of
a permanent member State. I assure you that we
support transparency and will continue to support you
throughout your presidency of the Council.
Of course, it is always better to adopt the programme
of work by consensus, in conformity with established
practice. It is also unusual to discuss the provisional
programme of work in an open meeting. Differences do
exit and what matters is that we must spare no effort to
reach consensus on the provisional programme of work.
Regarding the situation in Nicaragua, and
even the situation in Iran at the end of the month,
these are contentious issues, as we have heard from
other representatives. As a Member State, we consider
the Articles of the United Nations Charter to be sacred,
in particular those related to the non-interference in the
internal affairs of other countries and respect for their
sovereignty, while we must discuss only those matters
pertaining to international peace and security.
However, there are other Articles of the Charter
that should also be taken into consideration, such as
Article 34, as mentioned by Mr. Allen, which is quite
clear. The Secretary-General may also, if he wishes,
bring any matter to the attention of the Security
Council, pursuant to Article 99.
One of our priorities, as States members of the
Council, is the issue of preventive diplomacy and the

18-275035/7

S/PV.8339

Implementation of the note by the President of the Security Council (S/2017/507)

prevention of conflict. There can be no doubt that the
regional dimension, especially the role played by regional
organizations, is very important. We appreciate the role
played by Peru and its proposal to discuss this matter
in the context of regional peace. What I would like to
underscore is that the unity of the Security Council is
very important. If we are to contribute to addressing the
situation, I believe that we must be united. Sometimes,
differences and the discussion of a contentious issue
do not positively contribute to improving the situation.
That is a very important matter.
Ms. Guadey (Ethiopia): We would also like to
congratulate our colleagues from the United Kingdom
for their professionalism and efficient manner in
presiding over the Security Council. Allow me to
congratulate you as well, Madam President, for
assuming the presidency of the Council for the month
of September, a difficult month but we are sure that
you will fly through. We look forward to engaging
constructively in the meetings and would like to assure
you of our full support.
However, we would like to echo some concerns
raised by some members of the Security Council on the
agenda item scheduled for 5 September, as we think that
the situation in Nicaragua does not constitute a threat
to international peace and security. It would therefore
be very difficult for us to support the inclusion of the
agenda item in the provisional programme of work.
Mr. Orrenius Skau (Sweden): Let me begin by
joining others in congratulating you, Madam President,
in assuming your role for this month. Let me also echo
others in praising the United Kingdom presidency for
the manner they led the Security Council during the
month of August.
We have no objections to the provisional programme
of work. We look forward to this month. It is important
for the Council to assume its responsibility and come
together on the wide range of issues on its agenda.
We wish the presidency the best of luck. You, Madam
President, and your team have our full support.
The President: I will now make a further statement
in my national capacity.
The contention seems to about the meeting on
Nicaragua. I said to some of the members this morning
that all the explanations and reasons that have been
raised for not having a meeting on Nicaragua are
the exact same responses that were given to us on
6/7

04/09/2018

Venezuela. We were told that it was not a matter of
peace and security, that it was a regional issue and that
it was best dealt with at the Human Rights Council.
We went to the Human Rights Council. They would
not hear it because Venezuela was on the Council. We
had a meeting outside of the Human Rights Council, in
Geneva, to try to bring attention to the issue. Now, as we
look back to see where we are with Venezuela, we see
that the average adult in Venezuela has lost 24 pounds.
Ninety per cent do not know where their next meal is
coming from. Thousands are crossing the border every
day trying to get medical help and supplies. We have
dealt many times with the African Union on regional
issues; I do not know why we cannot deal with the
Organization of American States (OAS) on regional
issues. We have spoken with the OAS and give it full
support and respect. That is why the Secretary General
of the OAS is coming to brief us tomorrow.
I would ask any member who does not think that
Nicaragua is an issue of peace and security to talk to the
people of Nicaragua, the people of the region and the
countries that have to accept the people of Nicaragua,
to the Catholic Church, to which Ortega has turned
because of Nicaragua.
My final question is, how many people have to
die before it becomes a matter of peace and security?
I think we have already reached that point. That is why
the United States thought it was very important to have
a meeting on Nicaragua — because we do not want
another Syria or another Venezuela, and we think it is
the responsibility of the Security Council to ensure that.
I now resume my functions as President of the Council.
There is no consensus on the adoption of the
provisional programme of work, and there is no
requirement in the Council’s provisional rules of
procedure that a programme of work be adopted.
Rather, the adoption of a programme of work is Council
practice and not required. Accordingly, the Security
Council will proceed in its work without the adoption
of a programme of work. The President of the Council,
pursuant to rule 1 of the provisional rules of procedure,
will convene a meeting on the situation in Nicaragua
tomorrow at 10 a.m. in the Chamber.
Finally, I want to thank Ms. Egian and her team for
pulling together this open meeting on the provisional
programme of work. I also want to thank each and every
one of the members for supporting the transparency
18-27503

04/09/2018

Implementation of the note by the President of the Security Council (S/2017/507)

effort of this meeting. Any one of them could have
stopped it, and I thank them for not doing so. I also want
to thank the interpreters, who probably had to rush to

S/PV. 8339

get to us very quickly, for being flexible and realizing
how important transparency is to the United States.
The meeting rose at 12.30 p.m.

18-275037/7
