UNITED NA TIONS

SECURITY COUNCIL
OFFICIAL

RECORDS
ml LIBRMY

THIRTIETH

YEAR

MAY 91984

M/SA
~MzlK#d

/

1849’”

MEETING:

20 OCTOBER

1975

NEW YORK

CONTENTS
. .. .... .. .. ... ... .. .. ... ... .. ... .. .. .

1

Adoption of the agenda . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

1

The situation concerning Western Sahara:
Letter dated 18 October 1975 from the Permanent Representative of Spain
to the United Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council
(S/l 1851) . . . . . . . . . . . . ..*............................................

1

Provisional

agenda (S/Agenda/l849)

S/PV. 1849

NOTE
Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined with figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United
Natiohs document.
b.,” .’ .~~ ‘..
Documents of the Security Council (symbol S/ . . .) are normally published in
quarterly Supplements of the Officicrl Records of the Security Council. The date
of the document indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which information about it is given.
The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a
system adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Resolutions and
Decision% of the Security Council. The new system, which has been applied
retroactively to resolutions adopted before 1 January 1965, became fully operative
on that date.

1849th MEETING
Held in New York on Monday,
President:

Mr. Olof RYDBECK

(Sweden).

in the current discussion in the Security Council.
In accordance with the relevant provisions of the
Charter, rule 37 of the provisional rules of procedure
and the usual practice of the Council, I propose to
invite him to participate in the Council’s discussion,
without the right to vote.

Present: The representatives of the following States:
Byelorussian Soviet Socialist Republic, China, Costa
Rica, France, Guyana, Iraq, Italy, Japan, Mauritania,
Sweden, Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, United
Kingdom
of Great Britain and Northern
‘Ireland,
United Republic of Cameroon, United Republic of
Tanzania and United States of America.
Provisional

1. Adoption
2.

At the invitation
of the President,
Mr.
(Morocco) took a seat at the Council table.

agenda (S/Agenda/l849)

of the agenda

4. The first speaker is the representative
on whom I now call.

was called to order at 11.25 a.m.
Adoption

of Spain,

5. Mr. de PINIl%
(Spain) finterpretation
from
Spanish): My delegation‘kould-like
to thank the council for the speed with which it has met to deal with
the situation created by the announcement
made by
His Majesty the King of Morocco to conduct a march
of 350,000 people to invade Western Sahara.

of the agenda

The agenda was adopted.
The situation concerning Western Sahara:
Letter dated 18 October 1975 from the Permanent
Representative
of Spain to the United Nations
addressed to the President of the Security Council
(S/llSSl)

6. The march on the Sahara announced by the King
of Morocco constitutes an act of force, prepared and
carried out ‘by Moroccan subjects and authorities in
order to’ jeopardize
the territorial
integrity of the
Sahara and to violate an internationally
recognized
border. To carry out such a march as it has been
conceived would constitute an act which is internationally unlawful, runs counter to the principles and
purposes of the Charter, and is in contradiction to the
resolutions of the General Assembly on the decolonization of the Sahara.

1. The PRESIDENT:
The meeting of the Security
Council has been convened at short notice in response
to the urgent request made in the letter dated 18 October from the representative of Spain to the President
of the Security Council [S///851]. In his letter, which
has just been included in the Council’s agenda, -the
representative of Spain requested that he be invited
under rule 37 of the provisional rules of procedure to
participate in the discussion. In conformity with the
relevant provisions of the Charter and the rule cited
by the representative
of Spain, I propose to invite
him to participate in the Council’s discussion without
the right to vote.
At the invitation of the President, Mr.
(Spain) took a seat at the Council table.

Slaoui

3. ..The PRESIDENT:
The Security Council will
now begin its examination of the situation concerning
Western Sahara and the letter dated 18 October from
the representative of Spain. In this connexion, I wish
to draw the attention of members of the Council
to the text of a letter which I received yesterday
from the representative of Morocco [.S//1852].

The situation concerning Western Sahara:
Letter dated 18 October 1975 from the Permanent
Representative
of Spain to the United Nations
addressed to the President of the Security Council
(S/l 1851)
The meeting

20 October 1975, at 11 a.m.

7. Any one of the members of the Council can
imagine what would happen if their country were
invaded by a human mass four times larger than its
population.
Where would they be quartered? How
would they be supplied? Who would protect them?
Who would feed them? All of this has no sense.
In this connexion, let me recall that to invade is to
enter a place by.force; however peaceful the purposes
may be, it is a violation of a border against the aims
of the authority entrusted with its defence and with
the defence of its .population.

de. Pinies

2. The PRESIDENT:
In addition,
I have also
received a letter from the representative of Morocco,
likewise requesting that he be invited to participate
1

8. My delegation would’ like to point out to the
Council that the Sahara is a Non-Self-Governing
Territory under Spanish administration,
the decolonization of which was to be concluded this year,
in accordance with the statement made by my
Government,
in my letter of 20 August 1974 to the
Secretary-General,’
when it accepted the provisions
of Gene@ Assembly resolution 3162 (XXVIII).
This
aspect of the decolonization
of the Territory
will
follow the normal course in the Fourth Committee
and in the plenary meetings of the General Assembly,
the competent body in which all the interests involved
can be harmonized.

a situation of agitation in the Territory.
Because
of their threats. I brought them to the notice of the
Secretary-General
in letters dated 6 May, 14 July
and 25 August of this year [S/11857, annexes I-III].

9. As a result of the events to which I shall refer
later on, and in view of the publication of the report
of the 1975 United
Nations Visiting
Mission to
Western Sahara2 and the advisory opinion of the
International
Court of Justice of 16 October 1975,3
it would be advisable to speed up the action required
to terminate the Spanish presence in the Territory.

‘Why
are we keeping that army there?” [in
the southern area of Morocco] “For two reasons:
first, to affirm the Moroccan presence; in addition,
and above all, to provide a framework-at
all
levels-for
the inexorable march which the Moroccan people will not fail toundertake,
with their
King at their head, if embittered
or frivolous
persons should seek to initiate the process of selfdetermination
in the Sahara.”

14. I shall refer to some points in those letters.
In the declarations
made by His Majesty King
Hassan II on 28 April to the French broadcasting
station France Inter, which were widely publicized
by international
press agencies, His Majesty said,
among other things and in connexion
with the
presence of Moroccan armed forces on the Sahara
border:

10. In my statement I shall deal with the friction
created, the seriousness of the situation and the
danger which it ‘implies for international
peace and
security, and particularly
for peace and security
in the region. It is not surprising to anyone that
we shall have to. refer to some of the factors
in the decolonization
process because perhaps if the
Council knows about them it will be in a better
position to act in the situation which has arisen.

And later on he said: “Even if the Sahara situation
decays, that can only benefit Morocco”.
15. On 17 June 1975, in his inaugural speech to the
High Council of National
Promotion
and for the
Development Plan, the King said: “The recuperation
of the Western Sahara is a matter of life or death
for Morocco”.
He added: “We must face it with a
smile and with great confidence, even if we have to
go to the battlefield”.

11. It is no secret that my country desires to
terminate the process of decolonization
of the Territory. Towards this end, the aforementioned
statement’ established a period covering the first six
months of 1975 so that the referendum recommended
by the General Assembly could be held to decolonize
the Territory. For reasons which are not relevant at
this time, Morocco began a campaign of international
agitation, accusing Spain of attempting
by such a
process to establish a puppet State, and that therefore
the United Nations could not accept such an attempt.
Nothing could be further from the truth, because the
process of self-determination
was to be in accordance with resolution 3162 (XXVIII).

16. On 8 July of this year, at the Festival of Youth
at Marrakech,
His Majesty said “The battle to
recuperate our Sahara has begun politically
and
militarily”.
17. I should like to recall the fact that since
13 December 1974, the date on which resolution
3292 (XXIX)-which
I referred to earlier-was
adopted and side by side with the statements I have
just mentioned,
a. series of incidents has occurred,
instigated
from outside, and some very serious,
jeopardizing
peace and security in the Territory.
I
reported all these events promptly to the SecretaryGeneral in my notes of 9 and 29 July and 8 August
1975.

12. However, the General Assembly, after many
debates and in order to obtain additional
criteria,
adopted resolution 3292 (XXIX) which contains the
following points: first, a .request for an advisory
opinion of the International
Court of Justice; second,
a petition to the administering
Power to postpone
the referendum; and third, a request for the sending
of a visiting mission to the Territory, in accordance
with our invitation. The referendum was postponed;
the International
Court of Justice has handed down
its advisory opinion and the Visiting Mission has
also published its report.

18. With regard to those incidents.
the Suecial
Committee oithe Situation with regard to the Implementation
of the Declaration
on the Granting of
Independence
to Colonial
Countries and Peoples
indicated4 that it could see that:
“There was a tense situation on the frontier
between Spanish Sahara and Morocco, as well as
in the Territory, where there have been a number
of incidents which have resulted in several deaths
and injuries and the capture of prisoners. This

13. During this year several statements have been
made by Moroccans who have attempted to maintain
2

Territorv.
In order that the resnonsibihties
of the
administering
Power would not’ be unduly complicated, we invited the representatives
of Algeria,
Morocco and Mauritania to a conference, with a view
to involving them in the process of decolonization.
That meeting, convened by the Spanish Government, could not be held because of the opposition
of the Government of Morocco.

general state of tension, with its repercussions and
ramifications in the neighbouring countries, clearly
endangers the maintenance of peace and security
in the region.”
19. Moreover, in paragraphs 262, 263 and 264 of the
report, it is stated:
“262. The Spanish authorities
have reported
a series of incidents on the frontier with Morocco,
some of which occurred while the.Mission was in the
Territory
but most occurring after its departure.
These consisted mainly of exchanges of gunfire
and attacks on forts. On 8 June, a unit of 44 men
under the command of a captain, all Saharans, was
reportedly
captured
by Spanish troops while
attempting
to occupy the post of Mahbes. The
Spanish authorities stated that documents found in
their possession indicated that they were one of
four companies of the Moroccan army which had
been ordered to occupy four posts near the frontier,
but the Government of Morocco denied this, stating
that they were a unit of FLU [Frontfur Liberation
und

22. My Government
accordingly
requested
the
Secretary-General
to convene this conference under
his auspices. This proposal also met with no success. My Government
asked the Secretary-General
to send a personal representative or observers to the
Territory. This initiative also failed, perhaps because
of a question of competence, but perhhps this is the
time to take this step on the authority of the Security
Council.
23. My delegation, aware that any delay in decolonizing this Territory will increase tension, attempted
to speed up the publication
of the report of the
Visiting Mission. In any case, the already published
report contains some conclusions which should be
studied, because if they were adopted and complied
with by the neighbouring
countries, tension would
decline. The Security Council should issue an appeal
in terms of the conclusions of the Special Committee,4 which read as follows:

Unity].

“263.
On 24 June, a vehicle carrying a Spanish
officer and four soldiers was destroyed by a mine
near the post of Tah, 3 kilometres from the frontier
and 27 kilometres from Daora. All the occupants
were killed. The post of Tah had been under attack
on several occasions prior to this occurrence.

“In order to create a climate favourable to the
peaceful decolonization
of the Territory,
all the
concerned and interested parties should agree by
common accord to:

“264.
Between the end of June and mid-August,
a series of incidents took place on or near the
frontier
with Morocco.
These included
armed
attacks on the post of Tah and another post at
Hausa, as well as several clashes with Spanish
military patrols. On 22 July, an armed detachment
consisting of a sergeant and 15 men was captured
by a Spanish patrol in the vicinity of Hagunia.
Further bombings in El Aaihn were also reported.“2

“(a) Recognize the responsibility
of the administering Power with regard to the Territory during
the crucial stage in the decolonization
process and
give it all necessary co-operation in the discharge
of its responsibility;
“(b) Avoid taking any initiative
of any kind
which might change the stnrus quo of the Territory
as its exists at present;

Incidentally,
let me say that those 16 soldiers
captured in Hagunia belonged to the regular Moroccan army, and that they were returned to the Moroccan Government
on 15 October, as a gesture of
goodwill.

“(c) Stabilize the number of troops inthe Territory and on the frontiers by not reinforcing them
with men, arms and equipment;

20. The postponement
of the .referendum and the
repeated incidents, with all the additional burden of
responsibility
that involved
for the administering
Power, led the Spanish Government to communicate
to the Secretary-General
its decision to terminate its
presence in the Territory,
believing
that it had
completed the mission entrusted to it. This information is contained
in a letter from me to the
Secretary-General
dated 23 May 1975.s

“(d) Ensure that the existing
troops abstain
from committing
provocative
acts either by their
movements or by ambushes, mine-laying,
armed
commando strikes, sabotage and so forth;

“(e) Abandon the press campaign which the
parties have unleashed against each other through
the mass media and which does not facilitate the
search for a peaceful solution of the question;

21. My Government
also stated that it would terminate its presence without leaving a vacuum, and
would therefore transfer power to those who were to
assume responsibility
for the administration
of the

“cf) Abstain from, and if necessary discourage,
any action likely to contribute
to a worsening
3

of the situation in the Territory or ‘of the relations
among the concerned and interested parties.”

?However, ‘it is up to Morocco
necessary conclusions.“*

24. Why is it that at this precise moment the tension
has reached such a peak that an urgent meeting of the
Security Council is needed? On 16 October the
President of the International
Court of. Justice, at
a public hearing, read the advisory opinion,3 which
in paragraph 162 contains the following conclusions:

That is the text of the press release issued by the
Permanent Mission of Morocco to the United Nations
on 16 October..
26. Recognition
of “ties of allegiance”
between
the Sultan of Morocco
and some of the tribes
inhabiting Western Sahara cannot possibly be given
the interpretation
claimed
by the delegation
of
Morocco. The advisory opinion of the Court on this
question should be related to what Morocco asked.

“The materials and information presented to the
Court show the existence, at the time of Spanish
colonization,
of legal ties of allegiance between
the Sultan of Morocco and some of the tribes living
in the territory of Western Sahara. They equally
show the existence of rights, including some rights
relating to the land, which constituted legal ties
between the Mauritanian
entity, as understood by
the Court, and the territory of Western Sahara.
On the other hand, the Court’s conclusion is that
the materials and information presented to it do not
establish any tie of territorial sovereignty between
the territory of Western Sahara and the Kingdom
of Morocco or the Mauritanian
entity. Thus the
Court has not found legal ties of such a nature.as
might affect the application
of resolution
1514
(XV) in the decolonization
of Western Sahara and,
in particular, of the principle of self-determination
through the free and genuine expression ,of the
will of the peoples of the Territory.“*

27. In paragraph 90 of the advisory opinion,
Court defines the Moroccan claim as follows:

28. The Spanish thesis on this point was precisely
the contrary. This being the situation, I am obliged,
to avoid confusion, to repeat the cogent conclusion
of the Court in paragraph 162 of its opinion with
regard to the Moroccan claim:
6‘ . . . the Court’s conclusion is that the materials
and information
presented to it do not establish
any tie of territorial
sovereignty
between the
territory of Western Sahara and the Kingdom of
Morocco
or the Mauritanian
entity. Thus the
Court has not found legal ties of such a nature as
might affect the application
of resolution
1514
(XV) in the decolonization
of Western Sahara and,
in particular, of the principle of self-determination
through the free and genuine expression of the
will of the peoples of the Territory.“*3

“As a conclusion, the opinion of the Court can
only mean one thing: the so-called Western Sahara
was a part of Moroccan
territory
over which
the sovereignty was exercised by the Kings of
Morocco and that the population of this territory
considered themselves and were considered to -be
Moroccans.
“Morocco, therefore, finds its legitimate demands
confirmed by the International
Court of Justice,
arid sees as a .consequence that no other consideration could alter the Court’s conclusion.

29. In view of the Moroccan thesis that decolonization of the Sahara should be achieved through application of the principle of territorial integrity-paragraph .6 of resolution
1514 (XV)-the
Court stated
there were no historical legal ties that would justify
the non-application
to the Saharan population of the
principle of self-determination.
Thus the Moroccan
claim-that,!
on the basis of an alleged Moroccan
sovereignty, at the moment of Spanish colonization,
the ‘General Assembly should decide to implement
paragraph 6 of resolution
1514 (XV) on territorial
integrity-has
been clearly and categorically denied.

“Morocco
considers that its territorial
conflict
with Spain has been decided on, unequivocally
and without any ambiguity. As a result, no other
conclusion of debates bearing a political character
and not motivated by the rigorous aspects of rights,
can change the spirit of the conclusions that the
International
Court of Justice has just communicated to the General Assembly.
”
“Today, Moroccan demands have been recognized by the legal advisory organ of the United
Nations.
.’
in English

the

“Morocco’s
claim to ‘legal ties’ with Western
Sahara at the time of colonization by Spain has been
put to the Court as a claim to ties of sovereignty
on the ground of an alleged immemorial
possession of the territory.
This immemorial
possession, it maintains,
was based not on an isolated
act of occupation
but on the public display of
sovereignty,
uninterrupted
an uncontested,
for
centuries;“*

25. Despite the clear terms of that paragraph, the
Moroccan authorities have drawn from it the following
surprising conclusion:

* Quoted

to draw the

30. This denial is what led to the present crisis,
and, in this connexion, I should like to refer to my
letter dated 25 August 1975, in which I communicated
to the Secretary-General
some paragraphs of the

by the speaker.

4

speech made by His Majesty the -King .of Morocco
on 20 August as reproduced in and commented upon
by the Moroccan press and by various international
agencies. In this connexion, UPI reported as follows:

ensuring a free and“genuine
expression ‘of the
will of The people. In general, an opinion given by
the’ Court in’ the”.present proceedings will furnish
the General Assembly with elements of a legal
character relevant to its further treatment of the
decolonization
of Western Sahara.“*

“If we fail in the diplomatic
battle then I will
address a message to you, dear people, and I will
that day don a military uniform symbolic of our
decision because I want to be the first combatant
if necessary.”

33. Why is Morocco being so hasty? Why does it not
wait until the decolonizing
process has been concluded? Why does it not wait until the General
Assembly decides what policy should be followed in
the light of the advisory opinion of the Court and the
report of the Visiting Mission in accordance with
resolution
3292 (XXIX)?
Why does the Moroccan
Government
attempt, by its attitude, to place itself
in open rebellion against what has been stipulated
by the General Assembly? Is it because the International Court of Justice and the report of the
Visiting Mission reaffirm the principle of self-determination that Morocco has the right to begin a march
on the Sahara? For what purpose? Why? Is it to
provoke a catastrophe? It is alleged that this is a
peaceful march. Does this not constitute the violation
of a border? The very statement by the King, by
listing the facilities available to the invaders and by
indicating
that they might resort to their right of
legitimate
self-defence
in the Saharan Territory
against, foreign forces, clearly proves that the march
does not have peaceful aims. Let us not forget that
on that border there is a powerful Moroccan army
which has already caused many incidents and is
already acting in a war-like fashion to prepare for this
invasion.

“The King added: ‘I remain pessimistic because
our chances of recovering our land are only 50 per
cent. Thus we must be prepared to do everything
to attain our goal.’ “*
Reuters said:
“The King said Morocco was at present adopting
a wait and see attitude until the World Court
published its opinion, expected in October.”
“ ‘But whatever the result, Morocco will recover
its rights over its despoiled provinces no later than
towards the end of this year,’ the King said.“*
31. This attitude of His Majesty the King, already
announced in the month of August, demonstrates
that the present crisis has been deliberately prepared,
forestalling the advisory opinion of the International
Court of Justice, which could not do otherwise
than deny their unfounded claims. If to this we add
the fact that the report of the Visiting Mission also
reaffirmed
the right to self-determination
of the
Saharan people in accordance with the doctrine
established by the General Assembly, we have an
explanation
for this attitude,
which, with a total
lack of responsibility,
is seriously
endangering
international
peace and security and the peaceful
development of the decolonizing process.

34. In this connexion, let me report to the Council
the fact that on the 18th of this month, that is to say
the very day that, on behalf of my Government,
I
requested the convening of this meeting of the Council, three vehicles belonging to a unit of the Spanish
army were damaged by several mines in an area
close to the Moroccan border and one soldier was
killed while a captain and three soldiers were,seriously
wounded. In this connexion, let me say that we do
have information
which enables us to state that
Moroccan terrorists have been systematically placing
a considerable
number of mines, some irregularly
and insidiously
and others one by one, at points
where people must pass on the roads leading to El
Aaiun and the surrounding territory. These mines,
by their number and location, are a serious threat
to transit. To those mines placed by terrorists, we
have to add the ones which the Moroccan army has
already placed on its territory
along the entire
length of its border. What is Morocco attempting to
do with this massive emplacement
of mines? To
blow up its own citizens if they go into Western
Sahara and then place the blame on my country?
In publicly denounce this and, on behalf of my
country, decline all responsibility.

32. Moreover,
in paragraph -3 of its resolution
3292 (XXIX),
the General Assembly requests the
administering
Power to postpone the referendum until
the Assembly
“decides on the policy to be followed in order to
accelerate the decolonization
process in the Territory, ‘in accordance with resolution
1514 (XV),
in the best possible conditions, in the light of the
advisory opinion to be given by the International
Court of Justice.”
Similarly,
says:

in paragraph

72 of its opinion,

the Court

“As to the future action of the General Assembly,
various possibilities exist, for instance with regard
to consultations
between the interested States,
and the procedures and guarantees required for

35. My country for its part is very much aware
of the obligations incumbent upon us under Article 73

* Quoted in English by the speaker.

5

of the Charter of the United Nations. In this connexion, let me recall the fact that that Article stipulates:

all the parties involved so that peace, tranquillity
and security in the world may be achieved. We
believe that solutions can easily be found. With regard
to decolonization,
the Fourth Committee still must deal
with .the item on Western Sahara. All together, by
common agreement, we could find a joint solution,
but until that occurs we do not believe that it is
possible to accept this kind of threat or this kind
of invasion which jeopardizes peace and security. The
people of the Sahara is a courageous, worthy people,
respectful of the rights of others. That is why it hopes
that others will also show respect for its own rights
which today have been recognized by two organs of
this world community.

“Members
of the United Nations which have or
assume responsibilities
for the administration
of
territories whose peoples have not yet attained
a full measure of self-government
recognize the
principle that the interests of the inhabitants of these
territories are paramount, and accept as a sacred
trust the obligation
to promote to the utmost,
within the system of international
peace and security established by the present Charter, the wellbeing of the inhabitants of these territories, and,
to this end:
a. To ensure, with due respect for the culture
.of the peoples concerned, their political,
economic, social, and educational
advancement,
their just treatment, and their protection against
abuses;...
c. To further
rity;“.

international

39. The PRESIDENT:
tative of Morocco.
40.

I now call on the represen-

Mr.

SLAOUI
(Morocco) (interpretation
from
May I be allowed first of all, before going
into the substance of this discussion, and particularly
before replying to the various statements, assertions
or allegations made by the representative of Spain,
which I shall probably do during a forthcoming
meeting, to submit to the consideration of the Council
the opinion of the Government
of the Kingdom of
Morocco on the urgency of Spain’s request that this
matter be examined.
French):

peace and secu-

36. In accordance with the obligations I have just
mentioned, Spain will meet the responsibilities
incumbent upon it, and publicly denounces to the Security
Council the intolerable threats of the Government of
Morocco, and requests that the Council act immediately. My Government believes that it will be necessary, as a matter of urgency, to send a mission to
find out what the Government
of Morocco intends
to do with regard to its recent announcement
that
it will march on the Sahara. My Government invites
any mission appointed by the Council to go to my
country, to contact the Spanish Government and to
proceed to the Territory.
Without prejudice to the
report that the mission must speedily adopt, the
Council must take those measures which it considers
appropriate
to prevent the march. In view of the
urgency of the matter, and the fact that the march
has been announced for the 21st, my Government
hopes that the Council will direct an urgent appeal to
the King of Morocco to refrain from carrying out this
invasion.

41. This has not allowed me properly to inform my
Government nor to receive the necessary instructions
needed to give a complete exposition of our view on
the question before us. The amount of time which was
given to me appears to have been quite obviously insufficient to allow me to make the necessary arrangements
required by the seriousness of the accusation levelled
by the Spanish Government against the Kingdom of
Morocco. But such a state of urgency is all the less
justified in view of the fact that the request which we
are now considering is, in the eyes of the Government
of the Kingdom of Morocco, premature at the present
stage of the situation.
42. Indeed, according to Article
to which Spain has referred,

35 of the Charter,

37. In any case, on behalf of my Government,
I
refuse to accept any responsibility for what may occur
since the Charter requires us, as the administering
Power, and so long as we hold that position in the
Territory, to protect the Saharan people against any
abuse. It has been a very difficult thing for me to
come to the Council and to accuse a country with
which we have and hope to continue to have very
close and friendly relations.
We have very close
connexions with Morocco and with all of the Arab
world and, more particularly
at this time, with the
countires of the Sahara.

“Any Member of the UNited Nations may bring
any,dispute, or any situation of the nature referred
to in Article 34, to the attention of the Security
Council.”
and according to Article

38. We believe that the Saharan people is a noble
people entitled to exercise its right to self-determination. We would like to co-ordinate the interests of

43. Furthermore,
according to rule 3 of the provisional rules of procedure of the Security Council,

34,

“The Security Council may investigate . any
dispute, or any situation which might lead to international friction or give rise to a dispute, in order
to determine
whether the continuance
of the
dispute or situation is likely to endanger the maintenance of international
peace and security.”

6

49. It is thus perfectly clear that all the delays
which have occurred in the process of decolonization
are attributable ‘to Spain, just as are also attributable
to Spain the transformations
which have occurred
in the Territory and which have led to making any
attempt at self-determination
illusory. Furthermore,
let it be said that self-determination’is
not the only
possible solution. This is something that has been
regularly maintained
by Morocco for many years,
and this is the idea which prevailed during the past
session of the General Assembly’.
d4

“The President shall call a meeting of the Security Council if a dispute or situation is brought to
the attention
of the Security
Council
under
Article 35.”
44. Since the Spanish Government has itself referred
to Article 35 in connexion with this matter, it is not
difficult to note that this Article, like those that supplement it or that determine the conditions of its
application,
m.akes the convening of the Security
Council subject to the previous existence ‘of a dispute
or a new situation. We consider that in this particular
case this condition has not been met.

50. In 1974, Morocco
and Mauritania
stressed
before the General Assembly on many occasions
the fact that, far from promoting
the liberation of
the colonized peoples, the administering Power had on
the contrary endeavoured to subject them, resorting,
in particular, to the classical procedure of so-called
representative assemblies. It stepped up its military
and economic control. It intended to make of the
referendum which it wished to bring about, with
the blessing of the United Nations, an instrument
which it could wield according to its own whims
and which it would use when the time was ripe
and according to its own desires in order to elicit
a response the outcome of which would be known
in advance. Of course, this process of so-calied
decolonization,
which, in any case, has constantly
been delayed, involved no negotiation with Morocco or
Mauritania,
parties concerned;
and the United
Nations itself could intervene only by way of endorsing
something already decided upon by the administering
Power.

45. There can be no doubt that there is a dispute
between Spain and Morocco in connexion with the
Sahara. However,
this dispute is neither topical
nor novel. This is a dispute which arose immediately
after the Kingdom of Morocco gained independence,
when the latter requested that Spain restore to .it
the territories which-it occupied and Spain refused to
accede to that request. This dispute has existed
since 1957. It was at the basis of the surrender by
Spain to Morocco of the province of Tarfaya and the
enclave of Ifni. It was made official, in 1974, in
General Assembly resolution 3292 (XXIX),
which
notes its existence. It was legally recognized by the
International
Court of Justice, which referred to its
existence in its Order of 22 May 1975’j when it,
authorized Morocco to designate an ad hoc judge in
the Court.
46. It is perhaps fitting to recall that Morocco,
faithful to its commitments
towards the United
Nations, has always respected the decisions of the
Organization,
has regularly subscribed to .its resolutions, has been constant in advocating
peaceful
means and for 10 years now has sought within the
Organization
to obtain the recognition of its rights
through existing methods and procedures.

51. Morocco and Mauritania,
furthermore,
recalled
that Western Sahara had never existed as a legal
.entity and that it had always been an integral part
of one or the other of the two .States. The Sahara
therefore had a dual specific character:
specific
because for thousands of years it belonged to Morocco
and Mauritania; specific because of the Spanish enterprises which at every turn modified the political
conditions of the Territory.

47. When the United Nations invited the administering Power to initiate negotiations with a view to
the decolonization
of the Sahara, as indicated in
General Assembly resolution 2072 (XX), Morocco
stated its readiness to negotiate but was unable to
do so because. of the inertia evinced by Spain. And
when subsequently
the United Nations adopted a
series of resolutions
designed .to bring about the
decolonization
of the Territory,
it was again Spain
which regularly thwarted the impIementation
of these
resolutions by the lack of concern which it showed
about them.

52.. It is precisely this specific nature of Western
Sahara which prompted the General Assembly, in
resolution 3292 (XXIX), to seek an advisory opinion
from the International
Court of Justice on certain
legal aspects of the,problem. The Court was requested
to state whether Western Sahara was a terrb nullius
when it was colonized; and, if not, to state whether
there were legal ties with Morocco and Mauritania
and what the nature of these ties was. In adopting
resolution 3292 (XXIX),
the General Assembly first
of ,a11 sought information
about the legal status of
the Territory when it was colonized. It is unthinkable to argue that this preliminary
investigation
initiated by the General Assembly was ordered without any definite purpose and that, whatever the reply
of the Court should be, the principle of self-determination would subsequently be *endorsed and applied.
On the contrary, the General Assembly, in the light

48. Thus the administering
Power has for 10 years
turned a deaf ear to all the relevant resolutions that
were adopted. During that long period, rather than
co-operate in an objective spirit with the United
Nations in order to bring about the authentic liberation of the Territory, Spain devoted itself to seriously
perverting
the conditions
surrounding
the implementation of the resolutions that were adopted.
7

of the advisory opinion which was to .be handed
down, intended to advocate specific steps of a political
nature, and particularly respecting and ‘observing the
fundamental
tight -of the territorial
integrity
of
Morocco and Mauritania.

57. . But by its deeds and by its attitudes, Spain
persists in seeking to perpetuate an uneasy situation in
order-to bring about the only solution which will serve
its interests, and that is self-determination.
And it is
acting thus;not only to the detriment of the peoples
concerned; but above all in violation of the most elementary principles of the United Nations, particularly
Article 33 of the Charter, to which I have just
referred, ‘.as well as General Assembly resolution’
‘,
15 14 (XV) itself.
.
58. The statement made by His Majesty the King
of Morocco on 16 October did not, in any event,
create a new dispute: it is the same litigation which
the United Nations is considering. It would be vain
to attempt to assert that the implementation
of
the royal. decision, announced on 16 October, risks
threatening the maintenance of international peace and
security. Actually,
the articles invoked
by Spain
itself, which I have quoted just now, necessarily
suggest the occurrence of a ilispute which creates a
new situation-which
is obviously
not the case.
Just as there is no new dispute, there is no situation
in this. connexion which could lead to international
friction. The idea of a new situation presupposes the
emergence of a material fact which in some way
modifies the aspect or the nature of existing relations.

53. There really .can be no doubt that resolution
1514 (XV) stipulates the principle of the right of
peoples to self-determination.
But it also lays down
the principle of respect for the unity and territorial
integrity of States. And we are aware that the United
Nations has regularly opted for the application of the
second of these principles whenever the two have come
into conflict in any particular case.
54: ,Furthermore, the scope of application of these
two principles is not the same. The principle of selfdetermination
* applies in all cases where it is a
question of decolonizing a Territory having no known
ties with another State. As far as the principle of
territorial integrity is concerned, it must necessarily
be applied whenever we are-,dealing with a Territory
which did belong to another State and which is still
under colonial occupation. It was precisely in order to
be- able to invoke such a rule that Morocco and
Mauritania turned to the International
Court of Justice;
it was in this context as well that the General
Assembly consulted that highest international tribunal.
..
55. The Court has now handed down its opinion.
That opinion indicates that the Sahara, which was not
a terra nullius,’ actually had’legal ties with Morocco
and Mauritania when it was colonized. The Court has
recognized and stated the existence of the Sahara’s
legal ties of allegiance ,with Morocco, and links,of a
territorial
nature with Mauritania.
Those two countries therefore rightfully claim that the principle of.
national unity and territorial.integrity
should be applied
in this case. ,Hence they are perfectly justified in
requesting that the opuuon of the Court should’lead
to agreement and negotiations between themselves and
the administering
Power. It is in this context. that
we have to ,view the statement made by His Majesty
.
the King on 16 October..

,

59. An analysis of the letter of 18 October [s//185/],
by which Spain requested the convening of the Security Council., makes it easy to realize, how awkward
it has been’ for its authors .to justify their request.
It first of all affirms that “owing to the statements
made by His Majesty King Hassan II... a situation of
international friction has arisen”,-whereas
we know
that this friction has always existed, and that the
royal speech has not created any new dispute, as
we have already established.
60. It is then claimed that Morocco is planning an
“invasion”
of the Sahara, which is not in accord with
the facts. If “invasion”
is defined as the belligerent
infiltration
by the armed forces of one State of the
territory of another, it is clear that the action undertaken by Morocco cannot be thus described, since
it is simply a question of Moroccans returning to their
homeland.
Can going home be described as an
invasion?

56. There.can be no doubt that the dispute over the
Sahara is bet-ween .Spain, on the one hand, ‘.and
Morocco
and, Mauritania,
on the other. Now,
according to Article .33 of the Charter of the United
Nations:
_*
- r
._,.
“The parties to* any dispute, the continuance
of .which: is likely .to endanger the maintenance
of international .peace and security, shall,. first of
all, seek a solution
by negotiation,
enquiry,
mediation,
conciliation,
arbitration,
judicial
settlement, resort to regional agencies or arrangements,
or other peaceful means of their own choice.

61. It has thus been established that the conditions
laid down in Articles 34 and 35 of the Charter
and in rule 3 of the provisional rules of procedure
of the Security Council for that organ to meet are
not met in this particular case. The request submitted
by Spain, at the present stage of events, is thus
totally premature.
Nothing justifies, therefore, the
haste with which Spain has seen fit to convene the
Security Council, and even less the state of emergency
which it has alleged.

“The Security Council shall, when it deems
necessary, call upon the parties to settle their dispute
by such means.”

62. However, through Spain’s own fault, Morocco
finds itself invited, upon abnormally short notice, to
8

participate
in a discussion which deserves careful
reflection before it is embarked upon, and .perhaps
in debates which would be clearer and more consistent
if Morocco had the necessary time for preparation in
keeping with the importance of the subject on which the
Council is meeting. As we have established,
the
question is a serious one, and requires patient
research and an attitude based on the facts. At the
present stage in the development of the affair, we do
not believe that the members of the Security Council
can blame Moroccans for going back to their homes.

objective would Iind,it’ impossible to draw a line of
demarcation between these populations. It is impossible to say where; geographically
or in human
terms, the Islamic Republic of Mauritania
stops and
where the Sahara under Spanish administration
begins.
Is it not true that the Visiting Mission, which recently
made public the first part of its report,2 in fact
emphasized the fact that there are no Saharan refugees
in Mauritania? It would be incomprehensible
for a son
to be considered as a refugee in the house of his
father, or for a mother or father to be considered
as refugees in the home of their children, This is
self-evident and logical.

63. All these facts lead us to belive that the United
Nations will undoubtedly
refuse to act immediately
upon Spain’s request in view particularly
of the past
which is fraught with so many serious consequences
that have been ‘bequeathed
and modified by colonialism. With the Council’s permission, I shall have
occasion to return to this matter when the debate
goes into the substance. Under these circumstances,
I feel that at the present stage of events postponement
of the consideration
of this matter to a later date
would seem desirable. This request for postponement
is all the more justified, since the question of substance
is not of concern to Morocco alone.

68. The peoples of the Sahara merge with the Mauritanian population and are in the midst of their kin
when they are in Mauritania,
and the same’ thing
happens to Mauritanians when they are in the Sahara.
This is a reality that no one here can contest; it is
an everyday reality which the United Nations Visiting
Mission was not able to pass over in silence.
69. Another proof, a historical one, of the homogeneity of these Mauritanian
regions is the fact that
the missions which were sent by Spain to the Sahara
in the second half of the last century were carried
out under the protection of the Emir of Mauritanian
Adrar. It was thanks to him and to his political
authority that the Spaniards were able to set themselves up in the Sahara after having signed protectorate treaties with the Mauritanian ,tribes. It is on the
basis of these treaties-and
this deserves to be underlined-that
the International
Court of Justice, in
its advisory opinion .of the 16th of this month,
considered that the Sahara was not a territory without
a master, because it was inhabited by peoples which,
while they were nomads, were socially and politically
organized ans were under the authority,of the competent chiefs who were able to .represent them. In
its Royal Order of 26 December 1884, Spain itself
proclaimed that the King was taking Rio de Oro under
his protection,, on the basis of the agreements con’
cluded with the tribal chiefs.

64. Morocco and Mauritania
have mutually recognized each other’s rights in the Sahara before the
General Assembly during its twenty-ninth
session.
These rights, of a territorial
nature, have been
formally sanctioned by the International
Court of
Justice. Those two States therefore have an undeniable
community
of interests, since it is for them a matter
of their territorial integrity.
65. Mr. EL HASSEN
(Mauritania)
(inferpretation
from French): The problem of the Sahara is, as you
know, one which directly and acutely touches the
Mauritanian
Government and people. Indeed, it is a
matter of lands which are an integral part of our
national soil-for
more than one reason.
66. Historically,
the inhabitants of the Sahara under
Spanish administration
have always belonged to the
Mauritanian
or Shinguitti group of countries. They
were part of its political and economic organization,
as well as a cultural part of it. They are in fact
members of the same families, which the caprices of
colonialism split between two administrations:
French
and Spanish. This is a rather widespread phenomenon
in Africa, you will say, but here the element of
nomadic wandering lends particular dimension and
acuteness to the problem.

70. Which are the tribes that permitted Spain to set
itself up in the Sahara? They are the Oulad Bu-Sba,
the Oulad Oeleim, the Regheibat and other tribes ,of
Mauritanian
Adrar which are today administered
by
the Mauritanian Government, although living mainly in
territory under Spanish administration.
71. We can see, therefore, that the Spanish colonization, which only came into effect as of 1934,
was never able to change this homogeneity
in the
entire Mauritanian
north-west. Up to the present day,
the borders between the independent part of Mauritania
and the section which is under Spanish administration
only exist on maps and do not correspond to any
reality. As I am now speaking to you, all of our
brothers who are administered by Spain and who are
gaining their livelihood from pastoral activities-and
they constitute the majority-are
at the very heart of

67. The most outstanding proof of the homogeneity
of these two Mauritanian
regions which have been
unduly separated by colonialism
is the fact that
to this day the peoples living on each side of the
border are the object of administrative
census-taking
by both the Islamic Republic of Mauritania
and by
Spain. This is not done deliberately nor is it motivated
by any political designs: But anyone wishing to be
9

the Islamic Republic of Mauritania,
among their kin,
in search of pasture land. .They are following a
seasonal movement which occurs regularly and which
goes in both directions.

munity-has
recognized the existence, at the time of
the colonial occupation of the Sahara, of juridical
links between it and the Mauritanian
group. The
opinion of the International
Court of Justice can
only further confirm the legitimacy of the position
of the Islamic Republic of Mauritania with regard to
the question of Western Sahara and its pursuit of
the policy which it has followed for 18 years to
recover its rights by the reunification of our territory, a reunification
which is so deeply hoped for
by our peoples on both sides of the borders, which
were artifically drawn by colonization. The National
Political Bureau, which invites all the Mauritanian
peoples to close ranks and to mobilize to protect
our independence,
has decided to undertake a
large campaign of information and explanation with
regard to the question of Western Sahara, a campaign
which will begin by a mass meeting to be held at
Nouakchott
on Monday, 20 October”-that
is to
say, today-“presided
over by the members of the
National Political Bureau, and continued throughout the entire national territory by the organization
of mass meetings at the level of federations,
sections and party committees.”

72. Geographically,
the Territory which is administered by Spain falls precisely within the limits of
Mauritania.
It therefore constitutes an enclave whose
entire body and, I would say, whose entire soul
belong within the country. The language is the same,
the customs, social, political
and cultural habits
are strictly identical with and exclusive to the Islamic
Republic of Mauritania and to the major part of the
territory of the Sahara. It was on the basis of these
many links that in July 1957 the Prime Minister of
Mauritania,
even before we achieved independence,
stated that the first priority of our country was to
perfect its unity and its independence by integrating
the Sahara. Mauritania
has never relinquished
this
fundamental position, and the United Nations documents and those of all the relevant international
conferences amply prove, if need be, the firmness
and the constancy of this position.
73. If the Mauritanian
Government has based itself
on historical,
cultural,
geographical,
social and
economic links in order legitimately
to claim the
integration of the Sahara, it can only be further confirmed in the legitimacy and the correctness of its
position following the recent advisory opinion of the
International
Court of Justice.3 With regard to that
opinion of the International
Court of Justice, the
National Political Bureau of the Mauritanian
People’s
Party published the following communique,
which I
shall read out:

74. The National Political Bureau was pleased to
hear this opinion of the Court precisely because the
most competent judicial
organ at the international
level has recognized by a vote which was the largest
in the proceedings instituted-15
votes to l-that
our
country does have juridical
links with the Sahara
and rights, including territorial rights. That can only
mean the exercise by my country of political authority
over the territory at the time of its colqnization.
75. It has been said that these ties do not include
any sovereignty,
perhaps as Western law understands the term. But if one reads paragraphs 151
and 152 of the advisory opinion, one becomes fully
aware of the importance and the decisive character
of the legal ties which unite Mauritania
with the
Sahara, in relation to the process of decolonization.
In paragraph 151, the opinion of the Court reads as
follows:

“The National Political Bureau, during a special
meeting on 16 October 1975, was informed of the
opinion handed down that day by the International
Court of Justice with regard to the question of
Western Sahara. On that occasion it was able to
reaffirm the constant position of the Government of
the Islamic Republic of Mauritania with regard to
that question. In this connexion, it would like to
recall that,. from 1957 and even before the country
acceded to international sovereignty, the head of the
Mauritanian
State, Moktar Ould Daddah, basing
himself on human, cultural, historical and geographical facts, clearly indicated that Western Sahara
was an integral part of the national territory. This
position has since then .regularly and unswervingly
been affirmed by Mauritania, both within the United
Nations as well as on other occasions when this
problem arose. The National Political Bureau has
just heard that the International
Court of Justice,
in the opinion that it published today with regard
to the Western Sahara, has recognized the existence
of juridical links between Mauritania and Western
Sahara and of rights, including some rights with
regard to land. It expresses its deep satisfaction
that the International
Court of Justice-whose
opinions morally commit the international
com-

“The
language
employed
by the General
Assembly in Question II does not appear to the
Court to confine the question exclusively to those
legal ties which imply territorial sovereignty. On the
contrary, the use of the expression ‘legal ties’ in
conjunction
with ‘Mauritanian
entity’
indicates
that Question II envisages the possibility of other
ties of a legal character. To confine the question
to ties of sovereignty would, moreover, be to ignore
the special characteristics
of the Saharan region
and peoples to which reference has been made in
paragraphs 87 and 88 above, and also to disregard
the possible relevance”-and
I would emphasize
this-“of
other legal ties to the various procedures
concerned in the decolonization
process.“3
Therefore, as far as the Court is concerned,
legal ties uniting the Sahara with Mauritania
10

the
are

pertinent and should be considered in the light of the
special characteristics
of the region and peoples
concerned.

could it be otherwise when we know that the Mauritanian lands in the Sahara, their permanent and temporary watering places, their pasture-lands, their arable
lands, and so forth, are the indispensable
means of
existence and constitute the property of the population in the strictest sense of the word.

76. The Court further spelt out its thinking in paragraph 152 of its opinion when it said the following:
“The information before the Court makes it clear
that the nomadism of the great majority of the peoples of Western Sahara at the time of its colonization gave rise to certain ties of a legal character
between the tribes of the territory and, those of
neighbouring
regions of the Bilad Shinguitti.
The
migration routes of almost all the nomadic tribes
of Western Sahara.. . crossed what were to become
the colonial frontiers and traversed, inter ah,
substantial areas of what is today the territory
of the Islamic Republic of Mauritania.
The tribes,
in their migrations, had grazing pastures, cultivated
lands, and wells or water-holes in both territories,
and their burial grounds in one or other territory.
These basic elements of the nomads’ way of life,
as stated earlier in this opinion, were in some measure the subject of tribal rights, and their use was in
general regulated by customs. Furthermore,
the
relations between all the tribes of the region in such
matters as inter-tribal clashes and the settlement of
disputes were also governed by a body of intertribal custom. Before the time of Western Sahara’s
colonization
by Spain, those legal ties neither
had nor could have any other source than the
usages of the tribes themselves or Koranic law.”
-And
I feel that the Court, here also, stressed
an extremely important
factor, which should be
recalled-“Before
the time of Western Sahara’s
colonization
by Spain, those legal ties neither had
nor could have any other source than the usages of
the tribes themselves or Koranic law. Accordingly,
although the Bilad Shinguitti has not been shown to
have existed as a legal entity, the nomadic peoples
of the Shinguitti country should, in the view of the
Court, be considered as having in the relevant period
possessed rights, including some rights relating to the
lands through which they migrated. These rights,
the Court concludes, constituted legal ties between
the territory of Western Sahara and the ‘Mauritanian
entity’, this expression being taken to denote the
various tribes living in the territories of the Bilad
Shinguitti
which are now comprised
within the
Islamic Republic of Mauritania.
They were ties
which knew no frontier between the territories and
were vital to the very maintenance of life in the
region.“’

78. Mauritania
therefore thinks that it is more
than ever justified in demanding respect for its territorial integrity and the unity of its people. We would
find. it perfectly legitimate to seek the restoration of
our rights if the assistance of the international
community, in particular the United Nations, were lacking
despite the correctness of our cause and, from now on,
the legal validity of our position. My country therefore hopes that the United Nations wiil*take the steps
required by the need for an urgent solution, with
due regard for the rights of the States concerned-that
is, Morocco and Mauritania-to
territorial integrity and
national unity.
79. We have always sought for such a solution
within the context of the United Nations, because we
have faith, in the Organization,
because we believe
in the virtues of peaceful means, and because we
have always sought to enjoy the moral support and
the political backing of the Organization.
But when
we see the United Nations turning towards a solution-and
only one solution-which
has been prefabricated
and which, in its consequences
and
implications,
will threaten the very existence of our
country, we cannot justly be blamed for being concerned about our territorial
integrity and the unity
of our people. These are the feelings motivating
the
Islamic Republic of Mauritania, and it is undoubtedly
the same feelings that are motivating the Kindom of
Morocco.
80. In fact, the subject of the present meeting is
the peaceful action that the Moroccan Government
plans to take in the northern part of the Sahara.
Before giving the point of view of my ,Government
on this action, I shall describe the problem,
and
indicate its outlines and its limits.
81. We all know that the Kingdom of Morocco has
also claimed the Sahara on the grounds of the exercise
of sovereignty
because Morocco
was the only
structured State in the sub-region when the Spanish
colonization
took place. Mauritania,
for its part, has
recognized that Morocco does, in fact, have legal ties of
great importance
with the territory. To be precise,
these are ties between the Sultan of Morocco and
certain of the tribes which lived in the region of the
northern Sahara. The Court, in paragraph 102 of
its opinion, clearly states:

77. In other words, the International
Court of Justice
has recognized that Mauritania does have rights over
the Sahara, including territorial rights relating to the
nomadic routes of the’shinguitti
tribes. Now, there
routes covered a large part of the Sahara, normally
corresponding
to the region of Sakiet El Hamra.
The Court has stated that these links were essential
elements in maintaining
the life of the region. How

“Mauritania
does not oppose Morocco’s claim
to have displayed its authority in some, more
northerly, areas of the territory. Thus it does not
dispute the allegiance at that time of the Tekna
confederation to the Sultan, nor Morocco’s claim
11

that. through the intermediari
of Tekna caids in
southern Morocco,
it exercised a measure of
authority over Tekna nomads who traversed those
areas of Western Sahara.“3

Western Sahara, but in any case, this topic is before
another body of the United Nations, that is to say,
the General Assembly,
and not this forum, the
Security Council.

82. The Co&t further notes, at the end of paragraph 105, that Mauritania considers these Tekna septs
to have been in “Moroccan fealty*‘. The Court concluded, quite correctly, that there did exist ties of
allegiance between the Sultan and those tribes. Therefore, these are nomadic Tekna septs whose nomadic
journeys take them into the interior of the Sahara
under Spanish administration.
These’legal ties recognized by Mauritania,
and later by the International
Court of Justice, as existing for Morocco, and within
relatively specific limits, appear to establish rights for
Morocco over certain peoples living in the northern
Sahara. The proposed peaceful action by the Government of Morocco seems to us designed to bring law
into accordance with reality in one very limited region
of the Sahara under Spanish administration.

88. The same could also be said to the representative of Mauritania.
All the comments he has made
have already been taken .into account by the International Court of Justice. Today that opinion has been
distributed,
and at is in .your p&session.
What is
important,
in our view, is that first the Genera1
Assembly, in its resolution 3292 (XXIX), and now the
international
Court of Justice have reaffirmed the
right to self-determination
of the Saharan people,
denying that any links which might exist give any of
the claimant countries a right of sovereignty over the
Territory. That is what is important. Now, how do we
go about solving this problem? Through self-determination.
89. I have acted in accordance with my rights
and on instructions froni my Government. Friction has
been caused between Morocco and Spain by the
announcement
of a march which will invade the
Sahara with 350,000 people-a
number four times the
size of the Saharan population-and
this implies
serious danger. What my Government would like to
know is whether the’ Government
of Morocco will
refrain from conducting this march. Everything else,
the whole problem dealt with by the International
Court of Justice,, has already been judged and
conclusions have been drawn. The problem of decolonization will be dealt with in the Fourth Committee
and in plenary meetings of the General Assembly.
Here we are dealing with the friction which has been
caused by the announcement
of an invasion of a
Territory
which has been entrusted to us by the
Charter of the United Nations. We must face that
situation. We know how to act in accordance with the
Charter, but we believe that the Council should help
us and should discharge its responsibilities
by
indicating to us how we can act in order to confront
the invasion. I believe that what is necessary is an
urgent appeal to have the cause of friction removed.
What has caused the friction?, Announcement
of an
invasion of the Territory. I am not interested in people saying that their purposes are peaceful. Those
who have peaceful purposes should stay at horn&.
That is the best solution for any of these crises
and tension. To go into a territory where it is impossible to accommodate a human mass of 350,000 people is absurd, to say the least. Therefore we ask that
the Security Council help us.

83. That being so, and by virtue of the fact that
Mauritania
has recognized that morocco possesses
these rights, we can hardly blame the Government of
Morocco for planning the peaceful restoration of the
rights I have referred to. In the same way, Morocco
could hardly blame Mauritania if the latter decided to
resort to other peaceful means, including the United
Nations, in order to obtain its legitimate
rights, in
the Sahara under Spanish administration,
rights which
have been recognized not only by Morocco but also
by the International
Court of Justice.
84. My country, however, remains convinced-and
I should like to emphasize this-that
the most
appropriate framework and the most suitable means
are still to be found within the United Nations. The
latter can help fhe Kingdom of Morocco, Spain and
Mauritania to find together the most politically viable
solution to the problem of the Sahara, with due
regard for their interests and their rights to territorial
integrity, and also the views of the peoples concerned. We believe that the Security Council can
make a positive contribution
in this sense.
85. The PRESIDENT:
I call on the representative
of Spain who has asked to speak in exercise of his
right of reply.
86.

Mr.

de PINIl%
(Spain) (interpretation
from
I shall be extremely brief because I should
like to reserve my right to speak on .a later occasion
to answer the statements made by the representatives
of Morocco and Mauritania.
In any case, what I
should like to do now is to urge the Security Council
not to lose sight of what we are attempting to obtain
as a result of convening this Council meeting.

Spanish):

90. The territory north of the border is sown with
mines. Within our own territory Moroccan terrorists
have sown many mines. Prevention is better than cure.
We want His Majesty the King of Morocco to refrain
from conducting this planned invasion, which I repeat,
cannot be defended on the grounds that its purposes
are peaceful. Any country asks for documents, for
visas, when someone arrives at its border. In the case

87, The representative
of Morocco has referred
to the problem of decolonization.
There is no controversy between Morocco and Spain with regard to
12

I.

.

e

.

of such vast numbers-four
times the popu1atio.n of
the Territory-this
can be a serious problem.

Council for its consideration
shall now read out: .-

91. ‘On behalf of my Government, I ask the Security
Council, which I feel is competent in’ this regard,
for its backing and help. That is why I have unfortunately had to come to the Council under Article 35
of the Charter of the United Nations. I do not think
anybody needs to interpret this. My Government
is
interpreting the Charter, and it is quite clear. what is
there.

“The Security Council,

92. The PRESIDENT:
I want to inform, the Council
that the delegation of Costa Rica has submitted a draft
resolution, which is available in Spanish only at the
moment but which will be available in all languages
around 3 o’clock. I call on the representative
of
Costa Rica who, I gather, is prepared to read it so
that we can have it translated by the ‘interpreters.
93. Mr. SALAZAR (Costa Rica) (interpretation
Spanish): My delegation has indeed submitted

from
to the

“Without prejudice
due course adopt,

a draft resolution

which I

to such measures as it. may in

“Demands,
as a matter of urgency, that theGovernment of Morocco, desist immediately .from
the proposed march on Western Sahara.” [S//18.5.?/
Rev.l.1
The meeting

rose at 12.55 d.m.
Notes

’ A/9714.
2 Officiul
Supplement
’ Western
4 Official
Supplement

s A/10095.
6 Western

p. 6.

Records
of the Geneml Assembly,
Thirtieth
Session.
No. 23, vol. III, chap. XIII, annex.
,Sahura, Advisory
Opinion,
I.C.J. Reports
1975, p. 12.
Records
of the General
Assembly,
Thirtieth
Session,

No. 23, vol. III, chap. XIII, sect. B.
Saham,

Order

of 22 Muy

1975, I.C.J.

Reports

1975,

HOW

TO OBTAIN

United Nations
world. Consult
COMMENT

UNITED

NATIONS

PUBLICATIONS

publications
may be obtained from bookstores
and distributors
throughout
the
your bookstore
or write to: United Nations. Sales Section. New York or Geneva.
SE PROCURER

LES PUBLICATIONS

DES NATIONS

Les publications
des Nations Unies sont en vente dans les librairies’et
monde entier. Informez-vous
aupres de votre libraire ou adressez-vous
des ventes, New York ou Get&e.
KAK

IIOIIY’XHTh

ZI3&tHEIJl

OPrAHIi

3AI~HN

UNIES
les agences depositaims du
ti : Nations Unies. Section

OE%EnHHEHHhIX

HAllHH

~JAaXHR
OpraHR3aUHH
06%e~me~~brs
HauaR
MOXCKHO KynHTb B K(HHx(HblX
Marasnnax
H areurcreax
no acex pafionax
snapa. Hanonnve
cnpaann
06 ns~annfrx
a
naiuehr toinxno~
sraraonue
unu rmurn~e
no anpecy:
Opraxx3auen
06’begnxennbrx
Hauwk,
Ce~una no nponaxe
nsjrannA.
Hum-Ffopx
HIIU Xeuena.
COMO

CONSECUIR

PUBLICACIONES

DE LAS NACIONES

Las pu%caciones
de las Naciones Unidas es& en venta en lib&as
todas partes del mundo. Consulte a su librero o dirfjase a: Naciones
Nueva York o Ginebra.

Litho

in United

Nations.

New York

00300

UNIDAS
y casas distribuidotas
en
Unidas, Secci6n de Ventas.

82-61202-November

1983-2.200
