164

General Assembly-Thirty-sixth Session

Commending the Paris Declaration on Sanctions against
South Africa and the Special Declaration on Namibia, 2:1
adopted by the International Conference on Sanctions
against South Africa, held in Paris from 20 to 27 May 1981 .
Stressing the need to disseminate on a wider basis more
information on the crimes committed by the racist regime
of South Africa, taking into consideration the recommendation contained in the documents adopted by the International Seminar on Publicity and the Role of the Mass Media
in the International Mobilization against Apartheid, held at
Berlin, German Democratic Republic. from 31 August to
2 September 1981 , 24
Underlining that ratification of and accession to the International Convention on the Suppression and Punishment
of the Crime of Apartheid on a universal basis and the
implementation of its provisions without any delay are necessary for its effectiveness and would be a useful contribution towards achieving the goals of the Decade for Action
to Combat Racism and Racial Discrimination,
Firmly convinced that the legitimate struggle of the oppressed peoples in southern Africa against apartheid, racism
and colonialism and for the effective implementation of their
inalienable right to self-determination and independence
demands more than ever all necessary support by the international community and. in particular, further action by
the Security Council,
l. Takes note of the report of the Secretary-Genera12'
on the status of the International Convention on the Suppression and Punishment of the Crime of Apartheid;
2. Commends those States parties to the Convention that
have submitted their reports under article VII of the Convention, in particular those which presented their second
reports, and appeals to those States parties that have not yet
done so to submit their reports as soon as possible;
3. Appeals once again to those States that have not yet
done so to ratify or to accede to the Convention without
further delay;
4. Requests States parties to the Convention to take fully
into account the guidelines 26 prepared by the Group of
Three of the Commission on Human Rights, established in
accordance with article IX of the International Convention
on the Suppression and Punishment of the Crime of
Apartheid;
5. Calls upon all States parties to implement fully article
IV of the Convention by adopting legislative, judicial and
administrative measures to prosecute, bring to trial and punish, in accordance with their jurisdiction. persons responsible for, or accused of, the acts enumerated in article II of
the Convention;
6. Again calls upon all States parties to the Convention
and the competent United Nations organs to consider the
conclusions and recommendations of the Group of Three
contained in its reports 27 and to submit their views and
comments to the Secretary-General;
7. Requests the Secretary-General to intensify his efforts through appropriate channels to disseminate information on the Convention and its implementation with a
view to further promoting ratification of or accession to the
Convention;
. 8. Requests the Commission on Human Rights to contmue to undertake the functions set out in article X of the

2

A/CONF. 107/8. sect. X.
A/36/496-S/14686, annex I
2
' A/361454 and Add. I
2
• E/CN.4/1286, annex.
27
E/CN.4/1358. sect. IV: E/CN.411417. sect IV.
'

24

Convention and invites the Commission to intensify, in cooperation with the Special Committee against Apartheid,
its efforts to compile periodically •the progressive list of
individuals, organizations, institutions and representatives
of States deemed responsible for crimes enumerated in article II of the Convention, as well as of those against whom
or which legal proceedings have been undertaken;
9. Requests the Commission on Human Rights to take
into account General Assembly resolutions 33/23 of 29
November 1978 and 35/32 of 14 November 1980 as well
as relevant documents of the Commission and its subsidiary
organs in which it is reaffirmed, inter alia, that States giving
assistance to the racist regime of South Africa become ::.ccomplices in the inhuman practices of racial discrimination
and apartheid;
10. Calls upon all States parties to the Convention and
competent United Nations organs to continue to provide the
Commission on Human Rights, through the Secretary-General. with information relevant to the periodic compilation
of the above-mentioned list as well as with information
concerning the obstacles that prevent the effective suppression and punishment of the crime of apartheid;
11. Appeals to all States, United Nations organs, specialized agencies and international and national non-governmental organizations to step up their activities in enhancing
public awareness through denouncing the crimes committed
by the racist regime of South Africa;
12. Requests the Economic and Social Council, in preparing for the Second World Conference to Combat Racism
and Racial Discrimination, to be held in 1983, to give special attention to the activities aimed at the eradication of
apartheid;
13. Welcomes the active campaign waged by the Special
Committee against Apartheid, in co-operation with the
Commission on Human Rights, to publicize the importance
of the Convention;
14. Requests the Secretary-General to distribute the
above-mentioned list among all States parties to the Convention and all Member States and to bring such facts to
the attention of the public by all means of mass
communication;
15. Requests the Secretary-General to include in his
next annual report under General Assembly resolution 3380
(XXX) a special section concerning the implementation of
the Convention.
42nd plenary meeting
28 October 1981

36/16.

Physical education and sports exchanges among
young people
The General Assembly,
Recalling the Declaration on the Promotion among Youth
of the Ideals of Peace, Mutual Respect and Understanding
between Peoples. proclaimed in its resolution 2037 (XX)
of 7 December 1965.
Recalling also its resolution 33/8 of 3 November 1978.
in which it requested the Secretary-General to submit to it
at its thirty-sixth session a report on the activities undertaken
by Member State~. the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization, regional organizations and
other interested organizations and programmes of the United
Nations system in the field of physical education and sports.
particularly among young people,
Taking into account the activities carried out by the United
Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization
with a view to promoting physical education and sports in

VI.

school curricula and their importance in furthering universal
understanding and friendship,
Convinced of the importance of physical education and
sports exchanges in promoting peace, mutual understanding,
co-operation and the development of friendly relations
among peoples,
1. Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General2 8
submitted pursuant to General Assembly resolution 33/8;
2. Takes note also of the replies of Member States 29 to
the request addressed by the Secretary-General in accordance with resolution 33/8;
3. Invites Member States to develop sports activities
and physical education within the context of continuing
education and, in particular, to give priority to programmes
developed in the framework of a "sports for all" policy so
as to reach all sectors of the population, especially young
people who are not in school and the rural population;
4 .. Recommends that, in preparing programmes, special
attention should be given to the promotion of indigenous
forms of sport and physical training as well as to the adaptation of other forms of sport, especially through the use
of local materials, and to the reduction of their cost and
infrastructure requirements, so as to enable the largest possible number of persons to participate in these sports.
49th plenary meeting
9 November 198/

36/17.

Channels of communication between the United
Nations and youth and youth organizations
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 32/ l 35 of 16 December 1977, in
which it adopted guidelines for the improvement of the
channels of communication between the United Nations and
youth and youth organizations,
Recalling its resolution 35/139 of 11 December I 980, in
which it requested the Secretary-General, taking into account the views expressed by Governments, to submit to
the General Assembly at its thirty-sixth session, for adoption, proposals for additional guidelines, consistent with the
guidelines already adopted in its resolution 32/135 and on
the basis of the draft additional guidelines contained in the
annex to its resolution 34/163 of I 7 December 1979, as well
as the suggestions of the Secretary-General in his reports
to the Assembly at its thirty-third, ,o thirty-fourth 31 and
thirty-fifth 32 sessions,
Recalling also Economic and Social Council resolution
1980/25 of 2 May 1980 concerning co-ordination and information in the field of youth,
Taking note of the report of the Secretary-General of 10
September 1981, 33
Noting with appreciation that the report of the Advisory
Committee for the International Youth Year 34 contains useful proposals for the improvement of channels of communicati?n 1?etween the United Nations and youth and youth
orgamzat1ons,
Convinced of the need to improve the efforts of the United
Nations and the specialized agencies with regard to the
participation of youth in achieving the objectives of the
Charter of the United Nations.

Equally convinced of the valuable contributions that youth
can make in promoting co-operation among States and in
implementing the new international economic order and the
International Development Strategy for the Third United
Nations Development Decade, 1 "
Taking note also of the valuable contribution that the
United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization can make in the improvement of channels of
communication between the United Nations and youth and
youth organizations,
Bearing in mind the importance of the existence of channels of communication between the United Nations and
youth and youth organizations for the proper information
of youth and youth organizations and their effective participation in the United Nations and the specialized agencies
at the national, regional and international levels,
Convinced that the existence and the proper functioning
of channels of communication between the United Nations
and youth organizations form a basic prerequisite for the
successful preparation, celebration and follow-up of the International Youth Year: Participation, Development, Peace,
I. Adopts the additional guidelines for the improvement
of the channels of communication between the United
Nations and youth and youth organizations set forth in the
annex to the present resolution;
2. Requests Member States, specialized agencies and
other intergovernmental organizations to implement these
additional guidelines, together with the guidelines adopted
in General Assembly resolution 32/ l 35. in co-operation with
youth organizations in consultative status with the Economic
and Social Council and with other youth organizations
concerned;
3. Requests the Advisory Committee for the International Youth Year to promote the implementation of the
additional guidelines. together with the guidelines adopted
in resolution 32/ l 35, during the preparation for and celebration of the International Youth Year: Participation, Development, Peace:
4. Requests the Secretary-General, on the basis of the
reports of Member States, specialized agencies and other
intergovernmental organizations as well as non-governmental youth organizations, to report to the General Assembly
at its thirty-seventh session on the implementation of the
present resolution.
49th plenary meeting
9 November /98/

ANNEX
Additional guidelines for the improvement of the channels of communication between the llnited Nations and youth and youth
organizations
A

A/36/409.

29

Ibid., chap. VI.

JO

A/33/26).

31

A/34/199.
A/35/503.
33
A/36/427.
14
A/36/215, annex.
32

NAr!ON~I

I. Attention should be given to the expansion of advisory services on
youth activities provided by the United Nations to Governments at their
request.
2. Governments should consider the inclusion of youth representatives
in their national delegations to the General Assembly and to other relevant
United Nations meetings.
B

28

165

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

REGIONAi.

., . The regional commissions should review their relationships with
regional non-governmental youth organizations in order to facilitate cooperation with and among ,uch urgan izations.
4. The regional commissions should pay special attention to the question of the active participatinn nf youth in the process of development and
1
"

Resolution J.S/56. annex
