UNITED NATIONS

THIRTY-FOURTH

2114th
NEW

YEAR

MEETING:

YORK

Z~~tt8It?Y979

MAY
41982

CONTENTS
Page

Provisional
Adoption

agenda (S/Agenda/21

16) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . ...*....

1

of the agenda . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

1

The situation in South-East Asia and its implications for international peace and security
[Letter dated 22 February 1979 from the representatives of Norway, Portugal, the
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland and the United States of
America to the President of the Security Council (S/13111)] . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

1

NOTE

Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined
with tigures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United Nations
document.

,. -

: .>

Documents of the Security Council (symbol W...) are normally published in quarterly Supplements of the OflcialRecords of the Security Council. The date of the document
indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which information about it is given.
:
-The resolutions of the Security Council; numbered in accordance with a system
, adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Resolutions and Decisions of the
Security Council. The new system, which has been applied retroactively to resolutions
adopted before 1 January 1965, became fully operative on that date.
-

.‘:

’ ’ t”:‘-$!
‘I ..:

‘.,:,:..

!

f,!!
> !’

>‘I,
:’

*.

:
!

2116th MEETING
Held in New York on Sunday, 25 February 1979, at 3.30 p.m.
president:

Abdalla Yaccoub BISHARA

2. The PRESIDENT: I should like to inf’orm members of
the Council that I have received a letter from the representative of Pakistan in which he requests to be invited to participate in the discussion. In accordance with the usual
practice, I propose, with the consent of the Council, to
invite the representative of Pakistan to participate in the
discussion, without the right to vote, in accordance with the
provisions of the Charter and rule 37 of the provisional rules
of procedure.

(Kuwait).

Present: The representatives of the following States:
Bangladesh, Bolivia, China, Czechoslovakia, France,
Gabon, Jamaica, Kuwait, Nigeria, Norway, Portugal,
Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, United Kingdom of
Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United States of America, Zambia.
Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/2116)

At the invitation of the President,Mr. Naik(Pakistan) took
the place reservedfor him at the sideof the Councilchamber.

1. Adoption of the agenda
2. The situation in South-East Asia and its implications for
international peace and security. [Letter dated 22 February 1979 from the representatives of Norway, Portugal, the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern
Ireland and the United States of America to the President of the Security Council (S/1311 l)]

3. The PRESIDENT: The first speaker is the representative of Indonesia. I invite him to take a place at the Council
table and to make his statement.
4. Mr. ANWAR SAN1 (Indonesia): Mr. President, I
should like on behalf of my delegation to expressto you and
to the other members of the Council my deep appreciation
for the opportunity to participate in the Council’s deliberations. I should also like to extend to you my warm congratulations on your assumption of the presidency of the Council
for the month of February; I am confident that the Council’s work will greatly benefit from your wise leadership and
vast experience. Perhaps it would be more appropriate to
congratulate the Council on having you to guide its work at
a time when it is faced with serious challenges.

The meeting was called to order at 4.30 p.m.

Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.

‘Ike dtuation in South-East Asia and its bnplicatlons for
international peace and security. mtter dated 22 Febrw
sty 1979 from the representatives of Norway, Portugal, the
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland
and the United Rates of America to the President of tbe
!securlty &mdl (S/lSlll)]

5. My delegation is happy to see that the Council has
decided, in line with its responsibility, to meet and discuss
the situation in Indo-Chii,
which clearly endangers peace
and security not only in the region but in the entire world.
My delegation is of the opinion that, in view of the serious
developments in Indo-China, it is the Council’s duty to
meet to discuss what action to take to defuse the threat to
international peace and security.

1. The PRESIDENT:
In accordance with the decisions
taken at the 2114th and 2115th meetings, I invite the representatives of Australia, Bulgaria, Canada, Cuba, Democratic Kampuchea, the German Democratic Republic,
Hungary, India, Indonesia, Japan, Malaysia, Mongolia,
New Zealand, the Philippines, Poland, Singapore, Thailand
and Vi& Nam to take the places reserved for them at the side
of the Council chamber.

6. Indonesia is following the events affecting the countries
of IndcXhina with deep concern and apprehension; they
are events that may affect the peace and security not only of
theentire region of South-East Asia but of the whole world.
The developments of the past few days have highlighted
alarmingly the dangerous nature of the situation prevailing
in Indo-China since early last month.

At the invitathm of thePresident, Mr. Anderson (Australia),
Mr. KOS~OV (BuIgaria), Mr. Barton (Cana&), Mr. RoaKouri
(Cuba), Mr. TWunn Prasith (DemocraticKampuchea),Mr.
norin (GermanDemocraticRepublic),Mr. HolIai(Hungary),
Mr. Ja@ai (Z&a), Mr. Anwar Sani (Indonesia),Mr. Abe
(Japan); Tmr Sri zalton Ibrahim (Malaysia), Mr. Dashtseren
(Mongotia), Mr. Francis (New Zeakmd),Mr. Yang0(Philip
pi?@, .Mr. Jaroszek (Poland), Mr. Koh (Singapore), Mr.
GunaXasem (Thailmrd) and Mr. Ha Van Luu (Wet Nam)
took the placesreservedfor them at the sideof the Council

7. My delegation would like to make it quite clear that it is
Indonesia’s considered view that armed intervention by any
country in the affairs of another State cannot in any way be
justified. In order that stability and peace may be maintained in South-East Asia, the territorial integrity and sovereignty of all States in the region must be sc~pulously
respected by all. Without such scrupulous respect there can
be neither peace nor any real growth and economic develop

Child@.

1

ment. The current fighting in Indo-China is evidence of the
dire consequences that result from not adhering strictly to
the principle of respect for the territorial integrity and sovereignty of all States, irrespective of what one might think of
their ideologies or internal policies. My delegation is of the
opinion that relations between States must be based upon
the strict observance of the accepted principles of intemational law as enshrined in the Charter of the United Nations
and embodied in the Bandung Declaration which, inter ah,
call upon all States to respect one another’s sovereignty and
territorial integrity.

tion which might lead to a global war. We are glad that the
Council has decided to discuss the situation in Indo-China,
which is undeniably a serious threat to peace and security.
But it is obvious to everyone that discussing it alone is not
enough. My delegation earnestly hopes that the Council will
be able to agree on the appropriate action to take in order
effectively to lead to the cessation of hostilities and the
return of peaceful conditions to the countries of IndoChina, in accordance with the primary responsibility for the
maintenance of international peace and security entrusted
to it by the Charter in Article 24. In this connexion my
delegation would like to express its deep appreciation to the
Secretary-Geger$ for making his good of&es available in
the search for a peaceful solution. We would urge the
Council and the parties concerned to make use of the timely
offer of the Secretary-General.

8. Indonesia is not onlv eravelv concerned about the COI&
sequences which recent-d&eloiments in Indo-China may
have for the countries in South-East Asia, but is also concerned about the opportunity they may provide for outside
Powers to interfere in the internal affairs of those States. We
are particularly apprehensive of the possibility that outside
Powers will make use of the armed conflict in Indo-China to
serve their own purposes which may not be in the interests
of the countries of the region.

13. The PRESIDENT: The next speaker is the representative of Malaysia. I invite him to take a seat at the Council
table and to-make his statement.
14. Tan Sri ZAITON Ibrahim (Malaysia): Mr. President.
allow me first of all on behalf of my delegation to congratulate you most warmly on your assumption of the presidency
of the Security Council for the month of February. We are
pleased that the work of the Council is under your wise and
skilful guidance and confident that your distinguished leadership will contribute towards a fruitful coriclusion of the
Council’s business.

9. In my statement before the Council last month [221&h
meethgl I referred to the concept of the Association of
South-East Asian Nations (ASEAN) for the establishment
of a zone of peace, freedom and neutrality in South-East
Asia. The recent developments in Indo-China clearly underline the validity and the urgent need for the realization of
that concept that is meant to help to prevent South-East
Asia from being drawn into the confrontation between big
Powers as a result of their rivalry.

15. The unfolding of tragic events in Indo-China within
the last two months causes deep concern and anxiety to
Malaysia. Only a few weeks ago, the Council met to consider the armed intervention in Kampuchea. The position of
my Government at that meeting was made very clear. It is
unfortunate that since that meeting there has been no withdrawal of foreign troops. On the contrary, fighting continues unabated and with greater intensity, affecting seriously
the peace and stability of the South-East Asian region. The
situation, instead of improving, has now taken a turn for the
worse with the armed conflict between China and Viet
Nam, which we view with dismay and alarm. There is no
need to emphasize the gravity of this latest development,
particularly as the threat of outside big-Power involvement
looms frighteningly over us.
.
16. The Malaysian Government has consistently expressed
its rejection of any recourse to the use or threat of use of
force to settle disputes as well as any interference h the
internal affairs of another country. Such actions are contrary to the principles of peaceful coexistence and in violation of the Charter of the United Nations.

10. Faced with the prospect of a widening conflict in
. Indo-China which could engulf not only the region of
South-East Asia but the entire world, it is imperative that
means be found to put an end to the hostilities and to
resolve the outstanding issues peacefully. In this context I
should like to call attention to the statement made by Mr.
Mochtar Kusumaatmadja, Minister for Foreign A!Tairs of
Indonesia, in his capacity as Chairman of the ASEAN
Standing Committee, on the recent developments in IndoChina /S/Z3106J. In that statement the Indonesian Foreign
Minister, on behalf of the ASEAN countries, urgently
appealed to the conflicting parties to ceaseail hostilites and
urged that all foreign forces should be withdrawn from all
areas of conflict in Indo-China. The ASEAN countries
further appealed to the Powers outside the region to exercise
the utmost restraint and to refrain from any acts which
might lead to further escalation and a widening of the
conflict.
11. I should like to express the appreciation of my delegation to the representative of the United Kingdom for referring to the ASEAN statement as a possible basis for a draft
resolution. The ASEAN delegations would be pleased ifthe
Council wished to use the ASEAN statement for that purpose, and in that regard we should be happy to co-operate if
the Council so wishes. My delegation would also like to
thank the representative of Australia for his endorsement of
the ASEAN statement.

17. A threat to peace and stability in South-East Asia,
whatever its source, is a matter of direct concern to us. Our
region has been the scene of prolonged strife and warfare.
Peace is most precious to all of us. It is only in a stable and
harmonious environment that the States of the regiop can
effectively co-operate for our common prosperity and wellbeing. As contained in my previous statemeyt in the Council [211Othmeetins;‘. Malaysia remains strongly comtiitt6d
to the goals of regional co-operation and the establishment
of a zone of peace, freedom and neutrality in South-East
Asia. In the present con&t situation in the region,‘ bur
anxiety and distress is more acute, for all the par&s
involved are not pnly Malaysia’s good friends but also
neighbours with which we share the most cordi$,and

12. The purpose of our deliberations, in the view of my
delegation, should not be to try to put the blame of any one
party, for that can only lead to recriminations and make the
effort to find a solution more difficult. Our efforts rather
should be directed towards preventing the armed conflict in
Indo-China from further escalating into a larger conflagra2

friendly relations and with which we hone to sham ex&
rience m regional co-operation for the prosperity and wellbeing of our people.

concern for the peace and stability in Asia led my delegation
particularly to express a strong desire for the immediate and
total withdrawal of all foreign forces from Kampuchean
territory. Japan also strongly appealed to all the countries
concerned to use the utmost restraint and caution in dealing
with that situation so that it would not deteriorate further.
Similar views were expressed by many other countries,
members of the Council as well as non-members.

18. It is imperative that urgent action should be taken to
restore peace and stability in the region. To thii end, Malaysia and the other ASEAN countries-Indonesia, the Philip
pines, Thailand and Singapore-have jointly appealed to
the parties in conflict to cease all hostilities and urged that
allforeign forces should be withdrawn from all the areas of
conflict in Indo-China, from Viet Nam as well as from
Kampuchea. Our united and clear view on this grave matter
is reflected in the statement of the Chairman of the
ASEAN Standing Committee issued at Bangkok on 20
February [S/Z3106/. We most sincerely urge the parties in
conflict to stop causing further injury to themselves and
bring their disputes to the table for a peaceful and amicable
settlement, in the spirit of understanding and mutual
respect for each other’s independence, sovereignty and territorial integrity.

25. However, the situation in Kampuchea has asyet failed
to show any sign of improvement and the fighting there
rages on. Furthermore, a large-scale armed conflict has now
broken out between China and Viet Nam.
26. Japan strongly deplores the current situation in IndoChina and has profound misgivings that further deterioration of the situation would have an adverse effect on the
peace and stability not only of Asia but also of the world as
a whole. It was on the basis of this consideration that, on 22
February, we expressed a strong desire for the convening of
an urgent meeting of the Security Council. We believed that
it would be highly detrimental to the goals and objectives of
the United Nations if the Council, which the Charter invests
with primary responsibility for the maintenance of intemational peace and security, were to remain ineffective in
dealing with the deteriorating situation.

19. The possible escalation and widening of the conflict
involving outside Powers is also a matter of serious concern
to my delegation. The chance of such a dangerous and
dreadful development taking place must be prevented. It is
our fervent hope that all outside Powers will exercise the
utmost restraint and we urge them to refrain from any
action which may further escalate and enlarge the current
conflict.

27. Mr. Sonoda, the Minister for Foreign Affairs of
Japan, made the following statement on 18 February:

20. In conclusion, Mr. .President, I should like to express
on behalf of my delegation our profound appreciation to
you and the other members of the Council for affording us
the opportunity to participate in this crucial debate. It is
important that we should speak our mind on this grave
problem. We hope that the Security Council will be able to
take positive action to arrest the dangerous trend of a wider
escalation of the conflict by a call for an immediate cessation of hostilities, total withdrawal of foreign troops, restraint on the part of the parties in conflict both in
Kampuchea and Viet Nam, non-involvement by outside
Powers and the start of negotiations to settle the disputes
peacefully in accordance with the Charter of the United
Nations. In this regard, we welcome the offer of the good
oflices of the Secretary-General. It is our earnest hope that
this offer will be accepted by all the parties concerned.

“The Government of Japan expressed its deep regret
over the recent development along the Chinese and Vietnamese border. The Government of Japan had repeatedly appealed to the Governments of both China and
Viet Nam to settle the problems by peaceful means. It
had expressed deep concern that continuing tension
might escalate to a major military conflict. However, the
Government of Japan still retains a strong hope that
China and Viet Nam will come to settle their problems in
a peaceful way and that peace in Indochina can be
restored as soon as possible.”
28. In our pursuit of restoring peace in the whole area of
Indo-Chii,
we have asked the Government of Viet Nam to
contribute to a peaceful settlement through an immediate
cessation of hostilities and the withdrawal of all its forces
from Kampuchean territory. We have asked the Govemment of China to contribute to a peaceful settlement
through an immediate cessation of hostilities and the withdrawal of all its forces from Vietnamese territory. We have
asked the Government of the Soviet Union to exercise
caution and restraint for the sake of peace and stability in
Asia. In this connexion I should like to add that my Govemment fully supports the statement made on 20 February by
the Chairman of the ASEAN Standing Committee
[S/23206] appealing to all parties in conflict in Indo-China
immediately to cease all hostilities and to withdraw all
foreign forces.

21: The PRESIDENT: The next soeaker is the renresentative of Japan. I invite him to take a place at the Council
table and to make his statement.
22.. Mr. ABE (Japan): Mr. President, I should like to
express my thanks to you and, through you, to the other
members of the Security Council for allowing me to speak
on an issue which unequivocally bears vital importance for
the’maintenance of international peace and security. As we
earlier made it known that we for one supported vigorously
the convening of the Council [S/13212], we welcomed its
declslon to begin meeting the day before yesterday.
U..‘.‘, Mr. President, I should also like warmly to congratulate you on your assumption of the presidency of the Council for the month of February. I am sure that deliberations
as diicult as those currently under way can greatly benefit
from
,_.,I.the most capable direction of a man like yourself.

29. I should like to take this opportunity to appeal to all
the countries concerned to pay heed to the following two
points, and to express the fervent wish of my Government
that these points will, as the minimum requirement, be
incorporated in whatever type of action the Council may
eventually decide to take.

24:: :_)Members may recall that, when the Council discussed
the”.question of Kampuchea last January, Japan’s deep
3

30. Fit, all parties to the conflicts should immediately
cease all hostilities, all foreign forces should be withdrawn
from all the areas of conflict in Indo-China, and all parties
concerned should immediately initiate talks to settle their
conflicts peacefully, in accordance with the fundamental
principles of the Charter of the United Nations, particularly
those of non-interference in the internal affairs of another
cquntry and non-use of force. Secondly, all countries outside Indo-China, especially the big Powers, should exercise
the utmost caution and restraint so that the conflicts will not
be escalated and become a threat to the peace of the entire
world.

36. As the relevant facts that I have related are already
widely known to the public and nothing is concealed behind
them, I hope that they will suffice to clear up any erroneous
interpretation or misunderstanding.
37. The PRESIDENT: The next speaker is the representative of Hungary. I invite him to take a place at the Council
table and to make this statement.
38. Mr HOLLAI (Hungary): Mr. President, I wish to
thank you as well as the members of the Council for giving
us this opportunity to participate in these deliberations. I
am pleased to see you, a prominent representative of a
friendly country, in the highly important post of President
of the Council, and I am confident that under your guidance
this body will be able to fulfil its task in a most efficient
manner.

31. I should like to add that ‘my Government wholeheartedly welcomes the timely offer of good offices for a
peaceful solution made by the Secretary-General on 22
February. We hope that the parties involved will seriously
consider the possibility of making use of his offer.

39. The delegation of the Hungarian People’s Republic
takes the opportunity of this series of meetings of the Council to speak out on a subject that is profoundly disturbing
peace and stability in South-East Asia and in the whole
world. The convening of the Council is in fact very timely,
since the Council has to consider the situation in that part of
the world and its implications for international peace and
security.

32. It is the firm conviction of my Government that, in
view of the grave situation prevailing in Indo-China, it is
imperative that the United Nations should play a really
effective role in resolving this situation and that the Security
Council should do its utmost to restore peace and security
in the Indo-Chinese peninsula. I should therefore like to
reiterate Japan’s strong desire that the present deliberations
of the Council should result in the taking of appropriate
action along the lines I have just suggested, so that peace
and security can be restored in all areas of conflict at the
earliest possible moment.

40. The attention of the whole world is focused on the
events that have been taking place for more than a week,
and continue to take place even to&y, in the northern
region of the Socialist Republic of Viet Nam bordering the
People’s Republic of China. It was with sorrow and shock
that my country learned about the Chinese armed forces’
large-scale attack against Viet Nam along the entire
Vietnamese-Chinese border and their deep penetration into
the territory of that country. In an official statement issued
on 19 February /s/13202], the Government of the Hungarian People’s Republic expressed its deep indignation at the
Chinese aggression, which, needless to say, violates all the
norms of international law and the generally accepted rules
of international relations. The fact that it is a permanent
member of the Security Council, having special responsibilities for the maintenance of international peace and security,
that is committing such actions and trampling on the Charter of the United Nations only aggravates the situation and
makes that country’s behaviour all the more deplorable.
Such behaviour further exposes the big-Power ambitions of
China’s present leaders and raises new and disturbing questions about the whole general trend of Chinese policy.

33. Before concluding my statement I should like to comment on the following remark made yesterday in the Council by the representative of a Member State:
“It is necessary to stress the fact that the Peking
authorities launched the war of aggression against Viet
Nam after the signing of the Sinc+Japanese peace treaty
and the normalization of diplomatic relations with the
United States, and immediately after the return of Teng
Hsiao-ping from the United States and Japan, where
Teng publicly called for war against Viet Nam. Information has come to light showing that Washington and
Tokyo gave their consent, if not their encouragement, to
Peking in its aggression against Viet Nam.*‘[2ZZSrh meetthg, para. 104.1

34. I am quite confident that the overwhelming majority
of Member States are well aware that such a remark is
purely and simply against the facts, as far as my country is
concerned. Nevertheless, I should like to take this opportunity to let Members know the relevant facts once again.

41. It is primarily the countries of the region where China
lies, and also the group of States towards which the People’s
Republic of China is making continuous advances, that
should reflect on the true meaning and possible implications
of such behaviour by a vast country which claims to be the
defender and protector of the small and weak countries of
the world in the face of super-Powers* so-called aggressive
and hegemonistic endeavours. They should ponder the
consequences of indulging in activities which would, in one
way or another, bind them to ambitions in disharmony with
their own national interests and aspirations and which
would expose them, directly or indirectly, to threats stemming from irresponsible and false actions accompanied by
hypocritical and dishonest assertions.
(
42. But, beyond those countries, all of us-nearer to or
farther from the scene of the Chinese actions-should feel

35. First, the Government of Japan concluded the Treaty
of Peace and Friendship with the People’s Republic of
China with the fundamental aim of promoting peaceful and
, friendly relations between Japan and China, thus contributing to the furtherance of peace in Asia and in the world as
well. Secondly, when the Deputy Prime Minister of the
People’s Republic of China visited Japan on his way home
from the United States, the Prime Minister of Japan, Mr.
Ohira, after indicating Japan’s grave concern over the
mounting tension between China and Viet Nam, appealed
to him to make further efforts towards a peaceful solution
and to exercise the utmost caution and self-restraint in
dealing with the current situation. On that occasion, the
same appeal was made to the Minister for Foreign Affairs of
China by our Minister for Foreign Affairs.
4

immediate halting of the invasion and an unconditional
condemnation of it by the international community are the
only way to restore peace to that long-suffering region of the
world and to provide a chance for the peaceful work so
necessary for the emergence of stable, prosperous, peaceloving countries in that area.

concerned because in the world of today the risks of proliferation are certain and they can lead to unforeseeable consequences.
43. It is sign&ant that the aggressive activities undertaken by the present rulers of China have met with general
disapproval and condemnation. No country in this worldI repeat: no country in this world-has taken a stand in
support of those activities. Even the Chinese people themselves have been deprived of the true information and have
been kept ignorant by the rulers about the attack perpetrated against Viet Nam-although
today we have seen in
the newspapers that the Chinese people are getting a bit of
information. China’s aggressive a&vita are in flagrant
contradiction with the general tendency of international
life, with the efforts aimed at ensuring peaceful coexistence
and consolidating international detente.

47. The PRESIDENT: The next speaker is the representative of the German Democratic Republic. I invite him to
take a place at the Council table and to make a statement.
48. Mr. FLORIN (German Democratic Republic) (interpretation from Russian): Mr. President, permit me at the
outset to congratulate you on your assumption of the
important post of President of the Security Council for this
month and to express my conviction that under your skilful
leadership the discussion of the complex matters involved
will be successful.

44. In the light of these events, we cannot help recalling
the very recent visits by leaders of China to various countries, during which they blusteringly made overt and undisguised threats against Viet Nam-widely public&d by the
international press-about “bloody lessons to be taught”,
at the expense of that country. One may wonder who has
author&d China to play the role of international policeman and reward or punish according to its own judgements
and conceptions? We believe that Govenments, on similar
occasions, should make the best use of their abilities to
make positive contributions to the maintenance of international peace and security and to the dissuasion of potential
bellicose countries from unleashing armed conflicts.

49. I should like to thank you and the members of the
Council for the opportunity afforded me to set forth the
views of the Government of the German Democratic
Republic.
50. The people of the German Democratic Republic
learned with the most profound indignation the news of the
monstrous armed attack by China against the Socialist
Republic of Viet Nam. On behalf of the people of the
German Democratic Republic, the Central Committee of
the Socialist Unity Party of Germany, the Council of State
and the Council of Ministers of the German Democratic
Republic have issued a vigorous protest against this act of
aggression by China. We have seen a similar reaction
throughout the world. One could not expect anything else.

45. In this connexion, it is appropriate to emphasixe the
paramount and in fact, in our opinion, the vital importance
of the development of relations between the Soviet Union
and the United States of America. It is as obvious as can be
that ensuring peaceful and secure conditions in the world is
largely dependent on the evolution of competitive as well as
co-operative relations between these two States. All of us
have to take into account these present-day realities. Our
firm belief is that this two-sidedness of their relations should
in no way hinder them from working together for a peaceful
future on this earth. Neither side should forget that it needs
the comprehension and cooperation of the other to thwart
challenges endangering regional and international peace..
We Hungarians have pledged ourselves to do our utmost
and to make use of all our possibilities to contribute to the
improvement and widening of these relations, as well as the
relations among all the members of the international
community.

5 1. On 17 February, in flagrant violation of the Charter of
the United Nations, there began an unprovoked act of
armed aggression against a Member of the United Nations
that had been prepared long beforehand. The aggressor
itself confirms the violation of the frontier of the sovereign
Socialist Republic of Viet Nam. In actual fact the aggressor
has not denied its occupation of Vietnamese territory. The
statement of the representative of China in the Council
demonstrates that Peking intends to continue its aggression.
The Peking leadership, in order to justify its aggression, has
been attempting to mislead world public opinion by spreading rumours to the effect that the Socialist Republic of Viet
Nam attacked the huge country of China, which has a
population of many millions. It is clear, however, that this
treacherous war against the Vietnamese people is something that cannot be justified.

46. My country and its people express deep solidarity with
the Government and the people of Viet Nam and assure
them of our full support in the face of this indescribable
aggression by China. Fraternal and comradely feelings
towards Viet Nam and a readiness to help it are deeply
rooted in Hungarian public opinion. This sentiment found
a true reflection in the way Hungarian society reacted
throughout the country to the news of the Chinese armed
attack on Viet Nam. We shall continue, as in the past, to be
on the side of the Vietnamese people in its struggle for the
defence of the sovereignty and territorial integrity of its
homeland. We demand that the People’s Republic of China
should unconditionally cease its aggression and withdraw
its forces without delay from Vietnamese territory. China
must bear full responsibility for all the consequences arising
from its blatant encroachment on Vietnamese land. The

52. That these armed actions on the part of China against
the Socialist Republic of Viet Nam are acts of aggression is
not open to doubt. The definition of aggression adopted by
the United Nations character&s as clear acts of aggression
military actions such as those ordered by the Peking leadership against the independence, sovereignty and national
integrity of the Vietnamese State.
53. One does not have to look very far to find the goals of
and reasons for the aggression.The unprecedented invasion
by China of the Socialist Republic of Viet Nam is a continuation of the policy of blackmail and pressure that the
Peking leadership has been pursuing for a number of years
now with regard to South-East Asia as a whole and with
regard to Viet Nam in particular. The harassment and
5

l

intervention in internal affairs and the subversive activity
have been carried out in order to divert Viet Nam from the
course it has itself chosen and to subject it to China’s own
hegemonistic ambitions. Vietnamese territory had been
seized, and an economic embargo has been organized. Chinese living in Viet Nam have been incited by means of
chauvinistic slogans to undertake subversive activities
against the power of the people. All these actions have been
accompanied by increasing armed provocations on the
Chinese-Vietnamese border.
-~-

neighbour to the north has always been negative. Now we
know why: the Peking leadership wants the capitulation of
the Socialist Republic of Viet Nam to the demands of the
great-Power chauviniits. But this is something they really
cannot count on. Their aggression against the Socialist
Republic of Viet Nam will be defeated.
60. As far as the German Democratic Republic is concerned, its highest representatives have officially assured the
brother nation of Viet Nam of our active solidarity.

54. The Deputy Prime Minister of China, Mr. Teng
Hsiao-ping, when a guest of the United States, loudly
declared that, as he put it, the Socialist Republic of Viet
Nam had to be “taught a lesson”. Even that statement in
itself is an expression of a hegemonistic policy that denies
the right of other States, particularly smaller States, to an
independent position. We cannot fail to seein this a certain
kind of contempt for smaller States from the standpoint of
great-Power chauvinism.

61. The aggression of China against the Socialist Republic
of Viet Nam is a crime against international peace and
security. It is a defiance of all peace-loving peoples. The
Security Council must unequivocally condemn this aggression and those responsible for it and demand the immediate
and unconditional cessation of aggression and the withdrawal without any reservations of Chinese troops from the
territory of the Socialist Republic of Viet Nam. It would
also be desirable to call upon all States Members of the
United Nations to halt all arms supplies to China and
transfer of any technology that might be used for military
purposes. It is also just to demand that the aggressor should
make full reparation for the material damages caused to the
Socialist Republic of Viet Nam.

55. In other words, since the imperialist colonialists were
forced to withdraw from South-East Asia, a new policeman
has emerged in the region, brandishing his whip. If the
Governments of neighbouring peace-loving countries do
not dance to his tune, measures will be taken to“teachthem
a lesson*‘, including the use of military technological means,
bombs and grenades, of which women and children alike
will become victims.

58. The treacherous attack by China on the Socialist
Republic of Viet Nam is particularly abominable for
another reason, namely, that in the case of the Vietnamese
people we are talking about a people that has for decades
been forced to light for and to defend its national freedom
and independence, making sacrifices and enduring privation. The wounds of the last war against foreign intervention have hardly had time to heal. The destruction wrought
by years of warfare and the consequences of natural disasters have not had time to be repaired, and yet this heroic
people has once again been forced to take up arms to defend
its freedom, this time against the followers of .the Chinese
feudal lords.

62. The statements which have been addressed to both
sides in equal measure and making equal demands-that is,
the statements that have placed the aggressor and the victim
of aggression on the same footing-obscure the true picture, and this can only serve the interests of the aggressor.
What we need now is a decisive rebuff to China’s aggression. We should not allow room for manoeuvres that are
misleading; and it is misleading when attempts are made to
link two radically different problems, in other words, to
organize something in the nature of an imperialistic deal.
With regard to Kampuchea, everyone knows that following
its liberation a r&me wasset up which on instructions from
Peking carried out something along the lines of the “Chinese cultural revolution” and doomed the people of Kampuchea to destruction. I here venture to remind members of
the words of Sihanouk himself when he was addressing the
international press and talking about the crimes of the Pol
Pot r&ime. That r&ime, once again on instructions from
China, violated the frontier of the Socialist Republic ofViet
Nam, rejected talks and caused armed border conflicts. As a
result there was a national uprising, and in the course of a
few days the anti-people r&me of Pol Pot was overthrown
and new State bodies were set up in its place. The People’s
Republic of Kampuchea was proclaimed, and it embarked
upon a programme of peaceful democratic development
with a socialist orientation. So it was possible to talk of a
new situation that promised peace and stability in that
region of Indo-China. Once there wasa promise of stability,
the Peking leadership began its aggression against the
Socialist Republic of Viet Nam-because such developments
were thwarting their hegemonistic plans, impeding their
policy of provoking division among the peoples of IndoChina and provoking international conflicts.

59. The Vietnamese people over and over again have
stated their wish to live in peace and security and to build a
new life. The Government of the Socialist Republic of Viet
Nam has repeatedly proposed to clarify and resolve the
outstanding questions of its relations with the People’s
Republic of China by means of talks. But the answer of the

63. As a result of their aggression, at one fell swoop the
policy of today’s leadership of China wasexposed. Wehave
repeatedly had occasion to point out that the policy of Mr.
Teng Hsiao-ping is aimed at the unleashing of war. He and
those around him have themselves made it absolutelyclear
that the danger to peace and security comes from Peking.

56. If the States Members of the Organization, which was
founded for the preservation of peace throughout the world
and international security, permit such practices in intemational relations, then the danger of a new world war will be
increased many times over.
57. The aemessor is a oermanent member of the Securitv
Council. As%e know, thi permanent members of the Cou&
cil bear particular responsibility for the maintenance of
international peace and security. If such a permanent
member of the Council takes it upon itself brazenly to
combine the roles of prosecutor, judge, jury and executioner, and at its own whim and discretion to attack other
States, then the cause of peace throughout the world will be
seriously threatened. This is something to which we must
give the proper attention in the course of our discussion.

.6

-

64. It may be that individual imperialist politicians believe
that the aggession of hegemonistic China against socialist
Viet Nam servesthe class interests of imperialism. So particular imperialistic circles hasten to limit economic relations
with the Socialist Republic of Viet Nam while increasing
military supplies to the Chinese aggressor. It is typical that
four countries members of NATO have imposed on this
session of the Security Council a nebulous agenda,
obviously in order to enable the aggressor to abuse this
forum, this lofty organ, by its attempts to divert attention
from its own repugnant aggression.

an extremely able,knoWledgeable and skilful diplomat. We
are therefore confident that you will be able to provide the
Council with the wise and courageous leadership which it so
clearly needs during this difficult month of February.
71. The peace, security and stability of the region of
South-East Asia, and indeed of the world, is being threatened by the armed conflicts taking place between Democratic Kampuchea and Viet Nam and between China and
Viet Nam. The two wars have already in&ted death and
destruction and untold suffering on the civilian populations
of the countries involved. Unless arrested, these wars will
not only escalate in intensity ‘but also threaten to involve
other Powers in the conflicts. It is for these reasons that my
Government has given its support to efforts to convene an
urgent meeting of the Council.

65. There is no doubt that China’s aggression is not in the
interest of the peoples, whether they be Vietnamese, Chinese or any other. Right-thinking politicians
of the imperialistic world will not forget at this time that there have been
instances in history when a war policy aimed at a socialist
State turned out to be doom-laden for the peoples of the
capitalist countries too.

72. There are two armed conflicts taking place concurrently. The first is the armed conflict taking place in the
territory of Democratic Kampuchea between Vietnamese
forces and forces loyal to the Government of Democratic
Kampuchea. The second is the armed conflict taking place
in the territory of Viet Nam between Chinese and Vietnamese forces. The two conflicts are, in our view, related. The
conflict between China and Viet Nam is, at least in part, a
product of Viet Nam’s armed intervention against and
occupation of Demdcratic Kampuchea.

66. For the non-aligned States, China’s aggression against
the Socialist Republic of Viet Nam could serve as a serious
warning. With its present leadership, China is not a develop
ing country that is in favour of peace and international
security and a just new world order. Its leaders are aiming at
goals that are in conflict with the principles enshrined in
documents of the non-aligned movement.

73. At the ‘outset, I should like to state the principles
which govern our approach. First, I wish to recall that all
Member States are under an obligation to refrain in their
international relations from the threat or use of force.
Secondly, they are under an obligation to settle their disputes by peaceful means. Thirdly, they are obliged to
respect the principle of non-interference in the internal
affairs of other States. The wars in Kampuchea and Viet
Nam have arisen because the parties concerned have violated some or all of those principles.

67. The General Secretary of the Central Committee of
the Socialist Unity Party of Germany and Chairman of the
Council of State of the German Democratic Republic,
Erich Honecker, said in his speech of 17 February in the
capital of the People’s Republic of Angola, Luanda:
“This shameful act of Chinese aggression is fresh evidence that the Peking leadership, in its hostile policy
towards the Soviet Union and other socialist countries, is
pursuing goals that are entirely consonant with the goals
of the most aggressive imperialist forces. The support for
the Camp David deal, the repeated demands of Peking
for a build-up of armaments on the part of NATO, the
unbridled speeches of incitement made by Teng Hsiao.ping in the United States against the Soviet Union and
the cowardly attack by China against the Vietnamese
people should all serve as sufficient grounds to encourage everyone to curb the aggressor.”

74. I turn first to the armed conflict taking place in the
northern part of Viet Nam between Chinese and Vietnamese forces. That conflict began on 17 February 1979. In a
statement issued by the Xinhua News Agency on that same
day [s/13094], the Chinese Government explained that its
military operation against Viet Nam was a counter-attack
against numerous incidents of armed provocations and the
killing of Chinese frontier guards and inhabitants by the
Vietnamese. The Chinese Government stated that it did not
want a single inch of Vietnamese territory and that after
counter-attacking the Vietnamese, the Chinese forces
would withdraw to the Chinese side of the border. In his
message of 17 February [s/13095] addressed to the President of the Security Council, the Deputy Prime Minister
and Minister for Foreign Affairs ofthe Socialist Republic of
Viet Nam, Mr. Nguyen Duy Trinh, accused the Chinese of
waging a war of aggression against Viet Nam.

68. The responsibility for the aggression against the
Socialist Republic of Viet Nam and its consequences lies
wholly and fully with China under its present leadership.
The statement by its Vietnamese friends on the question of
talks has met with the total understanding of the delegation
of the German Democratic Republic. It believes that everything possible must be done to put an end to the aggression
of China against the Socialist Republic of Viet Nam, to
bring about the withdrawal of Chinese troops from Vietnamese territory and to make the People’s Republic of China
unswervingly respect the independence, sovereignty and
territorial integrity of the Socialist Republic of Viet Nam.

75. It is difficult to ascertain the truth of the allegations
and counter-allegations made by China and Viet Nam concerning various incidents along their border. But whatever
the truth of the matter and whatever the merits of the case
may be, they do not, in the view of my Government, justify
the action of the Government of the People’s Republic of
China in launching a military attack against Viet Nam. If
the Vietnamese have perpetrated border incursions and
have killed Chinese frontier guards and other inhabitants,
as alleged by China, the proper thing would have been for

69. The PRESIDENT: The next speaker is the representative of Singapore. I invite him to take a seat at the Council
table and to make his statement.
70. Mr. KOH (Singapore): Mr. President, like your imma
diate,predecessor, Ambassador Donald Mills of Jamaica,
you have the reputation amongst your colleagues of being
.
7

China to bring its complaint to the Security Council. China
should not have taken the law into its own hands. If countries, especially those which are big and militarily powerful,
take the law into their own hands and mete out punishment
to other countries, then the world is not safe for small and
militarily weak countries. For these reasons, we cannot
support the Chinese action which is in clear violation of the
principles of international law and of the Charter of the
United Nations. In line with the ASEAN statement of 20
February (s/IJlOfl, we call for an immediate cessation of
hostilities. We call upon China to withdraw its forces from
the territory of Viet Nam. We call upon the Governments of
China and Viet Nam to enter into negotiations in order to
settle their differences peacefully.. In this respect we commend the offer of his good offices made by the SecretaryGeneral, to those two Governments. Finally, we appeal to
Powers outside the region to exercise restraint and not to
escalate the present conflict.

achieved by convening a new international conference on
Kampuchea, my Government will support such an initiative.
.
79. The peace, security and stability of the region of
South-East Asia are being threatened by an intensifying
rivalry between two of the great PowersThis rivalry has
fanned the flames of war in both Kampuchea and Viet
Nam. Unless checked, the flames of war could spread to
other areas. We, who live in the region of South-East Asia,
must resist this danger. We must not allow ourselves lo
become pawns in the rivalry between the great Powers. We
should learn to live with one another in peace and in amity.
If we have differences, let us settle our differences by peaceful means, not by resort to force. Let us together make of
South-East Asia a zone of peace, of freedom and of
neutrality.
80. The PRESIDENT: The next speaker is the representative of the Philippines. I invite him to take a place at the
Council table and to make his statement.

76. I shall turn next to examine the situation in Democratic Kampuchea. When I spoke to the Council on 13
January /2ZZOlh meeting,?, I said the evidence was irrefutable that the Government of the Socialist Republic of Viet
Nam had sent its armed forces across an international
border into Democratic Kampuchea and had intervened in
the internal affairs of that country. I deplored the armed
intervention by Viet Nam in the internal atfairs of Democratic Kampuchea, which violated the latter’s sovereignty,
independence and territorial integrity. I urged the Council
to reaffirm the sovereign right of the people of Democratic
Kampuchea to determine their future by themselves free
from interference by outside Powers. I also urged the Council to call for the immediate and total withdrawal of Vietnamese forces from the territory of Democratic Kampuchea.

81. Mr. YANG0 (Philippines): Mr. President, allow me
to congratulate you on your assumption of the presidency
of the Security Council for the month of February. With
your well-known diplomatic skill and experience in the
work of the Council, I do not hesitate to say that we can all
look forward to a positive result of the deliberations in
which the Council is now engaged. And I am happy at this
opportunity to refer to the recent agreement between our
two countries to establish diplomatic relations at ambassadorial level.
82. I also wish to felicitate Ambassador Donald Mills of
Jamaica for creditably presiding over the work of the Council during the preceding month, a month in which my
delegation was able to make a modest contribution.

77. More than a month has passed since I spoke to the
Council. Has the situation changed for the better? Has Viet
Nam withdrawn or begun to withdraw its forces from
Democratic Kampuchea? The answers to both questions
are unfortunately in the negative. Viet Nam has not withdrawn its armed forces from Democratic Kampuchea. On
the contrary, there is evidence to suggest that Viet Nam has
introduced additional troops into Democratic Kampuchea.
Hostilities between the forces of Viet Nam and Democratic
Kampuchea continue and are taking place in various parts
of the country. In addition, on 18 February, the Govemment of Viet Nam concluded a Treaty of Peace, Friendship
and Co-operation (s/13101’ with the government of the
so-called People’s Republic of Kampuchea. This shows that
Viet Nam intends to perpetuate its occupation of Kampuchea and is using that treaty as a means of legitimizing its
military presence there. The conclusion is therefore inescap
able that Democratic Kampuchea continues to be a country
occupied by the Vietnamese army and that the so-called
government of the People’s Republic of Kampuchea headed
by Heng Samrin is a government imposed by the Vietnamese on the people of Democratic Kampuchea.

83. Through you, Mr. President, I wish to express the
sincere appreciation of my delegation to all the members of
the Council for allowing us to participate in the present
deliberations.
84. After a short span of about five weeks the Council is
once again confronted with a tense situation in South-East
Asia. As before, we are assembled to consider the peace,
security and stability of the area. The Philippines,’ like
Indonesia, Malaysia, Singapore and Thailand, as well as
other countries in our region, cannot help but be gravely
concerned at the recent turn of events in our part of the
world. When we addressed the Council in the middle of
January last f21ZZfh meetin&‘, we drew attention to the
armed intervention by a State against the independence,
sovereignty and territorial integrity of Kampuchea. On that
occasion we expressed the firm conviction that non-interference in the domestic affairs of any State was the basis of
international law and the very embodiment of the Charter
of the United Nations and that disputes should be resolved
in accordance with the Charter through peaceful means. We
then voiced a fervent appeal for a return to rational discourse among nations, in particular a return to the principle
of peaceful coexistence, which in essenceembodies respect
for the sovereignty and territorial integrity of all nations; the
peaceful settlement of issues, the renunciation of the use or
threat of force in the solution of conflicts and, above all,
mutual respect, equality and understanding among nations.
Today we maintain our firm conviction that the prinlziples
we have just cited should serve as the guiding light.inthe
deliberations of the Council.
...:1,

78. The issue in Democratic Kampuchea is clear. Viet
Nam has no right to send its armed forces into Democratic
Kampuchea and to impose a regime on that country. The
Security Council must therefore renew its demand for the’
withdrawal of Vietnamese forces from Democratic Kampuchea. Let the people of that country choose their own
government. Let Kampuchea regain its sovereignty, independence and territorial integrity. Let it live in peace and in
amity with all its neighbours. If these objectives can be
8

85. The present situation in Indo-China is cause for great
alarm not only in South-East Asia but also in other parts of
the world. In view of our deep concern, my delegation
extends its full support to the statement issued at Bangkok
on 20 February by the current Chairman of the ASEAN
Standing Committee, the Minister for Foreign Affairs of
Indonesia [S/Z3lMj. This statement voices grave concern
and anxiety about the fact that the situation in the region to
which ASEAN belongs has seriously deteriorated. In the
view of my delegation, that situation has become much
worse and has reached a very dangerous point. In view of
these circumstances, the ASEAN countries, which are
endeavouring to create a zone of peace, freedom and neutrality in their area, cannot but reiterate their firm commitment to the principle of peaceful coexistance, to the Charter
of the United Nations and the accepted principles of international law. Therefore, in order toavoid further disruption
of peace and stability in the South-East Asia region, they
urgently appeal to the conflicting parties to cease all hostilities and urge that all foreign forces should be withdrawn
from all the areas of conflict. Furthermore, the ASEAN
countries earnestly appeal to Powers outside the region to
exercise the utmost restraint and to refrain from any acts
which might lead not only to a further escalation of the
conflict but also to an expansion of the area of controvers\

matic skills and long experience in United Nations affairs,
the work of the Council under your leadership will be ably
guided towards a successful conclusion. I should also like to
take this opportunity to congratulate Ambassador Mills,
the outgoing President of the Council, for a job well done
the last month. I wish also to express to you and, through
you, to all the other members of the Council our thanks and
appreciation for allowing us to participate in the current
debate.
92. In keeping with Thailand’s firm commitment to the
principles of peaceful coexistance and the peaceful settlement of international disputes in accordance with the Charter of the United Nations and the accepted principles of
international law, my delegation has fully supported the
initiatives to convene without delay meetings of the Council
to consider and find peaceful solutions to the growing
conflicts in Indo-China.
93. The fact that violence has begotten more violence is
both tragic and alarming. This vicious circle must be broken
quickly, for violence and conflict might otherwise spread
even further, with most serious consequences for us all.
94. My delegation has requested to be allowed to take part
in the deliberations of this august Council for the second
time in five weeks, because the item at present before the
Council is one of special interest and particular concern to
Thailand, a country bordering on or near to the scenesof
armed conflict. It is also a known fact that my country
entertains close and cordial relations with all the States
involved and has throughout maintained strict neutrality.
We should like once more to appeal to ail concerned to
refrain from the use of force and to settle their differences by
peaceful means.

86. We welcome the current deliberations of the Security
Cti,unr;il on the situ,.ion in South-East Asia. Had the Council not met at this time, its image would have been seriously
impaired as the guardian of international peace and security. But, having decided to meet, the Council can now show
to the world that it is conscious of its grave responsibility
under the provisions of the Charter. The challenge of that
responsibility should, however, be met swiftly and purposefully in the present situation, in order to put a stop to the
mounting friction and growing tension in that part of the
world, It is therefore the fervent hope of my delegation that
the Council will arrive at a resolution which will be satisfactory to the parties in the conflict and effectively contribute
to peace, security and stability in the areas of conflict.

95. Regrettably the Council was unable in mid-January
this year to adopt the draft resolution submitted by the
seven non-aligned members [S/23027] calling upon all foreign forces involved in the Kampuchean conflict to observe
scrupulously an immediate cease-tire, to put an end to
hostilities and to withdraw forthwith from that country.
Since then, growing tensions and frictions in and around the
region wherein we also live have resulted in a further escalation and widening of the conflict. Both conflicts pose a
grave threat to the peace and security of South-East Asia
and indeed of the world and are matters of deepest concern
to my Government.

87. My delegation is encouraged by the offer made by one
of the parties to the conflict to negotiate, which, we hope,
will eventually be reciprocated by the other parties. The
offer of good offices made ’ by the Secretary-General is
indeed a step in the right direction.
88. In conclusion, I wish to say my delegation is ever ready
and willing to help in any way it can in the endeavours of
this august body at a solution of the present crisis, in order
to uphold independence, sovereignty and territorial integrity in all the areas of con&t in Indochina.

96. Our partners in ASEAN-Indonesia,
Malaysia, the
Philippines and Singapore-fully share our grave concern.
Consequently, ASEAN has once again demonstrated its
unity and solidarity and has expressed its common view on
this matter in the statement issued on 20 February at Bangkok by the Foreign Minister of Indonesia in his capacity as
the current Chairman of the ASEAN Standing Committee

89. The PRESIDENT: .I thank the representative of the
Philippines for the kind words he addressed to me. I too
respond with happiness to the establishment of diplomatic
relations between our two countries.

[s/13106-.

90. ‘The next speaker is the representative of Thailand, I
invitehim to take a place at the Council table and to make
his statement.

97. It is my delegation’s earnest hope that, in order to
avoid further disruption of the peace and stability in SouthEast Asia, the Council will be able to find a solution in the
form of a resolution which would, first, affirm full respect
for the sovereignty, political independence and territorial
‘integrity of all the States involved; secondly, urge the parties
in conflict to cease all hostilities and exercise maximum
restraint; thirdly, call for total withdrawal of all foreign
forces from all areas of contlict in Indochina;
and,

91. Mr. GUNA-KASEM
(Thailand): Mr. President, as an
Asian I should like to add to those of the speakers who have
.preceded me my warm congratulations to you on your
assumption of the presidency of the Security Council for the
month of February. I am confident that, with your diplo9

fourthly, appeal to the Powers outside the region to exercise
the utmost restraint and refrain from any act which may
lead to a further escalation and widening of the present
conflict.

The whole country is literally submerged by spontaneous
rallies and protest meetings, at which the people are condemning the Chinese aggression and expressing their total
‘support for the just struggle and legitimate self-defence of
the Vietnamese people. The National Assembly, that is, the
Bulgarian Parliament, and all political and mass organizations have come out with declarations condeming the chinese aggression. The Bulgarian Government has issued a
statement which has been circulated as document S/131 10.
In that statement we read, inter alia:

98. My delegation welcomes and commends the Secretary-General’s offer of good offices. We urge the parties
involved to accept this timely offer, in the search for a
peaceful solution.
99. Thailand will support any measure which the Council
may deem appropriate in order to put an end to these armed
conflicts and to provide ways and means for the parties
involved to disengage in the shortest possible time in
response to the call from the Council.

“In unleashing the aggressive war against the Socialist
Republic of Viet Nam, the Chinese leadership have
proved that they have turned China into a striking-force
of the most reactionary imperialist circles, a real threat to
international peace and security.

100. The PRESIDENT: The next speaker is the representative of Bulgaria. I invite him to take a place at theCouncil
table and to make his statement.

“The Government of the People’s Republic of Bulgaria has sharply condemned the adventurist aggressive
,actions of China against the Socialist Republic of Viet
Nam and joined the appeal by world public opinion for
immediate cessation of the aggression and for withdrawal of all Chinese troops from Viet Nam’s territory.

101. Mr. KOSTOV (Bulgaria): Mr. President, I would, at
the outset, express to you and the members of the Council
my gratitude for giving my delegation the opportunity to
take part in the Council’s deliberations. I should like also to
take thii opportunity to extend to you the warmest and
most sincere congratulations of my delegation on your
accession to the presidency of the Council for the month of
February, when the Council is called upon to discuss and
take decisions on highly important matters. In paying a
tribute to you for your great diplomatic skill, prestige and
profound experience in United Nations affairs, qualities
which are appreciated by all in the Organization, I should
like also to stress the satisfaction we feel at seeing as President of this body the representative of a country with which
Bulgaria has traditionally enjoyed friendly relations.

“We are deeply convinced that, as in the past, when
the Vietnamese people successfully defeated ,the foreign
intervention, its just struggle against the Chinese aggression will now in the present be crowned by total success.
A guarantee of that is the full support of the Soviet
Union, of the other socialist countriesand all progressive
and peace-loving forces throughout the world.
“Our Vietnamese brothem, can rely on the complete
fraternal solidarity of the Bulgarian people. As in the
past, the Government of the People’s Republic of Bulga;
ria and the entire Bulgarian people now resolutely sup
port the Socialist Republic of Viet Nam and the
Vietnamese people in their just struggle against the Chinese aggression, for the defence of their, independence
and sovereignty, for guaranteeing peace and security in
South-East Asia and in the whole world.”

102. For the ninth day in a row we have been witnessing
the continuance of the war of aggression unleashed by
China-a permanent member of the Security Councilagainst a sovereign and independent State, the Socialist
Republic of Viet Nam. A new conflagration has been
kindled, threatening world peace and security. In my delegation’s view, that is the only question which, for the
moment, deserves to be discussed in this body.

106. In perfect compliance with the traditions of aggressors and conquerors, the rulers in Peking are uow attempting to present their acts as actions in defence of China’s
border, as legitimate &defence, and even, odd though it
may sound, as actions in the interest of the Vietnamese
people. They even have the impudence to state that they
started the war because they cherished the friendship
between the Chinese and Vietnamese peoples. Such brazen
talk may well be exerting some influence over certain parts
of China’s population, which lives, as a matter of fact, under
a tight political lid, totally isolated from the test of the
world. World public opinion, however, and those who have
even a slight knowledge of history cannot be deceived. For
in fact the acts of China’s rulers are not different inmbstance from the well-known, and for that matter well-worn,
methods to which aggressors of the near and distant past
have resorted.
.,-

103. From the point of view of facts, the matter is starkly
obvious: On 17 February, Chinese troops crossed the SinoVietnamese border and launched a massive offensive, an
unprovoked attack against the border forces of the Socialist
Republic of Viet Nam, penetrating deeply into Vietnamese
territory, causing great loss of life and inflicting severe
material damage on its people. By committing more and
more troops and weaponry to the conflict, the Chinese side
has embarked on military operations on a wide front.
104. From the political and legal point of view, there is at
hand a classic example of direct and overt armed aggression
against a neighbouring country, aggression which is dangerous to peace not only in the region of South-East Asia but
also on a global scale. China’s actions constitute a gross
violation of the Charter of the United Nations and of
fundamental principles of international law. These actions
establish the political, moral, international and legal responsibility of the Chinese leadership.
.

107. The truth lies elsewhere. The Chinese aggression is
the result of long-standing ideological, political and military
preparation. Even for laymen in history it is perfectly clear
that the Chinese troops are now following in the steps&the
Chinese mandarins who for centuries oppressed the Vietnamese people, using even the same roads and basic direction
for their invasion.
I.-,I

105. The Bulgarian people received the news about the
Chinese aggression with feelings of profound indignation.
10

113. fin the course ofthecurrent debate, we have listened
to statements claiming to be neutral, even-handed, and so
forth. owever, what does it mean to be neutral when an
overt P d flagrant war of aggression is being conducted,
putting world peace to a serious test? How strange, indeed,
is the 1neutrality which in fact is encouragement to the
aggressor. It recalls the historic parallel of the well-known
policy of the “Munich plot”. When one hears some people
in this chamber speaking with an equal degree of concern
about the use of force by the people of Kampuchea itself in
bringing down the genocidal regime in Kampuchea and
about the direct armed aggression of China against Viet
Nam, one cannot escape the question whether thii is a case
of political simplicity or an attempt to reap political advantage for selfish interests. The latter is much more probable.

108. The great-Power chauvinism and the aggressive
ambitions of former Chinese emperors have not simply
been inherited by the present rulers of Peking. Today they
have been amalgamated and absorbed by Maoism, assuming appalling proportions and underlying the course of the
Maoist foreign policy of world domination. That course
and its political ramifications are nowadays a real threat to
world peace and security. Today it has become perfectly
clear that the liberation of South Viet Nam in 1975 and the
reunification of the country were a serious blow to the
Maoist ieadership in China, an obstacle to their expansionist designs in South-East Asia.
109. To the appeals of the Government of the Socialist
Republic of Viet Nam for a peaceful solution of contentious
issues, the Chinese Government responded by carrying out
a continuous build-up of troops along the Sine-Vietnamese
border, and in the end it chose a path fraught with extreme
danger both for world peace and for the Chinese people
itself.

114. It has already been said that the Chinese warmongers
have characterized their action as a punitive action, as the
administration of a bloody lesson. In this way they are
resurrecting in international practice doctrines which until
yesterday had been considered as belonging irreversibly to
the past. The Chinese nation itself knows from bitter experience their application in practice. It has more than once in
the past been taught a bloody lesson by colonialism and
imperialism. The Chinese leadership has assumed the role
of the former oppressors of the Chinese people vis-a-vis the
Vietnamese people, claiming also the role of policeman of
the world. Its unswerving policy course remains, as before, a
course leading towards a world war. Todor Zhivkov, First
Secretary of the Central Committee of the Bulgarian Communist Party, and President of the State Council, recently
stated.

110. In the past some have been tempted to seein Peking’s
militarist sloganeering just short-lived propaganda noise.
As events continue to unfold, however, the world is becoming increasingly aware of quite another sinister turn. The
psychological pounding inflicted upon the Chinese population in a chauvinistic spirit, the stirring-up of the so-called
danger from the north and the ill-grounded territorial
claims on almost all neighbouring countries are being
accompanied by frenzied militarization and full preparation for war. During Teng Hsiao-ping’s visit to the United
States, wide publicity wasgiven to the so-called new course
of the Chinese leadership, particularly the modemization
drive, that is, the advancement of the tasks of domestic
economic development so as to improve the livelihood of
the people in town and country and restore basic human
rights by expanding democracy and establishing a legal
system. Those .are indisputably noble purposes which
would do honour to any administration that cherishes the
interests of its people.

“The Chinese leadership not only do not -conceal but
have elevated to the rank of State policy the preparations
for war. This policy runs counter to the essence and
interests of socialism, to the interests of the Chinese
people themselves and of all the peoples of the world.**

111. Regrettably, however, very soon-even sooner than
expected-it became clear that thii new line was just
another gimmick aimed at nurturing the interest of world
public opinion and predisposing Western business circles in
China’s favour, at embellishing the image of China’s current leaders and deluding those quick of belief about the
true intentions of China. For, indeed, can it still be possible
seriously to talk about a drive towards modemization and
economic development when, barely two months after its
proclamation, a large-scale war is undertaken against a
neighbouring country, involving almost the entire military
machine of the aggressor7 Can there still be room for
serious talk about the promotion of human rights when the
very fact that Chinese troops are waging a full-scale war on
Vietnamese territory is kept from the Chinese people?

115. The Chinese militarists must be reminded that the
times of gunboat diplomacy and big-stick policy in relations
between States are long gone. There now exist in the world
forces capable of curbing the aggressor and preserving
peace.
.
116. We hope that the concern for peace will prevail in the
Security Council and that measures will be taken on the
basis of the draft resolution submitted by Czechoslovakia
and the Soviet Union [S/13117j’, to which my delegation
gives its strong support.
117. The PRESIDENT: The next speaker is the representative of Mongolia. I invite him to take a place at the
Council table and to make a statement.

112. The claims of the Chinese leadership about the
limited scope of their actions is yet another proof of the
tremendous gap existing between their words and their
deeds. We are directly witnessing how intensive are the
efforts-deployed here at the United Nations to spread the
version of the “limited nature” of the aggression, efforts
accompanied by promises to halt that aggression. It has by
now become quite clear that the *‘limited nature” version
was intended to lull the credulous and to afford time to the
aggressor for new actions on the territory of the Socialist
Republic of Viet Nam.

118. Mr. DASHTSEREN
(Mongolia): Mr. President,
first of all I should like to thank you and the other members
of the Council for giving me an opportunity to speak here
and to outline the position of my Government on the
question before the Council, namely, the question of the
Chinese aggression against the Socialist Republic of Viet
Nam. I also take this opportunity to extend to you our
sincere congratulations upon your assumption of the prcsidency of the Council for this month.
11

119. A month ago, my delegation warned that

invaders and aggressors have themselves always been
taught proper lessons.

“the mass concentration of Chinese troops and arms in
the Viet Nam-Chinese border areas . . . constitutes a
serious threat to the territorial integrity and independence of Viet Nam and also to peace and security in Asia
as a whole” [Zlllth meeting para. 601.

123. The large-scale armed attack launched by the Peking
regime against Viet Nam and against its territorial integrity,
national independence and freedom once again proves that
the adventurous policy of the present Chinese authorities
represents a real danger and threat to peace and intemational security. We regard the armed aggression committed
by China against the Vietnamese people as a natural result
of the great-Power chauvinistic and expansionist policy that
the Chinese ruling clique has pursued vi+a-vis all the neighbouring countries in general and those of South-East Asia
in particular. It is common knowledge that the Peking
leadership has long been resorting to such a reactionary
course, designed to trample on the independence and freedom of neighbouring countries and, if possible, to annex a
part or the whole of each of those countries and ultimately
to establish Chinese hegemony and domination in Asia and
throughout the world. The Mongolian people have constantly experienced the blackmail, pressure and aggressive
chauvinistic aspirations of the Peking leaders, who regard
the Mongolian People’s Republic as one of their “unliberated” territories and undertake numerous provocations at
our borders.

Today we arc witnessing a most wanton and predatory
aggression perpetrated by great-Power chauvinistic and
expansionist forces against the Socialist Republic of Viet
Nam, an integral part of the socialist community, one of the
leading members of the non-aligned movement and a fullfledged Member of the Organixation. The great Vietnamese
people, who are just recovering from a 30-year war against
imperialism and neo-colonialism, have once again become
the victim of a large-scale war of aggression, launched by
the Peking authorities along the entire Vietnamese-Chinese
border.
120. As is being reported in the world press, the Peking
regime is currently continuing its massive operation against
Viet Nam with a 200,000 strong army, bringing death and
destruction to the innocent Vietnamese people.
121. It is with great wrath and indignation that the Mongolian Government and people have learnt of such a fullscale and perfidious act of war launched by the ruling circles
in Peking against the heroic Vietnamese people, to whom
my country is bound by long-standing and traditional ties
of friendship and brotherhood in the family of the socialist
community. The Government and people of the Mongolian
People’s Republic immediately voiced their strong condemnation of and resolute protest against the treacherous act of
Chinese intervention against Viet Nam. This wave of strong
indignation and condemnation by our people of the latest
crime of the Chinese authorities is expressed in the statement of my Government which has been circulated as
document S/13100. As that statement emphasixes:

124. Another glaring example of the expansionist policy
followed by the Chinese leaders can be found in the fact that
the total number of provocations undertaken by China
during the last 10 years of Mao’s rule along its 20,000kilometre border exceeded the number of frontier conflicts
that occurred during that period throughout the world.
Such border wars provoked by Peking, the invasion of a
part of the Indian territory in the Himalayas and the armed
seizure of the Paracel Islands that belong to Viet Nam, as
well as China’s territorial claim to other neighbouring countries and its plan to use overseas Chinese to undermine
stability in the countries of South-East Asia are but a few of
the facts that shed light on Peking’s true aims and its
great-Power ambitions. The present aggression launched by
the Chinese leaders against Viet Nam is part and parcel of
the Chinese global policy of hegemonism. These and other
facts strikingly testify to the very origin of the present
massive aggression unleashed by the Chinese ruling circles
against Viet Nam as an attempt to intimidate and suppress
any forces opposing Chinese domination in South-East
Asia. This time the Peking leaders have undertaken an
armed intervention against Viet Nam because the valiant
people of Viet Nam and the Government of that country
have rejected the adventurous policy of the Chinese leaders,
and have thus constituted a mighty obstacle in the path of
Peking’s expansionism in South-East Asia.

“The Mongolian people and the Government of the
Mongolian People’s Republic resolutely condemn the
criminal aggression by the ruling circles in Peking against
the Socialist Republic of Viet Nam and demand the
immediate cessation of military operations and the withdrawal of their forces from the territory of Viet Nam
without delay.‘*
122. Comrade Batmunkh, Chairman of the Council of
Ministers of the Mongolian People’s Republic, stated at a
mass meeting on 23 February that, “by unleashing a war
against the Socialist Republic of Viet Nam, Peking’s rulers
perpetrated a vile crime against the world of socialism and
against all progressive mankind”. Indeed, the massive
attack launched by China against the Vietnamese people
represents a serious crime not only against Viet Nam and its
friends but also against all the progressive peoples of the
world who cherish independence and freedom as well as
international peace and security. The rabid action undertaken by the Chinese leadership under the false pretext of
acting in selfdefence or of teaching a lesson to a sovereign
nation poses an open challenge to the most elementary
norms and principles of international law and constitutes a
gross violation of the Charter of the United Nations. The
strange concept of “teaching a bloody lesson” to a sovereign State is nothing but a mockery of contemporary international law. History shows, on the contrary, that alien

125. Against this background, my delegation considers
that it is essential for all the peace-loving nations and pcoples of the world to voice the most unequivocal and unconditional condemnation of the treacherous invasion by
China of the Socialist Republic of Viet Nam, and to demand
the immediate withdrawal of Chinese troops from Viet
Nam. My delegation also fully shares the view that all the
damage and losses inflicted upon Viet Nam by the Chinese
aggressors must be paid for by the Chinese side.
126. ‘My delegation considers likewise that any condoning
or encouragement of the rabid action by the Peking authorities should be viewed not only as a crime against the Vietnamese people but also as a crime against all humanity which
12

prayers for the welfare and continued prosperity of the
brotherly people of Kuwait. May I also fully associate
myself with the tributes which previous speakers have
addressed to you for your outstanding ability, diplomatic
experience and sagacity in guiding the deliberations of the
Council during this month.

favours international peace and security. In this regard, we
submit that any attempt to link the Chinese invasion of Viet
Nam to the internal affairs of Kampuchea is nothing more
than an effort to justify Peking’s aggression and entails
serious damage to the cause of peace and security.
Moreover, the delegation of the Mongolian People’s
Republic maintains that heavy responsibility resides with
those imperialist circles in the West, which flirt with China
and are eager to supply the present Chinese regime with the
most up-to-date weapons, including the so-called Harrier
war planes.

133. The Government of Pakistan has watched with deep
anxiety the grave developments in the immediately neighbouring region of South-East Asia. These developments not
only affect the security of all countries in that region but
could have much wider implications for international peace
and security. It is our firm conviction that strict adherence
to the fundamental principles enshrined in the Charter of
the United Nations is the only guarantee against the disrup
tion of peace and stability in the world. Among these principles are those of respect for the political independence,
sovereignty and territorial integrity of all States, noninterference in their internal affairs and the peaceful settlement of disputes in accordance with the Charter.

127. It is our firm conviction that the heroic Vietnamese
people, led by their Communist Party and Government,
will achieve complete victory over the Chinese aggressors
just as they earlier defeated the most powerful forces of
imperialism and neo-colonialism. In this connexion my
delegation notes with satisfaction that the Vietnamese
border guards and militiamen, in the discharge of their
sacred duty to defend and uphold the independence and
freedom of their motherland, are inflicting heavy losses
upon the Chinese aggressors and thus bringing closer the
day of complete victory.

134. In keeping with our consistent and deep attachment
to those principles and since Pakistan is a country which is
profoundly aware of the imperative necessity for the international community to uphold those principles, my Govemment expressed its deep concern over the developments in
Democratic Kampuchea last month. In an official statement issued on 16 January, the Government of Pakistan
declared:

128. The Government and people of Mongolia, which
forms an integral part of the socialist community and is an
Asian socialist country, tirmly stand by their Vietnamese
brothers and sisters in their struggle against the Peking
invaders. In the above-mentioned statement of the Govemment of the Mongolian People’s Republic we read the
following:

“The external military intervention to overthrow the
lawful Government of that country constitutes a violation of the principles of the Charter of the United
Nations and the rules of international law governing the
rights and duties of States. It is the international duty of
every State to respect the political independence, sovereignty and territorial integrity of other States and refrain
from interference in their internal affairs.”

“The Mongolian people express their warm fraternal
solidarity and their unwavering support for the heroic
Vietnamese people in the defence of the national sovereignty and territorial integrity of their socialist homeland.”
129. In conclusion, my delegation expressesits full support for the draft resolution submitted by Czechoslovakia
and the Soviet Union /s/13117] and we entertain the hope
that the overwhelming majority of Council members will
favour that draft, which truly corresponds to the vital interests of the Vietnamese people as well as to the interests of
restoring peace and security in South-East Asia.

The statement continued as follows:
“Considerations of human rights cannot be invoked
to justify external military intervention. In accordance
with these universally recognized principles, the Govemment of Pakistan fully supports the international call for
immediate withdrawal of all foreign forces from Democratic Kampuchea.*’

130. The PRESIDENT: The last speaker is the representative of Pakistan. I invite him to take a seat at the Council
table and to make his statement.

135. When the Council considered the grave situation in
Democratic Kampuchea at that time, it did not succeed in
taking decisive action to effect an immediate cease-tire, put
an end to hostilities and ensure the withdrawal of all foreign
forces from that country. Had the Council performed its
primary responsibility under the Charter, the underlying
causes of the increased tension and violence in the region
would have been removed

131. Mr. NAIK (Pakistan): Mr. President, I should like to
thank you and the members of the Council for allowing my
delegation the opportunity to speak before the Council on
the situation in South-East Asia.
132. Before I explain the considerations which have led
my delegation to seek this opportunity, I would extend to
you our warm felicitations on your assumption of the presidency of the Council for this month. For me personally it
is a special privilege to address the Council for the first time
under your presidency both because of our personal friendship and because of the fraternal ties that exist between
Kuwait and Pakistan. It is indeed an extremely fortunate
coincidence that I am addressing the Council on the auspicious occasion of the national day of Kuwait. On my own
behalf and on behalf of the people and Government of
Pakistan I extend to you our sincere good wishes and

136. Now that the Council is once again seized of the
situation in South-East Asia, it must address itself to the
urgent task of finding a comprehensive solution to the
problems of the region. We are conscious of the opporhmity that the occasion provides to the Council and indeed to
the international community to adopt prompt and effective
measures to bring back peace and stability to an area whose
tranquillity has been disturbed by the violation of Kampuchea’s sovereignty and the provocations across the Viet
NamChina border areas.
13

137. In this context, we have noted the statement made by
the Government of the People’s Republic of China on 17
February /S/13094], which has been reiterated in the Council by the representative of China, to the effect that the
Chinese troops would withdraw from Vietnamese territory
12114th meet&f.

An appropriate draft resolution [S/13117 containing such
a provision was submitted by the delegation of our country
and by that of Czechoslovakia.
145. It is quite clear that the attempts of the Chinese
leadership and certain Western circles to try to justify the
aggression in Viet Nam by referring to the so-called Kampuchean question are quite pointless. The Chinese aggression
against Viet Nam and what took place in Kampuchea are
two completely different phenomena. To tie them together,
as certain speakers have tried to do, means willy nilly to
shelter the aggressor by putting him on the same level as the
victim of the aggression and to encourage Peking further in
its reckless and aggressive policy.

138. All the participants in the debate have underlined the
need for scrupulous respect for State sovereignty, national
independence, territorial integrity and non-interference in
the internal affairs of States. We support these principles.
We support the call for an immediate cessation of hostilities
in all the areas of conflict and withdrawal of foreign troops
from Kampuchea and Viet Nam. These immediate steps
should lead to the initiation of the process of restoring
stable peace and tranquillity in the region through negotiations among the parties directly concerned as well as
through the good off&s of the Secretary-General.

146. Therefore, my delegation would like to state quite
clearly and definitely that the statements of certain representatives, including those of countries members of the Association of South-East Asian Nations, which have expressed
thoughts about a draft resolution containing general appeals
instead of a clear-cut demand that the Chinese aggressor
should ceaseits aggression and withdraw its troops from the.
territory of Viet Nam cannot promote a solution by the
Council of the problems before it. The adoption of such a
resolution would only create an extremely dangerous precedent. It would provide justification for present and future
aggressors on various pretexts to carry out armed invasions
against the territories of other countries.

139. We should like here to express our appreciation to
the Secretary-General for his untiring efforts in the cause of
peace and for making his good oftices availiable to the
parties involved. However, in order to set in motion any
process for peace and stability, my delegation need not
reemphasize the necessity for the Council to adopt appropriate decisions to effect the immediate cessation of hostilities and the withdrawal of all foreign forces from all the
States of the area.
140. The PRESIDENT:
I thank the representative of
Pakistan for the kind, warm and friendly sentiments which
he expressed to me and to my country and also for the good
wishes that he expressed on the occasion of the national day
of my Government and my people.

147. The Soviet delegation considers that members of the
Council should adopt a responsible attitude towards the task
facing the Council and should support decisions which
condemn the Chinese aggression and demand its immediate
cessation.

141. The representative of the Soviet Union has indicated
that he wishes to speak at this juncture, and I now call on
him.

148. No one in the United Nations, whether in the Security
Council or in any other body, has asked China to be a
gendarme or to teach Viet Nam by bloodshed. Viet Nam did
not flinch in the face of aggression committed by a great
Power which attempted to dominate the entire world. Viet
Nam willstandfast. Itsfriendswillhelpitintbistask,because
the defence being conducted by Viet Nam against theaggressor is a noble undertaking. Viet Nam is defending its national
honour, freedom and independence.

142. Mr. KHARLAMOV
(Union of Soviet Socialist
Republics) (interpretation j?om Russian): Yesterday I set
forth the position of the delegation of the Soviet Union and
I shall not expatiate on the questions that were raised and
clarified yesterday.
143. During the discussions which have taken place in the
Council, the representative of the Socialist Republic of Viet
Nam fully and convicingly unmasked the Chinese aggression against his country and showed quite clearly how it was
prepared and perpetrated. He revealed the full extent of the
danger of the aggressive policy of Peking for neighbouring
States and for international peace. I must say that it is
necessary here to call a spade a spade. It is not simply a
conflict situation we are dealing with here; we are faced with
Chinese aggression against the Socialist Republic of Viet
Nam, and nobody can avoid that clear and definite fact.

149. The Security Council must assist the long-suffering
heroic people of Viet Nam to maintain and defend their
sovereignty and existence, their right to build their life
without interference from the Chinese aggressors, without
interference from outside by any champions of Chinese
aggression.

144. In the statements of many representatives that
aggression was in fact condemned. In one form or another
everyone in fact said that they were in favour of the cessation of Chinese hostilities and the withdrawal of Chinese
troops from the territory of Viet Nam. Obviously in this
situation the Security Council, in order to fulfil the duties
incumbent on it, should take urgent measures to condemn
the Chinese aggression, to call for the immediate cessation
of the Chinese aggression and for the immediate withdrawal
of the troops of the aggressor from Vietnamese territory.

me that it would be adjourned after the statement by the
representative of Pakistan, and appealed to me to cooperate with you. Just now the Soviet representative made
another statement, once again viciously attacking and
slandering China and resorting to sophistry in order to
justify Vietnamese acts of aggression and expansion with
the support of Soviet social-imperialism. However, I still
intend to heed your appeal and for the time being to ignore
the attack just made by the Soviet representative and to
reserve my right to make a statement later to refute it.

150. Mr. CHEN Chu (China) (interpretation from Chinese): Mr. President, before this meeting began you informed

14

151. Nevertheless, I wish to point out one thing here. Viet
Nam’s aggression against Democratic Kampuchea and the
Smo-Vietnamese border conflict arc two questions which are
entirely different in nature. In fulfilling its responsibility, the
Council must first of all condemn Viet Nam’s military
aggression against and occupation of Democratic Kampuchea with Soviet support and demand that Viet Nam should
immediately withdraw all its armed forces from Democratic
Kampuchea.
152. Now. in order to show resoect to YOU.Mr. President.
and also in celebration of you; national day, I shall say
nothing more at this stage. However, I shall make the
necessaryreply at a later stage.

153. The PRESIDENT:
I thank the representative of
China for his co-operation.
154. Mr. KHARLAMOV
(Union of Soviet Socialist
Republics) (interpretationfrom Russian):I do not intend to
take any more of the Council’s time to answer the representative of China. But I reserve the right to answer him
appropriately. There should be no doubt about that.
155. The PRESIDENT: I thank the representative of the
USSR for his co-operation.
The meeting rose at 6.55p.m.

HOW

TO OBTAIN

UNITED

NATIONS

United
throughout
Section,

Nations
publications
the world.
Consult
New York or Geneva.

COMMENT

SE PROCURER

may
your

LES

PUBLICATIONS
be obtained
bookstore

or

PUBLICATIONS

from
bookstores
write
to: United

DES

NATIONS

UNIES

Les publications
des Nations
Unies
sent
en vente
dans
les librsiries
d&o&&es
du monde
entier.
Informez-vow
auprks
de votre
Iibraire
B : Nations
Unies.
Section
des ventes.
New York ou Genhve.
KAK

IIOJIY’IHTL

COMO

CONSEGUIR

H3AAHIIR

PUBLICACIONES

Las publicsciones
de las
buidoras
en todas
psrtcs
Unidas,
Secci6n
de Ventas,

Litho

in United

Nations,

Hew

York

OPFAHH

3A42I11

DE

Naciones
Unidss
eatan
de1 mundo.
Consulte
Nueva
York o Ginebra.

Price:

SUS.

OD’bE~~HEWHIdX

LAS

NACIONES

et les agences
ou adressez-vous

HAUMH

UNIDAS

en venta
en librerias
a su librero
o dirijase

1.50

and
distributors
Nations,
Sales

y casas distria: Naciones

79-70002-December

1981-2,250
