S/2018/674

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
6 July 2018
Original: English

Letter dated 5 July 2018 from the Secretary-General addressed to
the President of the Security Council
I have the honour to refer to Security Council resolution 2372 (2017), in which
the Council requested me to conduct a comprehensive assessment of the African
Union Mission in Somalia (AMISOM), working closely with the African Union and
the Federal Government of Somalia. The review was aimed at taking stock of the
transition of Somalia thus far and providing recommendations on the progressive
transition from AMISOM to Somali security responsibility, includi ng during the
electoral period, taking into account the capacities of the Somali security forces.
Building on the recommendations of the special envoys of the African Union
and the United Nations on AMISOM financing, the joint review mission took place
from 10 to 19 May 2018. The mission was co-led by the United Nations Department
of Peacekeeping Operations and the African Union Peace Support Operations
Division, and included military, police, political, human rights and logistics experts
from the Department of Political Affairs, the Department of Field Support, the United
Nations Support Office in Somalia (UNSOS), the United Nations Assistance Mission
in Somalia (UNSOM), the United Nations Office to the African Union, the African
Union Commission and AMISOM. The European Union and States Members of the
United Nations that are key security partners in Somalia also participated in the
mission.
All AMISOM troop- and police-contributing countries were also represented
and all AMISOM sector commanders, the acting Force Commander and the acting
AMISOM Police Commissioner participated in the review, along with the Special
Representative of the Chairperson of the African Union Commission for Somalia,
Francisco Madeira.
Consultations, including on the transition plan for Somalia, were held with
national actors such as the National Security Adviser, the Chief of the Defence Forces
and other representatives from the Somali National Army, and with international
partners in Mogadishu and Addis Ababa. The joint review mission also briefed the
President of Somalia, Mohamed Abdullahi Mohamed Farmajo. Owing to ongoing and
overlapping political developments, including a meeting of the Council of Interstate
Cooperation, composed of the leaders of the federal member states o f Somalia at the
time of the joint review, the mission was unable to visit the federal member states.
The findings and recommendations of the joint review were considered by the
Peace and Security Council of the African Union on 27 June 2018 at its 782nd
meeting.

18-11230 (E)

130718

*1811230*

S/2018/674

Main findings
Overall, Somalia has made significant progress over the past 10 years. AMISOM
has been vital in this journey. It has been providing the security that has allowed the
political process to unfold and enabled the United Nations a nd international partners
to maintain their presence and to carry out their functions in support of peacebuilding
and State-building in Somalia. AMISOM played an important role in securing the
2016 electoral process across Somalia, which enabled a peaceful transition of power
to the current federal political dispensation under President Farmajo and Prime
Minister Hassan Ali Khayre. AMISOM will also be a necessary partner in enabling
the conduct of the next elections, envisioned for 2020–2021, in accordance with the
political road map of Somalia.
Notwithstanding the considerable positive developments under the current
Federal Government, including the agreement on the national security architecture of
Somalia, progress is still reversible. Al-Shabaab remains a potent threat,
demonstrating its continued ability to execute deadly terrorist attacks against
civilians, Somali security forces and AMISOM. Continuing regional and clan
divisions, coupled with the proliferation of arms in the country and the absence of the
rule of law, also present chronic impediments to the prevention of violence and armed
conflict. The small-scale but persistent presence of an armed group affiliated with
Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL) remains a major concern. The unresolved
dispute between Somalia and “Somaliland” has escalated into conflict between
Puntland and “Somaliland” in the disputed Sool region, claiming the lives of dozens
of Somalis and displacing some 10,000 people in recent weeks.
Somalis are also facing new challenges. Internal political differences are being
exacerbated by international rivalries that have resulted in contestation by proxy in
Somalia. This, in turn, is impacting the fragile relations between the Federal
Government of Somalia and its federal member states and sowing the seeds of deeper
division among Somalis. Owing to such friction between the Federal Government and
federal member states, progress with respect to federalism through, inter alia,
formalizing the status of federal member states, agreeing on an electoral model and
expediting the creation of a federated and integrated Somali security sector, has been
limited. Furthermore, differences between the Federal Government, parliamentary
blocs and opposition elements have exacerbated long-standing clan divisions over
representation at the leadership level and have increased instability and the risk of
violence.
In the absence of national reconciliation and a revised Constitution defining a
final political settlement and the principles of a federal State, the strategic location of
Somalia and its rising geopolitical importance render it increasingly vulnerable to
external influence and interference. This is a grave situation that underscores the
pressing need for agreement among the country’s leaders on key issues such as powerand resource-sharing and detailed security arrangements.
On the economic front, Somalia has made progress on the path towards the
clearance of arrears and in implementing fiscal reforms that would enable it to attract
grants and to regain access to financing from international financial institutions.
Efforts by the Federal Government to increase revenue generation are bearing fruit,
improving the prospects for Somalia being able to financially sustain its own security
sector in the future. However, despite significant investment by the international
community and the commendable achievements, notably by the Danab special forces
and by security services in Jubbaland and Puntland, Somali security forces in the
AMISOM area of operations largely lack the capacity, structures, institutional
oversight and support to be able to take over security responsibility. Security
infrastructure will have to be built with support from the international community and
2/13

18-11230

S/2018/674

then sustained progressively by the Federal Government. Success in building trust
between the Federal Government and federal member states, as well as with the
public, will be critical to making progress. Without that trust, the investment in
Somali security capacity will not be firmly grounded. AMISOM remains
indispensable to providing security and creating the necessary space for the political
process to unfold, until Somali security institutions can shoulder that responsibility.
The transition plan for Somalia presents a real opportunity to consolidate all
lines of activity related to military and police operations, institutional capacity building and stabilization in a holistic effort under Somali ownership. There is,
however, a significant lack of capacity and resources to adequately implement the
plan’s priorities and to improve the alignment between civilian and military
leadership, between the Federal Government and federal member states, and among
international partners that provide financial and capacity-building support.
The joint review determined that AMISOM had a continuing role to play in
carrying out the priority tasks set out in resolution 2372 (2017) in all sectors, which
are critical to achieving the strategic objectives of enabling the gradual handover of
security responsibilities to Somali security forces, reducing the threat posed by
Al-Shabaab and other armed opposition groups, and assisting Somali security forces
in providing security for the political process, stabilization, reconciliation and
peacebuilding.
As for the holding of elections in 2020–2021, the presence of AMISOM,
alongside Somali security forces, will also be necessary, with the latter expected to
have attained sufficient capacity to play a lead role in providing security for the
elections.
The civilian component of AMISOM has made an important contribution in
support of the political process, alongside its other civilian functions with respect to
humanitarian support, civil affairs and human rights. AMISOM has closely
collaborated with UNSOM (as the lead entity in supporting the political process), the
Intergovernmental Authority on Development and relevant Member States. The
African Union Commission will undertake an assessment of the civilian component
of AMISOM that will map the current deployment of AMISOM civilians and identify
the added value that AMISOM can bring in support of the political process, including
with respect to the need for a presence in key areas to complement that of UNSOM.
Developments since the previous joint review and resolution 2372 (2017)
On the basis of the desire of the Federal Government of Somalia to assume
security responsibilities from AMISOM, albeit gradually and through a conditions based handover, resolution 2372 (2017) reflects the intent of the Security Council to
seek an exit strategy for AMISOM after 10 years of deployment . The resolution
marked a shift in strategic focus from AMISOM to the building of Somali forces, with
a view to transitioning security responsibility from the former to the latter. The
resolution therefore presented the Federal Government and federal membe r states
with the task of setting out their priorities for the transition, in consultation with
AMISOM and its troop- and police-contributing countries and with international
partners. In this manner, AMISOM and donors can align their efforts to support th ese
agreed priorities and ensure a sustainable handover.
However, the real capacity of Somali security forces was not known, and, at the
time of the joint review in 2017, the plans for transition were not realistic.
Notwithstanding the development and execution of a Somali-owned Mogadishu
stabilization plan, Somalia suffered the worst terrori st attack in its history, on
14 October 2017 in Mogadishu, which claimed over 500 lives and left many more
injured. The attack, attributed to Al-Shabaab, underscored the deficiencies in capacity
18-11230

3/13

S/2018/674

and command and control of Somali security forces. It was followed by other deadly
attacks by Al-Shabaab on civilian and military targets in Mogadishu and other parts
of the country. These attacks clearly demonstrate that a premature handover would be
risky and that the continued presence of AMISOM is necessary during the transition
as Somalia builds the capability of its security forces and institutions and prepares for
elections in 2020–2021.
In order to assess the baseline capacity of Somali security forces, and in
response to the Council’s request in resolution 2372 (2017) to that effect, the Federal
Government, with the participation of AMISOM, the United Nations and inter national
partners, led an operational readiness assessment of the Somali National Army in
2018. The assessment concluded that, as currently manned, trained and equipped, the
Somali National Army is a fragile force with extremely weak command and control
and military capabilities. Despite multiple training processes in recent years, the
Somali National Army lacks a common doctrine and training standards; is extremely
poorly equipped and not sustained; and has little to no infrastructure, including
medical services at the battalion and brigade levels. In many areas, the Somali
National Army is static and wholly defensive in nature, limited to occupying ground,
and without the ability to hold newly recovered areas or prevent Al -Shabaab from
retaking territory. On 29 May 2018, the Chief of the Defence Forces of Somalia
endorsed the assessment findings in a memorandum to the President, Prime Minister
and Minister of Defence.
Although progress is being made in the implementation of the country’s new
policing model, an operational readiness assessment determined that the Somali
police force was almost entirely stationed in Mogadishu, and it also revealed serious
gaps with regard to human resources, infrastructure, equipment and logistics. Many
of the officers have reached retirement age, and several units are not operational. The
assessment did not cover the emerging State police services or the regional forces that
are to be integrated into the Darwish militarized police.
An additional operational readiness assessment of regional forces in the federal
member states is ongoing and expected to be completed by the end of 2018. The
national security architecture stipulates that regional forces should be integrated into
the Somali national army or be absorbed into the Darwish, in accordance with
authorized numbers. In February 2018, the National Security Council agreed that the
Federal Government would provide wide-ranging support to the federal member state
police services, including the Darwish, which were conducting operations against
Al-Shabaab in conjunction with the Somali national army. Progress in that regard has
been very limited.
Meanwhile, in line with resolution 2372 (2017), by 31 December 2017,
AMISOM had reduced military personnel by 1,000 and made progress in generating
an additional 500 police personnel towards the total authorized number of 1,040. At
present, 718 AMISOM police personnel are deployed, including three of the five
authorized formed police units, each with an augmented strength of 160 personnel.
Pursuant to resolution 2372 (2017), the number of military personnel is to be further
reduced by 1,000 by 30 October 2018.
Transition plan
Following the security conference held in Mogadishu on 4 December 2017 to
take stock of progress and challenges in the implementation of the national security
architecture, the Federal Government, in close partnership with federal member
states, led the development of a transition plan for Somalia. Representatives of the
federal member states, AMISOM, troop- and police-contributing countries, the

4/13

18-11230

S/2018/674

United Nations and other international partners participated in the development of the
plan.
The transition plan provides a strategic framework for the gradual handover of
security responsibility from AMISOM to Somali security institutions in three phases
over the next four years, until December 2021. It outlines key priorities, milestones,
indicators and conditions for the transition under a Somali (both federal and
sub-federal) vision for security. In line with the agreement among all stakeholders
that the plan should be comprehensive, it is organized into: (a) operational activities,
including the identification and prioritization of locations where Somali security
institutions would progressively assume full security responsibility, including
through the deployment of forces recognized in the national security architecture;
(b) institutional capacity-building, entailing the implementation of plans and
programmes for that purpose, including the national security architecture,
recommendations from the operational readiness assessments, and policing, justice
and civil service reform; and (c) supporting activities, which involve the alignment
of non-security efforts to create the conditions for a sustainable peace, including
through stabilization, strengthening local governance and the rule of law,
reconciliation, mediation, socioeconomic activities and activities aime d at preventing
and countering violent extremism.
The transition plan has incorporated the views of the federal member states and
other security stakeholders, including regional security council representatives, the
Somali national army, AMISOM troop- and police-contributing countries in the
sectors, AMISOM police and international partners. The transition plan was presented
by the National Security Adviser and endorsed at the 769th meeting of the Peace and
Security Council on 30 April 2018, and subsequently presented and endorsed at a
high-level meeting of the international community on security in Brussels, Belgium,
on 2 May 2018, which also provided a platform for the Federal Government to
highlight the key objectives of the first phase of the plan, whic h extends to mid-2019.
The plan was approved by the National Security Council in its meetings held on 3 and
4 June 2018 in Baidoa. Three priority areas have been agreed for the initial stage of
implementation: (a) the stadium in Mogadishu; (b) the town of Leego, in South-West
State; and (c) the road between Mogadishu and Baidoa.
During the joint review mission, AMISOM, troop- and police-contributing
countries and key security partners expressed their full support for the transition plan.
All stakeholders agreed that the transition plan provided a vision and strategic
direction for the process by which a gradual handover of security responsibility from
AMISOM to Somali security institutions could take place. Detailed operational
planning and implementation efforts were under way, requiring the alignment of
efforts by the Federal Government, federal member states, AMISOM military and
police components, troop- and police-contributing countries and international
partners, under a holistic approach that encompassed military, police, support,
stabilization, the rule of law and non-security elements under the three aspects of the
transition plan. To that end, the joint review recommended that coordination between
military operations and stabilization-related efforts continue to be enhanced with a
focus on policing, rule of law, justice, including courts, prosecution offices and
corrections facilities, mechanisms to protect human rights and the provision of basic
services to the population. It was agreed during the joint review that existing
coordination structures under the comprehensive approach to security should be fully
utilized by AMISOM, troop- and police-contributing countries and other partners. All
actors should be guided by existing Somali federal and State frameworks on
transition, stabilization and reconciliation.
The implementation of the transition plan in the three priority areas in the pilot
stage is an opportunity to test the effectiveness of the holistic approach to the
18-11230

5/13

S/2018/674

transition and to create a template for future locations and operations. It is also
important that progress continue to be made with respect to other tasks and priorities
of the first phase of the transition plan, in parallel with the planning and
implementation of the plan in the three priority locations.
On the basis of consultations on the transition plan, including the role of
AMISOM, the joint review determined that the implementation of the transition plan
should be constantly informed by the evolving situation on the g round, with the
participation and agreement of major stakeholders. Specifically, implementation
should be carried out in a flexible manner, adjusted to specific locations and
situations, with due consideration given to progress made in stabilization activi ties
and to the political situation in a given context. Future priorities should be decided in
consultation with AMISOM prior to their adoption, and each of the tasks under the
detailed plans require realistic costs assessments and a framework for resourci ng.
Updates on the implementation of the plan in the priority areas during the first phase,
including costing, will be presented at the Somalia partnership forum to be held in
Brussels on 16 and 17 July 2018.
Recommendations for the reconfiguration of AMISOM
In its resolution 2372 (2017), the Security Council envisioned AMISOM
shifting towards a support role and Somali security forces progressively assuming
responsibility for security. This continues to be the case, alongside the priority tasks
that are already part of the AMISOM mandate. With the development of the transition
plan and considering the AMISOM transformation proposed by the special envoys of
the African Union and the United Nations, the shift will require AMISOM to
reconfigure itself to align its strategic objectives, presence and mandated tasks with
the implementation of the transition plan, starting with the three priority locations in
the pilot stage. The joint review examined what the proposed reconfiguration of
AMISOM would entail with respect to its police, military, support and civilian
functions. The findings of the joint review and the recommendations for each of those
areas should inform a revised AMISOM concept of operations.
The reconfiguration of AMISOM would strengthen the capabilities of AMISOM
force headquarters and improve cohesion and coordination among AMISOM troop and police-contributing countries, as well as among AMISOM, Somalis and bilateral
partners. The reconfiguration should aim to ensure that troop- and police-contributing
countries work together in a coordinated manner to achieve a unified operational
objective. In that regard, the possibility of multiple troop- and police-contributing
countries being active in a sector, instead of individual troop- and police-contributing
countries operating largely independently in their own sectors, could be examined in
the AMISOM concept of operations. The reconfiguration should transform AMISOM
into a more nimble, dynamic and integrated mission that is better coordinated with all
partners and Somalis. Implementation of the transition plan in two of the three priority
locations in the first phase, namely, Leego and the Mogadishu -Baidoa main supply
route, involve, for the first time, two AMISOM sectors (sectors 1 and 3) and two
political entities (the Federal Government and South-West State). This presents an
opportunity for AMISOM troop- and police-contributing countries on one hand, and
Somali authorities on the other, to demo nstrate their capacity for collaboration and
coordination in planning and implementation.
With respect to the reconfiguration, it was recommended that, first, a
coordination platform, such as a joint operations cell or “fusion cell”, be established
at AMISOM force headquarters. That platform, with the participation of ranked
liaison officers from each sector, supported by force headquarters staff and external
experts, would be mandated to provide the AMISOM Force Commander with daily
operational information from all sectors and intelligence gathered by international
6/13

18-11230

S/2018/674

partners, together with analysis of the combined picture. The platform would
complement the strategic oversight mechanisms of the African Union and would
strengthen planning and coordination among AMISOM troop- and policecontributing countries under the authority of the Force Commander. Funding options
for the international experts include seconding Member States bearing the costs for
their deployment or voluntary contributions through the AMISO M trust fund
administered by UNSOS.
Second, it was proposed that the military mentoring and assistance role of
AMISOM be expanded into a more robust combat mentoring role. Trained Somali
national army units and Somali security forces identified to take pa rt in specific joint
operations should be gathered and mentored for combat readiness before commencing
operations, including through joint exercises within AMISOM -secured areas. Doing
so would facilitate coordination, cooperation, and de -confliction between the Somali
national army, Somali security forces and AMISOM, especially in areas where
responsibility is being transferred to Somali authorities.
Third, following the positive results of the pilot project undertaken in Kismaayo
and Baidoa to train the Somali police, it was recommended that the Security Council
give AMISOM a police training role. AMISOM should expand its training activities,
as foreseen under the United Nations-AMISOM joint police programme, launched in
June 2018, and in line with the new policing model and police plans of federal
member states that have already been approved by the National Security Council. In
support of the implementation of the first phase of the transition plan, the training and
mentoring activities of the AMISOM police component should be expanded with a
view to extending the Somali police presence to locations along the Mogadishu Baidoa route. The joint police programme should take into account projects that are
required to implement the transition plan, while mainta ining the implementation of
the country’s new policing model as its primary focus. The AMISOM police
component should participate fully in existing coordination mechanisms. The African
Union Commission should expedite the generation and deployment of the t wo formed
police units needed to reach the total number of police personnel that has been
authorized. The United Nations, through its Police Division, stands ready to provide
the required support, including by facilitating the training of identified units.
Fourth, the AMISOM reconfiguration requires that a comprehensive assessment
of the capacities and readiness of AMISOM be conducted jointly by the African Union
and the United Nations, with support from international partners, at the earliest
opportunity. The operational readiness assessment of AMISOM, together with those
of the Somali security entities that have been conducted or that are under way, would
present a complete picture of the capacities of all security actors in Somalia. It would
provide the baseline for the AMISOM statement of unit requirements to inform the
reconfiguration and the determination of how to best support the transition and would
serve to increase transparency and donor confidence. The findings of the operational
readiness assessment should feed into the development of a revised concept of
operations and the technical review proposed below, on the basis of which the
provision of key enablers, such as appropriate aviation assets, could be actively
examined and pursued to, inter alia, form the core element of a possible quick reaction
force under the Force Commander.
In parallel with supporting the implementation of the transition plan in the pilot
locations, AMISOM should continue its priority tasks and activities in the
implementation of its mandate in all sectors. That includes the further detailing of the
conditions that should be created by the end of the first phase and determining
appropriate modalities to achieve those conditions. In that regard, and as
recommended pursuant to the joint review, AMISOM sector 6, which covers an
unspecified area around Kismaayo, in Jubbaland, is expected to be closed and
18-11230

7/13

S/2018/674

subsumed into sector 2. The Jubbaland state forces in Kismaayo town are among the
most capable in Somalia, and the activities of the AMISOM contingent in sector 6,
which consists of approximately 1,600 troops, are limited. Decommissioning sector 6
may also provide flexibility for future troop reconfigurations and reductions and the
reallocation of logistical support.
The AMISOM reconfiguration process should begin with the joint AMISOM
operational readiness assessment, followed by a blueprint for the reconfiguration
created under the responsibility of the Force Commander and sector commanders, to
be agreed with the Somalis and endorsed by the Peace and Security Council. The
planning and endorsement of the reconfiguration is expected to be completed by
January 2019, at the time of the technical review, with implementation likely to
continue until mid-2019. The entire reconfiguration exercise in support of the
transition plan is expected to be completed in approximately 12 months.
Support implications for the African Union Mission in Somalia and Somali
security forces
The joint review found continuing gaps in logistics, equipment and funding for
the primary security actors in Somalia, namely, AMISOM military and police
components, the Somali national army and Somali police services, and concluded that
the implementation of the first phase of the transition plan, while simultaneously
conducting military operations and mandated tasks in all other sectors, might require
additional resources to meet support requirements. The joint review confirmed the
need for force enablers and force multipliers to support efforts to conduct concurrent
operations, both in the context of the transition plan and in wider sector operations.
The comprehensive AMISOM operational readiness assessment, as proposed above,
will provide an accurate understanding of AMISOM capacities and needs , including
force enablers and force multipliers, and serve as the basis for further specifying
AMISOM support requirements.
A working group established by the United Nations and the African Union to
develop a concept of operations for AMISOM aviation and intelligence, surveillance
and reconnaissance assets, on the basis of the broader strategic concept of operations,
will also contribute to clarity on aviation and intelligence, surveillance and
reconnaissance requirements to support concurrent tasks.
Once that is completed, the generation of the identified capacities will need to
be expedited by the African Union and the United Nations. The deployment of those
assets will necessitate a thorough risk assessment and related mitigation measures, as
outlined in the human rights due diligence policy on United Nations support to
non-United Nations security forces.
The full capacity of the Somali security forces to deploy and assume security
responsibilities in the first phase of the transition plan is not yet known, as the Somali
authorities are in the process of identifying capable Somali national army and regional
forces for this purpose. Support requirements for Somali security forces, including
regional forces, will become clearer as the transition gets under way.
A system of logistical support for Somali forces during the first phase is required
to facilitate a sustainable handover, in the light of an impending withdrawal of support
in locations where AMISOM is no longer present, which could dete r Somali forces
from assuming full responsibility. The joint review highlighted the need to establish
the support requirements for Somali security forces, including police and regional
forces, and to develop viable options for how those could be addressed. That support
should include the 2,400 Puntland troops that have been integrated into the Somali
national army, provided that they are dedicated for use in operations against
Al-Shabaab, ISIL-affiliated groups and piracy. In addition, Somali security forces
8/13

18-11230

S/2018/674

need to have enhanced capacity to deal with improvised explosive devices, which
pose a major threat to their security.
UNSOS support should eventually be adjusted in line with emerging demands
during the AMISOM reconfiguration and the transition process . Following an
assessment of the support requirements of Somali security forces and an analysis to
determine who is best placed on the basis of comparative advantage to deliver that
support, the UNSOS mandate with respect to the provision of support to AMI SOM
and the Somali national army could be adjusted to reflect the operational requirements
in the first phase of the transition plan.
Accountability and compliance
The joint review assessed progress in implementing the recommendations set
out in the matrix annexed to my letter to the Security Council on the findings and
recommendations of the 2017 joint review, which were aimed at strengthening
mechanisms and measures to better prevent and address human rights and
international humanitarian law violations by AMISOM.
Progress has been achieved in implementing some of the recommendations,
which include the translation and dissemination of AMISOM rules of engagement in
accordance with international human rights and humanitarian law; in-mission training
for troops and specific training for staff, including on accountability, led by the
African Union; the development of an African Union-United Nations predeployment
manual to facilitate the delivery of predeployment training by troop- and policecontributing countries after the transfer of that responsibility to them; the
development of African Union-wide policy guidelines on conduct and discipline; and
the allocation of $200,000 by the African Union to facilitate ex gratia payments or
amends for harm to civilians allegedly caused by AMISOM in 2018.
Nevertheless, gaps remain in addressing cases of alleged violations by
AMISOM, including in respect of feedback and the exchange of information on the
findings of the investigations into those allegations. Other gaps include delayed
responses to allegations, sometimes caused by delayed feedback from the sectors;
differences in the methodologies used by the UNSOM human rights team and the
AMISOM human rights unit, leading to discrepancies in figures; unsustainable or
inadequate funding to fully operationalize ex gratia payments to victims of harm
caused by AMISOM troops; and the inability of AMISOM to follow up on cases in
the field owing to there being a limited number of human rights officers to monitor
and report on human rights issues in the six AMISOM sectors. Additional
consultations between AMISOM and the United Nations on how to address such
challenges are necessary to improve results.
The joint review recommended a process to further agree on modalities to
enhance coordination of and support for investigations, including an assessment of
how agreed recommendations on that issue from the previous joint review could be
implemented. The matrix for recommendations on measures should therefore
continue to be used as a tool to monitor and report on compliance and the
implementation of the measures.
In the context of the transition, with anticipated joint operations including or
involving the use of regional forces, the risk of violations of human rights and
international humanitarian law is likely to increase. AMISOM compliance measures
need to be stepped up alongside measures for Somali security forces, in particular
those linked to identification (including numbers, locat ions and minimum vetting),
command and control and internal oversight, measures to avoid the use of children,
measures to prevent the perpetration of sexual exploitation and abuse, and timely
responses to allegations, including through investigations.
18-11230

9/13

S/2018/674

There is a need to strengthen coordination including through the United Nations AMISOM/United Nations joint working group on human rights due diligence policy
and joint engagement with Somali security forces to ensure accountability and respect
for international human rights, humanitarian and refugee law. The application of the
human rights due diligence policy remains pivotal. Effectively preventing and
addressing violations by AMISOM in the context of its operations will contribute to
enhancing the likelihood of meeting its security objectives.
Implications for the mandate of the African Union Mission in Somalia
While the strategic objectives and priority tasks for AMISOM should remain
largely as set out in resolution 2372 (2017), they should now be aligned with the
transition plan. AMISOM should continue its core tasks, with adjustments as outlined
in the present letter, including: (a) protecting main population centres , including the
presence of international actors, securing and enabling political and reconciliation
processes, the maintenance of law and order, public safety and early recovery, in close
coordination with Somali security forces, while implementing the tr ansfer of
responsibility to Somali security forces and institutions in accordance with the
transition plan; (b) contributing effectively to securing main supply routes, beginning
with the Mogadishu-Baidoa route; (c) conducting targeted joint operations with
Somali security forces to further degrade Al-Shabaab and other armed opposition
groups, with progressively increasing Somali participation and with appropriate
mitigation measures in place, including with regard to minimizing the threat posed
by improvised explosive devices; (d) mentoring Somali national army units involved
in joint operations in combat readiness, including through joint exercises prior to the
conduct of operations; and (e) contributing to the training and deployment of the
Somali police, in close collaboration with UNSOM, and in line with the national
security architecture, the new policing model and State police plans.
The coming months will be critical in assessing progress in the implementation
of the first phase of the transition plan and its three pilot priorities, as well as progress
in the reconfiguration of AMISOM. With the aim of enabling an effective AMISOM
reconfiguration in support of the transition plan at this early stage, I support the joint
review’s recommendation that the Security Council extend the AMISOM mandate for
one year.
The joint review recommended that a technical review be conducted in January
2019 to assess the state and effectiveness of the AMISOM reconfiguration in support
of the transition, and, on that basis, recommend how the next 1,000-person reduction
in AMISOM military personnel, mandated by the Security Council to take place by
30 October 2018, should be implemented.
It was recommended that the reduction be postponed to February 2019 to better
enable AMISOM to complete the planning and initiate the execution of its
reconfiguration in support of the handover of responsibility for the three priority areas
in the first phase of the transition plan. Doing so would allow for proper planning on
the basis of the AMISOM operational readiness assessment, the development of a
concept of operations and the implementation of the pilot stage of the transition plan.
It would also avoid reductions that are not aligned with the AMISOM reconfiguration
and support to the transition, including untimely reductions in active sectors.
If agreed by the Security Council, the proposed technical review would evaluate
progress and the effectiveness of AMISOM reconfiguration and positioning in support
of the transition, on the basis of the criteria set out in the present letter, focusing, in
particular, on measures to improve coordination and collaboration among AMISOM,
its troop- and police-contributing countries, Somalis and international partners. It
would also review progress in the operations being carried out pursuant to the first
10/13

18-11230

S/2018/674

phase of the transition plan and assess the pace of the plan’s implementation,
including by providing an updated understanding of the state and readiness of Somali
security forces and their integration in accordance with the national security
architecture. In the light of its findings, the review would aim to provide observations
on the trajectory of future reductions in AMISOM uniformed personnel. The technical
review would be conducted by the United Nations and the African Union, in close
collaboration with the transition plan implementation team, and its report would be
shared informally with the team and all interested partners. The report could also be
discussed in an informal interactive dialogue with the Council in February.
Observations
I would like to thank the African Union Commission for the strong collaboration
with the United Nations in carrying out the fourth joint review of AMISOM. The
participation of the Somali authorities in the review for the second time is equally
commendable and is a positive indication that, despite continuing challenges, Somalia
is on the path towards taking full responsibility for its security. I would also like to
thank members of the Security Council and the European Union for their participation
and engagement in the joint review mission. I commend AMISOM, UNSOM, UNSOS
and the United Nations Office to the African Union for facilitating the joint review
exercise and for their steadfast efforts to enhance collaboration among the security
partners of Somalia. I endorse the recommendations of the joint review as outlined
above and urge the Council to consider them positively.
I wish to highlight the presence in the joint review mission of the Special
Representative of the Chairperson of the African Union Commission for Somalia and
representatives of AMISOM troop- and police-contributing countries, along with the
participation of the acting AMISOM Force Commander, the acting AMISOM Police
Commissioner and all sector commanders. Their participation enhanced the
inclusivity of the exercise and the credibility of its outcomes. I encourage AMISOM
and its troop- and police-contributing countries to continue to carry out the priority
tasks towards achieving its strategic objectives, as set out by the Security Council,
and to implement the necessary transformation of AMISOM on the basis of the
outcomes of the joint review, thereby demonstrating full commitment to the Somali
transition.
Somalia faces a complex combination of new and old threats to its stability and
progress. Recurring humanitarian crises such as ongoing floods add to the suffering
of the Somali people, who continue to demonstrate exemplary resilience in the face
of formidable challenges. Alongside the threat of Al-Shabaab, its affiliates and other
non-State armed groups, continuing differences between the Federal Government and
federal member states, exacerbated by external influence and interference, are major
obstacles to the formation of a functioning federal State. I urge the leaders of Somalia
to put aside their differences and forge the necessary agreements, under a common
vision, to build a functioning federal State for all Somalis. The people of Somalia,
already among the poorest and more vulnerable in the world, must not pay the price
arising from a failure to strengthen political unity.
At the same time, the international community should redouble its efforts to
shield Somalia from the impact of external rivalries that threaten to revers e the gains
achieved so far. I urge the Security Council, the African Union, including its Peace
and Security Council, and Member States to examine ways and exert the effort
necessary to protect Somalia from further division.
I welcome the development of the transition plan as an important sign of the
commitment of the Federal Government of Somalia and its federal member states
towards taking ownership and responsibility for security. As the leaders of Somalia
18-11230

11/13

S/2018/674

continue on the path towards resolving key questions in relation to federalism, which
is to be enshrined in a permanent Constitution, political differences should not be
allowed to prevent the implementation of the transition plan and the establishment of
an effective and accountable security sector that is capable of gradually assuming
responsibility from AMISOM. Federal and sub-federal line ministries and security
institutions must continue to work together closely to realize the national security
architecture, including by accelerating the integration of regional forces into national
and State security institutions, in accordance with human rights standards. All efforts
should be made to ensure Somali ownership and unity of purpose at the federal and
State levels, as well as wider buy-in across Somali society, for the successful
implementation of the transition plan.
Equally, the implementation of the transition plan will not be possible without
the full participation, coordination and support of AMISOM and its troop - and policecontributing countries, as well as key security partners. I welcome the commitment
to the transition plan expressed by AMISOM, troop- and police-contributing countries
and partners during the joint review, and encourage them to continue this spirit of
engagement in the detailed planning and operationalization of the plan through
existing mechanisms, as part of a comprehensive approach to security.
Implementation of the first phase and its pilot priorities will be a test case for the
AMISOM-Somali security institutions nexus and should be fully supported. Lessons
learned from the early stage should be used to adapt the transition effort, thereby
enhancing its credibility and prospects.
Given the existing gaps in their current state of readiness, most Somali national
army units outside Mogadishu cannot assume responsibilities from AMISOM forces.
They lack the collective military capability to conduct effective offensive operations
on their own, being unable to independently sustain themselves, and require
significant investment if they are to become a legitimate force in Somalia. I commend
the efforts of the Federal Government to draw a clear and transparent picture of the
status of the Somali national army, which greatly assisted in further transition
planning. The endorsement by the Chief of the Defence Forces of the findings of the
operational readiness assessment of the Somali national army is an important step
prior to the finalization of the joint review’s findings and recommendations.
In that regard, I commend the integration of 2,400 Puntland force personnel into
the Somali national army, and urge Somali authorities to expedite the identification
and integration of regional forces in other federal member states into the Somali
security forces, in accordance with the national security architecture and the
agreements of the National Security Council. I also encourage the Somali authorities
to complete the operational readiness assessment of regional forces, which would
provide a better understanding of their readiness to conduct joint operations, and to
conduct continuous assessments of Somali security forces as they reorganize in
support of the transition.
I urge the international partners of Somalia, as signatories to the security pact
agreed in London in May 2017, in recognition and support of the country’s efforts to
assume responsibility for its own security, to step forward and provide the support
and resources needed for the successful implementation of the transition plan. At the
same time, I urge the Federal Government and federal member states to recognize
that progress in taking the political decisions needed for essential reforms, and
concrete steps towards the implementation of the transition plan, will be critical to
the availability of resources.
I reiterate my call for predictable and sustainable funding for AMISOM, and
refer to the report of the special envoys on AMISOM financing, submitted to the
Security Council on 19 April 2018, which makes a strong case for continued
12/13

18-11230

S/2018/674

predictable financing for AMISOM as it adapts in support of the country’s
transformation. The joint review has provided the parameters for that transformation
through the proposed AMISOM reconfiguration, for which financial support will be
critical.
On the whole, I am encouraged by the steps being taken towards a gradual,
conditions-based handover of security to Somali security forces and institutions.
I commend AMISOM for successfully completing its first drawdown of 1,000
military personnel in December 2017 and urge AMISOM to complete th e generation
of the remaining additional police personnel that have been authorized. Over the next
several months, AMISOM and Somali security forces will undertake operations and
tasks necessary to implement the first phase of the transition in the three p riority
locations. This will be a critical period that will test both the credibility of the
transition plan and the effectiveness of AMISOM support to the plan. AMISOM
should be afforded the time to complete its reconfiguration, with an extension of the
timeline for further reductions in its uniformed personnel. The proposed
reconfiguration would not only enable AMISOM to more effectively deliver on its
mandate in support of the Somali transition, but it would also improve the prospects
for sustainable reductions in uniformed personnel as a result of the creation of a more
efficient and transformed AMISOM, in line with a conditions -based transition.
In this overall context, assurances on issues related to accountability in the use
of resources underpin any enhanced United Nations support, and the human rights
due diligence policy remains the cornerstone of such support either to AMISOM by
virtue of its reconfiguration, or to Somali security forces.
I take note of the intention of the African Union Commission to conduct a review
of the AMISOM civilian component. I consider that, pursuant to resolution 2372
(2017), the focus should remain on tasks that enable the delivery on the core mandate
of AMISOM, including political engagement with respect to all aspects of mandate
delivery. The complementarity of mandates and close collaboration at all levels
should drive the work of AMISOM civilians and UNSOM.
I pay tribute and reiterate my deep gratitude to the brave men and women of
AMISOM and to the Somali security forces, whose courage and sacrifices give hope
to millions of Somalis in their quest for a durable peace and a future free from armed
conflict.
I also express my appreciation for the work of the leaders and participants in the
joint review. I am aware of the challenges that they faced and the proud manner in
which they sought to resolve them.
I would be grateful if you could bring the present letter to the attention of the
members of the Security Council.
(Signed) António Guterres

18-11230

13/13
