UNITED NATIONS

SECURITY COUNCIL
OFFICIAL

RECORDS

THIRTY-FIRST

YEAR

1926

a

;-

.

,)..i

th
MEETING:

14 JUNE 1976

N(-jV
13,;
1: 5 $+r
i .,t ‘. ,

NEW YORK

-.

, .,

CONTENTS
Page

Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/l926/Rev.

1) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

1

Adoption of the agenda . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

1

The situation in Cyprus:
Report of the Secretary-General
on the United
Cyprus(S/12093)..................................................

1

Nations

operation

in

S/PV. 1926

NOTE
Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined with figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United
. Nations document.
Documents of the Security Council (symbol S/ . . .) are normally published in
quarterly Supplements of the Of$cial Records of the Security Council. The date
of the document indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which information about it is given.
The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a
system adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Resolutions
and
Decisions
of the Security Council. The new. system, which has been applied
retroactively to resolutions adopted before 1 January 1965, became fully operative
on that date.

1926th MEETING
Held in New York on Monday,
President:

Mr. Rashleigh

E. JACKSON

Cyprus. Despite the enormous difficulties
he has
encountered, the Secretary-General
has been able to
maintain the negotiating
process between the two
communities.
We are greatly indebted to him, and we
should like to reiterate our admiration for his tenacious
endeavours, his patience and his skilful diplomacy.
Our deep appreciation also goes to the Special Representative of the Secretary-General,
Ambassador P&z
de CuCllar, whose contribution to the search for peace
has already proved extremely constructive,
to the
commander
of the United Nations Peace-keeping
Force in Cyprus, Lieutenant-General
Prem Chand, and
to the Under-Secretaries-General,
Mr.
Roberto
Guyer and Mr. Brian Urquhart, for their efforts.

(Guyana).

Present: The representatives of the following States:
Benin, China, France, Guyana, Italy, Japan, Libyan
Arab Republic, Pakistan, Panama, Romania, Sweden,
Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, United Kingdom
of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United Republic
of Tanzania, United States of America.
Provisional
1. Adoption
2.

agenda (S/Agenda/l926/Rev.l)

of the agenda

The situation in Cyprus:
Report of the Secretary-General
on the United
Nations operation in Cyprus (S/12093)
The meeting

5. In my previous statement I reaffirmed my Govemment’s unequivocal
stand on the representation
of
Cyprus. The Greek Cypriot representatives have no
right whatsoever to speak on behalf of Cyprus.

was called to order at 5 p.m.
Adoption

of the agenda
6. In its moderation and dedication to the search for
peace, the Turkish community
has refrained from
claiming external solrereignty for the administration
it set up after the collapse of the constitutional
order.
It has also taken a commendable
and constructive
initiative in proposing a provisional joint government.
But that proposal has fallen on deaf ears, and the Greek
community
has chosen to live with the myth that it
represents-the whole of Cyprus. It can continue to
delude itself with that myth, but that cannot and will
not change the reality.

The agenda was adopted.
The situation in Cyprus:
Report of the Secretary-General on the United Nations
operation in Cyprus (S/12093)
1. The PRESIDENT:
In accordance with the decisions taken by the Council at its 1925th meeting,
I shall now invite the representatives of Cyprus, Turkey
and Greece to participate in the discussion without the
right to vote.

7. It is high time for the leaders of the Greek Cypriot
community finally to understand that their insistence
on posturing as the representatives
of the Cyprus
State can serve no purpose other than to increase the
distrust and further accentuate the cleavages between
the two communities.
They will have to bear the
full responsibility
for the consequences which might
ensue from that political aberration.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Christophides,
(Cyprus), Mr. Tiirkmen (Turkey) and Mr. Papoulias
,(Greece) took places at the Council table.
2. The PRESIDENT:
Turkey.

14 June 1976, at 4 p.m.

I call on the representative

of

3. Mr. TiiRKMEN
(Turkey): During the last Council
meeting I confined myself to a f&w remarks about our
basic position regarding the Council’s discussions.,
With your permission I should now like to explain
in some detail the views of my Government on issues
that have been raised.

8. It became manifest at the last meeting that our
approach to these meetings of the Council is radically
different from that of the Greek side. Our position has
been a simple one. We were convinced of the imperative need to avoid as far as possible acrimonious
debates and an exchange of accusations, because such
a course of action would be detrimental to the prospects
of reactivating the intercommunal
talks initiated on a
new basis in February. We were hoping that, despite
the discouraging sequence of events since the last

4. At the outset, on behalfof my Government I should
like to express gratitude to the Secretary-General
and
to his dedicated staff for their untiring efforts in
connexion
with the United
Nations activities
in
1

5:
: I.

meeting of the Council on the subject, in December,.
and despite the protracted and unproductive character
of the intercommunal
talks recently, the Council would
best discharge its responsibility
by promoting
an
atmosphere conducive to a resumption of the quest
for a peaceful solution. We thought that the preservation of the negotiating process was more important
than ‘any other consideration.
We failed to see an
alternative to dialogue.

13. The Constitution adopted in 1960, when Cyprus
became independent, was based on the principle of
equal partnership between the two communities.
This
was a structure reflecting the realities underlying the
relations between the two national groups, a compromise arrangement which struck a balance between
the divergent aspirations of the communities.
But even
then the dangers that lay ahead were obvious. The
political struggle waged before 1960 by the Greek
community
aimed not at independence but, rather,
at union with Greece. The Greek Cypriot leadership
at that time-which,
incidentally,
is still the leadership today-had
also made clear its political ambition
of dominating the Turkish community totally. It therefore -became necessary to devise guarantees against
attempts to violate the Constitution and terminate the
independence of the island.

9. The statements made by the Greek side have once
more shown that we are far apart in our political
perceptions and in our approach to the problem.
Impervious to reality, imbued with an incredible and
frightening fanaticism,
inspired by a megalomaniac
drive, full of disdain for the rights of people who are
not of their creed and race, deprived of any sense of
historical perspective, the Greek Cypriot leadership is
unable to overcome its yearning for its bygone
monopoly of power, power it unscrupulously
abused
for so long to tyrannize and to oppress the Turkish
community. It cannot, and, I am afraid, perhaps never
will’believe in the virtues of negotiation, compromise
and harmonious co-existence.

14.‘* Notwithstanding
those guarantees, the Republic
of Cyprus barely survived three years; it collapsed in
1963. The reason for that tragic outcome was that the
leadership of the Greek Cypriot community considered
from the very beginning that independence was only
a transitional stage, to be followed at the first opportunity by enosis. The loyalty of the Greek Cypriot
community was channelled not towards independence,
not towards intercommunal
partnership
and cooperation, but towards racial hatred and enosis. The
tampering with the Constitution which began very soon
after the new State had come into being gradually
gained momentum
and culminated in a massive and
brutal onslaught against the Turkish community
in
1963, compelling
that community
to live under
constant
deprivation,
humiliation
and relentless
oppression and tyranny for 11 years.

10. In his statement the representative of the Greek
Cypriots echoed the national feelings and aspirations
of the Greek people. We appreciate those feelings
and have no quarrel with those aspirations as long
as they are legitimate and can be reconciled with the
respective feelings and aspirations of the Turkish
people. But it should be borne in mind that!Cyprus
is not a Greek island. It never has been. There exists
a Turkish community
which has lived there for
centuries. The aspirations and interests of the two
peoples, the two national communities,
can be reconciled only if they can succeed in living side by side
u#ty.rIfGreek
feelings are hurt today,
y$&P&.
k
6 a& the Greeks should only blame
their own leaders and the previous Greek Governments
who for years stimulated their imagination with false
hopes and impossible dreams.

15. During that period, which lasted for 11 years,
2,000 Turks were killed, wounded or maimed, and
nearly 30,000 were ousted from their homes. Their
constitutional
and human rights were outrageously
violated. They were subjected to unthinkable cruelty
and barbarism. They were discriminated
against in
every conceivable field. Their homes were looted and
destroyed in a frenzy of hatred. The economic restrictions, periodic blockades and prohibition
to import
the most basic commodities
condemned them to live
in misery, with degrading, subhuman standards of life,
and under the imminent threat of starvation. It was
again during that time that Greece, in 1964, openly
violated the independence of Cyprus and dispatched
20,000 troops to the island.

11. The Greek Cypriot representative has repeated
the familiar accusations against Turkey. He spoke of
aggression, invasion, military occupation. There were,
of course, no references thoughout his speech to the
tragic events which led to the lawful intervention of
Turkey in fulfilment of its commitments
under intemational treaties. He made no mention of the background
of the problem, which is the root cause of the situation
we face today in the unfortunate island of Cyprus.
I have therefore no other choice but to remind him and
the Council of the basic developments which brought
about the present state of affairs. I shall try to do so
as briefly as possible.
’

16. It should come as no surprise to the Greek Cypriot
leaders that the Turks of Cyprus, having had to endure
‘such a tragic fate, opted as soon as they had the’
opportunity to do so, to move massively to the Turkish
area of the island. Practically no Turks remain in the
area under Greek control. And yet in his statement,
Mr. Christophides had the audacity to associate the
Turks of Cyprus with the accusations he has launched
against Turkey, asserting that the Greeks and Turks
alike are suffering as a result of the Turkish presence

12. The essence of the problem of Cyprus is basically
a conflict between the Turkish and Greek communities
on rules of coexistence as embodied in constitutional
principles, and on the very future of Cyprus as a
State.
2

in the island. This was perhaps an attempt to give a
semblance of credibility
to his claim to represent
the whole of Cyprus, but it was pathetically unconvincing. It was, to use his own words, “an offence
against the integrity of hundreds of neutral observers
and an unconvincing attempt to underestimate human
intelligence”
[1925rh meeting, paru. 191.

never occurred to the Greek Cypriot leadership,
negotiating then from a position of strength, that time
was precious. It is because they face an equal negotiating party today, which is not ready to forego its
rights, that they have become so hysterically impatient
and are trying to substitute rhetoric and international
pressure for negotiations.
->
21. We all know how the previous negotiation process
came abruptly to an end, with the coup d’e’tut carried
out in July 1974 by the Greek military forces, with
the avowed aim of achieving enosis. Archbishop
Makarios has vividly described the true nature of that
undertaking.
This is what he said in the Council on
19 July 1974:

17. In 1964, the Greek Cypriot leadership had
successfully carried out its attempt to crush the&ate
structure and deprive the Turkish Cypriots of their
fundamental rights. Greece had established a military
supremacy on the island. True, enosis was notproclaimed and the fiction of an independent State of
Cyprus was maintained.
But Archbishop Makarios,
while on the one hand posing as a champion ofthe
independence of Cyprus, had not, on the other hand,
shrunk from his long-term goal. Here is an extract
from the interview he gave to the Greek newspaper
Apogevmatini
on 8 September 1966:

“The military regime of Greece has callously
violated the independence
of Cyprus. Without a
trace of respect for the democratic rights of the
Cypriot people, without a trace of respect for the
independence and sovereignty of the Republic of
Cyprus, the Greek junta has, extended its dictatorship to Cyprus.”
U780th rnyt&& pf/t$~~~~:~~.L ,,

“If I have any ambition, it is to link my name
with the union of Cyprus with Greece, with the
expansion of Greece’s boundaries up to the shores
of North Africa through the union of Cyprus. This
is my only ambition, for the realization of which
I shall continue to struggle till death.”

In the same statement

he pointed out:

“The coup did not come about under such
circumstances as to be considered an internal matter
of the Greek Cypriots. It is clearly an invasion from
outside, in flagrant violation of the independence
and sovereignty of the Republic of Cyprus.‘* [Ibid.,
para. 18.1

In the same year, in an interview with The Washington
Post, he reaffirmed his dedication
to the goal of
enosis. He said:
“I want something higher than being a temporary
President of Cyprus. My ambition is to connect my
name with history as the architect of enosis.”

He further stated:
‘6 . . . the events in Cyprus do not constitute an
internal matter of the Greeks of Cyprus. The Turks
of Cyprus are also affected. The coup of the Greek
Junta is an invasion, and from its consequences the
whole people of Cyprus suffers, both Greeks and
Turks.” [Ibid., para. 32.1

18. I know that the dual loyalty of Archbishop
Makarios, to enosis and to independence, is puzzling,
What is the explanation?
I think that one previous
representative of Greece was correct when he said in
the Security Council in the aftermath of the coup of
1974 that Makarios believed that he could fool all the
people all the time. Basically, of course, what moved
Archbishop Makarios and still does is his undying
ambition
to extend his power beyond reach. He
fervently desires enosis , but in conditions which would
exalt his power and ego.

22. Those words eloquently illustrate the justification
for the intervention
that Turkey was compelled to
undertake. They constitute also, I believe, the best
reply to the representative of Greece, who, during
his statement at the last meeting, regrettably, referred
to a Turkish invasion. The only invasion that took
place in July 1974 was the invasion from Greece.
Turkey was forced to undertake a lawful intervention.
The Turkish forces which are now in Cyprus are not
forces of occupation. They have been sent there to
stop the invasion by Greece, to remove the threat to
the independence of Cyprus, to pave the way for a new
constitutional
order and to protect the Turkish community.

19. During the period to which I am referring,
between 1963 and 1974, there was an attempt to
negotiate a solution. Negotiations between the Turkish
and Greek communities
were initiated
in 1968,
following the serious crisis in 1967, when the forces of
occupation of Greece had launched direct military
attacks against Turkish villages all over the island.
That recourse to the use of force in 1967 had provoked
an upheaval which eventually compelled the Greek
Government temporarily
to alter its policy of enosis
and to accept for the first time direct negotiations
between the two communities.

23. The Turkish Government
has repeatedly stated
that it has no political or territorial ambition and no
strategic interest in Cyprus and that its forces will be
withdrawn as soon as a settlement has been reached.
It has already substantially reduced the numbers of

20. These intercommunal
negotiations
lasted for
six years; they were in vain. During all that time it
3

military units on the island, but a total withdrawal
before the two communities
agree on a solution is
unthinkable.
The bloodshed that can occur between
communities
when they do not agree on principles by
which they will coexist and co-operate has been
tragically illustrated only recently in another country
in the area. The experience in Cyprus would certainly
be more dreadful.

27. The allegation that the Turkish Cypriot authorities are expelling the Greek Cypriots from the. northern
region of Cyprus is totally unfounded. The Greek
Cypriots who are emigrating from the north to the
south are doing so in accordance with the criteria
agreed upon between the representatives of the two
communities
during the third round of the Vienna
talks, held between 31 July and 2 August 1975. Indeed,
point 3 of the press communique on those talks reads
as follows:
i
“The Greek Cypriots at present in the north who,
at their own request and without having been
subjected to any kind of pressure, wish to move to the
south will be permitted to do so.” [S/11789, annex.]

24. I can reiterate, on behalf of my Government,
that Turkey has no intention of retaining its forces
there. Turkey has no intention of partitioning
the
island. We do not intend a Turkish solution in the
island. What we do want for the Turks of the island is
that they should feel free from all the threats under
which they have lived for so long. We want to rest
assured that the island will become what it has never
been-a truly independent island, a truly non-aligned
‘island. This is a process which will materialize through
negotiations; there is no other way. But negotiations
will not start by attempts to return to the situation
prevailing before 15 July 1974, when there was no
possibility of negotiation.

Sincethen the Turkish Cypriot authorities have been
faithful to that agreement. Nobody has been expelled,
but written applications
which the Greek Cypriots
have .:submitted to the Turkish authorities,
either
directly or through UNFICYP,
have been accepted.
The Turkish community
has consistently taken the
position that it considers it inhuman to compel the
Greek Cypriots who wish to go south to remain in
the north. This is, of course, in contradiction with the
political tradition of the Greek Cypriot leaders who,
for so long, prevented the Turkish Cypriots from
moving to Turkish areas in order to retain them as
hostages and as a means of pressure against the Turkish
community.

25. The Greek Cypriot representative, seconded by
the representative of Greece, made a series of allegations concerning
the freedom
of movement
of
UNFICYP
in the Turkish area, the Greek Cypriots
living in the north, the so-called colonization policy of
Turkey and the problem of refugees, missing persons
and certain other aspects of the situation prevailing
on the island. The representative
of the Turkish
Cypriot community
will, I hope, be provided again
with an opportunity to explain his views on all those
points. So far as I am concerned, it is not my intention
to engage in an exchange of arguments with the Greek
Cypriot representative or with the representative of
Greece. I should like, however, to shed some light on
the issues raised.

28. The Turkish Cypriot authorities have in their
possession documents and tapes which bear witness to
the voluntary nature of the movement to the south.
It is true that recently there has been an accelerated
tendency among the Greek Cypriots living in the north
to move south, but that is not due to any pressure
from the Turkish Cypriot authorities.
The Turkish
Cypriot community
would gain no political leverage
from such immigration.
The accelerated movement to
the south is, rather, due to the fact that the forced
resignation of Mr. Glafcos Clerides and the statements
of the extremist Greek Cypriot leaders advocating
a protracted struggle have led the Greeks living in
northern Cyprus to become disillusioned
as to the
outcome of the intercommunal
talks. But the Greek
Cypriots, once having moved to the south on purely
voluntary grounds, see fit to claim that they were
expelled from the Turkish zone. They do that to avoid
allegations of treason and deprivation of access to the
Greek Cypriot refugee fund.

26. On UNFICYP’s
freedom of movement,
the
Council is aware that discussions are under way
between the representatives of the Secretary-General
and the Turkish Cypriot community
with a view to
arriving at an agreement on the stationing, deployment
and functioning of UNFICYP
in the Turkish area. It
is our hope that if the mandate can be renewed it will
be possible to conclude that agreement rapidly and to
remove the difficulties that may exist owing to a lack
of clear guidelines.
I am glad that the SecretaryL
General shares this opinion, as he makes clear in
paragraph 66 of his report:

29. In order to find a solution to this problem in a
way that would safeguard the legitimate rights of the
Greek Cypriots living in the north and prevent misunderstanding
and tension between the two communities,
the Turkish Cypriot negotiator
made a
proposal to his counterpart at the meeting on 27 May
1976, held in Nicosia. The Turkish Cypriot representative asked the Greek Cypriot leadership to pledge
publicly not to accuse those Greek Cypriots voluntarily
moving south of treason and not to deny them access

“In this connexion, I should mention that the
discussions between Mr. Rauf Denktag and my
Special Representative
concerning the stationing,
deployment
and functioning of UNFICYP
in the
north in accordance with the pro&s-verbal
of
13 December 1975 [S/12093, pm-u. 81 are making
progress. It is my hope that once these discussions
are completed UNFICYP’s
functioning in the north
may be improved.”
4

to the refugee fund. Subject to the approval of that
suggestion, he proposed that the Greek Cypriots
wishing to move south indicate their desire in the
presence of the International
Red Cross. The Greek
Cypriot representative,
however, declined to accept
that proposal.

36. I .should
refugees.

like now to take up the question

of

37. As has been repeatedly stressed by the representative of the Turkish community during the previous
discussions in the Council, the question of refugees
is not new to Cyprus. The Turkish community
has
suffered from a refugee problem for the past two
decades. In 1963, as a result of the Greek Cypriot
attacks and oppression, 26,000 Turkish Cypriots were
uprooted, some of them for the second time, because
they had already been uprooted back in 1957. In 1974,
more than one half of the Turkish Cypriot community
-some 60,000 people-was
uprooted from the south
and had to flee to the north for safety.

30. We have had extensive consultations
with
President Denktas on this issue. He has taken it upon
himself to investigate any allegation of pressure and
he is studying various formulas which would permit the
applications to be screened by impartial authorities
and thus dispel misgivings expressed in this respect.
31. The assertion that there is a massive immigration of Turkish nationals from Turkey to Cyprus with
the purpose of changing the demographic character
of the island in order to allow Turkey to annex or to
partition the island is contrary to actual facts. The
Turkish Government
is not following a policy of
annexation or partition. The Turkish Government has
repeatedly stated its attachment to the principle of
independence,
territorial
integrity and sovereignty
of the island, and to a peaceful settlement of the
problem through intercommunal
talks.

38. We do not know the number of Greek Cypriots
who chose to go to the south during the military
operations in 1974. The figures cited by the Greek
Cypriots vary greatly. As this issue is exploited for
propaganda purposes, we have even heard a figure as
high as 220,000, which is certainly grossly inflated.
The Greek Cypriot Attorney General, in his book
entitled The Legal Aspects of the Problem of Refugees
in Cyprus, asserts that there cannot possibly be more
than 120,000 refugees in Cyprus.

32. As far as the Turkish community is concerned,
it is also in no need of an infusion of population to
assert its right to an equitable share of territory under
a federal solution.

39. That the Greek Cypriot side is blowing up the
extent of the refugee problem out of all proportion is
becoming more and more evident. In an article which
appeared in the Chicago Daily News on 27 January
1976, Mr. Bruce Love wrote the following:

33. But quite apart from these considerations,
it
should also be borne in mind that the economic situation in the north is not conducive to massive immigration. There are already in the north 60,000 immigrants
who came from the south of the island and who
should be settled. There is no more room for further
immigration
under the present economic conditions.

“Hardly a week goes by without a visit by representatives of Congress and various charitable
organizations. They are dutifully shown the 14,000
‘tent refugees’. They interview the same heartbreaking cases. Needless to say they are not told
that the .refugees could be housed in some of the
solid houses vacated by British troops or in prefabricated housing so easy to import. The blunt fact
is that Makarios wants at least some refugees under
tents. As it is, the authorities have a hard time
keeping the 14,000 from ‘defecting* to more comfortable shelter.‘*

34. What is taking place is that skilled technicians
and workers are being imported from Turkey on a
temporary basis to meet the immediate needs of the
economy. There is no question of those people
acquiring Cypriot citizenship or taking up permanent
residence in the island.

40. Nobody denies that the refugee problem is an
important one. But the solution will have to take into
account all the elements of the problem, not exclusively
the issue of Greek refugees. The Turkish Cypriot
community has 86,000 refugees, some of them stiil in
the process of being rehabilitated. An equal number of
Greek Cypriots has been resettled in Turkish houses
and on Turkish properties in the south.

35. The largest number of people who have come to
Cyprus since August 1974 is ‘made up of Turkish
Cypriots who had emigrated to Turkey, Great Britain
and other Commonwealth countries over the past years
under political, administrative,
social and economic
pressures from the Greek Cypriot administration
and
are now being given the opportunity to return to their
homeland and lead a normal life, under conditions of
security, in accordance with the Constitution and the
relevant citizenship laws of the Republic of Cyprus.
It should also be noted that there is a great number of
Turks of Cypriot origin in Turkey alone who are entitled
to come and settle in Cyprus under Annex D of the
Treaty concerning the Establishment of the Republic of
Cyprus signed in 1960.’

41. On the other hand, the scope of the problem has
undergone a great change since last year’s agreement in
the intercommunal
talks on a voluntary exchange of
population.
As a result of this agreement, all the
Turkish Cypriots who were living in the south of the
island under the jurisdiction
of the Greek Cypriot
administration
have moved to the north into the
5

area under the jurisdiction
administration.

of the Turkish

Cypriot

UNFICYP
for yet another period of six months, the
negotiations between the two communities
under the
personal auspices of the Secretary-General were stalled
and the political situation had deteriorated after the
acrimonious General Assembly debate and resolution
on Cyprus. One of the negotiating parties, the Turkish
Cypriot community,
had rejected resolution
3395
(XXX) for the reasons explained in detail to this
Council by its representative, Mr. Celik, last December [1863rd meeting].
Hence, a new basis for the
resumption of intercommunal
talks had to be found; a
new procedure had to be agreed upon between the
negotiating parties.

42. The solution of the remaining aspects of the
problem is therefore intimately linked to the overall
settlement of the Cyprus issue.
43. As regards the question of missing persons, the
Turkish side-and I mean the Government of Turkey
and the Turkish Cypriot community-has
repeatedly
stated that no missing Greek Cypriots are in the hands
of the Turkish authorities. This fact has also been
verified by the International
Red Cross, which formally
informed President Denktag and Mr. Clerides of its
findings. The Greek side, however, continues the
attempts to exploit humanitarian
feelings by blaming
the Turkish side for the losses it suffered during the
coup of 15 July engineered from Greece. It should be
recalled that the international press had reported at the
time that the death toll of the supporters of Makarios
was “at least 2,000”. In his statement to the Council
in 1974 [1780th meeting],
Archbishop
Makarios
himself said that the Greek coup had “caused much
bloodshed”
and stressed that the organizers of the
coup0 had killed thousands of his supporters. Perhaps
the conclusion of the trial of Sampson, that is if it is
ever concluded, will throw more light on this issue.

48. To such an end, the Foreign Ministers of Turkey
and Greece agreed upon a new basis for the resumption
of the intercommunal
talks last December in Brussels
and advised their respective national communities
in
the island to adopt it. The Brussels agreement
envisaged the resumption
of intercommunal
talks
without preconditions and with a view to arriving at a
package-deal agreement on the outstanding aspects of
the Cyprus conflict-namely,
on territory, federation
and the powers of the central Government-to
be
negotiated with no priority attached to any particular
aspect. The Brussels agreement further foresaw the
establishment
of two committees,
one dealing with
territorial questions and the other with constitutional
matters, at a certain stage of the negotiating process.
This was a practical compromise
in the form of
simultaneous
negotiations
on the political demands
of the Turkish Cypriot Community,
on the one hand,
and the territorial
demands of the Greek Cypriot
Community,
on the other, with a view to reaching
an overall settlement.

44. Having commented on the issues raised, by the
Greek side, I wish to reiterate to the Council that the
Turkish Government
is ready to encourage more
frequent and fruitful meetings between the representatives of the two communities
on humanitarian
questions.
Mr.
Christophides
and Ambassador
Papoulias had a great deal to say about the nonimplementation
of United Nations resolutions
on
Cyprus by Turkey. I do not accept that charge. If
they are studied carefully it will be seen that the
substance of all resolutions boils down to urging the
solution of the problem through intercommunal
talks,
notwithstanding
certain provisions
which Turkey
found impossible to accept.

49. After exhaustive consultations with the parties
concerned, the Secretary-General
appealed to the
two communities
to resume the talks with no preconditions, in conformity with the Brussels agreement.
The Turkish Cypriot community responded favourably
to that appeal on 2 February and expressed its readiness
to engage in meaningful negotiations.

45. ~1 should like now to make a few observations
regarding the part of the report of the SecretaryGenreai dealing with the negotiating process. This
indeed is the crucial aspect on which we should focus
our attention for the settlement of all issues related to
Cyprus depends on the outcome of the intercommunal
talks.

50. The new negotiating
process based on the
Brussels agreement, and initiated through the efforts
of the Secretary-General,
was a commendable
step,
for it could have generated a shared quest for peace.
Yet, the road leading to Vienna was marked by
difficulties from the very beginning, for one of the
negotiating parties, the Greek Cypriot community, was
tom by internal dissent and disunity. Archbishop
Makarios, as usual, wanted to play all his cards at
the same time and was quite reluctant to engage in
meaningful negotiations.
The result was that, even
before the Vienna meeting, the Greek Cypriot negotiator for the last eight years, Mr. Clerides, resigned
and later withdrew his resignation,
reflecting the
increasing turmoil within the Greek Cypriot leadership. Later Mr. Clerides had to go to the fifth round
of talks in Vienna accompanied by a Greek Cypriot
delegation composed of members representing the
divergent factions among the Greek Cypriots.

46. The section of the report of the Secretary-General
covering the intercommunal
talks retraces the difficult
path of bringing together the negotiators and maintaining the momentum
of the talks. The Greek side
has given a biased interpretation of this section and has
twisted the facts beyond recognition.
I should like
therefore to recall briefly what has happened since the
last meeting of the Council on Cyprus, in December.
47. As we all remember, when the Council met six
months ago to consider the extension of the mandate of
6

51. When finally the Vienna talks got under way the
Greek Cypriots failed to make any concrete proposals
throughout four days of negotiations.
The Turkish
Cypriot negotiator, Mr. Denktag, on the other hand,
explained in detail the views of his side on all aspects
of the question of Cyprus, as envisaged in the Brussels
agreement. At the end, a procedure was agreed upon
whereby the Greek Cypriot side would forward its
proposals within six weeks and the Turkish Cypriot
side would make its counter-proposals
within 10 days
after the Greek Cypriot proposals were received. In
agreeing to such a time-table, Mr. Denktas hoped that
the Greek side would overcome its internal differences
and be able to formulate a comprehensive negotiating
position. Yet, such hopes did not materialize. Unable
to settle its domestic divergencies as to what to
propose, the Greek Cypriot leadership seems to have
agreed on one thing: to misuse the name of the
Secretary-General
and his mission of good offices.
In utter disregard for the delicate role of the SecretaryGeneral, the Greek Cypriots deemed it convenient
to present-or,
rather, misrepresent-their
proposal as
if it were suggested or endorsed by the SecretaryGeneral. It was only long after the Secretary-General
had repreatedly repudiated such an allegation that the
Greek Cypriot side finally retracted somewhat its
unfounded claim.

events,. despite the’ legitimate
distrust and concern
that this has caused in the Turkish community,
the
Government of Turkey has persistently urged meaningful negotiations. The Turkish community, notwithstanding its serious apprehension
that fanatics of
Greek nationalism have gained the upper hand within
the Greek Cypriot leadership, has accepted, the continuation of intercommunal
talks and appointed a new
negotiator.
But this time the Turkish community
quite rightly insisted on serious negotiations.
The
previous talks had degenerated
into a profitless
propaganda exercise and a procedural wrangle. In
order to avoid a repetition of this unfortunate pattern,
the Turkish side proposed that the territorial problem
be discussed confidentially.
What has been the
response to this constructive
suggestion? A new
barrage of accusations and propaganda in the form of
a letter by the Greek Cypriot negotiator to the representative of the Secretary-General,
as echoed ;-and
amplified by the Greek side last Friday.

52. When the negotiators returned to Nicosia after
the fifth round of the talks in Vienna, the Turkish
Cypriot representative waited in vain for the Greek
Cypriot negotiator to forward his proposals as agreed
in Vienna. No proposals were forthcoming,
and
pandemonium
erupted in which the Greek Cypriot
side at first denied the procedure agreed upon in
Vienna, and thereafter came up with the incredible
assertion that Mr. Clerides had not communicated
the Vienna agreement
to his supreme
leader.
Mr. Clerides was sacrificed on the altar of truth. The
last voice of moderation and reason was thus drowned
by the opponents of a negotiated settlement.

“continues to regard the intercommunal
talks as the
best means for the achievement of a peaceful and
lasting solution to the Cyprus problem”
[192%/z

55. We hope, nevertheless, that this will not be the
last word and that the Secretary-General
will be able
to bring the two negotiators once more to the negotiating table. Despite the totally negative content of
his statement, we noted that Mr. Christophides has
said that his side:

meeting,

para. 34.1

If we can single out this statement from the rhetoric
surrounding it, we are ready to consider it as a positive
approach. Ambassador Papoulias has also said that his
Government
lends its full support to the SecretaryGeneral’s mission and will continue to do so in the
future. We fully share the view that the talks should
be meaningful and productive. I can assure the Council
that the Turkish Government is more than willing to
exert all its influence with a view to assisting the
parties to arrive at a peaceful settlement. We trust that
the Secretary-General
will be able to reactivate the
negotiating process within the framework which was
laid down before and during the fifth round of talks at
Vienna.

53. That the fanatical winds were blowing strong was
borne out by the choice of the new Greek Cypriot
negotiator. The person chosen, Mr. Papadopoulos,
had been an EOKA partisan who had no qualms
about his political aspirations. Here is an extract from
a statement Mr. Papadopoulos made in Morphou on
27 October 1967:

56. I should like to make a final remark. Mr. Christophides has asserted that the Turkish Government is in
a position of dominance and retains the main responsibility in the intercommunal
talks and that it should
therefore be blamed for the lack of progress. Leaving
aside the question that he proceeds from the selfrighteous assumption that all Greek proposals are
constructive and just, and all Turkish proposals unjust
and unacceptable, it should be pointed out that his
conception of the position and role of Turkey in the
intercommunal
negotiations
is totally
erroneous.
Turkey has no interest in Cyprus beyond the independence of the island, its non-involvement
in any strategic
arrangement or power politics, and the well-being and

“Our national tradition and ancestral endowment
have precharted the course of our evolution
in
history, and no power, no pressure, no threats, no
intervention,
no sacrifice, no time considerations
can divert the course of history from its natural
evolution, which leads to freedom and union with
Greece... It is high time Cypriots and others made
it their conviction that union of Cyprus with Greece
is an historical necessity.. . There can be no freedom
for Cyprus outside the boundaries of Greece.”
54. Despite the justified misgivings that such a choice
of negotiator created, despite the disturbing turn of
7

se&r&y of the Turkish community.
Therefore, any
solution acceptable to the Turkish Cypriot community
will unquestionably
be acceptable to Turkey as well.

their national liberty and independence and to ensure
their social progress, and lends them support in their
efforts to protect their independence and sovereignty
from interference by external reactionary forces. The
growing mutual understanding between the socialist
countries and the non-aligned countries has caused
some dissatisfaction in imperialist and certain other
circles. Those forces would like to deprive the nonaligned movement of its anti-imperialist,
anti-colonial
and anti-racist approach and undermine its friendship
and co-operation with the socialist community.
But
these attempts are doomed to failure.

57. Mr. MALIK (Union of Soviet Socialist Republics)
(interpretation
from Russian):
Mr. President,
in
addressing the Council on the item under discussion,
I should like, first and foremost, warmly to welcome
you, Sir, a prominent diplomat and political figure in
Guyana, and to wish you success in the discharge of
the responsible functions with which you are entrusted
as President of the Council. I should like to express
my conviction that your capabilities and rich experience of active work in the United Nations will
ensure that due consideration is given to and solutions
sought for the complex questions which will have to
be taken up by the Security Council in June under
your presidency. I am particularly gratified to note
that you are the representative of a country which is
an active participant in the non-aligned movement,
a movement which is an influential force in contemporary international
relations and which is making
an important contribution
towards ensuring intemational peace and security, detente, and the elimination
of hotbeds of tension.

61. The delegation of the Soviet Union would also
like to express its gratitude to your predecessor, the
President of the Security Council for last month, the
eminent representative
of France, Ambassador de
Guiringaud, under whose skilful guidance the Council
discussed a number of important issues.
62. The Soviet delegation would like to take this
opportunity to express its great satisfaction at the fact
that the positions of the Soviet Union and France
on the Cyprus issue coincide. In the joint SovietFrench communique,
dated 7 December 1974, the
following statement was made on the Cyprus issue:

58. In May of this year, the people of Guyana
celebrated the tenth anniversary of their independence.
During the short period of time that it has been
developing
independently,
Guyana has trod the
difficult path of struggle against internal and external
reaction, in order to overcome the burdensome
consequences of its colonial past. And now Guyana
is waging a resolute struggle against imperialist inroads
aimed at ‘undermining
its independence and sovereignty. The Soviet people has been following with
sympathy the efforts being made by the friendly
people of Guyana and would like to wish them continued success in the further consolidation
of their
independence and in their efforts to ensure the social
and economic progress of their country. On this tenth
anniversary
of the independence
of Guyana, the
soviet people would like to express their conviction
that the friendly relations between our countries will
further .develop and grow stronger, to the benefit of
both the Soviet and the Guyanese people and in the
interest of universal peace.

“The Soviet Union and France declare their
concern over the continuation
of the dangerous
situation in Cyprus. They believe that the settlement.
of the Cyprus problem should be achieved by means
of talks and should be based on full respect for the
independence,
sovereignty and territorial integrity
of the Republic of Cyprus, on the strict implementation of the decisions of the Security Council and the
General Assembly of the United Nations on Cyprus.
The Soviet Union and France are in favour of the
speedy withdrawal of all foreign armed forces from
the Republic of Cyprus and the return to their
homes of all refugees in conditions of safety.*’
63. On behalf of the Soviet delegation,
I should
also like to welcome the new representative of Panama,
Ambassador Illueca. I should like to wish him every
success in his new post and to assure him that the
delegation of the Soviet Union in the Security Council
will be pleased to co-operate with him in order to
strengthen international
peace and security and to
enhance the effectiveness of the United Nations.

59. The considerable
growth in the influence on
international
relations of liberated States which until
quite recently were either colonies or semi-colonies is
one of the most outstanding features of the present-day
world. Most of them are staunchly defending their
political
and economic
rights, by counteracting
imperialism,
neo-colonialism
and racism, and are
striving to strengthen their independence
and to
enhance the social, economic and cultural development of their peoples.

64. Today, the Security Council is once again discussing the question of extending the mandate of the
United Nations forces in Cyprus. However, it is quite
obvious to all that this is not a question which can be
considered as a separate issue, or in isolation from the
general situation at present prevailing in Cyprus or from
the Cyprus problem.
65. The reasons for the Cyprus tragedy are known
to everyone. They are also perfectly’ well known to
the United Nations, and to the Security Council, its
chief organ for the maintenance of peace and security.

60. Guided by the principles of its Leninist foreign
policy, the Soviet Union has consistently been on
the side of those peoples which are struggling to affirm
8

They are implicit in the continual attempts by aggressive external forces to destroy the indepkndknce,
freedom and territorial
integrity of the Republic of
Cyprus, to deprive of it of an opportunity
to pursue
its policy of non-alignment,
and to turn the island into
a strategic springboard for NATO [North Atlantic
Treaty Organization]
and an unsinkable
aircraftcarrier in the eastern Mediterranean.
I hardly need
dwell in any detail on the events of the summer of
1974, when, as a result of gross intervention
on the
part of certain circles, the Republic of Cyprus was
involved in a profound crisis and its people was
subjected to severe privations and suffering.

are anxious to maintain tension in Cypms and the
adjacent region, the decisions on the Cyprus question
adopted by the Security Council and by the General
Assembly have not been implemented.
According to
those decisions, a settlement of the Cyprus crisis must
be based on the preservation of the independence,
sovereignty and territorial integrity of the Republic of
Cyprus, on respect for its policy of non-alignment,
the speedy withdrawal of all foreign troops-and military
personnel from its territory, on non-interference in its
internal affairs and on the immediate
return of all
refugees to their homes in conditions of security.
Those are the key provisions of United Nations
decisions, the implementation
of which would provide
an opportunity for a just settlement to be found to,the
Cyprus problem
and for the elimination
of this
dangerous source of tension.

66. Almost
two years have elapsed since the
beginning of the Cyprus crisis, but the situation in
Cyprus continues to be complex and explosive. As
before, in violation of the decisions of the United
Nations, there are still foreign troops in Cyprus-both
those that have been there since colonial times and
those which recently invaded the island. Many
thousands of Cypriots continue to live as exiles and
refugees in their own native land. They have no
opportunity to return to their homes. We, the Soviet
people, who ourselves experienced all the horrors of
an enemy invasion and occupation of our country
during the years of the Great Patriotic War, understand and sympathize
with the sufferings of the
Cypriots.
67. The traditional
economic
links between
various regions of Cyprus have been destroyed.

71. Now it is becoming obvious to everyone-as
has been recognized even by The New York Times
in an editorial of 9 June-that
in Cyprus things are
moving towards a partition of the island and the destruction of the independence, sovereignty and territorial integrity of a non-aligned State, the Republic
of Cyprus. The Council should not close its eyes to
the fact that further developments
along those lines
would represent a serious threat of annexation and
even of double enosis for the island. This is a threat
that should not be overlooked.
72. In these circumstances, the elementary duty of
the Security Council is to discuss the substance of the
Cyprus question, to identify the reasons why the
resolutions of. the Security Council and the General
Assembly on Cyprus have not been implemented,
and
to take steps to prevent the partition of a Member
State of the United Nations and avert the destruction
of its independence,
sovereignty
and territorial
integrity.
It would be incomprehensible,
indeed
inexplicable,
if the Council, after studying the very
full and comprehensive report of the Secretary-General
and his grave warnings regarding the dangerous turn
of events in Cyprus, were to disregard his warnings,
pass over the fundamental
aspects of the Cyprus
problem in silence and confine itself simply to a
mechanical six-month extension of the mandate of the
United Nations Force in Cyprus.

the

68. Attempts are continually being made to “solve”
the Cyprus problem within the restricted circle of the
States belonging to NATO, in Brussels or in Oslo,
and behind the backs of the Cypriot people, to the
detriment of their vital interests. These attempts are
kept secret from the international
community and the
United Nations.
69. The intercommunal
talks, which were resumed
pursuant to Security Council resolution 367 (1975),
have not resulted in any positive progress towards the
conclusion of the necessary agreement. As can be seen
from the comprehensive
report of the SecretaryGeneral which is before the Council, the situation in
Cyprus continues to deteriorate; In paragraph 63 of
that report it is emphasized that tension in the island
has continued to be high and that the problems
resulting from the events of 1974 have remained
unresolved. The active participation
of the SecretaryGeneral, under whose auspices the intercommunal
talks have been held, have not yielded any positive
results so far. The reasons for this unsatisfactory
situation are discussed in detail in the report of the
Secretary-General.

73. It is natural to expect that the non-aligned countries, both in the Council and outside it, guided by
their fundamental position on Cyprus, which has been
set in out a number of official documents of the
conferences held by those countries, in particular the
Declaration of the Lima Conference*, will take the
initiative
regarding the concrete measures which
should be taken through the United Nations in order
to protect the independence,
sovereignty and territorial integrity of the Republic of Cyprus, which is
one of the founders of and an active participant in
the non-aligned movement.

70. The fact that the most important aspects of the
Cyprus crisis have not been settled means that the
situation is a serious threat to peace and security in the
eastern Mediterranean.
Because of external forces that

74. As far as the position of four permanent
bers of the Security Council is concerned-and
9

memI am

referring to the Soviet Union, the United States,
France and the United Kingdom-they,
together with
the non-aligned countries, have also in their joint
communiques
assumed the weighty commitment
to
preserve and respect the independence,
sovereignty
and territorial
integrity of the Republic of Cyprus.
I have already quoted from the Soviet-French communique. Similar provisions are to be found in the
joint communiques
on the Soviet-American
talks of
24 November
1974 and in the United KingdomSoviet talks of 16 February 1975. Those who participated in those talks also offtcially stated that they
respected the independence, sovereignty and territorial
integrity of the Republic of Cyprus. According to the
United. Kingdom-Soviet
statement,
the Soviet
Union and the United Kingdom “recognize the one
lawful Government
of Cyprus headed by President
Makarios”
[S/116.59, annex, para. 34.1 In the SovietUnited States communique, the parties emphasize that
a just solution to the Cyprus question should be
based on strict compliance with the decisions of the
Security Council and the General Assembly regarding
Cyprus. Consequently, four of the permanent members of the Security Council have made those important commitments.
The positions defined in those
documents on the Cyprus question are fully relevant
to the present day and acquire particular significance
now in view of the tense situation which continues
in Cyprus. What must be done now is to ensure that
these promises and commitments
are fulfilled without
delay.

78. From the very beginning of that crisis, the
Soviet Union has been a constant defender of the
independence, sovereignty and territorial integrity of
Cyprus and has been in favour of withdrawing all
foreign troops from the island and granting its population-both
those of Greek and those of Turkish originthe right to decide on their own future and to manage
the affairs of their own unitary State. The Soviet Union
has demanded and continues to demand that an end be
put to foreign intervention
in the internal affairs of
the sovereign State of Cyprus, which is a full-fledged
Member of the United Nations and an active participant in the non-aligned movement. It has strongly
condemned any attempts to annex or partition Cyprus.
79. The consistent and fundamental position of the
Soviet Union in the matter of Cyprus was further
reaffirmed in the report of the General Secretary of
the Communist Party of the Soviet Union, Mr. Brezhnev, to the Twenty-fifth Congress of the Party. He
stated:
“There still exists in Europe, for instance, such
a complex and dangerous source of tension as the
Cyprus problem. We are convinced that sensible
consideration
for the interests and rights of both
communities
in Cyprus will-given
unconditional
respect for the independence, sovereignty and territorial integrity of the Republic of Cyprus, and
barring attempts to impose outside solutions alien
to Cypriots-pave
the way to a settlement of this
acute problem to the advantage of peace, security
and tranquillity in Europe”.

75. Recently, at its thirty-second session, in Geneva,
the Commission
on Human Rights itself adopted a
resolution3 referring specifically to the need to respect
the sovereignty, independence and territorial integrity
and the policy of non-alignment
of the Republic of
Cyprus. The Commission also urged all countries to
refrain from unilateral actions in contravention of the
United Nations
resolutions
on Cyprus, including
changes in the demographic structure of Cyprus.

80. That is the fundamental
position of the Soviet
Union. It is based on the unshakable principles of
our Leninist foreign policy-that
is, to protect the
sacred and inalienable right of every people, in every
country, large and small, to decide its own future, in
the interest of international peace and security.
81. The Soviet delegation considers that the nature
of the present situation in Cyprus, as well as the
situation surrounding the Cyprus problem, bears out
once again the validity and timeliness of the main
proposal made by the Soviet Union at the very
beginning of the discussion of the Cyprus problem in
the United Nations. At that time the Soviet Union
proposed that the question of Cyprus should be considered in a representative forum of States and for
that purpose, that a representative international
conference should be convened within the framework of
the United Nations [S/Z1465 of 22 August 19741.
Only that kind of international
conference on Cyprus
could help to promote a just settlement of this ominous
source of tension. Unfortunately,
at that time the
culprits who were responsible for the Cyprus tragedy,
together with those who were longing for another world
war and those who were stirring up further tension
in all parts of the world, including
the Eastern
Mediterranean,
made it impossible for that proposal
to be accepted. The Soviet delegation considers it

76. The Soviet Union continues to be firmly in favour
of the immediate implementation
of the decisions of
the Security Council and the General Assembly on the,
question of a.settlement in Cyprus.
77. In the programme of further struggle for peace
and international co-operation and for the freedom and
independence of the peoples, adopted at the Twentyftith Congress of the Communist Party of the Soviet
Union, high priority was given to the need to concentrate the efforts of peace-loving
States on
eliminating
the remaining seats of war. The elimination .of the explosive situations which continue in
certain parts of the world is dictated by the interests
of international
peace and security, which in turn
accord with the principles and aims of the United
Nations and the objectives of the peace-loving Leninist
foreign policy of the Soviet Union. The Congress
drew special attention to the fact that one of the most
complex and dangerous sources of tension was the
Cyprus problem.
10

::

imperative
to remind the Council of that proposal
and, on behalf of the Soviet Government,
to reaffii
it and urge its adoption.

,.‘.../

tenure of office may be less demanding. You, on the
other hand, are obliged to preside over at least two
debates. However, the other members of the Council
can count themselves fortunate to find that in this busy
month our deliberations
are taking place under the
guidance of an old and respected friend in whose
experience and skill we have the utmost confidence.

82. Why have we come to this conclusion, and why
are we thus renewing our proposal? The reason is that
the deadlock in the taking of decisions on the Cyprus
question and the evident intention,
evinced, for
example, in Brussels and Oslo, of using the difficulties
in the intercommunal
talks to benefit NATO have
convinced us that a representative international
conference on Cyprus could, under present conditions,
promote a just settlement.

89. I should like also to associate myself with the
compliments that have been paid to your predecessor,
the representative of France, for the skill and, above
all, the style with which he conducted our deliberations
last month.

83. The delegation of the Soviet Union would like to
remind members of the Council of another proposal
made by the Soviet Union-that
is, the proposal that
a special mission should be sent to Cyprus by the
Security Council [S/Z1391 of 29 July 2974.1

90. Like other speakers before me, I should like
to thank the Secretary-General
for another admirably
clear report on the United Nations operation in Cyprus.
The report brings out very well just how much
UNFICYP
contributes to the creation of conditions
in the island in which the intercommunal
talks can
continue with some chance of success. It also reflects
the untiring efforts which the Secretary-General
ha B
exerted in pursuance of the good-offtces mission
which the Council has entrusted to him.

84. The adoption
and implementation
of those
proposals would undoubtedly help to achieve a just
and peaceful solution to the Cyprus problem that would
meet the interests of the people of Cyprus and the
interests of peace and security in the eastern Mediterranean. It would also help to bring about a reduction
of international
tension.

91. In the view of my delegation the SecretaryGeneral, and his Special Representative
in Cyprus,
Ambassador Perez de CuCllar, as well as the Commander of UNFICYP,
Lieutenant-General
Prem
Chand, and their civilian staff and the soldiers of
UNFICYP,
deserve the confidence and admiration of
us all.

85. As to the question of the extension of the mandate
of the United Nations Force in Cyprus for a further
period of six months, the delegation of the Soviet Union
does not intend to object to that extension, since
agreement to it has been received from the Government
of the Republic of Cyprus. However, it must be
understood that the Force’will continue to be financed
in the same way as before-that
is, on a voluntary
basis.

92. In his report the Secretary-General
states that in
the present circumstances the continued presence of
UNFICYP
is essential not only to help maintain quiet
in the island, but also to facilitate the continued search
for a peaceful settlement. My delegation agrees with
him that there is a real need for UNFICYP
to continue to perform its task, and we support the view
that the mandate of the Force should be extended for
a further six.months.

86. In conclusion, the delegation of the Soviet Union
considers it necessary to point out that the extension
of the mandate of the United Nations Force cannot,
by itself, bring a settlement of the Cyprus problem
any closer. What the Security Council has to do is
intensify its efforts to settle this problem in order to
guarantee the sovereignty, independence and territorial
integrity of the State of Cyprus, and to ensure the
implementation
of its decisions on Cyprus and those of
the General Assembly.

93. Moreover, I am glad to be able to say that the
United Kingdom hopes to maintain the British contingent at its present strength for the coming mandate
period. We shall continue to meet the cost of our
contingent in full; it is the largest contingent in the
Force. We shall also continue to meet a large part
of the cost of logistic support to the Force. In the
financial year 1975/76 this amounted to 1.7 million
pounds.

87. The PRESIDENT:
I thank the representative of
the Soviet Union for the kind and generous remarks
he made about me personally and about my country.
I wish to assure him of our reciprocal feelings concerning the further strengthening of relations between
our two peoples and countries.

94. In his report the* Secretary-General
warns the
Council again about the increasingly critical financial
situation of the Force. It is indeed highly unsatisfactory
that we should give a mandate to the Secretary-General
and then fail to provide him with the financial resources
to carry it out. The situation is so serious in the view
of the Secretary-General
that he warns us that if
no remedial measures can be achieved, UNFICYP
may well one day find itself unable to continue to

88. Mr. MURRAY
(United Kingdom):
May I first,
Sir, congratulate
you on your assumption of the
presidency of the Security Council. Were I in your
place I would consider myself somewhat unlucky to
have assumed the presidency in the month of June.
Your immediate successors may have some ground to
hope that in the holiday period ahead of us their
11

function. My delegation considers that the SecretaryGeneral could justifiably
hope that in view of the
numerous favourable votes in the Security Council
by which the UNFICYP
mandate has been renewed,
the number of States making voluntary contributions
in support of the operation would be much greater
than has been the case.
95. The immediate objective of the present meeting
was to renew the UNFICYP
mandate, not to embark
upon a detailed discussion of the political situation in
Cyprus. I much regret, therefore, that my Soviet
colleague should persist in going round in circled and
should repeat his preposterous allegation that all the
present problems of Cyprus apparently stem from a
wicked attempt by NATO to grab an unsinkable aircraft carrier. The Cypriots themselves, both Greek
‘and Turk, know a great deal better than that-and
so
should my Soviet colleague.
96. But though our immediate objective is to renew
the mandate, we must also do our best to promote
progress towards a political settlement. The resolution
which I hope we shall adopt must, in our view,
reaffirm resolution 367 (1975). That resolution contains the basis for the Secretary-General’s
mission of
good offtces and asks the representatives of the two
communities
to accord a high priority to their negotiations.

resulting from the events of 1974 have remained
largely unresolved. My delegation believes that the
Security Council, the UNFICYP
troop contributors
and, most of all, the people of Cyprus, have a right
to expect that the parties to the Cyprus dispute should
move with a sense of opportunity
and urgency to
resolve the problems which divide them. We ask that
they make a renewed and sustained effort and, like the
Secretary-General,
we hope that they will be prepared
to show the necessary flexibility to find solutions to
a problem which has for so long eluded attempts at
settlement.
100. Mr. de GUIRINGAUD
(France) (interpretation
from French): First of all, on behalf of my delegation
I should like to congratulate you, Sir, on your assumption of the presidency of our Council. During the one.
and a half years that you have been here we have all
been much impressed with your diplomatic
and
negotiating
skills. Most frequently,
together with
representatives of the other non-aligned members of
the Council, you have made a substantial contribution
to our work by producing most of the texts which we
have considered. There is no doubt that once again
you will have an opportunity
to display your talent
in the course of the present month, when the Council
is called upon to consider some of the most complex
and disturbing items on its agenda.
101. I wish also to express my gratitude to the delegations which felt it their duty to express their gratitude
to the outgoing President. I am most grateful for their
kind words and the special praise that they were so
good as to. address to me. The co-operation of all
members of the Council and that of the Secretariat
made my task an easy one, so I feel that all should be
included in this tribute of gratitude and in my expression of thanks.

97. The United Kingdom Government appeals to the
negotiators to heed such a request. My Government
and our partners in the European Community,
for
whom the Cyprus problem is a matter of common
concern-and
I may say, not clandestinely, as has been
suggested here, but openly and in co-operation with
all concerned-consider
that a loss of momentum in the
search for a solution to the Cyprus problem represents
a danger for peace and security in the eastern
Mediterranean.
In the view of the Community,
conditions are such that negotiations under ,the personal
aegis of the Secretary-General
within the framework
of his present mandate could now be resumed. We
earnestly hope that the parties will not act in such a
way as to prejudice this.

102. I would add a word for Mr. Malik and thank
him for having mentioned the 1974 France-Soviet joint
declaration, which emphasizes that his Government
and mine wish to see the restoration of a normal
situation on Cyprus.
103. Our examination
of the Secretary-General’s
report on the United Nations Peace-keeping Force in
Cyprus provides the Council with an opportunity every
six months to consider the situation on the island and
make
comments-gloomy
ones. The excellent
document submitted to us on 5 June hardly inspires
us to break with that tradition. The very fact that the
Secretary-General
considers it necessary to maintain
the Force for a further six-month period-a
position
which my delegation fully endorses-underlines
the
fact that the problems remain largely unchanged.

98. The United Kingdom delegation, together with
its partners in the European Community,
is also concerned with the humanitarian problem in Cyprus. They
support the efforts of international organizations such
as the International
Committee of the Red Cross and
the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees.
The Nine believe that the parties concerned should
assist those organizations to the best of their abilities.
A resumption of the intercommunal
talks would help
towards a solution of the humanitarian
problem.
Conversely, co-operation
based on trust aimed at
solving that problem could only improve the atmosphere of the intercommunal
talks.

104. But it appears from the report that there are
two kinds of problems. One is traditional and refers
to relations between the two communities
wherever
they are in contact and, accordingly, to maintaining
the cease-fire. Although there has been a marked

99. The Secretary-General
says in his report that
tension in the island remains high and the problems
12

reduction in the number of shooting incidents along
the cease-fire lines, on the other hand we observe the
persistence,
already indicated
in December
last
[,S/ZZ900], of violations of the cease-fire by forward
movement from those lines and the building of new
defensive positions. We can only renew our appeal for
observance of the cease-fire and of the cease-fire
line that was established on 16 August 1974. Preservation of the status quo is one of the necessary conditions in seeking a peaceful settlement.

108. Since our last meeting on this question in December 1975, a fifth round of talks has been held in Vienna.
In view of the guidelines that were laid down earlier
by the Brussels agreement, there were positive results
at that round, in so far as the parties committed
themselves to presenting concrete proposals on the
various aspects of a political solution to the problem,
proposals which were to be included in a “package
deal” which would form the basis and the instrument
of an effort at settlement. Despite certain vicissitudes
noted in the report, a process is under way. Letters
have been exchanged through the Special Representative and are published in the annexes to the report.
Their significance and scope are still being analysed by
the various parties concerned.

105. But there is another set of problems which is
more recent and equally disturbing. I am referring to
the obstacles encountered by the Force in carrying
out its mission in the northern part of the island.
The Secretary-General,
notwithstanding
the understandable caution with which he usually reports
difBculties encountered in the implementation
of the
Force’s mission, is led to note in paragraph 23 of his
report that it “has been unable to contribute in any
effective way to welfare, well-being and security of
the Greek Cypriots in the north.” That part of the
population which, like the rest of the inhabitants of
the island, should enjoy its protection is threatened,
it seems. The Secretary-General,
while recognizing
that the civilian police cannot make inquiries because
of the restrictions imposed on it, believes that he should
in fact report the serious complaints he has received,
namely, of pressures exercised to force the Greek
Cypriots to leave the north; if they did not agree,
they would be forcibly expelled without being allowed
to take their possessions. Similarly, we note that in
six months 1,400 Greek Cypriots have moved south.
Finally, from Greek Cypriot sources, we learn that it
is estimated that 44,000 Turkish immigrants
have
settled in the north of the island, while the Turkish
Cypriot authorities, without giving any figures, affirm
that the majority of these Turkish nationals are only
temporarily in Cyprus.

109. In our view, there is thus now a basis for negotiations to begin on matters of substance, since all
preconditions
have been excluded in advance, with
the single exception of the exchange of proposals,
which has’been fulfilled. However far apart the positions of the parties may be, we nevertheless consider
that they should be recognized as being sufficient
points of departure, it being understood
that, in
accordance with the commitments
entered into at
Vienna, none of the points appearing there as a principle can be interpreted as a precondition.
110. We therefore believe that, within the framework of his mandate, !which also determines the forms
and modalities
of the negotiations,
the SecretaryGeneral could, on the basis of this observation, proceed
to a new round of negotiations, if each of the parties
declares that it is prepared to submit to his judgement
on this point. That is, our hope and that of the other
members of the European Community
which have a
legitimate interest in a situation that implicates countries with which we have ties.
111. The Secretary-General,
who gives constant
proof of his boundless dedication,
has spared no
effort. In those he has yet to undertake he may rest
assured that he will have, as in the past, our complete
support. He has the entire confidence of the parties,
as they themselves have stated. As he knows, we are
also prepared to assist him in carrying out a difficult
mission, to which my country attaches the utmost
importance.
I also wish to pay a tribute to the onthe-spot activities
of his Special Representative,
Ambassador Perez de Cdllar. The Secretary-General
has confidence in him and has given him a delicate
task; he has justified that confidence fully.

106. Those complaints,
this information
cannot be
ignored. The best, the only response is to let the Force
bear witness impartially about what is happening. This
means that it should be in a position to carry out its
mission under the same conditions in the north and in
.the south of the island. Its function, as stated in
resolution 186 (1964) is, furthermore,
to prevent a
recurrence of fighting, to contribute to the maintenance and restoration of law and order and a return
to normal conditions. The parties concerned, which
have agreed to the renewal of its mandate, should also
ensure that it can carry out its mission fully. We
should therefore like to believe that that will be both
the purpose and the result of the arrangements now
being discussed between the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General
and Mr. Denktag.

112. Finally, I wish to pay a tribute to the devotion
and outstanding
ability of the Commander
of the
Force, Lieutenant-General
Prem Chand, and the troops
which make up the Force. The Council’s wish to
renew the mandate of UNFICYP
must also be
interpreted as being a tribute of high appreciation and
encouragement to him.

107. Another essential aspect of the situation is the
mission of good offtces of the Secretary-General.
It is
obvious that the presence of the Force is not an end
in itself and that when we consider the renewal of its
mandate, we cannot disregard the reasons which justify
it, apart from that of maintaining calm.

113. Mr. VINCI (Italy):
first of all to congratulate
13

Mr. President, I should like
you upon your assumption

.--

of the presidency of the Security Council. Your wellknown talents and skills as a diplomat and negotiator
are highly appreciated by all your colleagues in the
Council and in the other bodies of the United Nations.
My delegation and I take great pleasure in welcoming
in the Chair the representative of a friendly country
with which Italy enjoys cordials relations, relations
which have been strengthened on a personal level.
by our being neighbours at this table, owing to the
fortunate circumstances of the alphabetical order.

matters at a time when, on the contrary, attention
should be focused wholly ,on the substance of the
matter. If I heard well and understood correctly, the
representative of Turkey has said exactly the same
thing today. The Italian delegation frankly believes
that some of the issues raised in the letters appearing
in the
annexes to the report
Secretary-General,
--_-___-.---.-__~---- of the- _-__
--._
and m some of the lengthy statements made during
this debate, amount to a delaying of the negotiating
process which the Council itself has recommended.
Now that the text of the Brussels agreement and its
authentic interpretation
are officially recorded in our
verbatim records [1925th meeting, para. Ill],
we
cannot fail to notice that what the Council, and the’
Secretary-General
on our behalf, have a right to
demand, are negotiations
conducted in a businesslike way. In other words, the proposals must not
be subject to conditions of any nature, substantive
or procedural, or followed by too many reservations
of one sort or another. However far apart those proposals may be, they can be taken as the basis of
discussion. This has always been the purpose of
international
negotiations
since the beginning
of
human history.

114. I should like also to associate myself with the
well-deserved thanks and congratulations
that have
been addressed to your predecessor, the representative of France, Ambassador Louis de Guiringaud, for
his most successful accomplishments
through the
whole month of May.
115. I must once again confess that the Italian
delegation had very much hoped that it would have
been possible to re-examine the question of Cyprus
in the Council and the renewal of the mandate of the
United Nations Force in Cyprus in the light of constant
progress along the lines indicated by pertinent United
Nations resolutions.
We regret that that does not
seem to be the case, as emerges quite clearly from the
Secretary-General’s
commendable
report. We read
in paragraph 63 of that report that:

119. The Council is not a court and has not the power
to carry out detailed investigations
and, having
ascertained the facts, to deliver judgements like any
national court. We can nevertheless demand full
respect for the resolutions of the Council and for the
agreements reached at every stage by the parties to
a dispute.

‘6 . . . the situation in Cyprus has been relatively
quiet in the sense that there have been no, major
military confrontations and few cease-fire violations
of a serious nature. But tension in the island has
continued to be high and the problems resulting
from the events of 1974 have remained largely
unresolved.”

120. As far as my delegation is concerned, my predecessors and I have on several occasions stated and
restated Italy’s position on the basic issues of the
Cyprus crisis. As I said at the 1863rd meeting of the
Council on 13 December 1975, Italy is firmly convinced that the responsibility for seeking reconciliation
lies mainly with the parties directly concerned and,
in particular, with the leaders of the two communities.
At this stage, when a new stalemate seems to hinder
further talks between the two communities,
we feel
it our duty to emphasize the significance of such a
responsibility,
and express our trust that the parties
concerned and their leaders will duly live up to it.

Furthermore,
the Secretary-General,
referring to the
good offices mission entrusted to him by the Council
in paragraph 6 of resolution 367 (1975), informs us of
the following in paragraph 68:
“The sixth round [of talks] was scheduled for
May but had to be postponed because the exchange
of written proposals on the territorial issue had not
been fully carried out as foreseen in the agreement
reached during the fifth round.”

121. On the basis of the statements made today and
at the meeting on Friday, we are glad to note that
both parties seem ready now to resume the negotiations on the substance of the problem.

116. The Foreign Minister of the Republic of Cyprus
and many speakers before me have quoted other paragraphs of the report which are no less dismaying.
117. All this seems to my delegation both unfortunate and disappointing. In the first instance it raises,
in our minds, the question of whether one or the other
or both the parties directly concerned have really on
this occasion exercised all possible efforts to reach that
solution of the crisis to which they have publicly
committed themselves so often.

122. Having said that, may I express our belief that
the basis for progress in the search for a solution
can be found along the lines indicated by the nine
member States of the European Community.
At the
last General Assembly session4 those lines were
described by myself, in my capacity then as Chairman
of the Nine. Allow me to recall and summarize them
once again.

118. We find it particularly
disproportionate
importance

123. First of all, we think that the sovereignty,
independence and territorial integrity of the Republic

difficult to. accept the
given to procedural
14

Force is still obstructed, since some previous lamented
restrictions
have been increased instead of being
removed, as agreed upon in the third round of the
Vienna talks. Such a development
is even more
regrettable as it has prevented the Force from carrying
out to the extent required its humanitarian
tasks in
needy Greek villages in the north.

of Cyprus should be reaffirmed. Secondly, we believe
that agreement between the two communities
composing that sovereign State is essential to the search
for a settlement. Finally, we attach particular importance to the distressing question of the refugees,
which concerns a sensitive sector of the population of
the island. What we heard in this chamber from the
main parties concerned raises some better hopes than
in the past on this point.

129. On the second point, generally speaking, we
want to stress the relevance of the humanitarian
aspect of the crisis, because the ordeal of thousands
of refugees seems to go on indefinitely,
adding more
injustice and suffering to the real losers in this senseless
crisis, namely, the civilian population-thousands
of
innocent men, women and children.

124. Mr. President, I should like to assure you, as well
as the members of the Council, that the action of the
nine members States of the European Community
with regard to the problem of Cyprus is not restricted
to the issuance of statements, here or elsewhere. We
are, on the contrary, taking an active and open role in
promoting a durable peace in the area in the interest
of the communities
concerned, a role of which the
Governments of the parties involved are well aware.
To mention just one essential point: in the opinion of
the Nine, the long delayed exchange of territorial
propositions has indeed taken place as required.

130. It is with these feelings of anxiety and human
understanding
for all those involved in the Cypriot
drama, together with the hopes I have voiced, and
relying on the capacity and the will of the leaders
to put their brilliant minds at the service of the common
good of their peoples, that my delegation is ready to
support an extension of the mandate of the Force and
to vote in favour of a draft resolution along the lines
that I have indicated. To this effect, my delegation
lends its support to the further efforts you, Mr. President, are planning to undertake in order to bring our
deliberations to an early and positive outcome.

125. That is why, at this stage, my.country strongly
urges the parties concerned to leave aside, if not forget,
past wrongs, to abstain from any further procedural
wrangles and to agree to meet again around the table,
for the purpose of meaningful and productive talks,
at a date that the Secretary-General
may deem fittest
-talks
which can be carried on, as we read in the
documents annexed to the report of the SecretaryGeneral, “confidentially
and free of propaganda
considerations”
[S/12093, annex VI, para. 21, as
proposed by the Turkish-Cypriot
side; and “in an
effort to establish a common basis ‘prior to referring
the matter to mixed committees in Cyprus’ ” [ibid.,
annex VII], as advocated by the Greek Cypriot side.
At the same time, the parties concerned, following
the recommendation
of the Secretary-General in paragraph 70 of his report,
‘6 . . . must be willing to show the necessary flexibility,
taking into account not only their own interests but
also the legitimate aspirations and requirements of
the opposing side.”

131. Before concluding, I should like to express my
Government’s
deep appreciation
for the untiring
efforts undertaken by the Secretary-General.
We owe
him, for this and for all other well-known personal
undertakings
of his, a great debt of gratitude. We
should like to encourage him to go ahead with the
unshaken faith he has displayed. We place our full
confidence in Mr. Waldheim,
as well as in Ambassador Perez de CuCllar, his Special Representative,
to whom we wish to convey also our high appreciation for the skill and patience he has shown in circumstances that are rather unusual, even for the most
experienced diplomat he is.
132. We wish also to pay once more a well-deserved
tribute to the countries which have provided contingents for UNFICYP
and to all the personnel of those
contingents, who have so efficiently carried out their
duties under the respected, efficient command of
Lieutenant-General
Prem Chand.

126. I need hardly recall the very special interest of
Italy in the issue at stake, which amounts to a potentially dangerous situation
in Cyprus and in the
Mediterranean.
Italy being is the heart of the area,
this situation is a source of special-indeed,
seriousconcern to my country, which aims at the restoration
of stability in Cyprus and in the surrounding area,
both because of its geographical position and because
of its friendly relations with all the countries involved.

133. The PRESIDENT:
I thank the representative of
Italy for his kind and generous remarks about me
personally and about the cordial relations between our
two countries. May I say that it has been my good
fortune that an accident of the alphabet has enabled me
to benefit, through proximity,
by the friendship and
advice of my colleague from Italy.

127. I wish to add a few words on those parts of the
report of the Secretary-General
which refer to the
operations of UNFICYP,
and to the humanitarian
aspect of the crisis.

134.

DATCU
(Romania) (interpretation
from
Mr. President, before going into the subject
of our debate, may I be allowed to say how pleased
we are to see you presiding over the deliberations

French):

128. On the first point, we note with regret and
concern that the free and complete functioning of the
15

Mr.

of the Security Council when it has to consider important questions, the solution of which will doubtless
advance the cause of international peace and security.
Given the essential role of the non-aligned countries
in the just solution of these problems and their contribution to that solution, it is a happy coincidence
indeed that the presidency of the Council for this month
should fall to the illustrious representative of a nonaligned country. The active and positive role played by
your country, Guyana, in the United Nations in the
establishment
of a new kind of relations among all
nations is widely recognized and appreciated. We are
convinced
that under your wise and competent
guidance the work of the Council will be crowned
with success. In the discharge of your important duties,
you can always count on the unreserved support of the
delegation of Romania.

sonnel and the cessation
in its affairs.

of .a11 foreign

interference

142. Recognizing that the constitutional
system of
the Republic of Cyprus is a matter for the Greek and
Turkish communities to decide, the General Assembly
and the Security Council have recommended that the
parties concerned start negotiations under the auspices
of the Secretary-General
so as to arrive at a mutually
acceptable political settlement.
143. On the, basis of the latest reports of the Secretary-General, no substantial progress has been registered as regards the solution of the fundamental
problem of Cyprus. We note with regret that not even
the recommendations
on Cyprus adopted unanimously
by United Nations organs have been implemented.
What is more, measures have been taken in the
northern part of the island the effect of which is to
accentuate the political and demographic division and
separation between the two communities.

135. May I also express my gratitude and pay a warm
and well-deserved
tribute to the representative
of
France, Mr. Louis de Guiringaud, for his assiduous
and effective guidance of our work last month, which
enabled the Council to achieve positive results.
136. May I also avail myself of this opportunity to
welcome most warmly Ambassador Jorge Iliueca,
the new Permanent Representative of Panama, and to
wish him every success in this important mission.

144. According to paragraph 23 of the SecretaryGeneral’s last report, there is a continued outflow
of Greek Cypriots from the north of the island. Paragraph 29 of the Secretary-General’s
report, records
complaints that “Greek Cypriots in the north are being
subjected to pressure to move to the south and that
their property is subject to confiscation”.

137. The delegation
of Romania
would like to
consider the situation in Cyprus in its two essential
aspects-on the one hand, the activities of UNFICYP,
whose mandate is due to expire tomorrow, and, on
the other hand, the status of the intercommunal
negotiations, which began last year under the auspices
of the Secretary-General,
in accordance with the
provisions of resolution 367 (1975). These two aspects
are for obvious reasons inseparable.

145. We dwell on this aspect because General Assemi
bly resolution 3395 (XXX) laid down clear obligations
for the parties concerned. They must, on the one
hand, refrain from any actions that would change the
demographic structure of Cyprus, and, on the other
hand, they must undertake urgent measures to facilitate the return of all refugees to their homes.

138. The delegation of Romania has carefully studied
the reports submitted by the Secretary-General
on
the basis of resolution 383 (1975) [S/11993, S/12031
and S/12093], and we express our gratitude to him.

146. It is true that an initial step forward has been
made by the Vienna agreements of 2 August 1975;
but here again, as we see clearly from paragraph 65
of the Secretary-General’s
report, these agreements
have not been fully implemented.

139. As regards the first aspect of the problem,
I should like to state that my delegation has no objection to extending the mandate of the Force for a further
six-month period, particularly since the legal Govemment of the Republic of Cyprus has agreed to it.

147. We have approved and encouraged continued
negotiations between the two communities
under the.
auspices of the Secretary-General.
We rejoiced when
last February the representatives
of the two communities succeeded in reopening substantive discussions on territorial and constitutional
questions and
decided that there should be an exchange of written
proposals on these fundamental aspects. But on this
point, the Secretary-General’s
report states, in paragraph 68, that “the exchange of written proposals on
the territorial issue had not been fully carried out as
foreseen in the agreement reached during the ffith.
round” of talks, and the sixth round scheduled for
May had to be postponed.

140. As regards the procedures for the political
settlement of the situation, the delegation of Romania
would like at this stage to make the following
comments.
141. General Assembly
resolution
3212 (XXIX),
which has been confirmed and endorsed by the Security
Council [resolution 365 (197#)], states the principles
on which the Cyprus crisis must be solved, namely,
respect for the sovereignty, independence, territorial
integrity and non-aiigment of the Republic of Cyprus;
the withdrawal of all ‘foreign armed forces and per-

148. We consider that the Security Council should
play a more active part in reviewing diplomatic efforts
to achieve a solution of the Cyprus problem, par16

titularly when negotiations are held under the auspices
of our Organization.
Negotiations
between the two
parties should be carried out as provided for in resolution 3395 (XXX),
namely, “in a meaningful
and
constructive manner,” and that they should be “conducted freely on an equal footing.‘* In this respect
we completely agree with the opinion of our SecretaryGeneral, who states in paragraph 70 of his report that
for negotiations between the representatives
of the
two communities
“to serve a useful purpose, all the
parties concerned must be willing to show the necessary flexibility, taking into account not only their own
interests but also the legitimate
aspirations
and
requirements of the opposing side”.

might threaten international peace and security, it is our
view that the Council should remain actively seized
of the situation on Cyprus and be ready, if necessary,
to consider all ways and means of enabling the United
Nations and the international community to contribute
to the success of the negotiations between the two
parties concerned and to the over-all settlement of
the Cyprus problem.
154. In conclusion, I should like to state that, in the
future too, Romania is prepared to support any initiative, any sincere effort intended to make the long
awaited peace a reality for the Cypriot population,
whether Greek or Turkish, and to remove the tension
engendered by the Cyprus crisis, so that the Balkan
and Mediterranean
countries
may develop
and
strengthen relations of friendship and co-operation.

149. Since the outbreak of the conflict in Cyprus,
Romania has consistently .favoured respect for the
sovereignty, independence and territorial integrity of
the Republic of Cyprus. My country has pronounced
itself in favour of the withdrawal without further
delay of all foreign armed forces from the Republic of
Cyprus, and the cessation of all foreign interference
in the internal affairs of that country.

155. The PRESIDENT:
I have been informed that
Mr. Atalay, to whom the Council has extended an
invitation
under rule 39 of its provisional
rules of
procedure, wishes to make a further statement to the
Council. If there is no objection, I shall invite him to
take a place at the Council table and to make his
statement.

150. We have the highest appreciation for the efforts
made by the Secretary-General,
and by his assistants
and his Special Representative,
Ambassador Perez
de CuCllar, to achieve implementation
of the decisions and recommendations
on Cyprus. We wish to
express our gratitude to them and to encourage them to
continue their efforts with the same energy and dedication.

156. Mr. ATALAY:
Mr. President, I should like to
thank you and, through you, each and every member
of the Council for giving me the opportunity to speak
for a second time. I have asked to speak in order to
address myself to the statement of Mr. Christophides,
the Greek Cypriot representative,
and to comment
on some of the points raised by him and some of the
other speakers.

151. We are convinced that these efforts must be
continued in order to arrive at a solution to all the
controversial
aspects of the Cyprus question within
the framework of a constructive political dialogue, by
means of direct negotiations between the representatives of the two communities,
under the auspices of
our Organization.
The Council should request the
Secretary-General
to continue to lend his good offices
to promote the intercommunal
talks and see to it that
they are held in good faith and without any external
pressures. The Romanian delegation believes that the
Council should require respect for and faithful implementation of the agreements previously reached.

157. The Turkish side has always been criticized and
blamed by the Greek side for prolonging the Cyprus
problem and not doing its best to find a. just and
peaceful solution. We deny that. We sincerely believe
that we have done and are doing our best to find a
just solution to the problem on a realistic basis. It
is our view that it is the approach of Makarios, his
beliefs and his treatment of the problem, that prolong
the situation and cause it to drag on.
158. I will now briefly describe some of Makarios’
approaches and his treatment of the problem. First
of all, Makarios has for the last 13 years refused to
sign any agreement which might close the door to
enosis. As late as May 1975, through his public
information offrce, he declared:

152. We are convinced that it is possible to arrive
‘at an equitable solution to the Cyprus problem on
the basis of mutual respect and confidence which will
ensure the co-existence of the two communities within
a single independent State. To that end, any solution
reached by the two parties, particularly
as regards
the constitutional
regime and the state structure of the
Republic of Cyprus, must be in harmony with the
rights and legitimate aspirations of both communities
and be based on the United Nations resolutions which
have recognized the sovereignty, independence, territorial integrity and non-alignment
of that country.
153. Given the responsibilities
Council in correcting situations

“If the talks continue... the mistaken impression
will be formed that the Cyprus problem is merely
a dispute between the two communities
and the
problem
will shift from its international
basis,
shrinking to the dimensions of an internal problem
of the island.”
However, before the Turkish peace operation caused
by the Sampson coup, the same Makarios was saying
that the problem of Cyprus was an internal matter
to be settled between the two communities in Cyprus.

incumbent
on the
whose continuation
17

would contribute to peace and normalize the situation on the island. Far from it. I shall reiterate, in
a nutshell, the facts which culminated in the intervention of Turkey as a guarantor Power in Cyprus-an
intervention
which could not have been delayed for
another 24 hours. Had Turkey not acted in time, the
independence of Cyprus would have been destroyed
and all of the Turkish Cypriots would have been
massacred.

159. The insistence of the Greek Cypriot leadership
on a solution based on their unfounded and uncompromising assumption that the whole island belonged
to them is summed up in these words:
“The Greek Cypriot people will plan a struggle on
a long-term basis and will continue to resist and
struggle until they regain the independence
and
territorial integrity of their island.”
That reflects how far away they are from a realistic
appraisal of the new situation.

165. I should like to remind representatives that the
Turkish forces had to intervene in Cyprus at the
eleventh hour in order to stop Greece from completing
its annexation programme, which had been going on
for 12 years with the full connivance of Makarios
until the coup. The evidence that came to light of the
total massacre of the inhabitants of Turkish Cypriot
villages by the Greeks and the confession by Makarios
that the total destruction of the Turkish community
had also been planned-the
“Akritas
Plan”-is
a
clear indication of what tragedies the Turkish intervention prevented in Cyprus. To call this legitimate and
overdue intervention
“an invasion’* or “an occupation” is a gross misrepresentation
indicating a total
lack of understanding of the Cyprus problem. In short,
Turkey’s intervention was not an invasion of Cyprus;
it was, on the contrary, a peace operation which saved
the Turkish Cypriots from annihilation,
as well as
saving the independence of the Cyprus Republic and
effectively closing the door to enosis. Previously, the
bar to enosis was simply a written undertaking not to
pursue it, an undertaking which Makarios ignored with
great contempt, as was so clearly revealed in the
“Akritas Plan”, which came to light through captured
documents after the first murderous onslaught against
the Turkish Cypriots in December 1963, a few days
before Christmas-a
holy time when peace on earth
is preached.

160. It is this approach to the problem, it is this
belief that the Greek Cypriot people-a
projection of
the Greek nation on the island-own
the independence
and territorial integrity of Cyprus which lies at the root
of the Cyprus crisis. If the Greek Cypriot leaders
beheve that Cyprus is the property of the Greek
Cypriots to the exclusion of the Turkish Cypriots-a
projection of the mainland Turkish nation on the same
island-,
naturally the idea of continuing negotiations
with the Turkish Cypriots is meaningless and even
harmful to their cause.
161. It is because of that belief that they continue
to give a distorted, one-sided picture of the events in
Cyprus. It is that false and harmful belief that binational Cyprus is Greek, and therefore rightly, entitled
to destroy itself in order to unite with Greece, which
caused the Cyprus problem in the past and eventually
prevented its speedy solution.
162. I am addressing the Council for and on behalf
of the Turkish Cypriot community,
which is one of
the co-founder communities
of the binational independence of Cyprus. I am speaking on behalf of a
community which alone has been defending the independence and sovereignty of Cyprus at great cost
of life and property for 11 years against attempts by
the Greek Cypriot leadership headed by Makarios to
hellenize the island by uniting it with Greece, thus
dissolving the independent Republic of Cyprus.

166. During the Sampson coup of 15 July 1974, in
collaboration with the Greek junta, some 3,000 Greek
Cypriots were killed. Had Turkey not acted in time,
God knows how many more would have been killed.
Three thousand were already behind bars, but within
a short time they were all pardoned in order to tight
the common enemy, the Turk. If Turkey had not acted,
within a week union of Cyprus with Greece would
have been declared. If we had objected-as
we
naturally would have done-the
world would have
been told that the Turkish Cypriots had rebelled against
the State, and we would have been mercilessly
massacred.

163. In the light of the foregoing, I submit, with due
respect, that the Council should consider adopting a
policy which will discourage Makarios from prolonging
the problem at the risk of .destroying all chances
of meaningful negotiation; and, instead, will encourage
the speedy resumption of the intercommunal
negotiations with a view to finding a just solution, taking
into account the realities of the Cyprus problem.
164. As to the allegations that the independence and
territorial integrity of the Cyprus Republic have been
violated by the Turkish army, I should like to say
that the contrary is true. Any criticism of the stay of
the Turkish forces in Cyprus, any call for their withdrawal, directly affects the security of the Turkish
Cypriots in Cyprus.. Those who indulge in such
criticism and ask for the withdrawal of the Turkish
forces from Cyprus are under the impression that this

167. The call for the withdrawal of Turkish troops
before a final settlement is reached is unrealistic. We,
as the Turkish partners of the independent Republic
of Cyprus, declare that until a just and lasting peace
is reached the maintenance of the Turkish forces in
Cyprus is essential for the security and protection of
the Turkish Cypriot community, and for the independence of the Republic.
18

168. For 12 years, from 1963, no mention had been
made here of political, social, religious, administrative
and economic discrimination
and suppression. No
mention had been made here of a refugee problem.
Why? Because there was a different foot in the shoe.
Because then the sufferers were the Turkish Cypriots.
In the same way, for so many years there had been
no mention of a foreign military presence on the island,
because the occupying forces were Greek mainland
forces.

question of the so-called missing persons in Cyprus.
This question was the subject of numerous discussions
between Mr. Rauf Denktas and Mr. Glafcos Clerides,
both locally and during the intercommunal
talks in
Vienna. During these discussions Mr. Denktag made
it clear to Mr. Clerides that there were no missing
persons and/or civilian detainees in the hands of the
Turkish side. We also made a similar statement to that
effect during our speech before the Council on 16 June
1975 [183Zst meeting.]. It has also been suggested to
the Greek side, with ample justification,
that instead
of looking for their missing in the Turkish region,
they should hold Nicos Sampson responsible for the
task of accounting for them-for
it was Nicos Sampson
who led the coup of July 1974, in collaboration
with
the Greek National Guard, the Greek mainland officers
and EOKA-B. Greek casualties during the coup were
estimated to be as high as 3,000 by the Greek Cypriot
press itself.

169. With your permission, Mr. President, I should
like to comment on those charges very briefly.
170. One of the humanitarian issues which has been
the target of Greek exploitation
is the refugee
problem. Highly inconsistent figures have been put
out by the Greek Cypriot administration
and news
media regarding the number of Greek displaced
persons, figures ranging from 56,300-as appeared in
the Greek Cypriot press on 14 October 1975-to the
grossly exaggerated figure of 200,000. Although it is
difficult to determine the exact number of Greek
Cypriot displaced persons, a census of evacuated
Greek Cypriot villages and homes shows that the
figure is around 90,000.

175. Greek Cypriot accusations of the Turks on the
question of missing persons, while the leaders of the
coup are still freely roaming about in the streets of
Nicosia, are no more than an attempt to find a scapegoat for the Greek Cypriots’ own crimes.
176. We have repeatedly stated that we have no
detainees-political,
military
or other. The Greek
Cypriot leadership knows full well that there are no
detainees or so-called missing persons in the hands of
the Turkish authorities. None the less, they continue
to exploit the issue for two reasons: first, they are trying
to discredit the Turkish side by claiming that it has
violated
the Geneva Convention;
secondly,
by
directing these unfounded allegations
against the
Turkish side, they are trying to save face at home
by hiding their incompetence
to deal with terrorism,
incompetence to deal with violence, incompetence to
deal with their private armies, incompetence to deal
with murderous underground
organizations,
incompetence to deal with those who carried out the coup
and causes so much bloodshed and loss of life in
Cyprus.

171. I am not trying to underestimate
the humanitarian problem in Cyprus. Nor is the refugee problem
new to us. We have been living with the refugee
problem since 1963. Twenty-five thousand Turkish
Cypriots who were displaced by force of arms-as
confirmed by the Secretary-General’s
report-were
not allowed to return to their homes and for 12 years
were committed to a refugee life in their own lands,
under most unhygienic and unbearable conditions.
Another 65,000 Turkish Cypriots fled from the south
to the north in fear of their lives after the coup of
1974 and the events that followed it, thus bringing the
total number of Turkish displaced persons up to
about 90,000.
172. It is true that these people have since last year
been resettled and rehabilitated in the north in houses
and on land abandoned by Greek Cypriots. It is equally
true that almost an equal number of Greek Cypriots
have been similarly resettled and rehabilitated in the
south, in Turkish-owned
houses and property. This
process of regrouping has been facilitated by the agreement reached at the third round of talks held in Vienna
from 31 July to 2 August 1975, as a result of which a
voluntary exchange of populations between the north
and the south has actually taken place, thus paving the
way for a bizonal settlement.

177. The Minister of the Interior of the Greek Cypriot
administration,
Mr. Benjamin, at a press conference
in Nicosia on 22 December 1975, admitted: “It is a
fact that large quantities of weapons are still in the
possession of illegal elements.” This flagrant example
of lawlessness, this apathy, is also manifested in the
following questions levelled at the Greek Cypriot
administration
by the chief editor of Huruvgi,
the
organ of the arch-communist
party of Cyprus,
Mr. Costas Partassides:

173. As far as the Turkish side is concerned, therefore, we cannot but regard the refugee problem, in
its intercommunal
context, as having been settled
once and for all.

“ 1. Since the coup leaders and murderers are
roaming the streets freely and, moreover, are still
holding their previous posts, what kind of democratic order has been established in the island?

174. Another issue which is grossly exaggerated and
harshly exploited by the Greek Cypriot side is the

“2. Since we have not yet divorced our responsibility as a State from the heinous crimes committed
19

-T

by fascism against Turkish Cypriot women and
children and thousands of democratic
elements
within the Greek community, what sort of a democracy do we have?

“It would be useful to note that there are more
than 300,000 Turks of Cypriot origin in Turkey
alone who are entitled to come and settle in Cyprus
under Annex D of the Treaty of Establishment
(1960)’ not to mention the thousands of Turkish
Cypriots in other countries. There are more Turkish
Cypriots presently living abroad who are willing
and ready to return to Cyprus, now that conditions
of security have been restored, than we can possibly
house on the island.

“3. Since lawlessness is formally accepted and
the State lives in harmony with armed terrorists,
what kind of justice do we have?
“4. Does a policy of such co-existence between
the State and lawlessness ensure the unity and the
solidarity of people?

“There is therefore no need for the TurkishCypriot authorities to draw on Turkish nationals in
order to change the population ratio on the island
as alleged by the Greek side.”

“5. Since the ‘coup President’ and his ministers
can still act and behave in Cyprus as they did
during the coup days, has anyone pondered what
foreigners must be thinking of us?”
That is from a speech delivered
on 21 November 1975.

at the Nicosia

179. It will be recalled that during the third round
of the intercommunal
talks held in Vienna, the representatives of the Turkish Cypriot and Greek Cypriot
communities
reached agreement, inter din, on a
voluntary population exchange between the two sides,
paving the way for a biregional federal system of
government for Cyprus. However, the Greek Cypriot
interlocutor,
Mr. Glafcos Clerides, eventually denied
-we presume under pressure from Makarios-the
fact
that agreement in principle had been reached on a
biregional federation. This was the first indication
that the Greek Cypribt side did not intend to remain
faithful to the third Vienna agreement. During the
months which followed, the Turkish side indeed
witnessed numerous violations of that agreement by the
Greek Cypriot side.

Club

178. In connexion with the accusations regarding
colonization,
I should like to quote our answer from
the annex to document S/l1859 of 24 October 1975:
“The allegation that there is a massive immigration of Turkish nationals from Turkey to Cyprus
with the purpose of changing the demographic
character of the island within a pre-planned partition project, is not only completely contrary to the
truth but also a distortion of the actual facts. All
that is taking place is that skilled technicians and
workers are being imported from Turkey on a
temporary basis as ‘guest workers’ to meet the
immediate needs of the economy and improve the
economic lot of the Turkish Cypriots who had
suffered untold discrimination
and exploitation for
the last 12 years at the hands of the Greek administration. It will be recalled that all Turkish villages in
the north as well as in the south had been overrun
and devastated by Greek armed elements between
the first and second Turkish Peace Operation [in
19741 and all economic activity in the north halted.

180. For the latest manifestation
of Greek Cypriot
violations of agreements already reached, we can quote
what Mr. Clerides said only a few days ago when
some circles of the Greek Cypriot Parliament pressed
the placing on the agenda of the so-called Clerides
affair in order to remove him from the presidency of
the House. The Cyprus Mail of Friday 11 June reported
the following:
“House President Glafcos Clerides told the House
of Representatives
yesterday that he would defer
putting his personal case on the agenda until after
the forthcoming Security Council meetings.

“In order to meet the labour shortage that exists
in industry, agriculture and tourism and reactivate
the economy, therefore, skilled labour is being
imported from Turkey on a seasonal basis, but there
is no question of these people acquiring Cypriot
citizenship or taking up permanent residence in the
island.

“This
is to consider the extension
of the
UNFICYP
mandate in particular, and it is thought
that the Cyprus problem in general may be debated
as well.

“By far the biggest number of people who have
come to Cyprus since August 1974 are Turkish
Cypriots who had emigrated to Turkey, Great Britain
and other Commonwealth
countries in past years
under political, administrative,
social and economic
pressures by the Greek Cypriot administration
and
are now being given the opportunity
to return to
their homeland and lead a normal life under conditions of security, in accordance with the Constitution and the relevant citizenship
laws of the
Republic of Cyprus.

“Mr. Clerides told members at the last meeting
that if they insisted on a debate about his handling
of the Vienna talks he would put the matter on
the agenda, but he warned them that what he would
be obliged to say might harm the national cause and
they would have to bear the consequences.
“He offered to lay before any member
documents which he had available.”
20

the

I am sure that the members of the Council will consider it worth while to ponder the significance of
that most recent disclosure on the part of Mr. Clerides.
181. As another example of violations, mention may
be made of the fact that Turks stranded in the Greekcontrolled south were not allowed to take with them
their tractors and other vehicles during their transfer
to the Turkish region. The same has been true for the
Turkish-owned
tractors, lorries, buses, automobiles
and other property which remained in the British
Sovereign Base Areas, where the Turks sought jrefuge
on account of Greek and Greek Cypriot armed attacks
during 1974. The Greek side has so far refused to
allow their transportation to the north.
., ‘

“We are not preventing you and we do not want
to create difficulties for you. However, every time
you cross to the south, the Greek Cypriot leadership
accuses us and exploits the situation for propaganda
purposes. The delay for a positive reply to your
applications may be due to this.”
Greek Cypriot residents of the village told President
Denktag that the Greek Cypriot leadership had no right
whatsoever to prevent them from moving south and
added:
“We want to cross to the south of our own free
will. Our desire to cross to the south must be met
with understanding
since the island has been
separated into Turkish Cypriot and Greek Cypriot
regions. We are quite satisfied by the treatment
accorded to us by you and your administration,
but
we wish to live on the Greek Cypriot side.”

182. Not only was the Greek side unfaithful to the
Vienna agreement but it also attempted to exploit
certain of its provisions as a means of smu@ling
ex-EOKA-B
members into the Turkish region under
the guise of “doctors’*
and “teachers”.
When, the
Turkish side carried out investigations regarding the
background of those people and refused to allow their
entry into the Turkish region by virtue of the provisions of the third Vienna agreement, the Greek:side
embarked upon a false propaganda campaign to present
the Turkish side to the world as the real violator of
the agreement. That was demonstrated in the statement.
made by the Greek Cypriot representative on Friday
[1925th meeting] in which, again, various false charges
and allegations were made against the authorities of the
Turkish Federated State of Cyprus concerning the
implementation
of the third Vienna agreement.

186. Following
his conversation
with the Greek
Cypriot residents of the village, President Denktag
visited the headquarters of the United Nations forces
stationed in the village. He asked the United Nations
officials whether they were aware of the residents’
desire to move to the south. After giving a positive
reply, the United
Nations
authorities
made an
official record of the fact that the Greek Cypriots had
made a voluntary application
to President Denktag
to be allowed to move south. The President stated
that he would do all he could to facilitate the speedy
movement of these Greek Cypriots to the south.
187. On the other hand, during his tour of the Karpas
area last Monday, President Denktag also visited
Boltasli, where a Greek Cypriot told him:

183. The following deals with the specifics of these
charges and constitutes an answer to the baseless and
unfounded
Greek allegations
contained
in that
statement.

“I am* quite happy here and I have no family in
southern Cyprus. I listen to your statements over the
radio. You declare that you will continue to treat
us on equal terms within the laws and to extend us
state protection. You further state that those who
wish may stay where they are. I am one of those who
wish to remain and I am very happy.”

184. The Greek Cypriot side is insinuating
that
proper medical care is not being extended to the
Greek Cypriots residing in the Turkish region. All
Greek allegations regarding this matter are baseless,
since the Turkish doctors are taking care of their
Greek Cypriot patients in the best way possible, and
every medical facility is being extended to the Greek
Cypriots by the Turkish side. Arrangements were even
made for certain Greek Cypriots to receive medical
treatment at the Greek General Hospital in the south
and return to their homes in the north.

President Denktag reassured that Greek Cypriot that
those who wished to remain could do so and that there
was nothing for him to worry about.
188. The Greek Cypriots in the Karpas area also
protested against the Greek Cypriot leadership’s
propaganda about them. A Greek Cypriot family in
Boltasli said:

185. The United Nations Force officials stationed at
the village of Vatilaka in the Karpas region have put
on record once again that they are fully aware of the
voluntary desire of the Greek Cypriot residents of the
village to move to the southern part. These residents
applied to President Denktas last Monday and informed
him that they had received no reply to their monthsold applications for permission to be transferred to the
south. The information was brought to the President’s
notice while he was passing through the village. After
having listened to their wishes, the President told the
villagers:

“If the Greek Cypriot leadership believes that
they are helping us through their false propaganda,
they are wrong. For years they deceived us through
such false propaganda against the Turks and brought
the Cyprus problem to its present stage.”
In reply, President
family:
21

Denktas

told that Greek Cypriot

“There is no problem as long as you are not
poisoned or influenced by this propaganda. You
should continue with your daily occupation.”

clearly state to the Greek Cypriots that enosis is
aiming
at binational,
bizonal
out, negotiations
federalism cannot bring results.

189. The security, welfare and well-being of the
Greek Cypriots who choose remain in the Turkishcontrolled north of Cyprus is the responsibility
of the
Turkish Federated State of Cyprus. During the past
12 years UNFICYP’s
practice has been to regard the
security, welfare and well-being
of the Turkish
Cypriots living in the areas under Greek Cypriot
control as the responsibility
of the Greek Cypriot
administration.
Therefore,
UNFICYP’s
claim of
responsibility. for ensuring the security, welfare and
well-being of Greek Cypriots in the north appears to
be contrary not only to UNFICYP’s
mandate but also
to the established practice. Furthermore,
if this claim
were accepted, it would amount to the abolition of the
Turkish Cypriot-controlled
area as well as the denial
of the authority of the Turkish Federated State of
Cyprus.

193. Calling upon Cypriots to settle their problem on
the basis of equality is a laudable action. We are all
for it. But we pray that the leader who created the
problem artificially should not be encouraged in his
belief that Cyprus is Greek and that therefore Greek
Cypriots have more say in and over Cyprus than have
Turkish. %ypriots. Political equality, especially when
relating to the inalienable
rights of the two communities in the independence
and sovereignty of
Cypru~,~ cannot be apportioned. We are fully entitled
to defend our independence and sovereignty against
anyone: who wants to destroy it. We accept no
argument in justification
of such a move. We want
the world to understand and to underwrite the fact
that in. Cyprus two national communities
share the
sovereignty and independence of the island and that
the United Nations Charter and its principles cannot
be converted to provide that the Turkish Cypriot
community is a second class cqmmunity in Cyprus.

190. Now, I should like to refer to the question of
the freedom of movement of UNFICYP
in the Turkish
Federated State of Cyprus.

194. ,By this statement are we demanding too much?
Certainly not. We are merely asking the world to look
at the .facts with realism. We are asking the world
totally to reject the thesis that there is a Turkish
occupation of Cyprus. But for the intervention of the
Turkish troops in Cyprus, a total massacre of the
Turkish Cypriots, and even a section of the Greek
Cypriots, would certainly have been carried out. Even
Makarios
had to testify to the existence of this
dastardly plan. And the men who planned it, the very
men who caused the death of 2,000 Greek Cypriots
and forced Turkey to intervene in Cyprus are all free
in Cyprus and fully armed, roaming about with their
gunmen, and publishing papers advocating union with
Greece “after throwing the Turks into the sea”.

191. The Turkish Cypriot, side had all along maintained that the status of forces agreement [S/5634,
annex I] which provides for the stationing, deployment
and functioning
and the freedom of movement
of
UNFICYP
was not binding on the Turkish side as it
had been unilaterally
negotiated and signed ‘by the
then Secretary-Generalin
March 1964 with Mr. Kyprianou representing only the Greek Cypriot side. If there
have been some restrictions
in these matters in
practice, they were due to the lack of an agreement
regulating the freedom of movement of UNFICYP
in
the Turkish-controlled
part of the island. It is hoped
that the agreement envisaged in the prods-verbal
dated December 1975 [S/12093, paru. 81 will be signed
soon and the situation will be clarified.

195. We therefore state our position in the clearest
of terms: we are prepared to continue the negotiations
on the basis of equality with the Greek Cypriot side
for the establishment of a central Government between
the existing Turkish
Cypriot and Greek Cypriot
administrations
so that this 13-year-old de facto
position may be justly and peacefully settled within
the context of a bizonal Federal Republic of Cyprus.
We are also ready to negotiate all matters auxiliary
or appertaining to such a solution.

192. Finally, once again, I should like to reiterate
our position. We are ready to negotiate. We have
not left the negotiating table, but we are not to have
the method of negotiations
dictated to us. We are
not going to be hurried through the negotiations and
leave room for the Greek Cypriot leadership to attack
us anew in the future. For the last two decades we
have relentlessly waged a struggle against union with
Greece. Our children were born and have lived through
fear, bloodshed and destruction. There is not a single
Turkish Cypriot home which has not suffered, in the
most terrible way, because of this enosis policy of
the Greek Cypriot leaders. It is enough. We do not
want to be any part of this struggle again. We do not
want to see death and destruction, just because one
side refuses an honourable compromise and to accept
the realities as they are. Unless the Greek Cypriot
leadership abandons its policy of sabotaging the intercommunal talks, the negotiations will not bear fruit.
Unless the Greek Cypriot leadership and Greece

196. I shall not take any more of the Council’s time.
As I stated on Friday I say now that we, as the Turkish
side, still continue to believe that the intercommunal
talks under the auspices of the Secretary-General,
constitute the only way to find a peaceful solution to
the Cyprus problem.
197. The PRESIDENT:
The next name is that of the
representative of Greece, on whom I now call.
198. Mr. PAPOULIAS
(Greece): I shall deal briefly
with only two points from among those which were
22

..

*

touched upon by the representative
his speech.

: ’

(_

of Turkey during

procedural, and its sole purpose was to encourage the
representatives of the two communities and give new
impetus to the negotiations,
which had reached an
impasse.

199. First, Ambassador
Ttirkmen
said-this
time
quoting Archbishop
Makarios
positively-that
the
Turkish forces had carried out a lawful intervention
in Cyprus on 20 July 1974. He omitted to state that
article IV of the Treaty of Guarantee,5 which Turkey
invokes, provides that any action by the Guarantor
Powers should have as its sole aim the re-establishment
of “the state of affairs created by the present Treaty”.
What happened afterwards is hardly consistent with
the text of the Treaty of Guarantee. He omitted also
to recall-and
I understand that-the
statement made
by the representative of Turkey to the Security Council
on 19 July 1974-that
is, on the eve of the ‘Turkish
invasion of Cyprus: “the duty of the world community
[is] to restore the status quo ante” [178&h meeting,
para. 551 meaning in Cyprus.

204. The subsequent
resumption
of the intercommunal talks under the auspices of the SecretaryGeneral resulted in the agreement between the two ,
communities in Vienna, contained in the communique
issued at the conclusion of the fifth round, which
states:
“The representatives of the two communities will
meet again under the auspices of the SecretaryGeneral in Vienna in May, with a view to establishing
a common basis prior to referring the matter to Mixed
committees
in Cyprus.” [S/11993 of24 February
1976, annex.]
So the basis had still to be determined, as is clearly
stated in that communiqd.
And the communique was
issued by agreement between the representatives of
the two communities primarily concerned. It would be
incorrect, to say the least, to maintain that the basis
had already been laid before they met in Vienna.

200. The Council knows full well that the Turkish
invasion took place on 20 July 1974, that the military
dictatorship in Greece collapsed only three days later,
on 23 July 1974, and that constitutional
order was
immediately
re-established in Cyprus and in Greece.
Therefore, the way was open for a peaceful settlement.

205. The indisputable fact that a common basis has
still to be found is reflected in paragraphs 68, 69 and
70 of the Secretary-General’s
report; and it is needless
to add that preconditions of the kind contained in the
letter dated 25 May 1976 from the representative of the
Turkish Cypriot community addressed to the Special
Representative
of the Secretary-General
in Cyprus
[S/12093, annex VZ] are far from helpful.

201. So apart from the fact that any use of force
flagrantly violates the Charter of the United Nations,
nothing-especially
after 23 July 1974-justified
the
renewed use of force by Turkey against the Republic
of Cyprus, particularly after the restoration of constitutional order and the disappearance of any threat to
the independence and sovereignty of Cyprus, as had
been specifically demanded by Turkey according to
the official statements of its Government,
and when
negotiations were being conducted in Geneva for the
purpose of finding a satisfactory settlement.

206. The PRESIDENT:
I now call on the Minister
of Foreign Affairs of Cyprus.
207. Mr. CHRISTOPHIDES
(Cyprus): In the course
of the debates last Friday and tonight, the Turkish
side has made a number of false allegations. I do not
propose to reply to each and every one of them, since
most of them have been dealt with in my statement
before the Council on Friday. Furthermore, the report
of the Secretary-Genreal
gives silencing replies to a
number of those allegations.
There are, however,
certain issues to which I should like to refer, briefing
the Council on the true facts.

202. It should be added that Turkey undertook its
second invasion of the Republic of Cyprus after and
although the Security Council had been seized of the
problem, in open violation of Security Council resolutions 353 (1974) of 20 July; 354 (1974) of 23 July 1974,
ordering a cease-fire; and 357 (1974) of 14 August 1974,
which once again ordered a cease-fire which was, in
turn, once again grossly violated by Turkey, and so
on. It is clear with whom responsibility
rests for the
tragic and dangerous situation in Cyprus today.

208. It has been alleged, among other things, that
the Turkish Cypriots own 32.8 per cent of all private
land in Cyprus, as though such a figure, even were
it correct, which it is certainly not, could be any
justification
for the invasion of Greek Cypriot lands,
and the expulsion from them of the Greek Cypriot
population. But, furthermore, the figure is false.

203. Turning to my second point: in order that there
might be no further distortions of the Brussels agreement, on Friday I read out before the Council the full
text of that agreement [1925th meeting, para. Ill.]
The text is fully self-explanatory,
as proved by what.
was said today by the representative of Italy, to whom
I extend my thanks. None the less, Ambassador
Tiirkmen
came back to it today, inserting, among
* other things, the phrase “basis of negotiation”
with
reference to the Brussels agreement. I have to point
out again that nothing of the sort is contained in that
agreement.
The Brussels agreement
was purely

209. Since the days of British administration
there
has operated in Cyprus a Lands and Survey Department, which has one of the best land registry systems
in the world and whose records cover fully and
analytically
the registration of all land property in
23

Cyprus. According to available and indisputable data,
the Turkish Cypriots are the owners of 12.3 per cent
of the privately owned land of Cyprus. In this respect,
I should also like to quote from a secret telegram
dating back to 23 January 1958 which the then British
acting Governor of Cyprus sent to the Colonial Office
and which proves that at least since 1958 the percentage
of Turkish Cypriot ownership has remained constant.
It states:

Mr. Onan’s letter of 25 May 1976 [S/12093, annex VI],
that the crucial territorial aspect must be referred to
committees
straightaway despite the unambiguous
terms of the Vienna communique of 21 February 1976,
which states:
“The representatives of the two communities will
meet again under the auspices of the SecretaryGeneral in Vienna in May, with a view to establishing
a common basis prior to referring the matter to mixed
committees in Cyprus.*’ [S/21993, annex.]

“For our study on partition, an estimate was made
of the proportion
of land owned by main communities.
These showed: Crown, 28 per cent;”
--(‘Crown”
means the Government-“Greeks,
58 per cent; Turks, 12 per cent; others, 2 per cent.”

215. Ankara’s aim is obvious-to
avoid submitting
concrete proposals, and instead to have the committees
occupy themselves with long and fruitless discussions.
The only explanation for such shifting of positions
is that Ankara is not prepared to make any territorial
proposals, simply because it has no intention of making
any territorial
concessions. At this point, I might
perhaps be permitted to quote from an editorial in
The New York Times of 9 June:

I will not make any comment as to the reason for the
study. I think that it is quite obvious that it was done
with a view to partition.
210. The Turkish aim in inflating the figure is obvious;
it is an effort to justify an unreasonable stand to the
effect that they should not make any territorial concessions.

“On a visit to West Germany last month, Rauf
De&as...
said flatly that the Turkish side was not
prepared to make any territorial concessions.”

211. It has also beeen stated that the number of
Greek Cypriot refugees is only around 90,000. A glance
at the Secretary-General’s
report is enough to refute
this lame allegation. The number of Greek Cypriot
refugees as given in the report is 184,143, an increase
of 1,143 persons since the Secretary-General’s
report
of 8 December 1975 [S/11900.]

216. Since the hour is late, I will not reply in detail
now to what the representative of Turkey has said,
but, with your permission, Mr. President, I will reserve
the right to do so tomorrow. I shall restrict myself to
saying that I have heard the attempt at an apology of
the representative of Turkey for the deeds, misdeeds
and non-deeds of his country in Cyprus. If one took
his allegations at face value, one would think that the
tragedy of Cyprus is only a mirage, that the Turkish
forces of occupation are but friendly visitors on a
peaceful visit, and that the grim facts of the thousands
of dead, the refugees, the missing persons, the expulsions, the colonization and everything else that makes
up the tragedy of Cyprus today are mere figments of
the imagination
in which Turkey
takes only a
benevolent and academic interest.

212. In an effort to mislead world public opinion and
shift Turkey’s responsibility
for the stalemate in the
talks, an attempt has been made by Ambassador
Tiirkmen tonight to accuse the Greek Cypriot side of
undermining
the talks. It is indeed ironic that while
Ankara
does everything
possible to undermine
prospects for the intercommunal
talks through a series
of fails accomplis and broken promises and agreements, it endeavours to shift responsibility
for the
stalemate in the talks to the Greek Cypriot side.

217. All this surely strains the truth, as all who know
anything about Cyprus are only too well aware, and
is an insult to the intelligence of the members of the
Council and to all to whom these ludicrous claims are
addressed. If the situation in Cyprus were not so tragic,
the clumsy statement of the representative of Turkey
might even have been funny, but regrett,ably the
situation in Cyprus is not a laughing matter.

213. Turkey’s attitude towards *the talks is one of
manifest duplicity, for behind the frequent statements
of support for the talks lies a complete absence of
intent to enter into serious negotiations.
Turkey’s
statements in support of the negotiating process are
only a smoke-screen that is intended to mislead the
world and give Ankara time to consolidate its position
in the occupied area through the creation of fairs
accomplis. It may be recalled that, using as a pretext
the reference made by the Greek Cypriot side to the
procedural suggestion of the Secretary-General
during
the fifth round talks in Vienna, the Turkish side refused
to accept the Greek Cypriot proposals on the territorial
aspect of the Cyprus problem,
obviously for the
purpose of evading its commitment
to submit its own
proposals on territory.

218. As I said earlier, I reserve the right to speak at
a later time in reply to what the representative.-of
Turkey said. For the moment I shall do no more than
bring reality into focus by simply reading from an
article from the 29 May last issue of The Economist
of London, which no one can accuse of being an
instrument of Greek Propaganda. I quote:
“The evidence suggests that
interest in a negotiated settlement.

214. Beyond this evasion, the Turkish side has now
shifted to yet another position, as is clearly shown by
24

Turkey has no
During a visit to

West Germany a couple of weeks ago the Turkish
Cypriot leader, Mr. Rauf Denktas, was urged to
come up with proposals for a possible withdrawal by
the Turkish army from part of the area it has held
since 1974. He bluntly told his German interlocutors
that ‘the Turkish side will not make any proposals
on territory’. Although it was reported from Ankara
on Monday that the Turks would be putting forward
some ideas within the next 10 days, these are
believed to be hedged around with the sort of conditions that Greek Cypriots will not accept and are
unlikely to involve more than the tiniest changes to
the present dividing line. Indeed, the expulsion of
those Greek Cypriots who remain in the area
occupied by the Turks is being speeded up. Bellapais
should be cleared of all Greeks in a few weeks’
time and the 7,000 or so still left in the Karpas
peninsula are expected to be out by the end of the
year. Even the Maronite villages, hitherto immune,
are being forcibly emptied.

219. I believe this will help perhaps even the representative of Turkey to see matters in perspective,
as they are in fact and not as he would falsely
have us believe. But as the Turkish representative at
least appears to have a different conception of the
situation in Cyprus, would he agree to the dispatch
of a fact-finding sub-committee
consisting of representatives of the Security Council in order to ascertain
what the facts really are? For our part, we would
welcome such an investigation.
If the situation in
Cyprus is as the Turkish representative says, he would
have no difficulty in agreeing to such a proposal, as
Turkey would have nothing to hide. Would Turkey
agree to such a course of action?
220. The PRESIDENT:
of Turkey.

I call on the representative

221. Mr. TURKMEN
(Turkey): I should like to
reply to Ambassador Papoulias, the representative of
Greece. He is, of course, in a very comfortable
position. There is a Greek Government which undertakes an invasion of Cyprus, thus creating a stir in the
whole region of the Mediterranean;
the peace of the
world is endangered.
And then that Government
crumbles, and all the responsibilities
of Greece are
washed away. There is no such thing in international
relations. All Governments are responsible for the acts
of the preceding Governments.

“The mainland Turks, who are now in charge of
northern Cyprus, say frankly that the area is being
absorbed into, but not annexed by, Turkey. They
claim that the experiment
of letting the Turkish
Cypriots run their own affairs has failed-a
failure
that was at least partly due to the fact that the
Turkish Cypriots, cleverer and more efficient than
the mainlanders, were never given a free hand. Be
that as it may, the decision has been taken that
from now on northern Cyprus is to be run openly
and officially by mainlanders.

222. Furthermore, he said that the Treaty of Guarantee stipulates that any intervention should be for the
sole purpose of restoring the status quo ante. I do
not quarrel with that’ assertion. The Turkish forces
went to Cyprus for the purpose of trying to restore
the status quo ante, but that was impossible precisely
because of the de facto situation on the island. They
have therefore tried by their presence to pave the way
to a new constitutional order, and the two communities
are now in the process of negotiating it.

“One curious new development is that Varosha,
the modern Greek Cypriot quarter of Famagusta, is
being picked clean. For about 18 months the Turkish
army kept this area intact as proof of its probity
and discipline. This has now changed: for the past
few months ‘offtcial requisitioning’,
as well as
permitted private looting, has been going on. The
‘requisitioning’
is carried out by Turkish army units
operating from a small fleet of trucks. Day after day
they methodically
empty shops, hotels and houses
and then carefully sort out the contents into separate
warehouses for furniture, clothing and household
appliances.”

223. Ambassador Papoulias also made some reference to the Brussels agreement. I note that whenever
we mention that agreement he becomes very legalistic,
and he now objects to the use of the words “basis
of an agreement.”
Perhaps it was wrong to use those
words. It was the framework or the procedural basis,
but what the agreement says is in the papers, and we
do not claim that that agreement has to be interpreted
differently.

The article proceeds to refer to the lootings and to the
waves of Turkish immigrants pouring into Cyprus, and
adds:
“Many of the larger towns and villages in the
north stand in ghostly emptiness; this is true of
Kyrenia, Bellapais, Karmi, Karavas, Lapithos and
others. Since these places cannot be left empty
indefinitely,
the question is raised whether the
contents of the warehouses outside Famagusta are
to be used to make these places habitable again.
And, if so, for whom? Since it is unlikely to be for
Turkish Cypriot refugees from the south, who have
already been settled elsewhere, it must presumably
be for still more newcomers from the mainland.”

224. As to what the representative
of the Greek
Cypriot community
has said-that
the ratio of land
ownership mentioned
by the representative
of the
Turkish community
was not right, that it is not
32 per cent but 12 per cent-1 cannot argue with him
on that. I am sure that the representative
of the
Turkish community, if he is given an opportunity, will
straighten out this matter.
225. He accused Turkey of undermining
the intercommunal talks. I think that is a very unjust accusation.
25

After all, who took the initiative in Brussels to work
out a new framework for agreements? We have always
been in constant contact and consultation with the
Secretary-General
in every phase, and each time we
have tried to prevent a break-down in the talks. We
have stated here that the only thing we wish to do is
to encourage the talks, and that is our position.

Cypriot community.
The Security Council’s invoivement, the Council’s political concept regarding the
Cyprus question is there. It is in the resolutions. Our
position is clear, and it is not only our position but
also the position of many other representatives in the
Council. So I think it would be utterly unnecessary
to enter into any exchange or argument with him on
this subject.
c

226. The representative of the Greek-Cypriot
community has also said that the figure that I quoted or that
the representative of the Turkish community
quoted
was wrong, and that in his report the SecretaryGeneral himself said that the total number of refugees
is 184,000. But I think he omitted to mention that the
report says that government statistics show that the
number is 184,000. It does not affirm it on its own
authority; it affirms it on the authority of the Greek
Cypriot statistics.

The meeting

rose at 8.10 p.m.

Notes
I United Nations. Treatv Series. vol. 382. D.
- 8.
* See A/10217 anb Corrll.
’ Official Records of the Economic and Social Council, Sixtieth
Session, Supplement No..~, chap. XX, resolution 4 (XxX11).
4 Official Records of the General Assembly, Thirtieth Session,
Plenarv Meetinas. 2405th meeting.
5 United Natrobds, Treaty Series, vol. 382, p. 3.

227. I do not think I should give an answer to the
last point raised by the representative of the Greek

26
Litho in United Nations, New York

00400

83-60801-September

l984-2,200
