..

--'

-SECURITY COUNCIL
/

.OFFICIAL RECORDS
~.

~ECOND YEAR

. .

\

CONSEIL DE SECURITE, \
PROCES-VERBAUX, OFFICIELS
, DEUXIEME ANNEE

No.42 .'
136th and
137th ,meetings

'136eme et
. 137eme' ~ces

22· May 1947

22 mal 1947

..

Lake Success
( 64 p.)
,

.

New York .

lE

TABLE OF CONTENTS

TABLE DES MArlERES

Hundred and thirty-sixth meeting

Cent-trente-sixieme seance

,

Palfll

153. Provisional agenda .. . .. .. .. .. • . . .. .. 887
154. Adoption of the.agenda.............• 887
155. Discussion on the agenda •...•.......• 88S
156. Continuo.tion of the discussion on the
Greek q4estion .•.••....••••.•.•...• 891

Pages

153.
154.
155.
156.

Ordte du jour provisoire
887
Adoption de l'ordre du jour . . . . . . . . .. 887
Discussion de ltordre du jour .\ . . . . . .. 889
Suite de la discussion sur la question
grecque •............ , •........•... 891

Hundred and, thirty-seventh meeting

Cent-trente-septieme seance

157. Continuation of the discussion on the
Greek question ,' .....•....•......'. .. 910
158. Application of Italy 'for membership
in the United Nations . . . .. . . . . . .. ... 945

157. Suite de la discussion ~ur la question
grecque . '. . . • . . . . • . . . . . . . . . ... . • . . .. 910
158. Demande d'admission au sein de I'Organisation des Nations Unies fonnutee
par l'Italie ......•' . . . . . • . . . . . . . . . . .. 945

) ,

"
Documents

DGcurr.:ents
"
Annex

The following documents Eelevant to t4e one
hundred and thirty-sixth and one hundred
and thirty-seventh meetings ~ppear as fol.:
lows:

Annexes

Les docum!"nts suivants, se rapportant aux
cent-trente-sixieme e~ cent-trente-septieme
seances, figurent dans' les ,publications
, , suivantes:

; )Official Records of the Security Council,
Second Year, Supplement No: J 1"
.

~

Proces-verbaux officiels du Gonseil de se,'.. ., curite Deuxieme Annee, Supplement
No lJ
.
Cablegram dated 5 May 1947 from -the
Cablograinm~, en date du 5 mai 1947,
adresse au President du Conseil de
Chainriim of the Commission of Invessecurite par le :pr6sident de' la Comtigation concerning Greek Frontier Inmission d'enquete sur les incidents surcidents to the Ptesideut of the Security
venus a- 'la'frontiere grecque (document
Council (document ~/343) ....•'...... 27
S/343) : ~ .. . •. • . . . .. ... . .. . . .. . . . ..
Letter dated 7 May 1947 from the repLettre, en date du 7 mai· 1947, adressee au
resentative of the Union of Soviet SoSecretaire general, par le rt::presentant
de ,1'Union des Republiques socialistes
cialist Republics to '1:he, Secretary~General
, sovietiques (doc.ument S/347) •.......
(document S/3.47) .... ~
28
,Letter dated 2 May 1947 Jrom the liaison'
Lettre, en" date du 2 mai 194.7, adressee au
,Secretaire principal de la Commission
representative of Yugoslavia on the Comd'enquete sur les incidents survenus amission of Investigation concerning Greek
Frontier Incidents, to the PriIicipalSecla frontiere gi"ecque par I'agent de
retary of the'Co:mmission(document Si "I, I
liaison de· la Yougoslavie (document
',341)
~
30
S/341) ............•.........••....
Lettre, en date du 2 mai 1947, adressee au
Letter dated May 1947' froIIl the liaison
Secretaire principal 'de la CoIIlinission
representative of Albania on the Commisd'enquate sur les incidents g,urvenus asion,of Investigation, concerning Greek
, Frontier Incidents, to the Principal Secla frontiere grecque par l'agent de
liaison de l'Albanie (document ,S/3'li2) ••
retary of file Commission.Cdocuriielllt S/
I
.
342);,••-....... 0." e:. '• . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . e . . . . . ~.~ 31
Lettre, en date du 6 mai 1947, adressee ail
Letter dated 6 May 1947 from the liaison
Secretaire pr.ncipalde la Commission
representative of Bulgaria on the C()mmisd'e.uquete .sur les incicients survenus' a- la
sion of Investigation, concerning Greek
frontiere' grecque., par l'agent de; liaison
•Frontier, Incidents, to the Principal ,Secde la Bulgarie (docUIIlent S/345) . . . . . . •
!,eteuy of the Commission (document S/
3.45 J.....
~ 'eo. . . . . . . . . . • ' : ._~ .,. .. .. ..
82
0<

•• . . •

•

.. .. •

2.

27

28

30

31

0

32

,",ti . . . . . . . ti .. •

"

" oftheSecurit'Y. Council;" OfficialR'ec()rds
Second YearkSupplement No. 12
,Letter from .the ,Miillster. oft Foreign •AI-,
""..fairs "of, Italy totheSecr~tary~Gerier~1
dated 7 May 1947 (document S/355) •.

Proces~verbau)( officiels du Conseilde securite Deuxieme Annee, Supplement
No 1 2 '
'
"'.
Lettre, en date du7 mai 1947, adresseeau
" Secretairegeneral _par le Ministre des
Affairesetrangeres d'Italie (documentS/
~.355) •••• ••.••.•.•,. ~ .• '• .,. '.- •••• ~:', ••".. • 33

ps

N ATIONSUI~IES

UNITED NATIONS

SECURITY
COUNCIL

CONSEIL
DE SECURITE

OFRCLAL RECORDS

PROCES·VERBAUKOFFICIELS '

SECOND YEAR

No. 42

CI:NT·TRENTE·5IXIEME ~EANCE

Held at Lake Success, New York,

T enue aLake Success~ New-York,

Present: The representatives of the Jollowing
countries: Australia, Belgium, Brazil, China,
Colombia, France, Poland, Syria, Union -of
Soviet Socialist Republics, United Kingdom,
United States of America.
.

lejeudi 22mai 1947~ a 10 h~ 30.
, ,President: M. A. L6PEz (Co!ombie) ~
Presents: Les representants des pays suivants.:·
Australie, Belgique, Br€sil, Chine, Colombie,
Etats-Unis d'Amerique, France,' Pologne, Roy. aume-Uni, Syrie, Union des RC;publiques socmlistes sovietigues.,

153. Provisional agenda (document 5/357)

153. Ordre du iour proVisoire (docurnent
5/357)

1. Adoption of the agenda.
2. ,Letter dated 7 May 1947 from the Minister
of, Fo~ Affairs of Italy to the SecretaryGen~al (document S/355 ) ~l'

1. Adoption de l'ordre du jour.
2. Lettre,.en date du-7-mai'l947, adressee a.n
S-ecretaire' gCI!eral par le 'Ministre des
.t\ffairt'.'l etrangeres d'Italie (document,
S/355)1,
.
3. La question grecque:
,
a) Lettre, en datedl).J~nai, 1947, adress#'_
auSecretaire generalp:n le representant ..
de l'Union des 'Rq,ubliques socialistes
sovietiques (document 8/347) z.
b) Cablogramme, en date, du 5 mai 1947., ,
adressee au President, du Conseil de securite par le President de la: Commission
d'enquetefjur les incidents survenus a la
fronnere' ,grecque (document 8/343 et
documents S/341, 8/342 et S/345).,.
'ayant tr~t' a 'la situation exposee, dans
le cablogramme3 • '

3. The Greek question:
(a) Letter dated 7 May 1947 .from the
representati~e of the Union of Soviet
Socialist Republics _to, -the Secretary-'
General, (document S/347') .z
(b) , Cablegram dated 5 May 194Tfr:om the
Chairman of the Commission of In-"
vestigation concerillng Greek Frontier
Inciden.ts to the President of the Security Council,' (document S/343,
documents S/341, S/342 and 8/34;5)
referring' to the situation explained' in
the cablegram.3 ,
>,
,

and

15,4. Adqption of the agenda

~'

The PRESIDENT: We have before us the pro-'
visional 'agenda. If there are no objections, I
, shall consider it unanimously adopted.
C'

" 1

b

No 42

HUNDRED AND THIRTY..SIXTH MEETING
on Thursday, 22 May 1947, at 10.30 a.m.
President: Mr. A. L6PEZ (CC)lombia).

I

DEU>3EME ANNEE

,
See, OiJicial Records of the Security Co"~cil" Second,

Year, Supplement,No. 12, Annex 33.
: lbid.~ Supplement No. 11,Annex 28.
Ibid., Annexes 27, 30, 31 and 32 respectively.

154~ Adoption del'ordre du iour

Le .PRisIDENT(traduit,de l'anglais,) : L'ordre
du jour piovisoire' est 'soumis au Conseil poUF
examen. Siaucune objection n'est soulevee,. je
considererai qu'il est adopte a l'unanimite.
1 Voir les Proces~verbau~oiJici6ls d:e Conseit de sIcurite, Deuxieme Annee, Supplement No 12, Anne:lCe 35.

'~Ibid., Supplement No 11, Annexe 28.
"
8!bid.. '~nexes 27, 30, 31 et 32 respectivemettt.

Le coloncl HODGSON (Australie) (traduit de
Colonel HODGSON (Australia): For reas;jns
Pour les motifs que j'aieu l'occasioD
l'anglais):
w.hich I gavepreviClusly before this Council in
d'exposer
au
Conseil lors de l'examen de la
connexion with the application of Hungary for
demande
d'admission
de la Hongri~, mon Gouachniss.ion into the United Nations,:'- my Govvernement estime que le point 2 ne devrait pas
ernme.'lt does not think that item 2 should be
figurer a l'ordre du jour du Conseil de securite.
included in the agenda of the Security Council.
A notre avis. cette demande e.'1: absolument
In our opinion~, this application is quite out
irreguliere.
EIle" ne devrait etreni re~ue ni cdnof order. It should Dot be received and it should
sideree par le Conseil. La question ne devrait
not be' entertained by the Council. Therefore,
donc pas figurer a l'ordre du jour.
the question should not be on the agenda.
Je vais resumer brievement les motifs. Lundi
I will briefly smnma..-ize the reasons. On
prochain, la Commission speciale constitueepar
Monday we shall have a meeting of the special
l'Assembleepour ~aminer la procedure se reuCommittee appointed by the Assembly to conilira pour discuter d'une seance qui sera,tenue
sider the rules of procedure, with a view to
conjointement
avec un comite cree a cet effet
meeting a committee of this Council to agree
par
le
Conseil
de
securite en vue de recht>.rcher
on mutually satisfactory rules regarding admisune
procedure
satisfaisante
pour tous en ce qui
sion of new Members, because, in our opinion,
conceme
l'admission
de
nouveau."t
:Membres; en
c.ertain rules which t~ ill; Council has adopted are
CIJfet, a notre avis~ certains des articles que le
ultra vires. For-ex:·.lplJe, our rule 60 states that
"The Security Cuuncil shall decide whether : Consen a adoptes a ce sujet sont ultra rnres. Par
exemple, l'article60 de notre reglement stipule
• . . the applicant is'a peace-loving State arid is
que "Le Conseii de securite decide si . . . l'Etat
able and willing to carry out the obligations",
.
qui
soJlicite son admission est un Etat paci:fique.
whereas Article 4 of the Charter says ;'. . . in
capable
de remplir les obligati,ons de la Charte et
the judgment of the Organization"-that is to
dispose a le faire . . ."; alors que l'Article 4
say in the judgment of the General Assemblyde la Charte dit: " . . . au jugement de l'Or~'are able and willing to carry out these obligaganisation" (c'est-a-direau jugemerit de l'Astions".
sembIee generale) "sont capables de les remplir
~
et disposes a le faire".
D'autre part, en' tant que -Conseil de'securite,
Further, we, the Security -Co~cil, consider
nous
examinons'les demandes d'admission du
the application from the point of view of peace
point de vue de la paix et de la securite.' Ce
and security. That is a'limited portion of the
n'estIa qu'undesaspe<>ts des obligations inscrites
obligations of the Charter.
dans la Charte.
'Thenc~-c-isCaiSo the jUridical issue. The
n y a, de plus, une question juridique. Le
traite avec'l'Italie il'apas etc ratific, pas plus
treaty with Italy, like those with the other four
que ne I'ont ete lestraites conclus, avec les quatre
States, has not been ratified. Until it is ratified,
autres Etats.. Tant qu'il n'est pas ratifie, n ne
it' does not come. into effect. Although there is
a cla:use in everyone of these treaties' which says .peut entrer en vigueur. Bien que chacun des dits
thatratiiication shall be effected as 'soon as·" traites connenne' une clause stipulantque la
possible, to •the best of our knowledge not. one
ratification interviendra aussitot que possible, a
notre connaissance aucun d'entre cux n'a encore
of these treaties has been .ratified. We know
from our oWn knowledge that the Italian treaty
eteratifie. Nous n'ignorons. pas que l'exame.n,
actuellcment en tours, du traite'avec l'Italie par
is meeting with but slow progress through the
le Congres des Etats-Unis ne progresse quelenteUnited.States Congress.
ment.
Par consequent, etant donne que l'admission
Therefore, as the whole position in relation
to membership is based,according to the Char- d'un pays comme Membre des Nations Unies
ter, on the ,sovereign equality of all States, and est fondee, aux termes de laCharte, sur le principe de l'egalitesouveraine de tous lcis Etats et
as·~taly,like the, other ex-enemy States~ is still
bound by the provisions of the Armistice Agreeque l'Italie, de II1eme que les autres Etats exennemis, est en,coreliee.par les dispositions de la
m~nt, which place'3 grave limitations on her
sovereignty-,foreign. troops are still in occupaConvention d'armistice. qui impose.desrestriction of ItaIy-jD 'our opiirion, the a,pplication
tionsimportantes asa souverafuete -'des troupes
<;annot, be entertained.
.
ctrangeres occupent toujours sOD territoirenous .eStimons, dans'ces conditions, que la
demaIlde del'Italie ne peut etre prise en
consideration.
Quite apart from. that, there is an incidental
A cela s'ajoute, d'autre parts qu'aux termes de
_questionth~t by. the Assembly resolutionll this
la resolutiondel'AssembIee2 , ,le Conseil a. le
Council -hits a' prior duty, to re-examine the case ,devoir deproceder, en premierliew aun nouve1
of' the rejected applications before it Can enter examen des demandes d'admission qui ontete
jnto' considerations such as this.
rejetees, avant'd'aborder l'examen. de nouvelles
candidatures COllUIle celle de l'Italie.
1 See Offit!ial Records of the Security Council, Second
Year, No. 38, pages 812,to 814.
., .'.
•.• 2 See Resolutions adopted by (Jeneral Assembly, during
.the
&.'seCond
" Part" of its first session,
,. resolution 35 (lh page

1 Voir les Proces':verbaux offi,ciels duConseilde securite, nt;uxieme An~~eJ !'fo3S, pag~ 8128 814.
.
2Voir les Resolutions adoptees parl'AmmblCe glflirale, pendant laseeondepartie de sa premieresessio~:
resolution 35 (I), page 61.
(

I

···d

>

22 ,S .•

i1

sas

SSyL

As all the spokesmen of these ex-enemy States
have indicated thatt as soon as treaty ratification
takes place, they will make application for membership in the United Nations, we feel that the
Security Council should consider them all together. It is wrong to deal with these people
piecemeal, and it is certainly wrong to admit an
application like this _on our agenda.
For those reasons, we object to this iteJJl, and
cannot vote for the adoption of this agenda.

MR. EL-JUIOURI (Syria): The reasons presented . by the representative of Australia· are
certainly good ones, and they ought to be considered, but,I'do not think this is the time for it.
This is' a matter on the agenda, and the agenda
has not yet been adopted. Applications which
the Secretary-General receives in accordance with
his duties ought to be referred to the Security
Council and. ought to be put on the agenda.
When the agenda is adopted and we come to
item 2; then theoppasition of the representative
of Australia, and his remarks, would come ill for
~
consideration.
I think the agenda should first be adopted,
becau:;;e the Secretary-General cannot by himseH decide on the acceptance or, non-acceptance
of such an application. It is for the Security
Council to discuss the rp.attel' and give its decision.

lii

g lun

1111.

U&L

Au surplus, les parte-parole de' tous les EtatS
ex-ennemis ont fait entendre qu'iJs presenteront
une demande d'admission aux Nations Unies
des ratification des traites de paix. Dans ces
conditions, nous estimons que le Conseil de securite devrait examiner toutes ces demandes
simultanement. Ce serait commettre une erreur
que de s'occuper de ces Etats un par un, et c'en
est certainement une que d'admettre a notre ~r-­
dre du jour une demande comme ceUe-d.
Voila pourquoi nous nous opposons a I'inscription de ce point et ne pouvons voter en
fawcur de l'adoption de l'ordre du jour.

M. EL-KHOURI (S)'lie) (traduit de l~ anglais) ;. Les motifs exposes par le .representant de l'Am:
tralie sont certainement justifies~ et I'on devrait
les prendre en consideration; mais j'estime que
le moment de le faire n'est pas venu. n s'agit
d'une question inscrite a I'ordre du jOUf et
I'ordre du jour n'apas encore ete adopte. Les
demandes dont est saisi le Secretaire general d~
l'exercice de ses fonctions doivent etre renvoyees
au Conseil de securite et portees a l'ordre du
jour. Lorsque rordre du jour aura ete adopte et
que nous en serons arrives au point 2, ce sera·
le moment de prendre en consideration les arguments et les observations du representant de
l'Australie ~ propas du point discute.
jestime qu'au prealable ilconvient d'adoptCll'
l'ordre du jour, car le Secretaire general ne peut
decider lui-meme, de la recevabilite d'une de.
mande. C'estau Conseil de securitede discuter
la question et de- prendre une decision a son sujet.
j

The PRESIDENT: Unless I hear .any further
remarks, I shall take .it that t..lte agenda is
adopted unanimously.
The agenda was adopted.

Le PRESIDENT (traduit de l'anglais): S'il n'y
a pas d'autres obserVations, je considererai que
l'ordre du jour est adopte a l'unanimite.
L~ord'fe jour estadopte.

155. Discussion on the ~gendC!

155. Discussion de I'ordre du' iour

Colonel HODGSON (Australia): In view of
the fact that we have now adopted the agenda,
and in view of the fact that there may be some
_members who desire ~J speak on the subject of
the letter ftom the Minister of Foreign Affairs
of Italy, which is listed as item 2, I should like to
propose that we proceed with the discussion of
the· Greek question, .item 3. Th.emeeting this
morning was· ,convened for that purpose, so ,I
think that item 2 should be postponed for the '
consideration, o( the Greek question, which we
. all understood we, were, to discuss this ID0rning
and on which we hoped to reach a final decision
-. .
.
today.

Le colonel HODGSON (Australie) (traduit 'de
Pangla'is): Etant donne que, nous avonS m~­

tenant adopte l'ordre, du jour, et que certams
membres du Conseil' ont sans dout.e l'intention
de .prendre la, parole a, propos de la lettte du
Ministre des Affaires etrangeres d'Italie, ,qui
figure au pOllt, 2, je ,propose que ,nouspassions
a la discussion de la questiongr~cque,qui figure
au point 3; Lt\ reunion de ce matin a ete convoquee cet effet, et c'est pourquoi j'("-stimeq~'e
l'examen du point, 2 del-Tait etreajoume en
faveur de la clli'cUssion de -la question, grecque
qui, si nous avonn tous bien compris, etait preyue
pour ce :r;natin et que nous~peri<ins clore defini.:.
tivement aujourd'hui.
That is my, proposal. I, think it, js -cOrl-eetin
Telle estmaproposition. J'estimequ'elleae
point of fact,because the letter from the' Minister . 'justifie du point de vue des faits; en efIet, la
of Foreign Affairs of Italy is a later communica- . communication du Ministre des Affairesetrari-'
tion and it should figure as item.3 oLour agenda . geres d'Italie e,;'t plus recen~e: eUe devrait daM
instead of item 2.
figurer au point 3 et non au point 2 denotre
ordre du jour.

b

a

Mr., Quo Tai-chi (China): I believe thisM. Quo Tai-chi (Chine) {traduit de l'an,L
Council has a long-established procedure-that- glais}: Je ~rois que le Conseilpossede une trawis; sinceJhe Council.has beehfunctioning-for ;' tion deja longue-, aussi longue~ en tout c3$,'que
dea1ingwith the application of a State for adsa propre existence -- en ce quiconceme la pl"Qmission to membership. ill the United Natiqns.
cedure observee pour l'exam.en,. ~es delnandes

,4\ .'uu-u

CQ

I suggest that this matter be referred to the
'appropriate Committee of,;the Council, where
the applicant's eligibility for membership can be
fully discussed and a report can be made to the
Council. That is the customary manner of dealfig with a matter such as this.

The PRESIDENT: Perhaps it might be as well
to have ruling from the Chair regarding the
proposal of'the Australian representative to the
effect that we should proceed with the Greek
question now and leave the matter of the application of Italy for membership to be dealt
with afterwards.
I should mention that in including this item
concerning the application of Italy for member. sllip, the Chair did not expect any discussion,'
ihasmuch as we had a similar case only about
a month ago at our hundred and thirty-second
meeting, on the occasion of the application of
Hungary for membership.1 However, since the
representative of Australia wishes to discUss the
matter further, the Chair wishes to accept his
, sugg~l)n and discuss, the Greek question first,
unless there is any, objection from the Council.

a:

'-

'

d'aclmission de-s Etats dans I'Organisation des
Nations Unies. Je propose que ,cette question
soit renvoyce au Comite du Conseil charge de
la question, qui pourra examiner en detail lci
titres de I'Etat qui sollicite son' admillsion, et
presenter un rapport au Conseil a ce sujet. C'est
la maniere dont on traite, en regIe generale, une
question COl!'..me, celle qui nous occupe.

Le PIffiSIOENT (traduitde l'anglais): Le mo-

me~t est peut-etre yenu, pour le President,

d'enoncer une decision en cequi concerne la
proposition du representant de ]'Australie de
renvoyer l'e.xamen de la demande d'admission
de l'Italie, a une date ultene1.!re et depoursuivre
maintenant la discussion de ,la question grecque.
. Je dois dire qu'ell inscrivant la demand~ d'ad,mission de l~Italie a I'ordre du' jour, je nem'attendais a aucune cliscussion, puisqu'un cas similaire s'est presente il y a environ un mois, au
cours, de notre cent-trente-deuxieme seance, a
propos de, la demande d'admission de la HO:lgrie1. Toutefois, comme le ~epresentant de l'Australie desire discuter la question plus a fond, le
President .sera heureux d'adopter sa,suggestion
tendant a examiner en premier lieu la question
grecque, si les membres du Consei1 n'y ont pas
d'objection.

Mr. GROMYKO (Union of' Soviet Socialist
M. GROMYKO (Union deS Republiques sociaRepublics): I should not object if the applicalistes sovietiques) (traduit de ~'anglais): Je ne
tion 'received from the Italian Government were
ferais pas d'objection Si la demande du Gousubmitted to the Committee which considers the
vemement de I'Italie etait renvoyee auComite
applications for membership received from difcharge d'examiner l~ demandes d'admission
ferent countries.
, '
emanant de'clifferents pays.
,Now, the, Security Council and the CommitOr, ni le Conseil de securite; ni le Comite' des
tee on Admission of New Members cannot condemand~ d'adm.ission de nouveaux,~/[embres ne
sider the substmce of the application, because
peuvent examiner le fond" de la demande. En
this question ,of consideration of the ,substance
diet, la. demande du Gouvemement itaiien,
of'the application received from the Italian - aussi bienque ce1leduGouvernement hongrois,
Governinent,' as well as the application received
rentt.e dans le cadre de la question generale de
from the Government of Hungary, 'is part of
l'examen des candidatures des pays aveC lesquels
the whole question of the consideration of applides traites de paix doivent €tre conclus et ratifies.
cations for' membership from countries with
C'est une partie de cette question, generaIe. Par
which peace treaties should, be concluded and
consequent, si nous decidons de, renvoyer cette
ratified. It is part of this whole question. And
demande' au Comite des demandes d'admission,
~'weagree to send this'application to. theComce dernier !'examinera en temps voulu.
'mittee on Admission of New Members, then the
Committee will consider it at the appropriate

tUne.
Mr. :&A':tz-SucHY(Poland): As (you men-

M. KATZ-SUCHY (Pologne)· (traduit de I'aniioned, Mr. President", only a month',ago we
glais): Comme vous I'avez fait reIharquer, Mondealtwi~an application which ,is quite idensieur le President, nous avonsexamine,il y a
ticalwith the application of Italy. I believe that
un mois ,~.i1ement .. une demande absolument
the procedure we adopted in regard to the appli- Identique acelle
l'Italie. Je croisque la pro,,:
cation, of Hungary could easily, be adopted with
cedure que nousavons adoptee pour la demande
, ~egard to this applieation. '1 do not see any pos- \ de la Hongrie pourrait,· sans inconvCnient,etre
sib~ty of this Council's discussing the matter in
adoptee pour la presente demande. Jene 'Vois
substance. \Jefore it is'l.investigated by 'the ,Oompas comment' leConseil pourrait entamer une
mittee '0"1 Admission of New Membersand,redisc'IJss~on 'sur cette question quant au fond,
ferred back to thiS Council.
'J
avant qu'elle n'ait ete eJl;aminee paT le Comite
des· demandes d'admission de nouveaux Membres et renvoyee au Consen. '
,Therefore, I move formally that the Council .
Je propOse donc formellement que'le Conseil~6uIdacknowledge the.' receipt of the applicaprenne ~cte de la demande d'admission du Goution of the Italian Government, for membership,
vemement italienet qu'il decide de la renvoyer
.and ~at it should decide to send ihis-a:pplicapon
au Comite des demandes d'admission de noa-

de

:l Vi;lir les¥'roci$~verbau;c offipiels du Conseil de $e~
curitl, Deuxiemc Annee~ No 38. "
,

·-.$eeOfficW, Records of the Security Council, Second
Year, No. 38.
",
"
'
•

r a

h

a

'

to the Comrilittee on Admission of new Memobets for review and investigation; the Committee
will then refer it baclt to the" Security Council8t
the appropriate time.

veaux Membres pour .etude; le Comiteretournera ensuite au Conseil en temps' voulu.

The PREsIDENT: The Chair respectfully submits; unless the Council decides to overrule the
Chair, that the discussion of the question raised
by the letter from the Minister of Foreign Affairs
of Italy should come after the Greek .question.
I should like to liave a decision from the
Council as to whether we should take the pr~ent
item 2 now or after the Greek question.

Le PRESIDENT (traduit de l'anglais): A moins
que le Consei1 ne s'oppose a la decision presidentielle, je propose d'ajoumer la discussion de la
lettre du MUWtre des Affaires etrangexes d'!talie
jusqu:apres la discussion' de la question grecque.
Jevoudrais clonc que le Conseil decidat mamtenant si nous' devons examiner le point 2 immediatement ou a rissue des debats sur la question grecque.

Mr. Quo Tai-chi (China): A motion has
been made by the Polish repreSentative.

M;, Quo Tai-chi (Chlle) (traduit, de l'anglais): Nous avons a cet egard la propositioIl
du representant de laPologne.
.

Mr. LAWFORD (United Kingdom): I have a
point of order. I asked ta sp~ak quite a long time
ago on your ruling. May I.spe?~~ now?

M. LAWFORD. (Royaume-Uni). (traduit de
fan.glais) : Je souleveune question d'or~. J'ai
demande a prendre la parole il. y a quelque
temps deja a pl'OpOS de la decision presidcnticlle.
Puis-je l'avoir maintenant?
Le PRESIDENT (traduit de l'anglais): Qui.

The PREsmENT : Yes.

Mr. LAwFoRD(United Kingdom): I underM. I AWFORD(Royaume.;.l,Jni) (traduit destood that the Chair had ruled that we were to . f anglais) : ,J'ai cru comprendre que le ,~esident
discuss the Greek' question first. Has the I'lng
avait decide que nbus devions discuter en pIoemier
been chall~nged? If not, it stands.
lieu la question grecque., Cette decision a-t-elle
,ete contestee? Sinoll, elle reste .toujours valable.

156. Continuation' of the ,discussion on

the Greek q~estion

,156.' Suite de la diiiiCU5$ion. SU~ la qu.estion
grecque.

Sur l~invitation du President, M. Kahreman
A.t the invitation of the President~ Mr. KahreYlli3 representant dd 13Albanie, M. Athanassov3
man Ylli3"representative of Albania3 Mr. Athan;'
assov3 representative of Bulgaria; Mr. DendrfJ,mis3 reprlselttant de la Bulgane, M., Dendr(lmzs3
representant de la Grece,et M.Krasovec3 reprerepresentative of Greece3' and Mr.' Krasf,1vec;,
representative of Yugoslavia3 took their' seats at . se1l,tant de la Yoiigoslavie3 prennent place' a la
the Council table.
i'abl"e du Conseil,
j

M. ATHANASSOV (Bulgarie) (ttaduzt,de13an-"
gl.ais): Avant d'aborder ladisc::ussiondelaquestion inscritea J' ordre du jour, je dois exptimer
mon / regret de constater que, danscertains
"milieux,l'attitudede mon Gouvemement a ef!.
interpretee comme un refus de~ooperer, co~tme
une tentatived'obstruction etm@me COIIlIl1e'Ull
defi a l'autorite du Conseilde secmite..
"
A cet egard, je desire m'explimersans amIn this respect I wish to be quite explicit and
bages avn de dissiper tout miitentendupo~ble.
dispel any possible misunderstanding. Th~ BulLe Gouvernernent bulgare a le plus grand respet:t
garian Govequnent has,'a great respect for the
pour-I'Qrganisation des NationsUnieset pour
United Nations and all., its organs. The' Btdgarianpeople and the Bulgarian Government . tous ses organes. Lepe\lple ~t le Gouv~rne~ent
are anxious to contribute their part to the ts- , bulgares veulent lapporter leur part ~·~uvre
des Nations Unies, en aidant.a etablir la pm
tablishment of peace and security' in
world
et lasecurite dans le, mondepar ·l'intermediaire
through the' United Nations. Although nota
de cette ,Organisation.. 'Bien qu'elle ne soit 'pas
Member State, Bulgaria abides by'its 'formal
un Etat MeqJ.bre, la Bulgarie ~ coW'orme .aux
obligations, to observe the decisions of,th~ CounoJ?ligations formelles "qu'eUe ~assumees et s'iri
\ cil ontheGreek case. I wish to.stressthat our
faith in the United Nitionsand our sincere
dine dev,ant les decisions du Conseil it ·propos
desire to co-operate With it are not mere words.
de la question grecque. Je desire souligner que
notre foi dans lesN~tio!l:}UDies et notre desk
We have proved this by' co-operating loyally
with the .Commission of Investigation. We put, sincere, de.c,ooperer ahX efforts de l'Qrganisation
all oyr facilities, cornmunicationsand hotelacne sont. p~ de'vaines affirmations.. Nous ravons
cQnunodations .at the disposal of the qo~on;
pmuve en coop&ant loyalement avec la Comwe produced witnesses and interpreters; we facilmission d'eIiquSte. Nous .avoD,S facilite sa.tache
itated the entry of the CommissiC'n into Bulgaria
'en mettant a sa disposition tous' 'les servic~
, Mr. ATHANASSOv' (Bulgaria): Before I enter
into disqussion of the questiori on the agenda, I
wish !o' state with regret that· in some quarters ,
the attitude, 'Of my Government has been quali- '
. fied as a refusal to co-operate,as an attempt to
obstruct, and even as a challenge to the authority of the Security Council.

the

u

'tr ;

.

i

:

! •• a

.k

uta

2

22.

wo

;

Ullllll~

necessaires, nos moyens de communication, nO'$
and we did our best to help it in its task. Upon
their departure from our country, members of ' hetels; nous avons fourni a 'la Commission des.
temoins et des intel'pretes; nous lui avons facilite
the .Commi'SSion expressed to the press their apl'entree
en ten:itoire bulgare et nous avona fait
preciation of the willingn~ with which our
denotre mieux pour l'aider a mener a bien. sa
adininistration. had helped them to make their
investigations. as efficient and as fruitful as they .tache... Enquittant notre pays, les membres de
la Commission ont declare a la presse combien
«;ould be.
Us avaient apprecie la bonne volonte avec laqueUe notre administration les avait aides a
rendre leurs enquetes aussi efficaces et aussi
fIilctueuses que possible.
.
Cela etant, je crois qu'nest imp~ssible d'af"~Thesefacts having been given, I ~ it is
firmer que la Bulgarie ne desire pas donn~r suite
impossible to assert that Bulgaria is unwilling to
aux decisions du Conscil de securite. La declaracarry out the decisions of the Security Council.
tion
de notre agent de liaison a Geneve en cc
The Statemerit made on the Subsidiary Gro~p
qui
conceme
le Groupe subsidiaire ne peut en
by our liaison officer in' Geneva camiot in any
aucune
maniere
etre interpretee comme un refus
circumstances be' construed as a refusal to code
cooperer.
Notre
attitude a cet egard est-tout
operate. Our position is quite dear and cannot
a fait c1aire et ne peut donner lieu a aucun
possibly be subject to misinterpretation.
malentendu.
Nous desirons obtenir des eclaircissements sur
We desire clarification as to the purposes and
les buts du Groupe subsidiaire et voir definir le
scope of activity of the Subsidiary Group. The
domaine ou s'exercera son activite. Le fait
fact that we have asked for this clarification
d'avoir demandeces ec1aircisse~ents ne peut
cannot be represented as an action undermining
etre interprete comme une mesure tendant a
the autbority of
Security Council. I believe
saper l'autorite du Conseil de securite. J'estime
tha.t it is our right to point out to the Security
que 110US avons le droit de signaler au Conseil
Council that in our opinion the Commission has
not. instructed the Subsidiary Group in ac- de securite qu'a notre avis la Commission n'a
pas donne au Groupe. subsidiaire des instructions
cordance with the resolution of 18 April 1947.1
conformes auxtel'mes de la resolutiondu 18
The. Commission did not mstruct tIle Subsidiary
awil 19471 • La Commission n'a pas charge le
Group' 'to perform subsidiary functions, but
tiansformed it into a new body 'to investigate
Groupe subsidiaire de fonctions secondaires; eUe
l'a trahsfonne en un organisme nouveau charge
possible futUre ~cident8 .. The representative of
Belgium mentioned at our last meeting that it
d'enqueter sur tous 'les incidents qui pourraient
was not surprising that·in the present case hesise produire a l'avepir: A notre de~ere se~ce,
tations might arise. ~ I quite agree.. Hesitations , le representant de la Belgique a declare qu'il
anddifIerent interpretations .of 'the' competence
n'est pas surprenant qu'iI y ait quelque incertiof the Subsidiary' Group do indeed exist. Our
tude dans le 'cas qui nous occupe2 • Je suis tout
position is that the Commission cannot in 'any
a fait de son avis. Certaines hesitations se sont
circuinstancesassign to its Suh!idiary Group the
effectiveme..!1t:rnanifestees et il, existe -'les inter-'
investigation' of cases 'with which the ~ecurity
pretations divergentes quant a la competence du
COuncil Ims. not been seized. Some members of
Groupe subsidiaire. A notre avis, la. Commission
the yt>mmission seem to think differently. It is
ne' peuten aucune cii,-constance .charger le
only natural that we should ask the· Council to ' Groupe subsidiaire d'enqueter ·sur des questions
c!arify aris problem.
'
dont le ConseiIde securite n'a pas etesaisi. Certains des meinbres de la Commission semblent
avoira cc sujet urie opinion differente. Il est
tout naturel' que nous demandions' au Conseil
d' eIucid~r cette question.
'
La position que nousavons adoptee aGeneve
Mter having loyally co-operated with the
est ceUe-ci :~pres 2.voircoopere loyalement avec
,Commisrion of Investigation, our position in
la Commission d'enquete,il ne nous a pas paru
Genevafuts been that we could not see the
possible de rOlivnr l'etude d'une phaSe deja
possibility of going again over a phase, already
close.de la·q1:lestion.grecque. Nous avons souIigne
closed, of th~ Greek question. We' have pointed
qu'iI etait inutile de creer une nouveUe. COll1Iilisout that there is no. need to .establish a new
sion d'enquete alors que la premiere e~t sur.
commission of investigation while the first one
le point d'achever ,. sOn rapport; or" en fait, le
is about to complete its report, becal;Ise, as a
matter of. fact, the tenns of reference given to' mandat cQnfie au Groupe, subsidiaire etabIit
virtuellement· une nouvelIe commission d'enthe-Subsidiary Group virtually establish a new
Commission of investigation. To this, naturally,
quete. La Bulgarie ne pouvait, evide:m:qlent, acBulgaria could' not· Subscribe without requesting
cepter cette dec~-'on sans demander des eclaircissements au Const21 de securite et sans solliciter
clarification from the Security Council, and
without requesting authoritativeinterp:retation
une interpretation autorisee precisant Ies buts et
.of the purpose and competence of the Group.
la competence du Groupe.

the

1See OfficUzl Records of the Security Courzcil, Second
Year, No. 37, 131stineeting.
: Ibid.; No. 40.

1 Voir les Proces-verbaux pfficiels du Conseil tIe securitJ, Deuxieme Annee, No 37, 131eme seance.
21bid., No 40.

.....
Lorsque le Conseil de securite aconstitue le
When the Subsidi~ry Group was established
Groupe subsidiaire, il etait entendu, je crais; que
by the Security Council, the understanding, I
ce Groupe n'allait pas supplanter la Commisbelieve, was that the Group was not going to
siond'enquete, prendre sa place ou assumer ses
supersede the Commission of Investigation or
droits. End'autres termes, dans resprit du Constep into its place and its rights. In other words,
seil,
le Groupe ne devait pas constituer une •
it was the sense. of the Council that the Group
was not going to be a second commission of seconde commission d'enquete. Or, si l'on
examine la partie Y des instnIctions donnees le
investigation. Now, to judge from palt Y" of the
29 avril par la Commi<>&on d'enquete au Groupe
directive given on 29 April by the Commission
of Investigation to the Subsidiary Group 1, it· st:bsidiaire\il semble bien qu'une nouvelle com
mission d'enquete .ait ete, en. fait~ coil,stituee. A
seems th&~ a hew ~ommission of investigation
notre
avis, c'est la une procedure tout a fait
has been set up. This is, in our opinion, quite
inadequate and qUite an Imusual procedure for . inappl'Opriee, tout a fait singuliere, pour la solution des. oroblemes de cette nature..
the solution of such matters.
QueU:S pourraient etre· "les fon~tions d'un
What could possibly be the functions of :t
groupe
stibSidiaire qui resterait en Greee? Four- ..
subsidiary group remaining in Greece? To sup00, aubesoin, des renseignements complem.mply, where -necessary, additional subsidiary intaires sur.les cas ayant deja fait robjct d'une
forrp.a:tion oD. cases already investigated, but on
enquete mais pour lesque1s certains details peuwhich some details might be lacking, where cervent mZ:'lquer, ou dont certains points peuverri:
tain points needed clarification, as for· example,
exiger des ec1aircissements, comme, par exemple,
in the case of ambiguous testimony. Instead
lorsque des temoignages"·equivoques ont ete en..
of having the whole Commission returning to
tendus. Au lieu quetuute la Commission reGreece in order to obtain those links lacking in
toume en Grece pour obteOO les maIDons manits chain of information, a subsidiary group requants dans lacha.ine des Tenseignements deja.
ma4llng on the spot for convenience could
eventually supply those missing links. But all " recueillis, ungroupe subsidiaire. demtmre sur
place a cet effet pourrait eventuel1ement ~tre en
thisconcems past· incidents and not future on~.
mesure de foumir. les renseignements· voullls,
~.falli tous ces renseignements concemeraient des
incidents passes· et non pas· des incidents futurs.
La .Commission d;enquete est allee a Geneve
The Commission of Inve .dgation went to'
en raison du manque d'hotels .. en Gr~e. Si la
Geneva because of the lack of hotel accommoCommissiun etait restee en 'Grece, il n'y. aurait
dation in Greece. Had the Commission remained
pas eu lieu de-constituer un groupe subsidiair-e,
in Greece, there would have been ;:0 need of
et aucUD. groupe de ce genre n'aurait ete cree.
a sl.!?sidiary group, and no such group would
Dans ce .::as,apres avoir enquete· sur les faits
have been created. In that case,.the Commission,
precis presentes par le Gouvemt:ment gree, la
after baving investigated the concrete facts subCommission aurait conunencea !'ediger son
Initted by 'the Greek Government, would have
rapport a leur sujet et il serait difficile d'imaginer
started drafting its report on those facts, and we
cannot visualize a. Situation in which the Comla Commission~ttendantindefinimentque de
mission would have waited indefinitely for new
nOuveaux incidents de frontiere surviennent pontborder incidents to· happen in order to include
les. incluredans son rapport. Ayant commence .a
them in its report. Mter having started the
rediger son rapport, la Commission auraitpu, le
wording of the report, the Commission could .cas echeant, rouv.rir un~ enquete limi!eeapropos··
have reopened,ii necessary, a Hmited investigad'un faitexamine,en Vile d"obtenir des rention oIa fact under consideration, in order to" seignemetJ.ts compleme;ntaires . ou des. prtki. obtain additional or more precise. information
Sions. Or,la C!)riImi~ion ayant ete' obligee de
on it. Now, for technical reasons, the Commisquitter la Grece, la tache de recueillir'des IeD;sion being away from Greece, this task of obtainseigIlements complementa4'es stir lescas ayant
ing additional information on the' cases already
deja fait robjet d'une enquete a ete, pour des
investigated has been assigned to a special body
raisons d'ordre· technique, attribuee a. un. or-the Subsidiary Group. But the fact that the
ganisme .special, le Groupe subsicliake.. Mais le
CommisSion deals. through a· speCial organ does
fait que la C0mnlissi0n. a recours' a un organisme
not change the nature of the work which may
special ne change ~ .rien la nature dutrav~
need to he _done. The work to be· don~, either
qui pourrait se revBer necessaire.Que la Comdirectly by. the Commission, or through the Subrnission agisse elle-meme o~que le Groupe subsid!ary Group, ~ not· to open a. totally new in- . sidiaire intervienne, le travail a accomplir' ne
qwry; hut only to complete, whenever. n~ceSsary,
cortsiste pas it ouvrir une enquete nouvelle, mais
the mfonnation already gathered.
simplement a completer, le ,cas echeant, les renseigriements .deja· recueillis.
.
Je desire, a ce propos,soUlever un autre point.
There is another pomt which I should like to
J'estime que le Conseil de securite ·dewaitfucer
raise in this connexion. I think the Security
ladurt~e de l~ periQdependant laquelle. le
COtncil should establish the period of time duringwhich .the SubSidiary Group will exercise
Groupe subsidiaire. exercera Bes fonctions.Ce
its fWlctiorts.This Group cannot stay indefinitely
Groupe ne. peut· rester indefiniment dans les
in' the Balkans. I doubt very much whether any
Balkans, Je doute tres fort qu'un Etat souverain,

I

1 See Official Reco,ds of the Security Council•. Second
·Year, Supplement No. 11,Annex 26. . .

b

1Voir les P'1Oces-vBTbauxoffi,d,ls du COfJSBilde secu,it., Deuxieme Ann~. Supplemeat No U i Anne:1re 26.

sovereign country would allow an international

;body, whatever its name and purpose, to stay
indefinitely on its borders, to enter its territory
.whenever it pleases, to summon its officials, in·cluding the highest ones,. without any limitation
of time.

That would be a case without precedent in
international reIatinns and in absolute contradiction to established practice for the solution of
international disputes. Vie have pledged ourselves to carry out the decision of the Security
Council on the Greek. complaints, a."ld we abide
by our pledge. We have carried out there obligationsin a spirit· of loyal co-operation, but we
have not abdicated our sovereignty. It was not
the sense of the Council, I believe, when it
voted the resolution of 18 April, to have Bulgaria placed under the control of the Subsidiary
Group' for an indefinite period.

Moreover, from the point of view of procedure, I do not see how we can accept the
report of the Commission and start cfucussion
and evaluation of the facts reported if there is
to be a continuous flow of new information. We
have to have a time-limit. There must be some
limit to the facts to be discussed and considered.
This is a most elementary practice in any court;
and I think that, for all practical purposes, the
procedure of the Council should be assimilated
tCi the procedure of a court. In the settlement of
every dispute, tJ;tere is always a phase in which
the iJ;Uormation is gathered. There is subsequently
a phase in which. this information is' examined
.and. sifted, and there is a third phase when the
facts are evaluated as t~ their juridical significance. We can never reach the second, let alone
the third phase-that is, the discussion and·
evaluation of the report of the Commission.ifthe first phase is not closed at a given moment.
As a matter of fact, the first phase, the phase·
of .gatherin~ factual· information, should have
been' closed when the Commission .left for
Geneva, because the gathering of· factual information concerris definite complaints enumeratoo ()ne by one. in the letters which the representativ~ of Greece addressM to the Security

Au cours d'une de nos seances' precedentes,
proposant son
le repr~..sentant de la France,
amendement au projet de resolution, a donne
a entendre que le Groupe subsidiaire projete
n'etait qu'un organisme temporaire1 • Si ee
Groupe est maintenant charge par le Conseil de
fonctions etendues, si ces fonctions ne sont pas
determinees, s'il est autorise a proceder a des
enquetes sur tout evenement qui pourrait survenir dans les Balkans, ce ne sera pl1;1S alors un
groupe temporaire. Ainsi done, en partant de
dispositions,adoptees pour des raisons techniques
et pour plus' de commodite, nous aboutirons
finalement a que1que chose de fondamentaleme.'1.t different.
En outre,. du point de vue de. la pl:oceclure,
je ne vois pas comment nous pouvons accepter
le rapport de la Commission, comment nous
pouvons entamer la discussion et l'appreciation .
des faits qu'ils nous signale, si de nouveaux ren~eignements doivent continuer a nous parvenir
sans interruption.
faut qu'il y ait un deIai
determine. Il faut limiter les faits qui seront
sujets. a discussion et a examen. C'est une pratique eIementaire que r on observe dev:ant n'importe que! tribunal, et j'estime que du point
de V1J.epratique, la procedure du Conseil devrait
etre assimiIee a la procedure d'un tribunal. Dans
le reglement de tout conflit, il y a toujours une
phase premiere ou l' on recueille les renseignements. Vient ensuite une phase ou Ces renseigne;.
ments sont examin~ et tries, suivie de la troisieme,
phase ou les faits sont apprecies du point de
vue juridique. Nous ne pourrons jamais atteindre
la seconde phase, ni, a plus forte raison, la
troisieme - c'est-a.-dire arriver a la discussion et
a I'appreciation du rapport de la Commission si la premiere phase ne se trouve pas close a. un
moment determine. En realite, la premiere
phase, ceLJpendant laque1le on recueille .les
faits, aurait dft prendre fin quand ·la Commission
est partie pour Geneve, car le recueil de ces faits

1 See Official Recordso! tile Security Council, Second
Year, No. 33. pages 713 and 714.

1 Voir les Proces-verbaux oificiels· du Conseil. de securite, Deuxieme Annee. No 33. pages 713 et 714.

. At one of our previo1JS meetings, while offering his amendment to the draft resolution, the
representative of France explained that the proposed subsidiary group was meant to be a temporary body.l If the Council now assigns to the
Group large and unspecified functions and autho:izes .it to investigate at its own discretion
anything that may happen in the Balkans, it
will no longer be a temporary group. Thus,
starting .from a procedural arrangement established for technical convenience, we shall be
faced finally with a substantially different thing.

~

quel qu'il soit, puisse accepter qu'un organisme
international, peu importent son nom et le but
qu'il se propose, s'installe indCfiniment St!f ses
frontieres, penetre a l'inteneur de son terrltoire
quand cela lui plait et convoque ses fonctionnams, y cQmpris les fonctionnaires les plus importants, sans qu'aucune limite de temps :3oit
fixee a la duree de ces acti"it~.
Ce serait la un cas sans precedent dans les
relations iniernationales et en contradiction absolue avec la procedure etablie pour le reglement
des conflits internationaux. Nous nous sommes
engages a nous conformer a la decision du
Conseil de securite en ce qui conceme la
plainte grecque, et nous faisons honneur a notre
promesse. Nous nous sommes acquitt~ des obligations que nous avons contractees dans un
esprit de cooperation loyale, mais nous n'avons
pas abdique notre souverainete. Je ne crois pas
que le Comeil, en adoptant la resolution du 18
avril, ait entendu soumettre la Bulgarie au contrale du Groupe subsidiaire pour une penode
indeterminee.
.

er

..

t

MUII_tft

Xli

en

n

sf

Council last year.], All these' complaints have
invesalready been investigated. The scope
tigatio~ cannot go beyond these complaints. That
is self-evident.

0:

conceme- des griefs definis enumeres un: par un

8ans les lettres quP. le representant de la Grece

a adressees au Conseil de securite Pannee derniere\ Tous ces griefs ont deja. fait l'objet d'une
enquete. L'enquete ne peut aller au dela, cela
va de soi.
festime done que le Conseil devrait donner
Therefore, I think the Council should make
plus de precision aux objectifs du Groupe subclearer the objeCtives of the Subsidiary Group
and especially should set a time-limit for its, lddiaire; i1 devrait, en particulier, fixer une
limite a. la duree de l'activite de ce Groupe. A
activity. This time-limit should, in my opinion,
mon a'\>is, cette limite devrait etre le moment
be the moment when the Security Council begins
ou le CoD.SeJ1 de securite entreprendra l'examcn
hearings on the report of the Commission. Otherwise, we shall get nowhere. At any moment, the
du rapport de la Commission. Autrement, nOll&
n'aboutirons jamais. A tout moment, le travail
work of the Council could be interrupted by a
new piece of information, and then the whole
~u Conseil risqUeI"'.Jt d'etre interrompu par
I arrivCe d'Wl nouveau renseignement, et il
discussion would Lave to begin. again from the
very beginning. I do not think it is ~ble to
faudrait alors reprendre toute la discussion
work and to achieve results under those condepuis le debut. festime qu'il n'est pas possible
ditions.
de travailler et d'arriver a un resultat dans ees
conditions.
Enfin, je veux declarer une fois de plus que le
Finally: I wish to declare once more that the
Gouvemement bulgare n'a jamais refuse de
Bulgarian Government has never refused to cocooperer aveC un vrai groupe subsidiaire. Lorsoperate with a real subsidiary group. When
que le Groupe aura des raisons sufflSantes pour
there is sufficient reason for the Group to enter
, Bulgarian territory, our Gover:llnent will grant
penetrer en territoire bulgare, notre Gouvemeit permission to do lID. But I do not think that
ment lui accordera ]'autorisation necessaire.
the Council expects the Bulgarian Gov~ent
Mais je ne pense pas que le Conseil attende
to assume a vague obligation for letting the Subdu Gouvernement bulgare qu'il assUIile de
sidiary Group make investigations in Bulgaria for
vagues obligationS en s'engageant a laisser le
an indefinite future period on matters of which
Groupe subsidiaire proceder a. des enquetes en
we are not aware. Such a general and· vague
Bulgarie pendant une periode de temps jn:'
obligation would mean abdication of sovereigntY,
definie et sur des questions que nous ne eonand I do not think anybody will. ask Bulgaria to
naissons pas. L~ fait d'assumer des obligations
abdicate its sovereignty.
d'un caractere aussi general et aussi vague
equivaudrait a une abdication de souveramete,
et je .pensc que personne ne demanderaa la
Bulgarie d'abdiquer sa souverainete.
. I wish to repeat that we are ready to coJe tiens a repeter que nous sommes disposes
operate with the Security Council and all its
a cooperer avec le Conseil de securite et avec
organs, but we cannot accept indefinite obliga~
tous ses organes, mais nous ne pouvons accepter
tions for an indefinite period of time.
des obligations indetemllnees pour une p&iode
de temps indefinie.
As I have pointed out, before we are able to
Comme je l'ai deja sbuligne, pour nous per;.
see clearly what our. ohligations are, the Council
mettre de voir clairement en quoi ConsistCilt nos
should consider the question whether the tenns .obligations, le Conseil devrait ex~er la ques.of reference given to the Subsidiary Group by the
tion de savoir si le mandat comic au Gr6upe
Commission are consistent with the Council~s subsidiaire par la Commission est compatible
resolution. We have before us a draft resolution,
avec les termes de la resolution du Consen.
submitted by the representative of the Union of
Nons' examinons en ce moment un projet de
Soviet Socialist Republics, proposing -terms of
resolution du representant de rUnion des
reference for the Subsidiary Group.ll After this
Republiques sQcialistes sovietiques qui propose
draft resolution has been discussed aIld the
un mandat pour le Groupe subsidiaire2. Lorsque
nature of our qbligations has been made more
ce projet de resolution aura ete discute et qu'on
clear, I shall ask the Chair for the floor and shall
aur&. \ defini avecplus de precision en ,quoi
st~te the position of my _,Government.
. consiStent nos obligatio~, je .demanderai la
p~ole au President pOUf exposer l'attitude de
mon Gouvernement.
,

M. LAWFORD (Royaume-Uni) (traduit del'anglais): La delegation du Royaume-Uni a etudie .avec la plus grandeat;tention le discours
prononce le 12 maipar le .representant de
l'Union des Republiques sociaIistes sovietiques2. -

1See Official Records of the Security' Council. First
Year, Second Series, Supplement No. 10, Annex 16, Sup.
plement No. 11, Annex 20 and Supplement No. 12,

"Voir lesProces-verbaux officiel:: du Conseil de ~e­
curiM. Premiere Annee, Seconde. S6rie,· Supplement No
10. Annexe 16. Supplement No 11, Annexe ~O (ft ~up"
pIement No 12, Annexe 24.
.
2Voir les Proces.verbaux afftciels du Con$eil \dtl securit~> Deuxieme Ann~, No .39.
'-;

Annex 2'4.
.
See Official R8cords of the Security Council. Second

'" 2

_ ~ ear, No. 39.

>

,

Mr. LAWFORD (United Kingdom): The
United Kingdom delegation has studied with
the closest a.ttention the speech made by the
representative of the Union of Soviet Socialist
Republics on 12 May.2

'

Le fond de la plaintc fonnulee par M. GromyThe burden of Mr. Gromyko's complaint
ko nous semble porter sur l'argument que la deappears to us to be that the d~cision of the
Commission of Investigation on 29 April was . cision de la Commission d'enquete en date du
29 avri! etait irreguliere.Le representant d~
an incorrect one. The representative of the
l'Union des Republiques socialistes sovietiques a
Union of Soviet Socialist Republics said the
dit que le Groupe subsidiaire n'etait pas reeneSubsidiary Group was not really a subsidiary
ment un groupe subsidiaire, mail! une comgroup, but a commission with the same functions
mission ayant les memes fonctions et les memes
and powers as the Commi..o;sion itself.
pouvoirs que la Commission elle-meme.
A notre avis, il n'y a rien la de hien extra, In our view, there is nothing very extraordini d'irregulier. Aux termes de la
ordinaire
nary or incorrect about that. Under the terms
resolution du Conseil de securite en date du 18
of the Security Council's· resolution of 18 April,
avril, le Groupe est expressement habilite a
the Group is specifically empowered to continue
continuer a exert,er toutes fonctions que la
to fulfil such functions as the Commission may
Commission peut lui assigner, dans le cadre de
prescribe, in accordance with its terms of referson mandat. Il semble qu'aux terrn.-..s de cette
.ence. There seelns to be no reason why the
Subsidiary Group, under this decision, might not
decision il n'y a aJ,lcune rais~>n pour que le
Groupe subsidiaire n'ait pas exactement les
have had· e."Cactly the same powers as the Commemes pouvoirs que la Commission elle-meme en
mission itself as regards watching the situation.
ce qui coneerne sa mission de surveillance. Mais
In point of fact, if we study the Subsidiary
Group's terms of reference, we will see that the
en fait, si nous examinons le mandat du Groupe
Commission has actually limited its powers. The
subsidiaire, nous verrons qu'a vrai ~e la ComCommission, in out' view, acted properly under
:rr..ission alLT.it6 ses pouvoirs. A nOtre avis, la
a. Council decision. We have heard no really
Commission a agi en parfaite conformite d'une
tangible suggestion as to any impropriety under
decision du Conseil de securite. Aucun argUment
this head, except the recurrence in Mr. Gromy- vraiment probant n'a ete avance pour demontrer
~o's statement of the word "automatic". I do
l'incorrection de cette action, si ce n'est peutJ;1ot know what is thought to be so sinister about
ctre la repetition constante, dans le. discours de
this word. If it means strict compliance with
M. Gromyko, du mot "automatique". Je ne
the Council's decision, I cannot see that it has
sais pas ce que M. Gromyko peut voir de telleany pejorative smse.
ment sinistre a ce mot. S'il s'applique a la smcte
execution de la decision du Conseil de securite,
je ne vois pas qu'il ait un sens pejoratif.
Then, the representative' of the Union of
Le representant de l'Union des Republiques
socialistes sovietiques a affirme d'autre part que
Soviet Socialist Republics claimed that the original Commission had been set up to investigate
la Commission avait ete constituee a l'origine
pour enqueter uniquement sur les incidents sur
only those incidents to which the Greek Gov°ernment ha. called the attention of the Security
lesquels le Gouvernement grec avait attire
l'attention du Conseil de securite. Il a souligne,
Council. He pointed out, as is quite evident, that
et cela va d~ soi, que le mandat de la Comthe terms of reference of the original Commission could not refer to iuture incidents of
mission initiale ne pouvait se rapporter a des
which no one had any knowledge. But then, as
incidents futuIS dont personne ne pouvait rien
savoir. Mais ensuite, comme l'a fait observer le
the Australian representative pointed out, he
does, later Qll in his speech, admit that °"the
representant de l' Australie, M. Gromyko, dans
Subsidiary Group, in accordance with the resoun passage subsequent de sa declaration, reconlution of the Security Council, can and should
nait que "conformement a la resolution du Concarefully investigate any incidents that may take
seil de securite, le Groupe subsidiaire peut et
place in the Greek frontier areas1". With this
doit enqucter minutieusement snr .tous incidents
latter statement, my Goverrm~ent finds itself in
qui pourront survenir dans les regions frontalieres
full agreement.
grecques 1». Mon Gouvemement souscrit entierement a cette derniere declaration.
Incidentally, I calmot at all accept the Bul~
Ace propos, je me permettrai de dire que je
garian representative's interpretation, given this
ne puis accepter l'interpretation que le repremorning, of the sphere of work of the Sub~
sentant de la Bulgarie a donnee ce matin en ce
sidiary Group. In thisconnexion, I should like
qui conceme le champ d'activite du Groupe
to draw attention to the last clause in the
subsidiaire. A cet egard; je desire attirer l'attenSecurity Council's resolution of 19 December. 2
tion du Conseil sur la derniere disposition de la
It reads as follows: "That the Commission be
resolution du Conseil de securite en date du
invited to make any proposals that it may deem
19 decembre2 • Elle est con~ue en ces termes:
wise for averting a repetition of border viola"Que la Comm1"-c:ion soit invitee a faire toute
tions and disturbances in these areas." Quite - proposition qu'elle jugera susceptible d'emclearly, it is the intention that the Commission
pecher le renouvellement de violations de fronshould make recommendations for the future.
tiere et de troubles dans ces regions." Dc toute
01This statement is quoted from the provisional interpretation given during the one hundred and thirty-third
meeting of the Security Council (document SIP.V.133) ,
and not from the official translation contained in the Official Records of the Security Council. Second Year, No. 39.
:l See Official Records of the Security Council, First
Year, Second Series, No. 28, p~ 701.

1 Cette declaration est tiree de l'interpretation provisoire
donnee au cours de la cent-trente-troisieme· sean~ du
Conseil de securite (document S/p.V. 133) et non deJa
traduction officiele figurant aux Proces-verbaux officiels
du Conseil de. securite, Deuxieme Annee,No. 39.
: Voir les Proces-verbaux officiels du Conseil de. securite, Premie:re Annee, Sec~nde Serie, No 28, page 7(11'.

That being so, it would be ridiculous to leave a
gap, during which there would be no vigilance
and no security in the frontier areas, between
the time when the original incidents are alleged
to have taken place and the time when the
Commission's report may be acted upon by the
Council. In any case, the Council itself, in its
resohtion of 18 April, decided that this gap
must be filled, and the Council is the supreme
authority.

There was a further C!Igument in Mr. Gromy.ko's speech. He cast doubt on the validity of
the Commission's proceedings on, 29 April, when
it adopted its resolution regarding the powers
and functions of the Subsidiary Group, on the
grounds that the liaison officers of the four
Balkan countries were not invited to participate
in the discussion. If I may say so, the Belgian
representative, in his admirable and closely
reasoned statement, has completely demolished
this theory, and we have nothing to add to
that.1
So much for the legal, er 'quasi-Iegal, arguments used in ~upport of the theory of the
representative of the Union of Soviet Socialist
Republics that the decision of the Commission
of Investigation of 29 April was a wrong decision. Stripped of these arguments, which, for
the reasons I have given, we consider fallacious,
the speech of the representative of the Union of
Soviet. Socialist Republics does not, in the view
of my delegation, constitute a convincing justification of the attitudes which have been adopted
by the Governments of Yugoslavia, Albania and
Bulgaria in declining to t:o-operate hitherto with
the Subsidiary Group.

With regard to the terms of the resolution
which the representative of the Union of Soviet
SocialiSt RepUblics has tabled, there is little to
add to the objections, valid in our view, .which
have already been raised by various members
of the Council. Paragraph 1 of the reSolution,
which apparently proposes that the Subsidiary
Group should refer each separate case. or·each
separate incident back to a Commission situated
in Geneva, or even at a later date somewhere
in mid-Atlantic· or on Long Island, seems to us
on the impractical side. Whatever may have
been the object underlying such a proposal,
there can be no doubt that its effect would be
to stultify the whole purpose of the Council's
decision.
.
Paragraph 2 of the resolution,· which proposeS
that the'Subsidiary Group should have its headquarters in Athens, seems to us to be equally
inappropriate and unacceptable. In his speech,
Mr. Gromyko reminded us that Athens is the
political and administrative centre of ('-"eece.
I shall not· bother the Council by reaclliilb over
again the Commission's terms. of reference, but.
it .is not my impression that they contain anything that would rule .out Salonika as the head...
," 2

See Official Records of .the Security Council, Se.e0nd
No. ':to.
.
.

~ ear,

n

evidence, il ressort de ce texte que la Commission
doit pouvoir faire des propositions poUf l'avenir.
Dans ces conditions, il serait ridicule qu'il y eat
une p&iode pendant laquelle n'existerait ni
surveillance ni securite dans les regions frontalieres, entre le moment ou les premiers incidents sont censes avoir eu lieu et celui ou le
Conseil prendra des decisions en se fondant sur
le rapport de la Commission. En tout cas, le
Conseu lui~m@me, par sa resolution du 18 avril,
a de~de que cet intervalle doit etre comble, et
le Conseil est l'autorite supreme.
M. Gromyko a invoque un autre argument
dans son discours: il a mis en doute la validite
de l'action de la Commission lorsqu'e11e a adopte,
le 29 avril) la resolution relative aux pouvoirs et
fonctions du Groupe subsidiaire, en raison .du
fait que les agents de liaison des quatre pays
balkaniques n'avaient pas ete invites a participer
a la discussion. Permettez-moi de dire que, dans
son expose remarquablc par la precision de l'argumentation, le representant' de la Belgique
a r"eduit cette these a neant, et nous n'avonS
.
rien ay ajouter 1.
Telles sont les observations que je voulaiS
faire en ce qui concerne les arguments juridiques,
ou d'apparence juridique, invoques a l'appuide
la these du representant de rUnion· des Rep~­
bliques socialistes sovietiques, d'apres laquelle·Ja
decision de la Commission d'enquete en date dn
29 avril est une decision· erronee. DepouilIe de'
ces arguments, que nous estimons fallacieuxpour
les raisons que je viens d'indiquex:, le discours
du representant de rUnion des Republiqu~
soeialistes sovietiques, de l'avis de ina delegation, ne justifie pas de fa~on convamcante l'attitude adoptee par les Gouvernements de la .
Yougoslavie, de l'Albanie et de la Bulgarie q~
jusqu'ici, ont refuse de cooperer avec le GrouP.e
subsidiaire.
. .,
Pour. ce qui est des termes de· la resolution
que le representant de rUnion des Republiques
socialistes sovietiques a presentee, il y a peu de
ch.ose a ajouter aux objections, a notre avis
pertinentes, qu'ont "eja ·soulevees divers membres du Conseil. Le paragraphe 1 de eette resolution, qui semble proposer que le Groupe sub-sidiaire renvoie chaque cas particulier QU chaque
incident particulier a une Commission sieg'eaut
actuellement a Geneve, ou qui' siegerait meme,
par la suite, quelque part dans l'Atlantique ori
Long Island, nous parait d'1ine application peu
pratique. Quel qu'ait pu etre I'objet de cette
proposition, il ne fait' aucun doute qu'elle aurait .
pour efIet d'infirmer lesbuts memes que visait
la decision du Conseil.
,
Le .paragraphe .2 de la resolution sovietiqu~,
qui propose que le Gronpe subsidiaire' fixe son
siege' a Athenes, ·noussemble tout aussi inopportun et inacceptabIe. Dans son discours,
M. Gromyko nous a rappele qu'Athenes est le
centre politique et" administratif de la Grece.
Je n'imposerai pas au Conseil une seconde lee..
.ture .des termes ;du' mandat confie a la Comtnission,mais je nesache pas que ce, manda:t
contienne. une disposition a l'effet que le siege
1 Voir lesPToces-veTbau~ officiels du Conseil' de sscnriM. l)euxieme Annee, No 40.

du Groupe subsidiaire ne peut etre fixeS a
Salomque - tout au contraire.
Pour sa part, mon Gouvernement est disposeS
a adopter comme raisonnable l'opinion de la
majorite des membres de la Commission d'enquete, qui ont travaill6 SlJr place: selon leur
.experience, l'emplacement le plus approprie pour
le siege du Groupe subsidiaire est Salomque.
Mon Gouvemement ne voit aucune raison de
modifier la decision de la Commission a cet
egard, ou meme de l'ouvrir, au sem du Conseil
de'securite, la discussion qui a deja eu lieu au
sein de la Commission, uniquement parce que
la preference qu'6prouve pour Athenes le representantde I'Umon des Republiques socialistes
sovietiques aupres de, la Co!!1Inis1rlon n'a pas
reuni
les suffrages de la majorite 'de ses colc~eagues.
legues.
Le paragraphe 3 de la resolution sovietique
Paragraph 30f
resolution lays down that
, the Subsidiary Group shall cease its activity
stipule que le Groupe subsidiaire cesscra son
activite au moment ou la Commission eIIe-meme
with' the liquidation of the CoInmission itself.
,The Security Council has not yet, of course,
sera dissoute. Le Conseil de securite n'a naturelletaken any' decision with regard to the liquida- . ment pas encore pris, de decision en ce qui
conceme la dissolution de la Commission. Quand
tion of the Commission. When the time comes
le 'moment sera venu de prendre cette decision, je
for ~ch a decision, I do not'think that anyone
pense que personne nesoutiendra que le Groupe
could tnaintain that the Subsidiary Group of
the Commission should not cease its activity if
subsidiaire de la Commission doive poursuivre
the Commission itself is liquidated. That follows son activite des lors que la Commissionellelogically, since the Subsidiary Group is a submeme est dissoute. C'est la. une consequence
sIdiary group of the Commission. A subsidiary logique, puisque le Groupe subsidiaire est un
group dies ,with the, parent organization, but in
organe subsidiaire .de la Commission. Un groupe
oUr view, death dpes not occur until the Council
subsidiaire disparait avec l'organisation dont il
liquidates the parent. Under the last paragraph
emane; toutefois, selon nous, cette disparition
of our resolution of 19 December, the Council ne peut se produrre que lorsque le Conseil dismay conceiVably provide for some permanent
sout I'organisation mere. Aux termes'du demier
bOdy of, obs~ers. If we say that the Subsidiary
paragraphe de notreresolution du 19 decembre,
Group dies with the Commission of Investigale Conseil pourrait fort bien decider de creer
tion, that cannot, of course, limit in any way ungroupe permanent d'observateurs. S'il est bien
the right of the Council to continue its existence
entendu que le Groupe subsidiaire disparait
or to substitute something similar in its place, if
avec la Cemmission d'enquete, cela ne saurait
if should wish to do so.
en aucune fa~on restreindre le droit duConseil
de securite de proroger I'existence de ce Groupe,
ou de lui substituer un groupe similaire s'il le
juge bono
In any case, this question of the length of
Quoi qu'il en soit, ~ette question de la duree
existence of the Subsidiary Group, which is
de l'existence du Groupe subsidiaire, inseree
sandwiched into the resolution of the Union
dans la resolution de l'Union des R6publiques
of Soviet Socialist Republics, does not· seeni to
socialistes sovietiques, ne semble pas etre liee
be intimately connected with the rest of the
tres etroitement au reste de la resolution. CeIle-ci
vise en dIet a. cQrriger ce que l'Union sovietique
resolution, which is designed to rectify .what
I understand the Union of Soviet Socialist Reconsidere, si je ,comprends bien, comrile une
publics regards as the' mistake on the 'part of
erreur de la part de la Commission, c'est-a-dire
the Commission in giving to the Subsidiary
le fait d'avoir COMe au Groupe subsidiaire le
Group certain precise terms. of reference which
mandat precis que l'on sait. Il n'est pas question
'weknow~As is well known, there is no mention
dans ce mandat, comme on le sait, de la' duree,
in those terms of reference of the duration of
de l'existence du Groupesubsidiaire.
the .subsidiary Group's exiStence.
Si les objections aux paragraphes 1 et 2 de
. •If the objections to paragraphs 1 and 2 of
la resolution de l'Umonsovietique sont fondees
,the resolution' of ,the Union of Soviet Socialist
-" et ma d8.egil,tion 'est convaincue qu'elles le
Republics are well founded, and my delegation
sont -le paragraphe 4 devient superflu, puisque
is convinced that they ,are, then paragraph 4 is
le mandat du Groupe subsidiaire ne contient
super1luous,since there is nQthing in' the Subaucune disposition qui, ne soit conforme a. la
sidiary Group's terms of reference which, is not
decision duConseil.
inconformity with the Council's decision.
En resume, ,done, et sous. reserve de ce que
To sum up, therefore, subjeCt toW-hat I have
said about, paragraph 3, my delegatjonwill' j'ai dit 'a, propos du paragraphe 3,ma deIega~
tion voteracontre la resolution de l'Union deS
vote, againSt the resolution of the Union of
Republiques socialistes sovietiques.
SovietSoc:ialist Republics.
,
quarters of the Subsidiary Group-quite the
contrary.
For its part, my Government is prepared to
accept as reasonable the opinion of the majority
Of the members of the Commission, who have
had the practical experience of working on the
spot, that the most appropriate place for the
headquarters of the Subsidiary Group would be
Salonika. ~{y ,Government sees no reason for
altering the decision of the Commission on this
point, or indeed, for reopening here the discussion which has already taken place in the
Commission, simply because the representative
'of the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics on
the Commission may have been overruled in his
predilection for Athens by the majority of his

the

,

Finally, I should like to say a word about the
attitude ,of the·four Balkan States concerned.
My ·Government notes that Greece accepts
the decision of the Council of 18 -:April, and has
not questioned the terms of reference granted
by the Commission to the Subsidiary Group.
As regards the other three States, it observes
that Albania, according to the statement of her
liaison representative, thinks there is no need
for the Subsidiary Group. As to that, I must say
that the, Council thought there was a need, and
the Council's view must prevail, since Albania,
in participatiIig in the discussion of this question,
accepted the obligations of the Charter.

Bulgaria,! for her part." if I understand her
position correctly, will apparently co-operate
only on her own terms.
The case of Yugoslavia~ in the view of my
Government, i'1 more serious, since Yugoslavia
is already a Member of the United Nations.
The Yugoslav liaiso!!. offker, in his letter to the
principal'Secretary of the Commjs<>jon, declared
that "the Yugoslav Government is not in a
position to accept the decision;' of the Commission.1 In our view, this is ,tantamount to a
refusal to accept a decision of the Security
Council.
However, we now understand, from the speech
of the Yugoslav representative on 16 May,2 and
from the speech which we heard this morning
from the Bulgarian representative, that the attitude of the Yugoslav and Bulg-arian Governments in this matter is not meant to imply the
!Cnon-recognition of the decision of the United
Nations", but, rather, a request that the CoUncil
should re-examine the question of the validity
· of certain decisions. Accordingly, we, for our
part, since,rcly hope that if, as a result of our
discussion, the Council rejects the resolution, of
the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, the
Yugoslav Government-·and I would add, the
other Governments concerned-Will conform to
the Council's decision and not persist in an
attitude which, in our view, would constitute
a breach of Article 25 of the Charter.

En conclusion, je voudra:s dire que1ques _
apropos .de I'attitude adopt~e par les quatre
Etats balkaniques intexessis.
Mon Gouvernement preud acte que la Grece
accepte la decision du Conseil en date .du 13
'avril et qu'eIle n'a pas conteste les termes du
"mandat que la Commission a confie au Groupe
subsidiaire.
.
En ce qu~ concerne les trois autres Etats, man
Gouvernement constate que l'Albanie, d'apies
la declaration de son agent de liaison, ne croit
pas que le Groupe subsidiaire soit necessaire. A
cet egard, je ne puis dire qu'une chpse: le
Conseil a estime ce Groupe necessaire, et son
opinion doit prevaloir puisque l'Albanie, en
prenant part a la discussion de cette question,
a accepte les obligations de la Charte.
Pour.ce qui est de la Bulgarie, si je comprends
parait dispos&: "a,
bien son attitude, eIle
cooperer qu'a ses propres conditions.
Le cas de la Yougoslavie~ de l'avis de mon
Gouvemement, est plus grave, car la Yougoslavie est Membre des Nations Unies. Dans la
lettre qu'il a adressee au Secretaire principal de
la Commission, I'agent de liaison de la Yougo$lavie declare que "le Gouvemement yougoslave n'est pas en etat de consentir a la, decision
de la Commission.1 Se10n nous, cette declaration equivaut a un refus d'accepter la decision
du Consei1 de securite.
Toutefois, a en juger parte discours prononce
le 16 mm par le representant de la Yougoslavie~,
et par cehii qu'a prononce ee mam le representant de la Bulgarie, no~ croyons comprendre
que l'attitude des Gouvemements yougoslave et
bulgare danS cette affaire ne doitpas etr(': int1~­
pretee 'comine un "refus de reconnaitre la de:cision des Nations Unies~'.) mais qu'il s'agirait .
plutot d'une requete tendant a' obtenir que le
Conseil examine a D.ouveau 'la validite de certaines decisions. Nous esperons done si.ncerem~t
que si le, Ccnseil; a la' suite de' notre discUssion,
rejette la resolution de rUmon des Republiques
socialistessovietiques, le Gouvemement yougeslave -,et j'aimerais pouvoir ajouter: Ifs autr.es
Gouvemements 'interesses-' se conformeront, 11
la decision du Conseil et ne persisteront pas clans
une attitude qui,. a notre a~,constin,.erait une
violation de l'Article 25 de la Charte.

ne

M. KRASOVEC' (Yougo.slavie) (traduit de,
Mr. KRAsoVEc (Yugoslavia): I shall on this
l'anglais): Je m'abstiendrai de repondre idaux
occasion refrain. from answering the deliberate
accusations set forth ,by the representat;ive of the
accusationsdeIiberees 'portees contre monGouvemement par le representant de la Grece au
Greek Government at the last meeting of this
· Council.3 I believe it will be more appropriate
cours de la derniere seance du Consei18 •• Je '
to deal with them duting the discuSsion of '~
crois qu'il sera plus opportuIi d'y revenIr all
Commission's report, and in that way prevL-~
moment de la discussion - du rapport de la"
repetition. May I only remark that the, repreCommission; 'cela permettra d'eviter desrepesentative of the United States did not consider ,. titions. Je ferai observer seulement queJe repreit necessary on that occ~ion to interrupt the
sentant des Etats-Unisn'a pas juge necessaire
speaker.
d'interromprei'orateura cette occasion.
Comme J'a declare 'le representant _de la
As the Yugoslav representative stated at the
· Security Council meeting of 16 May,2 the GovYougoslavie au.' cours de la reunion, du Conseil
emm~Iit . of the Federal People's' Republic of " " de securite du 16 mai2, le Gouvemement de la
. 1 S~ Official Records o/the Security Coun~il, Secon:d
Year, Supplement No. 11, Annex 30.
,1 Ibid., No. 40.
3 Ibid., No. 41.

»

1 Voir le$ PToc~s.veTbaux officiels du Conseilde· $8curite, Deuxieme Annee, Supplement No 11. Annexe 30.
1 Ibid., No 40.
. '
, .
.s Ibid., ,No 41.

Yugoslavia continues its objections~ which are
based on complete respect for the U~ed Nations
Charter and the view that the authority of our
Organization can be upheld only through strict
adherence to ,it.
The Yugoslav delegation never declared, nor
·does it have the intention of declaring, that it
will not carry out the decisions of the Security
Council. Howevct', our delegation has pointed
out that the decision arrived at on 18 April
· 1947 contains a violation of the Charter, and it
·is of the opinion that the Council would con~
tribute to its ownauthority~ as well as to the
authority of the United Nations, if it would study
,thoroughly the objections brought forth by the
Yugoslav delegation.
We regret to state that so far, perhaps with
the exception of the Australian representative,
the representatives who have spoken in the
Council have not shown any inclination to deal
thoroughly with the arguments presented by the
Yugoslav delegation.
. ,
,
It is true that Article 25 of the Charter
8.",?ecmcally directs the Members of the Organiiation to accept and to apply decisions of the
Security CounciI. It is very typical that thema~
jority of the Council members who have quoted
this Article invariably neglect to quote the en-l
of this Article, for it is in the final phrar that
we, find the essence of this entire disagreement.
,Article 25 reads. as follows: "The Members of
the United Nations agree to accept and carry
out the decisions of the Security Counc.ilin ac-.
C()rdance with the present Charter."
· . The essence of the issue is in the application
of this phrase. The Yugoslav delegation bound
itself, and, conscious of its obligations, an" ~ounces that it is prepared to accept and to
~pply the decisions of the Security Council. in.
compliance with the Charter of our Organiza, tion. We stated this dearly at the meeting of the'
Security Council.
Included in every legal order is a system of
.legal remedies. A violation of regulations can
·.always occur for various reasons, in spite of the
· good intentions a:ild conscientiousness of those
'who apply the regulations. For this very reason,
.the rule' prQvides for revisi(!n~ procedures. The
. ·very structure of the Sec~rityCouncil excludes
.. any possibility of appeal and revision .before any
other authority. However, that does not exclude
the .possibility or .' obligation .of the Security
·COUD,cil to investigate. every objection which is
...'weU"meant, made· by any Member of the Organization who. claims and submits argum.ents
to the effect that the Council, by one of its decisions, violated the Charter of the Organization.
The Yhgoslav ·delegation ,believed-an~ it sti,ll
., believes~that.C<lnmg the attention of the Coun~cil to such violations of theCha.rt~ris not only
its right iindduty, hq.t also a contribution.to the
greater authority()f t~ s~preme organ
the
international syst~ which 18 ,entrusted With the

.of

Republique fMa-ale populaire de Yougoslavie
maintient ses objections, qui se fondent sur le
respect absolu de la Charte des Nations Uni~;
l'autorite de notre Organisation ne peut, en
effet, etre maintenue que par une stricte observation de la Charte.
La delegaq.on de la Yougoslavie n'a jamais
declare et n'a nullement l'intention de declarer
qU'elle n'executera pas les decisions du Conseil
de securite. Toutefois, notre delegation a souligne que la decision prise le 18 avril 1947
constitue une violation de la Charte' et elle
estime que le Conseil contribuerait a renforcer
tant sa propre autorite que l'autorite de l'Organisation des Nations Unies s'il examinait attentivement les objections soulevees par la delega.tion yougoslave.
Nous regrettons de devoir dire que les representants qui, jusqu'ici, ont pris la parole au
Conseil, a l'exception peut-etre du representant
de I'Australie, n'ont pas semble tres dCsireux
d'examiner de maniere attentive les arguments
invoques par la delegation de la Yougoslavie.
n est exact que rArticle 25 de la Charte porte
expressement que les Membres de I'Organisation
doivent accepter et appliquer les decisions du
Conseil de securite. n est tres caracteristique que
la plupart des membres du CoIiseil qUi ont cite
cet Article aient omis regulierement d'en citer
la fin. C'est, en effet, dans le dernier membre
de phrase que reside l'essentiel de notre desaccord. L'Article 25' est ainsi con~u: ,. Les l\I,[emb!es ,de l'Organisation conviennent a'accepter
et d'appliquer les decisions du Conseil de securite,
conformement a-la pris.ente Cha.rte/'
L'application de cette derniere clause constitue l'essence de toute la question. La delegation yougosIave a pris un ~gagement, et, consciente de ses obligations, ell~ annonce qu'elle
est prete a accepter et, a appliquer les decisions
du Conseil de securite, .conformement a la Charte
de notre Organisation. Nous avons fait une
declaration 'tres claire a cet egard devant le
Conseil de securite. '
Chaque syst~me juridiquecomporte
systeme de remMes d'ordre jUridique. n est toujours possible que, pour des raisons diverses, les
reglements se trouvent violes en dcpit des bonnes '
intentions et de la loyaute de ceux qui les
aBpliquent. Aussi ,est-il de regIe de prevoir des
procedures de reVision. La· structure m&ne du,
Conseil desecurite exclut la possibilite d'un appel
a . mie autre autorite,oud'~e revisi0Il par une
autre autorite. Toutefois, tela ne dispense pas le
Conseil de.1'obligation, ni ne lui enleve la possi~
bilite d'examiner. toutes les objections presentees
de bonne foi par un Membre de I'Organisation
qui estime que le Conseil, parune deses
decisions, a viole· la Charte de I'Organisation
etqui,a l'appui de sa these, presente lesarguments necessaireS.
La delegation yougoslave estimait -. et elle
estime encore-"'qu.'en attirant l'attention du
Copseil sur de telles violations, nonseulement
elleexerce un droit et accomplit undevoir,mais
encore eUe contribue a accroitre l'autorite .de
l'ergane supt~me du systeme international, qui
.
.............

un

5

002

duty and responsibility ~f maintaining peace in
the world.
•
The objection that so far there has been no
precedent and that, consequently, creating a
precedent regarding the importance of the Councirs decision should not be permitted, is in the
first place neither proof for nor ag~t. On
the other hand, the slightest impression that the
decision is not in the spirit of the Charter would
be dangerous. We all believe that the United
Nations Charter is a guarantee for better international relations. It is, in the first place, the
,Security Council's responsibility to protect the
solidarity of the new international system as well
as the legality of the decisions of its supreme
organs.

a pour charge et pourresponsabilite de main':'
tenir la paix dans le monde.
'
.
Objecter qu'il n'y a pas eu, jusqu'ici, de
precedent et que, par cons~uent, il ne devrm"t
pas etre permis qu'un precedent fut cree quant
a l'importance que revetent les decisions du
Conseil, cela ne constitue un argument con~
vaincant ni pour ill contre. D'autre part, il serait
dangereux de laisser subsistet le moindre doute
sur le point de savoir si la decision du Conseil
est conforme a I'esprit de la Charte. Nous
sommes tous convaincus que la. Charte d~
Nations Dnies garantit l'ameIioration des rela..;
tions intemationales.. C'est au Conseil'de securite
qu'il appartient au premier chef.de proteger la
soIidarite dans le nouveau systeme intemational
et de s'assurer de la Iegalite des decisions prises
par ses organes supremes.
De I'avis de la delegation yougoslave, une
In the opIDlon of the Yugoslav delegation,
premiere violation de la Charte a ea lieu lorsque
the first violation of the Charter occurred when
le Conseil de securite a delegue son autorite aauthority was delegated to the Commission of
la Commhsion d'enquete, en ,accordant a cette
Investigation by the Security Council, which enderniere le pouvoir de former des groupes
trusted the Commission with the power to form
subsidiaires.
subsidiary groups.
.
AuCUIi des membres du Conseil de securite
I did not notice that any of the members of
the .Security Council who have taken the floor . qui ont pris la parole n'a meme tente, que je
sache, de repondre acette objection d'imporeven a1ttempted to explain this most essential
tance soulevee par la Yougoslavie. G'est cepen.objection made by Yugoslavia. Nevertheless, it
dant cette question-la que nous tenons expressewas' this particular question that we expressly
ment a voir eclaircir.
wished to have cleared up.
On critique le Gouvernement ycugoslave parce
The Yugoslav Government is being critiqu'il ne' s'est pas conforme', aune decision'.~
cized for. not having' complied with a decision,
laquelle il aurait dti se soumettre aux termes de
which on the basis of Article 25 of the Charter
l'Article 25 de la Charte. Or, l'Article 25, en
is binding ¥pon it. Article 25, however, refers
parlant de I'obligation qui incombf' aux Memto the decisions only of the Security Council as
hres des Nations Dnies, ne fait allusion qu'aUK
binding upon the Members of the United Nadecisions du Conseil de securite; il n'nn.pose pas
tions. This Article does not compel the Members
of the Organization to accept and apply the
aux Membres de l'Organisation l'obligati<m
decisions of' any other body. This is not only a
d'accepter et cl'appliquer les decisions~'un.autre
question, of words, but one of substance.
organisme. 11 lie s'agii pas seulement id d'une
question de forme, mais hkn d'une question de
fond.
The Security Council is of a unique composiLe Conseil de .securit6 est,compose d'une
tion; it has special methods of voting, as well
maniere toute particuliere; il suit des methocles
as special procedural rules, which assure partici- , de, vote sui generis et a.pplique un reglement
pation in its work, without voting rights, to all
interieur special qui assure ~ tous les Etats dolit
interested States whose interests could be violes interets pourraient se trouver leses par une
.1ated by a Council decision. For this reason and
decision ~u Conseil, le droit de participer a 5~
because such guarantees, were foreseen; the decitravaux sans droit de. vote. C'e8t pour cette
sions of the Council have taken on great interraison, et parce qu'on a prevu ces garanties, que
national' significance. Therefore,. it is not only
les decisions du. Conseil ont.pris une importance
outside the scope of. the Charter regulations to .internationale considerable. 'Aussi, .·en del~guaut
delegate authority from the Security Council to
l'autorite du Conseil de securite a d'autres
other organs, but it is also against the spirit of
organismes, op. n'out..epasse pas seulement les
the Charter. To charge that a. Member State
prescriptions de la Charte: on va a I'encontre
did' nut carry out the decision of the competent
mSme de l'esprit dans leque1 elle a 6t6 redigee.'
organ because it did· not carry out and because
C'est commettre une erreur de raisonnement··
it .does not accept as authoritap.ve ·the decision
que d'accuser un Etat Membre de ne pas
of a non-competent organ-to which the compeappliquer la decision de I'organismecompetent
tent organ qelegated its authority for a specific
pour le motif qu'il n'a pas applique ou n'aceepte
occurrence without being empowered to do sopas comme faisant autorite' la decision d'un
represents a mistake in reasoning.
organisme non competent auquel l'organisme
competent a' deIegueson autorite dans un cas
particulier, alors qu'il n'etait pas habilite a le

faire.

It cannot be maintained that a decision of
On ne peut soutenir qu'une decisipp.. d~ l~
the Commission is a decision of the Council. 'Commission soit une d.ecision du Conseil. En
,Accordingly, a decision of the CommiSsion can- , consequence, on ne. peut, en troo.tant' d'une

b _ _~ _ ~

~ot be dealt with on "the bas.is of Article 25 of
the Charter, nor can compuJsnry power over

decision de la Conmiission, s'appuyer sur l'Ar~
ticle 25 de la Charte. En vertu du meme raisonMefubers of the Organization be attributed to nement, cette" Commission nesaurait ctre dotee
such a Commission.'
.
d'un pouvoir coercitif sur les Membres' de
l'Organisation.
,
En .affirmant que la ConUnission eXerce ses
The assertion that the Commission caD. operfonctions en tant qu'organe subsidime du Conate even as a subsidiary organ of the Councilseil de securite, en vertu de l'Article 29 de la
. in the ~ense of Article 29 of the Charter--without taking into consideration the guarantees ex- . Charte, sans 'prendre en consideration les garantended to Members of the Organization by Arti- . ti~ qu'accorde aux Membres de I'Organisation
l'Article 31 de la Charte - en affirmant, en
~e 31 of the Charter-or in other words, the
d'autres termes, qu'un organe subsidiaire du
assertion that a. subsidiary organ of the Security
Conseil de securiten'est pas oblige de consulter
Council does not need to consult representales representantsdes Etats interesses qui ne sont
tlves of non-m~ber States of the Security
pas membres du Conseil de.securlte - ' on va a
CoUncil if they are concerned-is an assertion
l'encontre de I'esprit de la Charte de notre
whiCh is in opposition to ~e spirit of the CharOrganisation. Dne tclle pratique ne serait pas
ter of our Organization. Such a practice would
conforme a la Charte et entraineiait de graves
not be in conformity with the Charter and would
consequences.
.
lead to senous consequences.
Examinons les faits. Tout d'abord, Si le ConLet us consider it. In the first. place, if the
seil .deIegtie sonautome a d'autres organes,
Council delegates its authority to other organs,
toutes les garanties, accordees aux EtatB qui ne
every guarantee' extended to the States wIUch
sont pas' membres du Conseil de securite en
are non-members of the Security Council, acvertu de l'Article 31 de. la Charte deviennent
rording to .A11:icle 31 of the Charter, becomes
illusory in all cases where Article 31 would apillusoires dans tous les cas ou I'Article 31s'applique. LeConseil pourrait simplement. decider
ply. The Council· would simply be decidirig to
de creer des organes subsidiaires, et ce sont ces
establish subsidiary. bodies, while these subsidiary
organes subsidiaires' qui, en' fait, prendraient les
bodies would be making the actual decisions.
decisions. L'Article 31 de la Charte se reduirait
Thus, Article 31 of the Charter would be reduced to a guarantee to interested countries
ainsia garantir aux pays interesses le droit
d'assister aux discussions du Conseil concernant
tliat they may 'be present at discussions in the
'Council when subsidiary bodies are being establa creation d'organes subsidi~es, mais il leur
lished, but not present at the deliberations of
refuserait le droit d'assister aux deliberations de
those. bodies.' If we add to this the assertion of
tesorganes. Si l'on ajoute. a cela que, seIon
soni~ members-of the ,Council that the decisions , certains membres du' Conseil, les decisions de
ces' organes subsidiaires ont pleine autorite en
of such subsidiary bOdies have full authority in
~ccordance with Article 25, then we can come
vertu de l'Article 25, onpeut en conclure que
fa the conclusion that interested nations would
les nations interesSees se verraient interdire toute
not. be participating in the reaching of' decision..c;
participaticn - a I'eIaboration de decisions sur
of substance; or in other words, the guarantees
des questions de fond; en d'autres tennes, la
of' particip.ation of non-members of the Security
garantie qui assure aux Etats non membres la
Council in activities covered by Article 31 would
participation aux discussions du. Conseil de
be reduced to consid~rations of procedure.
securite dans les cas vises par .1'Article 31 se
tr(;mverait reduite a la. permission. de participer
a l'examen des questions de procedure.
We cannot' understand the explanation by
Nous ne pouvons comprendre. le raisonne, some .members of the Council that the Comment de certains membres du Conseil' qui ont
donne a entendre que la Commission n'est pas'
mission do~ not need to consult the representaobJigee de consulter les repr€sentants, des .Etats .
tives of the mterested States in the Commission,
'\.,'Ven' when the decisions concern the .States m
interesses au sein de la Commission,' m@me
. qu~on. This e.,-{planation is based on an etymoquand les decisions a prendre concement ces
Etats~ Cette these s'appuie sur une interpretation
etymologique de I'expression "agent de liaison".
tains .that .the liaison organs cannot actually
Le representant de l'Australle sOutient que les
organes de liai;;on .ne peuvent pas vraiment
~present their States but are onlv' instruments
fa. communicate the will of the State to the Comrepresenter les Etats dont ilsemanent, qu'ilsne
mission and to inform the·'State of the' Comsont que des instruments charges de faire coli·
mission's decisions..... It would be superfluous to
naitre a la Commission les dCsirs de ces Etats
discuss at length and prove that the duty of the ,et decommuniquer a ceux.,ci les decisions de la
Commission was to consult with liaison officers
Commission. n parait superflu de discuter
and that the Commission could not ll!ake deci- longuement cette these et de chercher a proqver
sions without having consulted tIi,em~
que la tache de la Commission etait de con. sulter les agents· de liaison, que la Co~on,
. en fait, ne pouvait prendre de decision: sans les
avoir consultes.
This is -, a qu~tion which has been solved by
Au teste, l~ .Conseil de securite luf-meme a
resolu cette question. Quand la resolution prise
the· Council itself. At the time the resoluti<:>n of
19 December 19460£ the Council was being
par.le Conseille 19 decembre 1946 a ete mise
~~~
f

'~~;~~ih~r;;;~:n~;ti~e'oi~=~~~:=~

$

,j

90s

voted upon, the P:resident of the Security Coun· I aux voix, M. Johnson, qui presidait alors les
cil at that time, Mr. Johnson, declared: "Then _debats, a declare: "Alors nous aurons: "Qu'un
representant de chacun des Gouvernements de
it would read: 'that arepresentative of each of
la Grece, etc., soit invite a participer a titre
the .Governments of Greece\ etc., be invited to
consultatif"1.
participate in a consultative capacity."
Il y a plus. Le representant de la Yougoslavie,
But this is not all. The Yugoslav representaM. Kosanovic, a pose la question suivante:
tive, Mr" Kosanovic, put the question: "Has the
«Les agents de liaison auront-ils le droit d'etre
liaison officer. the right to be present in. every
presents dans chaque pays ou hien se concountry or only locally in the respective countenteront-ils d'etre sur les lieux dans leurs pays
tries?"· The President answered this question as
follows: "As I underStand it, he wouldbewith ' respectifs?" Le President a repondu a cette questhe commission all the time." 2 .
tion comme suit: "Je. crois que c.es agents de
liaison accompagneront toujours la comniission"2.
Is any further comIilent necessary? Is. the
Est-il besoin, d'autre commentaire?Est-ce que
declaration of the President not an authentic
la declaration du Pr~ident ne constitue pas une
interpretation of the text that was put to the
interpretation authentique du texte qui a ete
vote? That was the interpretation which was put
'mis aux voix? C'est bien cette interpretation qui .
into practice when the Commission was in the
a· ete acceptee etappliquee quand la Commisfield, not because of the liberal spirit of the Comsion a commence sestravaux et ce, non pas a
mission, but because it was correct. If the concause de i'espIit liberal de la Commission, mais
trary opinion, which is so staunchly defended
parce que c'etait l'~~erprctation exacte. Supby some members of the Council, is accepted,
posons que le point de vue oppose, que defenand if we add to this what has ~eady been said
dent opiniatrement certainsmembres duo Conregarding the creation of· subsidiary organS for
seil, soit accepte; sit l'on tenaitcolllPte, en outre,
making decisions of substance, what would then
des remarques _qui ont ete fait~ relativement;,a la~ ,
be the consequence? The result would be that
creation cl'organes subsidiaires appeles a prendre
. States sitting on subsidiary. organs would be able
des decisions de fond, a.quels resultats aboutirait.. "
to deprive the States concerned of the opportun""
on? On aboutirait a ceci: les· EtatS participant
ity of - presenting _arguments which would be
aux trava1.lx desorganes sub~diaires seraienta
helpful in making decisions of substance; or the
meme de priver les Etats interesses de I'occ~ion
Council would not be resolving questions of
de. presenter des arguments quipourraient consubstance, but would be delegating the solution
tribuer a .des decisions de' fond; OU encore, le
of such questions to the. Commission. The ComComeil ne resoudrait pas les questions de fond
mission,however, would, be ignoring the existmais en confierait la solution a 'la Commission.
ence of liaison officers, reducing them to the
La Commission, toutefois, ignorerait l'existence
status 6£ messengers. This simply means "that
des agents de liaison, les rabaissant a la condition
the decisions would be made without consulting
de messagers. Cela signifierait, tout simplement,
the interested States, and this would be contrary
que lesdecisionsseraient prises sans que les
to the spirit of A1~tic1e 31 of t!!e Charter.
Etats iht~resses fussent consultes, _contrairement
a l'esprit de l'Article· 31 de la Charte.
This interpretation given by the representative
Selon cetteinterpretation, donnee par le
of Australia would deprive any small nation
representant de l'Australie, Jes petites nations
concerned of the ·right· awarded it by the Char.interessees se verraient privees du. droit que leur
ter. I have to state that' the Australian delega- . accorde la Charte. Je dois constater, a ce propose>
. tion, which has always pretended to be the proquela delegation de I'Australie, qui a toujours
tector of small nations, which has always pleaded
affirme qu'elle tenait a proteger .les droits des
for equal rights for small nations in the Security
petites nations, qui a toujours plaide po.~rqu'on
Council and in the United Nations generally,
leur accordat des droits egaux tant aux Jebats
this time deserts this _alleged role. In _this condu Conseil de securite qu'a ceux des autres
crete case in which the rights of the Yugoslav .organes des Nations Unies, abandonne i:ette foisand two other small democratic nations are inci le role qu'elle pretend e~e 'le sien. Dans le C3$
. volved, the Australian representative. changes
qui nous occupe~·. et •alors que -les clroits de -la
his attitude towards small nations. '
Yougoslavie et de deux autres petites nations
democratiques. sont manifestement eri jeu, •le
representant de l'Australie modifie son attitude
anterieure a l'egard des petites nations.
It is apparent, froni what we have set forth,
Il est clair, d'apr~ ce que je' viens d'exposer,
that there -is a dispute over the interpretation
qu'ilexiste une divergence d'opinionsen ce qui
of the application of the Charter. What the
concerne I'interpretationa donner a la manlere
Yugoslav -representative on the Commission obdont la Charte _doit etre -appliquee. Le -reprejected to was not merely the factl.:finding role of
sentant de la Yougoslavie aupres d,e la Com::the. Stibs~diary Group and Yugoslavia's particimission ne .'l'est pas eleve uniquement contre le
pation in that work-'although -we consider it
role d'enqueteur confie·· au Groupe subsidiaire,
unnecessary to postpone the decision further, in
ni contre la participation de -son paysaux
order to- allow the investigation of the various
travaux de ce Groupe, bien que nOlls -soyons
:le

S~e Official Records of the Security Council. First

IIIIt7bi~~;~~~eS6~4: No. 28, page 693.

1 Voir les --Proces-verbaux officiels du Conseil de se- curitl, Premiere Annee, SecondeSerie, No 28, 'page 693.
: Ibid., page 694. .
- - - .'

incidents to proceed, since it is known who is
the spearhead of the troubled situation in Greece
--what we objected to in the Commission in
Geneva, and what- we objected to here before
this Council,· is, .if I may say. so again, first, the
delegating of powers· unknown either in the
Charter or hi' the rules of procedure; secondly,
the fact' that the Yugoslav representative was
not consulted wheri the terms of reference of
the Subsidiary Group were discussed .and
adopted in·. Geneva.

.,' .• When .• the' resolu1ion . of. 18. April was '.' being
discussed, we· expressed our stand against that
resolution. We .cannot be responsible if the'resolution is vague. If the Council, in a new decision on. interpretation, would m$e the disputed
points more precise, it would reach a decision
whi~h, first"wouldbe emanatmg- from. a competent body, and secondly, would be remaining
within the limits of the Charter. Such a de~ision
would show that Members of the United Nations
, nt;ednot fear that decisions of the Security
0uneiI could be incompetently and inaccurately
mterpreted'by,some other body.

9

We consider- thatsuch a grave measure as al'lawing .' a!t..·internationat 'body.. to inv~~tigafe
freely throughout the territory of a State represents a step w¥chmustbe taken with thegreatest.cautiollby the highest and most respOnsible
organs,. arid under all guarantees as regards procedure.
"Mofeover,the Commission ',' of Investigation,
byway of hypothetical reasoning about the futu.r~ situation in the :6alkans, withOJ,lthearing the
directly interested parties, has purely and simply
traIl$formed its exceptional authorization, with
which' it was invested ad hoc and. for. the study
. of. a given. situation,. into a pennanent authori;.
zation,invested •in .• a. subsidiary organ." 1 This
paragraph 1 quoted from the speech of the
Yugoslav.•• represeiltative .'. at .the hundred and
thirty-fourth .' meeting.
.
~Iay I again be allowed to repeat what our
representative, Mr. Kosanovic, stated at the
rtleetiIlg:of 16 May? ,
.,••
"Article 31 ofthe Charter guarantees to every
Member, State. which is· not a rnember· of the
Security Council the right to take ,part, without",ote,in. the c:Escussiohofany question dealt
With by the Security,Council,whenever tlielatterconsiders that its. resulting .qecisions might
.' specially affed the "interests of that Member
State. The same·· provision' constitutes the ,gt!.ar~
ant~e .wher~py ·the ·.right of sovereignty .of each
l\1emner State. is protected, a .right which' is the
basis of .thecontractua.! . character of our Organization under Article 2, paragraphr.1
'
.Should the. Security Councifacceptthesuggestions ,?fYugoslavi~ in the same spontal1eous
. 1 See' Official Records 0/ the>$ecurit')1 Council. Second
Year. No. ~O.

d'avis que l'on pourrait s~dispenser d'ajoumer
a nouveau la decision,en a,ttendaiIt les r6;ultats
d'une iIouveIle enquete sur .les mcidents recents,
puisqu'on sait qui est a'l'origlne des troubles de
.Grece; - nons ·ee a. quoi 'nou~ nous. sonnnes
opposes devant la ConUnission .•. de Geneve, et
ce contre quoi nous nous eIevdns .ici, devant·
le Conseil, peut se resumer comme suit (et je
me permettrai dele repeter): premierement,.une
deIegationde pouvoirs dont il n'est question ni
dans la Charte ni dans le teglementinterieur;
deuxiemement, le fait que le representant de la
Yougoslavie n'a pas ete consulte quand le
mandat du Groupe subsidiaire a ete discute et
adoptea Geneve.
_Nous avonsexprime· notreopposition~Ia
resolution du 18 aVrillors de sa discuSsion. Nous
ne saurions done ~tre tenus pour responsables
de ce· que cette resolution manque de .precision.
Si, par une nouvelle decision concernant l'inter~
pr'tation a donnera ce texte, le Conseil voulait
preciser les pointslitigieux, tout d'abord. cette
decision emaneiait d'une organecompetent et,
de plus, elle resterait' dans leslimitcs de la
Charte. Dne decision de cette nature .demontrerait que les Membres des Nations Unies n'ont
pas aredouter qu'unautre organe donne aux
decisions du Conseil de securite une interpretation erronee et ne faisant pas autorite.
Nousestimons .qu'une mesure aussi,.grave
que celle qui consiste a pernlettre unorganisme
international d'enqueter librem~nt a travers le
territoire d'unEtaj doit ette envisagee avec la
plus grandeprodence .et ne peutetreprise que
par les. organismes les pluseIeves" et les plus
responsables, avec toutes les .garanties necessaires quanta la procedure
"En outre, se Jivranta des conjectures sur
l'evolution de la situationdans lesBalkans, la
Commission. d'enquete a" sans entendre les
partiesdirecte~tmtinteressees,
purement et
simplement tr~forme "les pouvoirs extraordinaires dont elleetait specialement investie pour
l'etude· d'une situation donnee enpouvoirs permanents deIeguesa un organe subsidiaire 1."
Ce paragraphe .est une citation du discours qu'a
fait lerepr~entant de la Y ougoslavie au cours
de. la· cent.,trente.,qmitriemeseance.
Jeme permettrai de repeter une foisde pluS
ce q1.le notre representant, M. Kosan.ovic, a
declare au coursde la seance du 16 mai: '.
"L'Article31 .de la. Chart,e prevoit que • tout
Etat Membre qui ne ·fait pas partie du Coriseil
de secutitepeut 'participer, ,sans droit de vote,
a .. la discussion de toutequestion .souniise au
Conseil .de securite~. chaque fois,. que celui-ci
estime que sesdecisions sOl1tsusceptibles d'affecter les interets de cet Etat Membre. POUf
·chaqueEtat Membre, cette. meme disposition
garantit, lasauvegarde de son droit de souverainete, droit quiconstitue la, 1:>asememe.du
caractere contractuel de notre Organisation aux
1
i:e~es du premier paragraphe de I'Article2 ."
SI le Conseil. de securlte acceptait lesproposila Yougoslavie aussi sincereIllent, aussi
tions de
,
7

a

1Voir les. Proces-verbaux cl'/Jiciels du Conseil de securite, Deuxieme Annee, No 40. .

and sincere way,' with the same desire. to protect
the authority of both the Security Council and
the United Nations. that motivates the Yugoslav
delegation, then we are sure that a great step
will be made towards the further strengthening
of our Organization, and' all objections regard;.
ing the violation of tne. Charter· will bee1imi~
nated. The Security Council should not ignore
the loyal and, fullest co-operatiop, of Yugoslavia
in the Comniission set up bytlie resolution of
19 J;>ecember, and this co-operation shouIdbe
considered as, a guarantee that Yugoslavia will
metieuloiIsly and faithfully catty out all decisions
baSed on the Charter.

,spontan~ent qu'elles ont eM presentees, avec

egal desk de sauvegarder· tant l'autorite du
Consei1 ,de securite .que ce1le de l'Orgdisation
des Nations Unies,nous sommes sUts qu'un grand
pas en. avant serait fait et que notre· Organisation s'en trouverait renforcee, et toutes les o~
jections concernant une violation ,pollllible de la
Charte seraient eliminces. LeConseil de securite
se doit de prendre en consideration la cooperation loyaleet· totale que la Yougoslavie a apportee a. laColllIllission cn~ee par la resolution
du .·19 decembre; cette cooperation devraitcons~
tituel' a ses yeux unegarantiedu fait que ·la
Yougoslavie executera, meticUlensement .et
loyalement toutes les deciSions, fondees .;gill' la
Charte;
Uii

M. DE LA TOURNELLE . (France): La resolu~
tion adoptee le 18 avril parleConsei1 de securite,
et a .la· redaction de laque1le la, delegation franSecurity Council on .18 April, in the drafting
of which the French delegation .participated,
~aise a palticipe, declare que ".. .•. la Commis- .
states that: "•.. the Commission established by
.'lion creeepar la resolution duConseil en date
the resolution of the Council of 19 October 1946
du 19 clecembre 1946· maintiendra dans les
shall maintain in the 2.1'ea concerned a sub~
regions interessees un groupe' subsidiaire . ••
sidiarygroup .. . . to continue to fulfil such
qui continueraa accomplir te1les fonctions que
lui assignera la Commission,en confomnte avec
fanctions as' the Commission niay prescribe,. in
son mandat".
accordance with the terms of. reference . • ."
Nous· sOIn.mesdoncen presence d'un texte
We have before 'us, therefore, .a clear and preclair, precis, ne ·laissant· pbl.ce .a. aucUIie arr.t-:
cise text allowing of no ambiguity. Within the
limits of. its terms of reference as laid down by
biguite.• La ConnnisSion, dans les limites de son
the Security Council, the Commission was bound
mandat tel qu'il.a ete detemrine par le.Consei1
to orgronze a subsidiary group. Anyone who
de securiM,'.a •. ete .' tenue d'organi'ser. un groupe
, objected to this decision of the C~mmission's subsidiaire.. Quiconque . s'eleverait contre cette
decision .de la Commission' contesterait' directe,would be directly •contesting the' Security Council's authority.
meni l'autorite 'du Conseil de securite.
On.29 April1947,the Commission ofIn~
La Conunission d'enquete, le 29 avril 1947,
vestigation drafted instructions to the Subsidiary
a redige avec la meme precision des. instructions
pour leGroup~ subsidiaire. Jene puis admettre,
Group with. the •same precision. I cannot admit,
as has just bef'Jl suggested, that in taking these
commit il~ent de l'etresuggere,que leConsei1
decisioris the Security 'Council •. violated the
de securite, al'occasion de •ces"dedsions, .aurait
Charter.
,
vioIC la Charte.
The Sbviet resolution submitted to us does ,.
La resolution· sovi~tiquei qui no:us est~0posee
.not. seem to' me to make any modification neces-'
n,e •I;l1eparait·· apporter 'aucunemodification
sary in the. text· .of' the .instructions' .drafted by
netessaireau textedes instructions redigees par
the Commission. Indeed, the latter acted as the
la CommisSion. Celle-ci a, eneffet, procede
Security Council< had requested.. It did not oyer- , commele C6nseil de' securitel'en ·avaitpriee.
fltep its rights.
.•
Eile n'a pasoutrepasse sesdroits. .
. As .regards the headquarters of the Group, a
Au sujet dusiegedu Groupt:, qui donne lieu
question. which has given rise to discussion, it
a discussion, Rme. semble que .1aCommission
seems to we that the Commission was. entirely
avait toute libertepour l'etablir a l'emplacement
,free· to choose "any' location which it considered
qui 1ui paraissaitleplusqualifie,que ce. soit
most·suitable, whether that was. Salonika, Ath~
Salonique, AtheIles,Larissa ou.toute autre vine;
ens, Larissa,or any other town; this is a question c'est la une ,question relevant de la seule com'"
solely. within the 'competence of the Commission.
petence de la Commission.
In regard to the duration of the Subsidiary
, En. ce qui conceme la duree'de l'existencedu
Group, it is quite. evident. that it cannot. exceed
Groupe subsidiaire, il est bien evident qu'e1le
that. of the CominisSion, sirice the Group was
ne peut. exeeder ce1le de la Commission~ puis~
created by the Commission in conformity with _ qu'il a ,ete .cree par cette derniereen conformite
the provisions of its terms ofi'eference. The pow~
des tertnes de son ma."ldat. Les· pOuYQirs du
ers of the.Subsiciiary Group will therefore expire
Groupe subsidiaire. expireront done •en ., metne
at the same tiIheasthose of the Commission~ temps 'que ceuxde la Commission. Rien, clans
There is'nothing in the text drafted. by the Com~
le texte·redige Pal," la Commission.d'enquete, ne
prission of Investigation to suggest that the Sub~
laisse supposer .que le Groupe subsidiaire pourrait
sidiary Gn:lUP might continue to exiSt after the
subsister apresla disparition de la CoInll)isSion.
Commission'sdisappeaunce. All comments on
Tous commentaires surce sujet me paraissent
this subject therefore appear to mestrperHuous.
donc superHus.LeConseilpourra, apres' dissolu~'
Mter .the . dissolution of the Comm~sion, the
tion .de la (JoIDlllission, creer tout autregroupe
Council mlJ,Y esta~lish any other supervisory
desuryeillance .qui luL paraitrait necessaire.
group it li'..ay think nece,'ls'FY.
Mr. DF, LA TouRNELLE (France) (translate'd

from French): The resolution adopted by the

1IIIrIIIIre-1~1I'1l1i1~·.

"_"1IIIlIiI

""

"""'_ _"""'' ' --------.. .

'-

(

$

Finally, the French delegation has no doubt
that Yugoslavia, which is bound by Artic" e 25
of the Charter like all the other Members of
the United Nations, and Albania and Bulgaria,
who it hopes will soon become Members of the
United N"ations, will make a point of carrying
out all the Security Council's decisions.
Mr. KATZ-SUCHY (Poland): On 18 April
1947, after a long discussion, a resolutit:..n setting up the Subsidiary Group of the Commission of Investigatiori was adopted by a vote of
nine in favour and two abstentions. The Polish
delegation, during the discussion, did not agree
to the necessity of setting up such a body, and
abstained from voting.'

In our opinion,however" this resolution is
valid and stands, and we consider that it is the
duty of all the members of thiS Council of the
United Nations,as well as the parties concerned,
who agreed to accept the authority ami the decision of the Council and who are not all Members
of the United Nations, tt> adhere to that decision.
My Qovernment 'has alreaG" shown its adherence
to it by appointing a member on the Subsidiary
Group.
Entering today's discussion on the resolution
submitted by the representative of,the Union,of
Soviet Socialist Republics" we do not challenge'
the previous reSolution, and it is not our mten='~'-tto1¥tochangecit, to abolish-it, or even to weaken:
it. We consider this discussion and the proposal
itself as very valuable, and in the opinion of the
Polish delegation, what we are doing now is only
a practical implementation of the resolution
adopted on 18 April.
It may be well to remember how we arrived
atthe decision to set up "a subsidiary group. It
was after the statement of the representative of
the United States of America, Mr. Austin,who,
m spit,e of many rumours, came before this
Council'and outlined the United States plan for
aid to Greece.:L In Mr. Austin's spf:ech, few ref,erences were made to the alleged border violations ot' the threat to Greece from its northern
neighbours. The statement dealt mostly with the
terrible plig-ht of the Greek people, with Greece's
mtemal difficulties and the raging civil war. Mr.
Austin described this state of affairs as a "disintegration of the Greek State".
'

Although we discussed the matter thorou~hIy,
and the Polish delegation took several'opportunities to show· its sympathy •and support for the
plan of economi~ aid to Greece, in our opiniQn
this Council acted rather hastily and \ as anxious '
to close the subject in reac:hing at ieast some
kfud of resolution.
. Our' delegation accepted the res9lution submitt~d by Yte United States setting up, a sub-

sidiary group as a certain token of ' assurance

---'See Official Records of the Security Council. Second

YelU', No. 3 0 . '

-

Enfin, la delegation fran~aise ne doute pas

.. ""'"

que'la Yougoslavie, qui est lice par l'Article 25
de la Charte comme tous les autres Membres
des Nations Unies, l'Albanie et la Bulgarie, dont
elle se plait ,a esperer qu'elles seront bientot
Membres des Nations Unies, tiendronta executer
toute;:;; les decisions du Conseil de sccurite.
M. KATZ-SUCHY (Pologne) (traduit de l'anglais): Le 18 avril 1947, apres un debat prolonge, le Conseil a adopte, par neuf voix, avec
deux abstentions, une resolution want a' la
creation du Groupe subsi4iaire de la Commission ci'enquete. Au cours de la discussion, .
la delegation de la Pologne n'a pas reconnu la
necessite de cet organismeet s'est abstenue de
voter.
'Selon nous, toutefois, cette resolution reste
valide; nousestimons donc qu'il est du devoir,
non seUIement de tous les membres de ce Conseil,
mais encore des parties interessees, qui ne sont
pas toutes Memhres de l'Organisation mais qui
se sont engagees a accepter l' autorite et les
decisions du Consei1, de se :tallier a cette decision.
Mon Gouvemement a demontre qu'il acceptait cette decision en df.signant d'ores et deja.
son represt>..ntant au Grm'pe, subrddiaire.
En participant aujou::d'hui ;<1-1 debat sur la
resolution qu'a ~umise le reIJresentant de
l'Union des Republiques sociaIistes scvietiques.
nous ne nous elevons pas cantre la res'Olution
pFecedente, --et- ne-songeoIls,--rj:.a .la--n:tediller, pj
a la supprimer,ni meme a. en diminuer la
portee.. ~ous ~timons que la presente discussion
et la proposition eIle-meme sont d'une importance mcontestaole "et,. .du point, de vue de la
delegation de la Pologne, 'nos...!lebats ne servent
qu'une fin: 'meitre en, ctU\Te la: 'resollltion que
_
nous avons adoptee le 18 awl.
Il convient peut-etre de rappeler a ce prop os
comment nons en sommes venus a decider de la
creation d'un groupe subsidiaire. La. decision a
ete prise a la suite de la declaration du representant des,Etats-Unis d'Amerique, M. Austin, qui,
en depit de nombreuses ruIheurs, vint exposer
brievement devant le Conseil le programme
americain d'aide a la Grece:L. Le discours de
M. Anstin ne contenait que derares allusions
aux pretendUes violations de frontieres ou aux
menaces ,que feraient pt:;Ser ,sur la Grece sea
voisins du nord. Sa declarationportait principalement sur l'etat dedetreslie du, peuple grec,
sur ses difficultes d'ordre interieur et sur la
guerre civile qui dechire le pays.•M.' Austin a
pade a cet egard d'une "desmtegration de l'Etat
grec".
'
Bien que la question ait ete debattue a fond,
et que la delegation de la Pologne ait a plusieurs
reprisessaisi l'occasionde mantrer combien eUe
approuvait le plan, d)aide ' economique a. la
Grece, le '. Conseil a agi, selon, nons, d'une
maniere un peu precipitee, desireux qu'il etait '
sans doute de clore la question en adoptant une
resolution .quelconque.
Si notre delegation a accepte la resolution
soumise par le representant des '. Etats-Unis, a
l'ellet de ereer ungrOtlpe subsidiaire, c'est qu'il
---"Voir lesP,roces~v,erbalJ,x, officiets'd,u 'Conse,il d~", 'L
curite. Deuxieme Annee, No 30
"~Ji
SoB,

,~~

= that' the plan of aid to Greece would not be

lui semblait y voir la gatantie que le programme
d'aide
la Grece ne serait' pas soumis au
Congres ,sans que l'Organisation des Nations
Unies en fUt avis6e. Voila pourquoi nous n'avons
pas vot~ contre la creation du Groupe subsidiaire.
Si le mandat avait ete defini avec plUs de soin
a. l'epoque, les d6bats d'aujourd'hui eussent ete
superflus, et nous aurions eu tout loisir d'etudier
la question clans son ensemble au moment de
la discussion du rapport de la Commission d'enquete. Mais comme les termes de la resolution
manquaient de precision, certains malentendus
se sont produits; c'est ce qui expEque que nous
devons, discuter la question aujourd'hui.
Le mandat de la Commission d'enquete n'est
The terms of reference of the Commission of
pas illimite. n a ete soigneusement r6dige le 19
Investigation are not wide open. They were caredecembre 1946 et il d6finit avec precision les
fully dravm up on 19 December 19i.l:6, and they
fonctions de cette Commission. Aux termes de
defined its functions exactly. According to the
cette resolution, la tache de la Commission
above-mentioned resolution, the task of the Cometait "de verifier les faits relatifs aux violations
mission was "to ascertain the facts relating to the
de frontiex-e qui auraient eu lieu ••.". Voila
alleged border violations . . .". I believe this
qui, a. mon sens, definit clairement l'objet de la
clearly defines its task. Certain border violations
Commission. Le representant de, la Grece a
had been reported to the Security Council by
the Greek representative, and in order to investi- , infonne le Conseilde securite de certaines violations de frontieres, sur quoi ce dernier a cree
gate them, a Commission was set up. We find,
une Commission chargee de proceder a. une
however, that the Commission of Investigation,
enquete. Or, nous constatons que la Commissioa
in drawing up directives for the Subsidiary
Group, has given it much wider powers than
d'enqu:ete, redigeant a. son tour les instructions
those possessed by the Commission itself.
du Groupe subsidiaire, a accorde a. celui-cides
pouvoirs beaucoup plus etendus que ne l'etaient
les si~, propres.
It was stated at this Council that no one can
On a declare devant ce Conseil que l'on ne
bestow more power than he himself possesses.
saurait ,accorder plus de pouvoirs qu'on n'en
Did the terms of reference of the Commission
possede. La~ Commission d'enquete etait-elle
of Investigation entitle the Commission' to inautorlsee, en ver~ dn mandat qtri lui avait cte
vestigate all violations or incidents? The Polish
confie, .a. mener uneenquete sur to~tes violations
delegation is quite willing to agree to the Widest
de frontieres au tous incidents pouvant, se protenus of reference, but this must be stated in the
duire? La delegation de, la Pologne est toute
resolution. At tlie present moment,' we do not
disposee a. accepter le mandat le plus large
yet know the results of the, investigation, except. possible, mais encore faut-il que la resolution
, for certain. rumours-very often offensive ruen fasse etat. A l'heure qu'il est, nollS ne conmours-reaching us through, the press. From
naissons pas encore les resultats de l'enquete, si
these rumours, we hear that there is going to
l'on fait abstraction de certaines rumeurs-" des
be more than one report and that certain presrumeursd'un caractere souvent offensant -'- qui
sure was exerted on four membt::..s of the Comnous parviennent par la voie de la presse. A' en
mission to bring them into' line with another
croire ces bruits, l'on preparerait fion pas' un
group.
seul rapport, mais plusieurs, et ulle certaine pression aurait eteexercee sur quatre membres de
la Commission pour ks ,inciter a se ranger' au
point de :vue d'un autre groupe.
We do not know the results, and we are imNous ignoronsqudssont les r6;ultatsdel'e..l1~
patiently waiting for' them. To our knowledge~ quete et nous les attendons avec impatience.
no new incidents ~ave occurred, 'although ilie ' A notreconnaissaIlce, il ne s'est produit aucUn
main cause of trouble in the Balkans, the civil
nouve! incident, 'bien que la guerr~ civile,' cause
WM, is continuing. Should ne:w incidents occur,
essentielle des troubles dans le& Balkans, ", elure
,We are quite prepared to agree to'suh.nit them
toujours. Si de nouveaux incidentsavaient lieu,
to the Subsidiary Group's investigation, but we;
nous consentirions volontiersa. cc qu'ils fia"ient
believe, that no' organ of the ,Security, Council
1'0bjet d'une enquetepar le Groupesubsidi,aire.
can deal with .incidents which have not' been' Nous estimons cependant qu~aucun organisme
reported tQ the Security Council and with cases
du Conseil de, securite ne saurait examiner des
of which the Security' Council has not been'
incidents dont leConseil de securite ne' soi;t
seized.
'
informe au' prealable, ni se .charger de qUestiODlS
dont leConseil n'auraitpas d'abord ete saisi.
I do not know whether some of the m.embers'
Je doute, que tous les m:embres de •ce' Conseil
of the Council will bevery happy with the broad
soient' tres satisfaits de J1interpretation ,large
interpretation given to the terms cif reference.
donnee ,aux termes d1,1 mandat. n y aquelque
Some time ago, the Council discussed theinter~
temps, le Conseil de securit~ a discute la question
vention of the Commission to prevent theexecu..
de sayoir si la Conunission devait intetvenir en
introduced without the knowledge of the United
Nations. That is why we did not vote against
the Subsidiary Group. Had more attention been
given, at that time, to the drawing up of t'
terms of reference, thisdiscuss1.on today would
have been unnecessary, and we would have had
full opportunity of reviewing the whole subject
when debating the report of the Commission of
Investigation. However, owing to the fact that
the resolution was not sufficiently precise, certain misunderstandings have arisen, and that is
why we have to discuss this matter today.

..

''W

t!

a

vue d'emp@cher l'execution de plusieurs democrates grecs1 , 11 ne fait aucun doute qu'il s'agissait bien la. d'un incident au sujet duquel la
Commission avait fait une enqu@te. T-outefois,
autant que je me souvienne, le representant de
l'Australie .n'etait pas tres desireux, alors, d'autoriser la Commission a. cQmpter de pareilles
interventions au nombre des taches et des fonctions que lui prescrivait le mandat.
Le Conseil consentira-t-il a. charger le Groupe
Will this Council agree that the Subsidiary
subsidiaire d'enqueter sur des incidents te1". que
Group should investigate such incidents as the
le massacre de centaines de prisowle..", ..=oIislaying of hundreds of political prisoners, or the
tiques? L'autbrisera-t-il a. etudier la question des
case of the Albanian quislings who escaped into
Greek territory and retumed armed into Alquislings albanais qui se sont refugies en territoire grec et sont revenus en territoire albanais
banian territory to wage war against the Albanian Government?
armes four lutter contre le Gouvemement de
l'Albanie?
Nous sommes parfaitement disposes, je le
I repeat, we are quite prepared to vote for
r~pete, a. voter en faveur d'un mandat de cette
such terms of reference, but they have to be
nature, a. condition toutefois que, d'abord, on
drawn up and voted upon. At the moment, we
have the terms of reference which were voted. en fixe les termes et le mette aux voix. A I'heure
upon on'19 December. These terms of reference
act;uelle, les terriles qui nous lient sont ceux du
mandat vote le 19 decembre, qui chargent la
direct the Commission to investigate certain
CommisSion de proceder a. une enquete sur
cases which have been reported to this Council
by the Greek Government.
certains cas precis que le Gouvernement grec
a portes a. la connaissance du Conseil de securite.
La delegation de la Pologne estime que le
The Polish delegation cqnsiders that the terms
mandat. du Groupe subsidaire ne saurait aIler
of reference of 19 December cannot be exceeded
au dela. des termes du mandat vote le 19 decemby the Subsidiary Group. Therefore, we believe
bre. En decidant de n'autoriser les enquetes du
that by resolving that the Subsidiary.Group can
Groupe, subsidiaireque sur instructions de la
@'I'Y.out iIlvestigations ,0nlYc-, on the instructions
of the Commission-investigations of facts which
Commission - et a. conditio~que ies faits soumis
have been' reported to the Security Council-it
a. l'enqueteaient ete, an prealable, portes a. la
will enable us to proceed over this case with connaissance du Conseil de secm:ite .- nous pourgreater success, and, I dare say, with unanimity.
rons, j' en suis persuade, poursuivre l' examen de
cettequestion avec plus de succes, je dirai meme
en parfaite una.trimite.
With regard to the seat of the Subsidiary
En ce qui- concerne le siege du Groupe subGroup, I must again refer you to the terms of
sidiaire, .je vous demanderai, une fois de' plus,
de vous reporter au mandat.. Celui-ci declare
reference which state that the Commission "shall
have authority to, conduct ,' its investigation in
que la Commission "aura autorite pour c~)l1duire
. northern Greece and in such places in other
son enquete en Grece septentrionale et en tous
lieux dans les' autres parties de la Grece, en
parts of Greece, in Albania, Bulgaria, and Yugoslavia . . ." Therefore, they shall investigate
Albanie, en Bulgarie, en Yougoslavie . . .". Le
not only on the northern. border, but'in any
Gtoupe menera, donc son enquete non seulepart of Greece, for instance, the Peloponnesus,
ment a. la frontiere septentrionale, mais en tout
where military operations are going on at the
lieu du territoire grec, par exemple dans le
momenf.
.
.
'. Peloponnese, OU des' operations militaires se
deroulent a I'heure actuelle..
I do not think theywiUbeable to do it from
Je ne pense pas qu~ le.Groupe subsidiaire
Salonika..,In support of this, lwill quote a statesera en mesure dt mener son enquete en prenant
ment of the representative of Australia, at a preSalonique comme point' de depart. Comme
vious meetirIg of the Security Cou"'cil. He
preuve, je citerai une declaration qu'a faite le
stated: "Road communications between Athens
representant de l'Australie, a. une seance preceand Salonika are very bad; there is no railway
dente du Conseil'de securite. Voicisesparoles:
connexion at all; air communications are' not
~'Les communications, par route entre Athenes
regular; it is several days by sea."2
et Saloriique sont tres'precaires; il n'existe aucune
ligne de chemin de fer; 1es communications
par air .sont irregulieres et ·le voyage par mer ,
dure plusieurs jours2."
If these are the connexionsbetween Salonika
Si tel est l'etat des communications entre
and the,capital at Athens, we can easily imat1l1e
Salonique et la capitale, on peut imaginer' aisc':'
what tb.e connexicus would be betWeen Salonika
ment ce qu'ellessont entre Salonique et les
and !1ny otIjer place in Greece; Do you really autres parties de la Grece. Croit-on vraiment
believe that frop:1 a place cut ()fLfrom the rest
qu'un. organisme du Conseil de securite pourra
of the w.or1~,as Salonika is today, an organ of
travailler ,avec succes sm insta,lle son siegedans
tion QI several Greek democrats.1 This was, no
doubt, an incident which the Commission had
investigated; however, as far as I can remember,
the representative of Australia at that time was
not very willing to include such interventions in
the tasks and duties of the Commission,

1, See Offici(ll Records of the' Security Council, Second
, " , .' , ' ,
" .
Year, No. 10.
2 See Official Records of th.e Security Council, Second
Yeai'. No. 41.

1 Voir les Proces-verbaux 1Jfficiels du Conseil de. se.
curite, Deuxieme Annee, No 10.
2 Voir 'Ies Proces-verba'ux officiels du Conseil de securiU, DeuxiemeAnnee, No 41..

..:.....iI

-

the Security Council will be able to operate
fruitfully?
There is another aspect to be considered, and
that is the security of the Subsidiary Group.
While in Athens there are foreign embassies
which one can approach both' for purposes of
protection and purposes of communicating with
one's Government, in' Salonika the Group will
be completely at the mercy of local authorities,
about whom opinion is not very high. We shall
therefore vote for Athens as the seat of the Subsidiary Group.

un endroit isoIe du reste du monde, comme rest
Salonique aujourd'hui?
Un autre aspect de la question qu'on ne
saurait negliger est celui de la securite du Groupe
subsidiaire. Alors qu'a Athenes il y a des ambassades avec lesquelles les membres du Groupe
pourront prendre contact tant pour chercher
protection que pour communiquer avec leurs
Gouvernements, a Salonique ils seront totalement a la merci des autorites locales, qui ne
passent pas pour avoir une reputation sans tache.
Nous voterons par consequent en faveur d'Athenes comme siege du Groupe subsidiaire.
There is no need to continue longer on the
n n'y a pas lieu, d'autre part, de poursuivre
question of the termination of the ,mandate. It is
la discussion sur la duree du mandat; il va de
,quite understandable that the Subsidiary Group
soi que le Groupe subsidiaire ne saurait exercer
cannot live longer than the Commission from
ses fonctions plus longtemps que la Commission
'\\l1ich it draws. its power and mandate. Practidont il a re~u ses pouvoirs et son mandat. Nous
cally:all the representatives have agreed on that.
sommes presque tous d'accord la-dessus. Le
It was stated by the representative of the United
representant des Etats-Unis, celui de la France,
States, by the representative of France and by
d'autres encore, ont fait des declarations dans ce
sel'eral others. I do not think there is any need
sens. Je ne pense pas qu'il y ait aucune utilite
..0 discuss this longer.
a poursuivre les debats sur ce point.
, It is regrettable that certain statements of the
n est regrettable, .enfih, que la presse ait
representatives of Yugo~~via, ,Albania, a~d. Buldonne une interpretation erronee de certaines
garia before' the COmmISSIOn have been nnsmter- 'declarations qu'ont faites devant la Commission
preted by the press. That has brought a very
les representants de la Yougoslavie" de }'Albailie
unhealthy atmosphere into the previous' discuset de la Bulgarie. L'atmosphere des debats qui
sion. I must say that listening to the statements
se sont deroules ici en a ete profondement
here of representatives of all the four Balkan
troubIee. Je doisdire qu'apres avoir entendu les
countries; I do not find anyt1ing \Vhich would be
declarations faites devant ce Conseil par les'
contradictory to their -duties;' caccordi..",g'-:to,_~·therepreserrtants des' quatre ·pays'oaikaniques,· jt:
Charter of the United Nations.'
,
n'y trouve rien qui ne. soit conforme aux' devoirs
qu'ont contr~ctes ces pays aux termes de la
Cliarte des Nations Unies.
We have invited them to send liaison officers.
Nous avons invite ces Etats a deIeguer des
They can accept or decline. No one has declined
~gents de' liaison. lls peuvent accepter OU,refuser
to accept the decision of the Security Council,
de le faire.Personne;pourtant, n'a refuse de se
and we do not understand how legal. and quasiconformt;r a la deciSion du Conseil desecurite,
legal arguments on the violation of the Charter
et nous ne comprenons pas, au point ou en sont
by' Yugoslavia, Bulgaria and Albania have been
nos debats; comment des argumentS'juridiques
brought in at' this stage'of the debate.
ou d'apparence juridique ontpu ctre invoques'
id en ce .qui concerne une violation des dispositions de la Charte de la part de la Yougoslavie,
de la BUlgarie et de l'Albanie.
I wish to assure you again,that by voting for
J e desire, une fois de .plus, vaus donner
, the resolution of the Union of Soviet Socialist
l'assurance qu'en votant en faveur de la resoluRepublics,we are animated by only one desire,
tion presentee par 'rUnion ~es Republiques
to see a quick settlement in the Balkans which
sodalistes sovietiques,nous sommesanimes par
will bring peace and possibilities of rehabilitation
le seul desir deparvenir a un reglemellt rapide
to these war-torn countries. We know their suf- de la situation dans les. Balkans; pour que ces
feri..llgs.We ourselves are a country which smpays ravages < par laguerre puissenttetrauver
feredcomplete destructioJ). in this war and .we
la paix et la possibilite de mener .' a .bieJ:l lenr
have. a greatfee1ing. of 'unity with all four of the
tache de reconstruction.Nous connaissons les
.~Ba1kan .. countries, with Greece and Bulgaria, . souffrances que ces pays ont endurees. Notre
'~ithAlbania and Yugoslavia-unity as a Europays. a ,ete lui aussi detruit completement .au
p,eancountry, as .a . war-destroyed country and
cours de cette guerre; aussi nous sentons-nolls
,as a .Member of the United Nations.
profondement unis alL"!: quatre Etats balkaniques
sans distinction.: la Grece et la Bulgarie, .1'Alban!e et la' Yougoslavie -"- nous nous sentonsunis
a euxen t~t que payseuropeeg, en tant que
pays detruitpar la guerre, . et en tantqu'Etat
de l'Organisation des Nations Unies~
Let .us bring peace to tl$ unhappy part of Membre
Apportons la Palx a cette. region infortunee
the world, forgetting power politics andrememdu. glpbe et oublions lapolitique. de force pour
beringtbe simple people of the Balkans.
Ile penser qu'aux seules. populations des Balkans.
Le PRESIDENT :La seance est levee et re'fhe'PImSlDENT:The meeting is. adjourned
until' 3 o'dock this aftelll.oon.
prendra a 15 heures.

nnr!ll:

T h_e_n_t-.ee_ting rose atJ.20 p.m.

La seance est levee a 13 h. 20.
