16

General Assembly-Twenty-first Session

strengthening educational and training programmes,
and urges others to take the same action ;
11. Recommends that those responsible for the development of the Thumba Equatorial Rocket Launching
Station, and in particular the Member States associated with the construction and operation of the
facility, the United Nations Development Programme
and the specialized agencies concerned, should extend
all the assistance necessary to continue the development
of that station ;
12. Noles also with appreciation that, in accordance
with General Assembly resolution 1721 B (XVI), the
Secretary-General continues to maintain a public registry of objects launched into orbit or beyond on the
basis of information being furnished by Member States ;
13. Suggests that the Committee on the Peaceful
Uses of Outer Space examine means to increase its
usefulness as a centre of information for Member States,
particularly the developing countries and those with
small space programmes ;
14. Notes with appreciation the reports submitted
by the World Meteorological Organization13 and the
International Telecommunication Union 14 on their activities in the field of outer space and invites these
organizations to make progress reports to the Committee on the Peaceful Uses of Outer Space in 1967;
15. Requests the Committee on the Peaceful Uses of
Outer Space to continue its work as set forth in the
present resolution and in previous General Assembly
resolutions and to report to the Assembly at its twentysecond session.
1499th plenary meeting,
19 December 1966.

2224 (XXI). The Korean question

The General Assembly,
Having noted the report of the United Nations Commission for the Unification and Rehabilitation of
Korea, 15
Reaffirming its resolution 2132 (XX) of 21 December 1965 and previous resolutions on the Korean question noted therein,
Recognizing that the continued division of Korea
does not correspond to the wishes of the Korean people
and constitutes a source of tension which prevents the
full restoration of international peace and security in
the area,
Recalling that the United Nations, under the Charter,
is fully and rightfully empowered to take collective
action to maintain peace and security and to extend its
good offices in seeking a peaceful settlement in Korea
in accordance with the purposes and principles of the
Charter,
Expressing the hope that conditions can soon be
created which will facilitate the reunification of Korea
on the basis of the freely expressed will of all the
Korean people,
lS World Meteorological Organization, Fifth report on the
Advancement of Atmospheric Sciences and their Application
in the Light of Developments in Outer Sf!ace (Geneva, 1966).
T~ansmitted under the symbol A/AC.105/L.31.
14 International Telecommunication Union, Fifth report by
the International Telecommunication Union on Telecommunication and the Peaceful Uses of Outer Space (Geneva, 1966).
Transmitted under the symbol E/4188/Addl.
1 ~ Official Rec.ords of the General Assembly, Twenty-first
Sessiol4, Supplement No. 12 (A/6312).

1. Reaf}irms that the objectives of the United
Nations in Korea are to bring about by peaceful means
the establishment of a unified, independent and democratic Korea under a representative form of government,
and the full restoration of international peace and
security in the area;
2. Expresses the belief that arrangements should
be made to achieve these objectives through genuinely
free elections held in accordance with the relevant
resolutions of the Generill Assembly;
3. Requests the United Nations Commission for the
Unification and Rehabilitation of Korea to intensify
its efforts to achieve these objectives and to continue to
carry out the tasks previously assigned to it by the
General Assembly;
4. Notes that the United Nations forces which were
sent to Korea in accordance with United Nations
resolutions have in great part already been withdrawn,
that the sole objective of the United Nations forces at
present in Korea is to preserve the peace and security
of the area. and that the Governments concerned are
prepared to withdraw their remaining forces from
Korea whenever such action is requested by the Republic of Korea or whenever the conditions for a
lasting settlement formulated by the General Assembly
have been fulfilled.
1499th plenary meeting,
19 December 1966.
2225 (XXI). Status of the implementation of the
Declaration on the Inadmissibility of Intervention in the Domestic Affairs of States and
the Protection of Their Independence and
Sovereignty

The General Assembly,
Deeply concerned at the evidence of unceasing armed
intervention by certain States in the domestic affairs
of other States in different parts of the world and at
other forms of direct or indirect interference committed
against the sovereign personality and political independence of States, resulting in increased international
tension,
Reaffirming all the principles and rules embodied in
the Declaration on the Inadmissibility of Intervention
in the Domestic Affairs of States and the Protection of
Their Independence and Sovereignty, contained in its
resolution 2131 (XX) of 21 December 1%5,
Deems it to be its bounden duty:
(a) To urge the immediate cessation of intervention, in any form whatever, in the domestic or external
affairs of States;
( b) To condemn all forms of intervention in the
domestic or external affairs of States as a basic source
of danger to the cause of world peace;
( c) To call upon all States to carry out faithfully
their obligations under the Charter of the United
Nations and the provisions of the Declaration on the
Inadmissibility of Intervention in the Domestic Affairs
of States and the Protection of Their Independence and
Sovereignty and to urge them to refrain from armed
intervention or the promotion or organization of subversion, terrorism or other indirect forms of intervention for the purpose of changing by violence the existing
system in another State or interfering in civil strife in
another State.
1499th plenary meeting,
19 December 1966.
