United Nations

1643rd

GENERAL
ASSEMBLY

PLENARY MEETING

Wednesday, 44 Apri11968,

at 3 pomo

TIFENT1'·SECOSI> SESSION

Official Records

NEW YORK
CONTENTS

7. At the beginning of the session the General Assembly referred item 28 (Non-proliferation of nuclear
weapons) to the First Committee, requesting it to
report to the plenary.

Page

Resumption of the twenty-second session. • • • •

1

Organization of work •••

1

0

••••

0

•

•

•

•

•

•

•

•

•

Agenda item 99:
Admission of new Members to the United
Nations (concluded). • • • • • • • • • • • • . • . •

8. As a result of consultations which 1 have held,
1 understand that Member States wish the Committee
so to organize its work as to ensure that this item
is given careful scrutiny on the basis of the relevant
documentation. If 1 hear no obj ection, may 1 take it
that the Aseembly still wishes agenda item 28 @} to
be dealt with by the First Committee?

4

President: Mr. Corneliu MANESCU (Romania).

It was s 0 decided.

Resumption of the twenty-second sess ion

9. The PRESIDENT (translated from French): With
regard to item 64 (Question of South West Africa),
1 wish to inform the Assembly that the Chairman of
the Afro-Asian Group, R.E. Ambassador Shahi of
Pakistan, has conveyed ta me the Groupls· request
that the General Assembly begin its consideration of
this item at once, on the understanding that plenary
meetings of the Assembly and meetings of the First
Committee will not take place at the same time.

The PRESIDENT (translated fro.m French): 1 declare open the 1643rd plenary mee~ing with which the
General Assembly resumes its twenty-second session.

1,

2. It gives me much pleasure to welcome the representatives who have come here to take part in our
work. 1 take this opportunity to express the hope that,
through our combined efforts, we will succeed in
reaching fair decisions which will meet the aspirations of the world's peoples and serve the interests
of international peace and security, in accordance
with the ethics governing inter-State relations.

10. 1 consulted as many representatives of Member
States as 1 could during the short time at my disposaI
and 1 have reached the conclusion that it is generally
felt that items 28 @) and 64 should be discussed immediately, provided that the meetings on those two
questions are not held concurrently. 1 should therefore
like to consult the Assembly on this matter.

3. 1 should like to remind representatives that on
19 Deoember 1967 [1642nd meeting] the General
Assembly agreed to give further consideration to the
following three items: item 28 (~) (Non-prolife~ation
of nuclear weapons: report of the Conference of the
Eighteen-Nation Committee on Disarmament), item 64
(Question of South West Africa) and item 94 (The
situation in the Middle East).

11. If there are no objections, may I.take it that the
Assembly agrees to that procedure?
It was so decided.

12. The PRESIDENT (translated from French):
Agenda item 94 (The situation in the Middle East)
wiU of course, as decitled earlier, remain before the
General Assembly.

4. On that occasion the Assembly decided that the
work of the session should be resumed when, after
the necessary consultations, it was established that
the conditions were appropriate for consideration of
one of those items.

13. During the period which has elapsed since we
interrupted our work another sovereign and independent State. Mauritius, has emerged as a result of the
irreversible process of decolonization. As we aU
know, the State of Mauritius has submitted an application for admission to membership in the United
Nations [A/7073] and the Security Counci! has unanimously recommended that its application should be
accepted [A/7083].

6. As a result of subsequent consultations, it was
agreed that the conditions set by the General Assembly
for the resumption of the twenty-second session were
now present, and that the work of the session should
begin today.

.

Organization of work
6. The PRESIDENT (translated from French): 1 now
invite the Assembly to decide upon the procedure it
wishes to follow in carrying out the work of this session. Representatives bave, no doubt, taken note of
the document [A/7090] which lists the three items
remaining on the agenda of this session in accordance
with the decision taken by the General Assembly on
19 December 1967.

14. 1 understand from the exchanges of views l have
had with representatives of certain States and geographical groups that the Assembly wishes to decide
now on the application of Mauritius for admission to
the United Nations. May 1 take it that the General
Assembly agrees with this procedure?
It was s 0 decided.

1

A/PV.1643

2

Gen(lral Assembly - Twenty-second Session - Plenary Meetings

AGENDA ITEM 99
Admission of new Members to the United Nations
(concluded)*

15. The PRESIDENT (translated from French): Iwish
to draw the General Assembly's attention to the draft
resolution on agenda item 99 which has been submitted
by a number of countries [A/L.545 and Add.l and 2].
. 16. May 1 take it that the General Assembly adopts
this draft resolution by acclamation?

The draft resolution was adopted by acclamation
[resolution ~371 (XXII)}.
17. The president (translated from French): 1declare
the state of Mauritius admitted to membership in the
United Nations.

The delegation of Mauritius was escorted to the
place reserved for it in the General Assembly hall.
18. The PRESIDENT (translatedfrom French): !trust
that 1 speak for aIl the Members of this Assembly in
welcoming the young State of Mauritius to membership
in the United Nations and in expressing to its Government and people our sincere congratulations and best
wishes for their prosperity and for success in attaining their goals.
19. Mr. PARTHASARATHI (India): Mr. President,
during the first part of the twenty-second session,
my delegation had an opportunity to convey our greetings and felicitations to you on your assuming this
high office and to salute your great nation as a bridgebuilder and a pathfinder in Europe. Your masterly
handIing of the matters dealt with in the early part
of the session has further confirmed us in our beIief
in your outstanding statesmanship and the dynamic
and important role played by your great country in
international affairs.
20. The resumed session has to consider important
questions such as non-proliferation of nuclear weapons, the problem of South West Africa and the situation
in the Middle East. My delegation has not the slightest
doubt that under your able leadership the Assembly
will be in a position to find adequate solutions to
these intricate questions. We wish to assure you that
my delegation will continue to extend the fullest cooperation to you in the performance of your tasks.
21. It is with great joy and pride that we welcome
the emergence of Mauritius from colonial bandage to
freedom and independence, and to its rightfulplace in
thls world body. My Prime Minister welcomed the
independence of Mauritius with this message to the
Prime Minister of Mauritius. She said:
"On the historie day of attainment of independence
by your country. my colleagues in the Government
of India and 1 send our warmest felicitations to the
Government and the people of Mauritius.••• 1 want
you to know that you have our most sincere good
wishes for your personal happiness and welfare.
May the people of Mauritius prosper under your
wise, dedicated and distinguished leadership. We
look forward to an era of friendship and co-operation between our two countries."
• Resllmption of the debate of the 1630th meeting.

22. The attainment of independence by any nation is
always a matter of pleasure and of great emotional
satisfaction to aIl freedom-Ioving countries. However, if 1 seek to express today the particular gratification of my delegation at the independence of
Mauritius, it is due to the long-standing, close and
indissoluble ties which have bound our two countries
together in deep friendship and amity. These ties are
deeply rooted in our similar cultural heritage, our
colonial history and struggle for independence, our
geographic proximity and above all our mutually
cherished goals of freedom for aIl dependent peoples
and universal peace.
23. My delegation, along with several others, has
keenly followed the progress of Mauritius towards·
independence. We have had the occasion to express
our feelings from the forums of the United Nations
and to encourage the people of Mauritius to carry on
the fight for freedom, undeterred by any setback. It
is, therefore, not only with joy but with profound
satisfaction that my delegation welcomes Mauritius
to the comity of nations.
24. May 1 be permitted to reiterate my delegation's
warm and sincere felicitations to the Government and
people of Mauritius. We are confident that Mauritius,
known for the spirit of enterprise and the courage of
its people, will grow into a strong and prosperous
nation under the outstanding leadership of its great
Prime Minister, Sir Seewoosagur Ramgoolam, and
that it will be a dedicated and active Member of the
United Nations, wedded as it is to the principles on
which this body was founded. We are equally confident
that independent Mauritius will join our common
struggle for freedom, peace and progress and will
make a valuable contribution to the various fields of
activity of the United Nations.
25. Mr. RABETAFlKA (Madagascar) (translatedfrom
French): There can be no pleasanter dut Y for any
delegation, and particularly for my own, than to welcome a new Member State ta our great international
family,
26. Mauritius's request for admission represents the
culmination of the political evolution of that country
which, having acquired independence, has clearly
indicated that it wishes to play its full part in the
concert of nations.
27. At a time when, in this troubled world of ours,
certain basic values seem ta be challenged, if not
discarded, it is a source of pleasure and deep satisfaction to find once again that the principles of peace,
tolerance, co-operation and mutual respect have not
been advocated in vain.
28. Thus we are firmly convinced that Mauritius,
by its tradition, its history and its culture, will make
a contribution to our Organization the unique nature
of whi9h will in no waydetract from its universal
import.
29. Perhaps in an Organization such as ours one
should not emphasize the quality of uniqueness, but
we must admit that countries situated in the western
part of the Indian Ocean have certain common attitudes, actions and reactions, which to some extent
condition their partièipation in international life.

1

,.

,

i

,'(

1643rd meeting - 24 April 1968
30. In so saying Madagascar is not attempting to act
as a spokesman for anyone else; but the age-old and
traditional relations which my country has enjoyed,
first with the Ile de France and then with the island
of Mauritius, give us some title to attempt to analyse
the enriching phenomenon of diversity in unity.
31. These general considerations lead my delegation
to pay a tribute to the people and Government of
Mauritius, who have been able to rise above the circumstances of their past, harmonize them into a
human and brotherly whole, and fully realize their
desire for independence. That continuous and compre~
hensive growth has been made possible through the
far-sightedness and determination of Sir Seewoosagur
Ramgoolam, the Prime Minister, who is held in great
and friendly esteem in Madagascar, both among its
leaders and among the Malagasy people as a whole.
32. For many years, Madagascar has followed with
a sympathetic interest the policy carried out by Sir
Seewoosagur with the backing of the Mauritian people,
a poUcy aimed at development, social progress and
national well-being.
33. Because the Malagasy Government shares the
beUef that priority should be given to the growth of
democracy, to the welfare of the most humble as weIl
as the most highly favoured without discrimination,
with an overwhelming concern for justice and equity,
my delegation would like to assure the representatives of Mauritius that they can count on its brotherly
co-operation. so that these same principles to which
we are so deeply attached may prevail in our Organization.
34. At a moment of such historic importance for the
Mauritian people, my delegation could not fail to
mention the role ofthe erstwhile administering Power.
The act which establishes the international sovereignty
of Mauritius is clearly in the Une of the liberal tradition which has been in evidence ove r the past twentyyears. We rejoice, and we hope that the same willingness and the same determination will be maintained
whatever happens, particularly in those painful situations which are a constant appeal to our consciences
and our sense of freedom.
35. Mr. BERARD (France) (translated from French):
Mr. President, there is no need for me to say what a
great pleasure it is for me to speak once again with
you in the Chair.
36. At the Security Council's meeting on 18 April
[1414th meeting] 1 had an opportunity to sayhow happy
the French delegation was to welcome the independent
State of Mauritius to our Organl.zation.
37. Of course we are always happy when a new State
comes te> join our family of nations, but we rejoice
particularly when that new State is one which is so
closely linked to my own country by historical and
cultural ties.
38. It has been 150 years since Mauritius ceased to
have any political relations with France, but in that
great island French is still the everyday language of
a large section of the population, the language of
culture among its élite, and the language of communication between its different ethnic groups. My country
Is particularly touched by this faithful adherence to
our common culture.

3

39. For more than two centuries, the relationship
between our two countries has been one of cultural
exchange. Mauritius and, as the poet says, nits happy
shores dazzled by the flames of a monotonous sun Il
have markedly inspired several of our greatest novelists and poets, and French literature has been enriched in turn by the contributions of many Mauritian writers. from Léoville l'Homme to Malcolm de
Chazal.
40. The Prime Minister of Mauritius, when he honoured us with a visit to our capital in October 1967,
was kind enough to say that his country intended to
co-operate with mine, especially in intellectual and
economic matters. and that he wished to see agreements concluded between our countries strengthening
the existing cultural and historical ties. My country~
men were particularly receptive to that statement,
and it is the wish of France that the friendship and
cultural co-operation between the two countries may
continue.
41. From this rostrumj 1 should like ta renewour
warmest wishes for happiness and prosperity to the
newly independent State of Mauritius, to its leaders
and its people, and especially to Sir Seewoosagur
Ramgoolam, its Prime Minister.
42. Mr. BUFFUM (United States of America): When
the Security Council considered the application of
Mauritius for membership in the United Nations just
last week, the United States made it clear that we
welcomed both the achievement of independence by
Mauritius and its desire to participate fully in the
work of this world Organization, with aIl the responsibilities, satisfactions and frustrations that United
Nations membership entails.
43. Rather than reiterating the points made in our
statement to the Council in support of the application
of Mauritius, 1 should like ta use this opportunity to
extend a warm hand of friendship and weIcome from
the people and Government of the United States to an
the people of Mauritius and to their distinguished
Prime Minister, Sir Seewoosagur Ramgoolam, a
leader who has commanded our respect for the important role he played in bringing his countryto independence.
44. You, Mr. Prime Minister, represent a country
whose population embraces diverse races, religions
and nationalities. These diversities and your long
history of dealing with them have provided that country with a wealth of experience with the problems,
challenges, opportunities and richness which. such
diversities entai!. We shaH look to you to enrlch us
an by sharing that experience here at the United
Nations.
45. We are gratified that you have joined us and we
are determined to do aIl in our power, bath aS host
country to the United Nations and as one of your fellow Members, to make your participation in this
Organization enjoyable and satisfying. Our gratification and determination stem from a deep and renewed
awareness of the meaning of independence for a
former colony and of the importance which the concept of self-determination has under the United Nations
Charter. Our gratification also stems from our :e.alization of your determination to share respons1bllity

4

General Assembly - Twenty-second Session - Plenary Meetings

with aU the other Members of the United Nations in
seeking solutions to the world-wide problems which
'we face in common.
46. Mr. IGNATIEFF (Canada): Canada was happy to
be a co-sponsor when last week the Security Council
in resolution 249 (1968) recommended that the General
Assembly admit Mauritius to membership in the
United Nations. Therefore the Canadian delegation
has particular reason to welcome the decision taken
today by acclamation by the General Assembly, because of the special ties which this new Member of
the United Nations has with Canada, since both our
countries are members of the Commonwealth and both
are b1l1ngual in culture and tradition.
47. As a new nation in the world community, Mauritius faces a great challenge in the task of development. My country recognizes the responsib1l1ty of
developed countries to assist those in the process of
development to resolve the difficulties confronting
them. Canada, for its part, is prepared to continue
making available, through its external aid programme,
technical assistance to Mauritius.
48. Mauritius has before it also great opportunities
to participate in the valuable work ofthis Organization
for peace and international co-operation, and we are
particularly happy that on this auspicious occasion,
when this association of Mauritius with the world
Organization begins, the distinguished Prime Minister
of this new nation, Sir Seewoosagur Ramgoolam, who
has already contributed so richly to the politicallife
and development of his country, should be present
here in person, and 1 wish to express, on behalf of
the Government and people of Canada, to the Prime
Minister and to Mauritius our very best wishes for
the future.
49. Mr. VAUGHAN (Barbados): It was a greathonour
and pleasure for the Barbados delegation to be .a. cosponsor of the draft résolution [A/L.545 and Add.1
and 2] in accordance with which Mauritius has been
admitted to membership of the United Nations.
50. After more than three centuries Mauritius, which
has changed hands under no less than three imperialist
Powers, has sha:ken off the shackles of colonial bondage and is now free. In the Immediate circumstances
in which it has occurred this is, by any standards, a
great triumph, and we heartily congratulate the Government and people of Mauritius. Let me say too that
my country, which became independent less than two
years ago, shares to the full their aspiration and confidence in their ability to realize and maintain the
Ideals of the Charter oÏ this Organization.
51. There are other respects in which my country is
able to enter fully into the feelings of the Government
and people of Mauritius at this hour, Mauritius is a
predominantly agricultural country and,like Barbados,
is tied to a sugar economy with aIl the problems and
difficulties that such a nexus entails. It isnot so
densely populated as Barbados, yet it is a fact that
economic and demographic pressures have, as in
Barbados. contributed much to its constitutional development. Indeed, the same large-hearted, if somewhat self-willed, ruler who initiated a period of
organic change in Barbados, went from there to
Mauritius and effected a similar development. Above

an, though comparatively small in land mass and
population, Mauritius brings to this Organization an
enlightened example of the way in which people of
different races, religions, languages and cultures
can co-exist peacefully and strive harmoniously for
the common goals of human dignity, progress and
self-respect. No greater contribution can he required
from a country seeking membership of this great
Organization.
52. Admittedly, there have been otheragencies which
have contributed to this great result. We applaud
Her Majesty's Government of the United Kingdom of
Great Britain and Northern Ireland for its co-operation in bringing Mauritius ta independence. My Government is equally appreciative of the splendid work
which is being done in the field of decolonization by
the Committee of Twenty-Four and by other organs
of the United Nations family. This places the struggle
for independence by any colony within a wider ambit
and gives to its people a clearer and nobler vision.
53. Mr. President, permit me once again to extend
our warmest congratulations to the Government and
people of Mauritius.
54. Mr. AKWEI (Ghana): Today, as the delegation of
Mauritius takes its place in this great Assembly, the
United Nations is once again adding another glorious
page to the history of human freedoms and national
independence.
55. On 12 March 1968 the Government and people of
Ghana rejoiced with the Government and people of
Mauritius on the accession of Mauritius to independent
statehood.
56. Ghana, together with other members of the group
of Commonwealth States. is gratified to have sponsored the resolution, which has just been adopted by
acclamation, admitting Mauritius to membership in
this world body. Now, as the current Chairman of the
group of Commonwealth States, 1 take great pleasure
and pride in welcoming Mauritius to membership of
this Organization of equal sovereign States. Our
pleasure derives from the conviction that this Organization has welcomed into its ranks the newest
member State resolved to contribute its share to
world peace and human brotherhood. Our pride springs
from the happy outcome of the determination of the
peQple of Mauritius in rejecting coloniallsm in aH its
forms and manifestations.
57. This Organization cannot fail at this time to look
back with pride on the role which it has played in
exerting pressure on the colonial Power to accelerate
the independence of Mauritius. Mauritius, with its
rich and varied culture, the Island whose exotic enchantment was sung by sorne of the poets of the Parnassian and Symbolist movements in French literature,
has had a long history of contact with the peoples of
many nations. Out of this long period of contact Mauritius has emerged as the meeting point of different
r aces and civilizations and now provides a much
needed example of inter-racial co-operation. This
phenomenon alone is. a good qualification for Mauritius' membership in the United Nations and the
Commonwealth of Nations-organizations which span .
different races and cultures.

1

J

1

1

r

.......

1643rd meeting - 24 April 1968
58. Let us take renewed hope and confidence from
the success of Mauritius that the racist territories
of Southern Rhodesia and South Africa and the oppressed people of South West Africa will also before
long be ushered into the sunlight of freedom and independence. As Mauritius, with its multiracial society,
joins this Organization we are encouraged in our
resolve to exert every effort to eradicate the twin
evils of colonialism and racism from the face of the
earth.
59. The Ghana delegation welcomes the delegation of
Mauritius as they take their seats for the first time
in this Assembly. The representatives of Ghana pledge
their full est collaboration with the representatives of
Mauritius in our work here. To the Government and
people of Mauritius Ghana extends its warmest good
wishes as they embark on the exciting but arduous
task of nation building.
60. May the peaceful development and progress, on
which Mauritius is already so happily launched, Continue and expand to the satisfaction of its people and
the advancement of world peace and prosperity.
61. Mr. OTEMA ALLIMADI (Uganda): The group of
African States has bestowed on me the honour of extending to the newest Member of this Organization a
very Warm welcome to our midst. At the same time,
and in the same representative capacity, 1 wish to
extend to the delegation, the Government and the
people of Mauritius our congratulations on having
travelled successfully the very difficult road towards
political independence, an experience which we in the
liberated portion of Africa have every reason to
commemorate.
62. We wish the Government and people of Mauritius
the best of luck in aIl their endeavours to achieve
their aspiration of national identity both at home and
here in the family of nations. We extend to the delegation of Mauritius the friendly hand of co-operation
in our joint deliberations in this Organization.
63. We hope that the General Assembly will in due
course welcome to membership many countries which
are not yet liberated; 1 have in mind countries from
all regions of the world, including South West Africa
and Rhodesia.
64. 1 wish also, on behalf of my delegation, to extend
our sincere congratulations to the Government and
people of Mauritius upon this historic occasion in the
life of their country and, in a joyful spirit, to welcome the Mauritius representatives as the 124th delegation te be seated in this Hall.
65. Mr. BELOKOLOS (Ukrainian Soviet Socialist
Republic) (translated from Russian): 1 should like,
on behalf of the group of socialist countries, to express
our sincere welcome to the new state Member of this
Organization, Mauritius.
66. The birth of the independent State of Mauritius
constitutes yet another success for the forces of the
national liberation movement and proof of the invincibility of the people's struggle for freedom and independence against the system of exploitation imposed
by colonialism and imperialism.
67. The people of Mauritius, who have been living
under British colonial domination for more than a

5

century and a half, have followed the road taken by
many other former colonial peoples who, after a long,
stubborn struggle, have freed themselves from colonial slavery and joined the family of independent
States.
68. We wish to express our most sincere satisfaction
at the Mauritian people's success in their legitimate
struggle-a success which brings even closer the final
abolition of the shameful system of colonialism.
69. In welcoming today the admission of the State of
Mauritius to membership of the United Nations, the
socialist countries, which calI and have always called
for a speedy and complete end to colonial rule, wish
to convey ta the Government and people of Mauritius their sincerest wishes for success in the speedy
elimination of the onerous consequences of colonialism, the consolidation of their nation's sovereignty
and the building of a new life, withprogress and prosperity for their development as an independent nation.
70. Allow me also ta express our confidence and
hope that the State of Mauritius, as an independent
country and a new Member of the United Nations, will
be making its contribution, together with the other
independent states of Asia and Africa, to the work of
our Organization in the strengthening of peace and
friendship among peoples.
71. Sir John CARTER (Guyana): In congratulating
the Government and people of Mauritius upon their
achievement of independence and in welcoming them
to membership of the United Nations, 1 speak on behalf of a nation whose people sprang from origins as
diverse as those of the people of Mauritius. It is especially for this reason that we welcome Mauritius
here today, for we believe that plural societies such
as those that our two countries have in common represent the true hope of the world. Such societies are a
living witness of the evil lies of apartheid. In the selfrespect which they offer to aIl their people, regardless of racial or cultural origins, such societies are
in the vanguard of that true freedom which sorne day
will triumph.
72. We e~ress to His Excellencythe Prime Minister
our warmest good wishes, and our confidence that
our two countries will find many opportunities here
at the United Nations to work together for the benefit
of the international community and of ourselves.
73. Mr. PINERA (Chile) (translated from Spanish):
Mr. President, as we renew our confidence in the
spirit of fairness with which you guide our debates,
we also wish today ta welcome a country that is with
us for the first time. In renewing my country's confidence in you, allew me also to extend a special welcome to your family, which is with you and supports
you.
74. In the United Nations family vast geographical
and historical distances are forgotten in our adherence to the principles which make us neighbours and
even brothers. Such are Mauritius and Chile, perhaps
.the two lands most remote from one anotheron earth:
Mauritius in the Indian Ocean, and Chile very near
the South Pole. However, this immense geographical
distance does not prevent Chile from feeling very
close to Mauritius.

ii

6

General Assembly

Twenty-second Session - Plenary Meetings

75. The United Nations, based on the exercise of the
sovereign independence of states, is greatly enriched
by the presence of a new independent country. It is
aIl the more enriched because the State of Mauritius
has harmoniously integrated aspirations derivedfrom
many diverse origins, religions and cultures. Nations
gain autonomy by sharing needs and difficulties.
76. Mauritius has a rural population with the highest
density in the world, and a rapidly rising birth rate.
That is a direct challenge to the courage and unitY of
this new Member of the United Nations, which today
sets us a new example.
77. This is not my delegation's first contact with
Mauritius. A few weeks ago at New Delhi, at the
United Nations Conference on Trade and Development,
we had the honour to welcome Mauritius as a new
member of that great body and to work with it on
more than one committee in the defence of common
views, For us, therefore, Mauritius is more than the
124th State Member of the United Nations: it is a
country with which we have already worked and hope
to èontinue to work in the defence of our common
interests.
78. With deep emotion 1 welcome this new Member
to the community of nations today; and 1 would add
that Mauritius is joining this Organization at the
culmination of its history. Its presence will bring
even closer the long-sought universality of the United
Nations, which expects a bold and original contribution from Mauritius.
79. 1 wish today modestly to convey the greetings
of the Government and people of ChUe to the people
of Mauritius, so ably represented by their Prime
Minister Sir Seewoosagur Ramgoolam. Chile extends
its most fraternal welcome to the rulers and people
of Mauritius.
80. Mr. KJARTANSSON (Iceland): It is a great privilege to welcome Mauritius to membership in our
Organization, 1 do so on behalf of those members of
the group of Western European and other states that
have not already spoken or are not going to speak
individually for themselves. sa many eloquent words
have already been spoken that 1 believe 1 can limit
myself ta joining in the chorus of congratulations and
good wishes. The advent of a new and independent
State to the community of nations is always a joy.
For me as a representative of an island country, it
is a particular pleasur.e to welcome the distinguished
Prime Minister and the delegation of another island
nation. 1 wish to assure them that my country, as
weIl as aIl the members of the group of Western
European and other States, is looking forward to
friendly and fruitful co-operation with them within
this world Organization.
81. Mr. SHAHI (Pakistan): Mr. President, my delegation takes great satisfaction in the fact that you
will be presiding over this resumed session of the
General Assembly which is charged with the consideration of sorne of the most momentous issues
that have confronted the United Nations. 1 shall have
sever al opportunities, in due course, to state the
views of my Government on the question of South
W8st Africa and on the action te be taken on the draft
non-proliferation treaty submitted to the General

Assembly' by the two Co-Chairmen of the EighteenNation Disarmament Committee.
82. On this occasion 1 should like to extend the sincere felicitations of my Government to Sir Seewoosagur Ramgoolam, to his Government and to the
people of Mauritius on the unanimous admission of
their country to membership of the United N,ations.
Speaking in the Security Council on 18 AprIl last,
1 expressed confidence
"•.. that the Government of Mauritius will surmount the difficulties that confront new nations"
in general "and will do its utmost to promo,te respect for human rights, a fundamental prinClple of
the Charter... and one of cardinal importance ta
the governments of multiracial societies."

et'I

i

83. rt is not necessary for my delegation to dweIl at
this moment on the many ties of history and culture
that the people of Mauritius have in common with the
people of Pakistan. With the achievement of independence by the island, these links are reinforced by
the political interest of Pakistan in the preservation
of the independence and sovereignty of Mauritius and
in the promotion of the prosperity and welfare of the
communities that constitute its people. Under Sir
Seewoosagur Ramgoolam's dedicated and inspiring
leadership, we have not doubt that the people of Mauritius will realize their deepest aspirations,
84. It is my privilege and pleasure, on behalf of aIl
the Asian States Members of the United Nations, to
extend our warmest welcome to Mauritius as it joins
our ranks and to express our bestwishes to its people
in their march along the high road of independence.

~.1

1

i

.-.1
•

85. Lord CARADON (United Kingdom): We warmly
welcome you, Mr. President, on your return to direct
our deliberations, and aIl of us rejoice today in welcoming a new Member to the United Nations. Especially we of the Commonwealth welcome Mauritius
to this world assembly of free nations.
86. In the Commonwealth we are proud of the equality
amongst us. Now that Mauritius has become the
twenty-seventh independent nation of the Commonwealth, we welcome it as an equal pnrtner. We boast
that amongst us there is no precedence and no privilege on grounds of age or size or geography or race
or origin. The last shall be first and the first shall
be last. It was President Nyerere of Tanzania who
said:
"The Commonwealth bindlS together in friendship
and likemindedness the astonishing variety of nations
great and smaIl, without distinction between them
and without discrimination amongst them."
87. My country had responsibility in Mauritius for
more than a hundred and fifty years. The people of
the island have advanced to independence on a welltrodden road. They have advanced, as in other countries under British administration, through adult
suffrage, through representative government, with
the executive responsible to the elected legislature,
and with an independent judiciary. There was eventual1y a series of constitutional conferences and then
a final general election in which aU the people were
able freely to express their views before independence
was achieved.

;::'

r'

,

t-

(

l'

1643rd meeting - 24 April 1968
88. These are the methods which have been tested
and tried in the Commonwealth, and 1 warmly acknowledge, in particulaI' , the generous comment on
that record made this afternoon by the representatives of Madagascar. Barbados and other States. It is
on this broad road of free government that the peoples .
of the Commonwealth, a quarter of the population of
the whole world, have advanced to nationhood.
89. We are glad, 1 am sure, that the Prime Minister
of Mauritius, the Hon. Dr. Seewoosagur Ramgoolam.
could be here to listen to the speeches of welcome
today. He has long been an outstanding leader among
his people. Twenty years ago he advanced with his
party to win in the first elections heId in Mauritius
under adult suffrage. He has always been robust and
positive and progressive, a happy warrior in the
rough-and-tumble of democratic political life. To
him most of a11 is due the credit for the courageous
decision ta go forward confidently inta independence.
He knows as we11 as anyone the difficulties and indeed
the dangers which his country faces. and a11 of us
will join today in wishing him and aIl his countrymen
well. in the hope that under resolute leadership Mauritius will draw from its rich diversity strength and
unity for the future.
90. We specia11y wish the Prime Minister we11 in
his reconstruction and development programme. Many
are giving practical support. including support through
the Commonwealth Assistance Plan and the United
Nations Development Programme. British aid will
continue: in this financial year it stands at over
4,000,000 pounds.
91. On this happy day, a11 of us-French and English.
African and Asian, East and West-have vied with
each other in a competition of congratulation and a
chorus of sincere good wishes. May our international
unanimity be a weicome augury for the future of Mauritius, a future. so we pray. of unity and harmony
and increasing good fortune.
92. The PRESIDENT (translated from French): 1have
the honour and the pleasure to invite R.E. Sir Seewoosagur Ramgoolam. the Prime Minister of Mauritius.
to address the General Assembly.
93. Sir Seewoosagur RAMGOOLAM: Ml'. President.
1 should like to express to you and to aIl the distinguished representatives my cordial thanks for the
admission of my country to the United Nations. My
special thanks go to those Member States which have
so generously sponsored and co-sponsored our application for membership. It is gratifying to acknowledge
the wide response and welcome Mauritius has received from Members of the United Nations. By this
act, you have given formaI consecration to the ac- .
cession of Mauritius to the status of a sovereign
independent State. Although 1 come from a small
country, my Government and the people of Mauritius
are very conscious of the honour of belonging to this
great Assembly. and we can assure you that we shall
strive to uphold the great ide ais which are enshrined
in the Charter of the United Nations and will play
full Y our part in the struggle for justice, racial
equality. peace and understanding among nations.
94. This is indeed a solemn moment in the history
of my country. 1 stand here in aU humility, in the

7

midst of this great world community as the symbol
of the hope of my people that through the effort of
the United Nations mankind will really see the ultimate fulfilment and practical realization of the principles and purposes to which men and women in this
august Assembly have dedicated themselves. In that
grand and noble endeavour, we as a small nation will
bring our contribution. however modest it may be, ta
the shaping of the destiny of a better world-a contribution which we hope will lead towards a new and
broader world civilization in which man's essential
needs will transcend considerations of national selfinterest.
95. 1 also bring to you, Ml'. President and distinguished representatives, .the greetings and good wishes
of my count~y which aitel' successive periods of colonization by the Dutch. the French and the British. is
now looking forward to an era of fruitful collaboration
and partnership with aIl nat~ons.
96. Mauritius has a rich historical background and
it has in the past played a notable part in some of the
great events which have moulded the course of history. Mauritius is a densely populated island, and
over an area of 720 square miles live a population of
almost 800,000. It is a view commonly held among
some scholars that our Island was visited byDravidian
seamen in pre-Aryan days, and during the time of
their great awakening, the Arabs sighted Mauritius
in the early part of the Christian era while plying
between lndia and the Red Sea.
97. However 1 it was the Dutch who took formaI possession of the Island in the 17th century and gave it
its present name. But colonization proper was started
earnestly by the French who succeeded the Dutch,
and France has left its lasting imprint on the history
of Mauritius. Such indeed has been the impact of
French culture and civilization on the life of the
people that even those who came from other lands
have been profoundly influenced by it. The meeting
of the peoples of Asia. Africa, and the West in Mauritius has enriched our precious heritage, and as
1 said in France during my last visit:
"Sovereign Mauritius will ally itself still more
ciosely with France. as with the other countries
from which our forefathers came. Thus this remote
island in the Indian Ocean will become one of the
mosi important meeting places of East and West. "!:/
98. Towards the end of the Napoleonic Wars. in1810,
Britain conquered Mauritius. Because of the island's
proximity with India, Mauritius was captured from the
French with the help of Indian troops from BengalI
Madras and Ceylon. British powér in the Indian Ocean
became supreme after the annexation of MauritiuS
to the British Crown and British rule was to last
until the accession of Mauritius to independence on
12 March 1968. In the course of European colonization
of Mauritius, people from Africa and Asia came to
its shores and they have aIl played a decisive part in
the progress and development of the island. Ever
aince, the people of Mauritius have been trying to
promote the maintenance of contrastedcultures within
the framework of a wider community to which each
group could contribute its own share.

.!J Spoken ln French.

8:

General Assembly - Twenty:..second Session - Plenary Meetings

99. It is indeed true to say that although Mauritius
has drawn its cultural inspiration from Africa, Asia
and Europe, yet it has succeeded to a remarkable
degree in evolving a distinct Mauritian way of life.
The visitor to Mauritius is impressed by the fact
that the average Mauritians have more in common
with each other than with the native inhabitants of the
land of their forbears. Indeed, it has been the privilege of my small country that Us citizens have inherited the influence of the best traditions of the East
and of the West. And this influence is notioeable in
the works of our poets and writers as has just been
pointed out by many speakers who have preoeded me.
100. 1 spoke a little while ago of the basic principles
of the United Nations and ofits workfor the oppressed
peoples who have been struggling for the recognition
of their rights to nationhood. We are aIl here pledged
to this great ideal. and indeed aU Member States have
with great fervour and dedication been working to
achieve these great ends we aH hold in common. But
it is still unfortunately true that in many areas of the
world denial of human rights, hatred and violence are
still raising their ugly heads, and human beings are
being subjected to segregation fromone another because of the colour of their skin or their ways of life
which appear alien to the selfish outlook of a smaU
minority. It is a statistical fact that more than half
of the world's population is forced to live in conditions where human dignity and social justice have
hardly any meaning. Even in sorne of the progressive
countries which have been the bulwark of democracy,
men of goodwill are constantly trying to find a formula
by which the under-priviledged can banish inequality
and fear and aspire to a place in the sun.
101. We in Mauritius have a long tradition of mutual

respect, tolerance and understanding, despite the occasional evil exploitation of our diversity. Our social
customs and habits have transcended racial and cultural differences. Although much has been achieved
in the past two years in the field of economic and
social development, Mauritius, like other developing
countries, is bedevilled by the rapid rate of population growth. As a sequel, unemployment is a cause
of great anxiety, for the rapid increase in the birth
rate is a constant and positive threatto our present
standard of living. We are taking steps to contain this
serious population explosion, and to counteract it a
comprehensive programme of family planning is
being launched.
102. FuHy conscious of the seriousness of the problem, the Mauritian Government has embarked on the
diversification of our economy. Great efforts are also
being made to stimulate the production of tea, tobacco
and food crops, and a number of manufacturing industries have been set up. We have also been giving

careful consideration to the possibilities of emigration as a means of easing our unemployment problem.
In this respect 1 am glad to say that a large number
of Mauritians who have emigrated to countries like
Britain, Australia and Canada are actively contributing towards the development of those countries.
1 should like to add that Mauritian workers are efficient, intelligent and adaptable. and have proved to
be an asset to those countries which have welcomed
them. We an know that there are yet many large
areas of the world available for settlement, whereas
in other territories like Mauritius there is a serious
surplus of human resources. It is precisely in this
vital task of revolutionizing the social and economic
set-up of Mauritius that my people are looking forward to a close and fruitful partnership with Member
states of the United Nations.
103. Here, with your permission, Mr. President,
1 should like to avail myself of this opportunity to
express the gratitude of my Government and mycountry for the help and assistance that have already
come to us from these quarters and the various Uni ted
Nations agenciesj and 1 might add in this context how
deeply indebted we are to countries like Britain,
France, India, Canada, Australia, New Zealand, the
United States of America and Pakistan, which have
sympathized ina practical way with the problems we
have been facing.
104. We are very much aware of the fact that eoonomic stability and world peace depend so much on
the understanding between individual groups at a
national level, as weIl as in the field of international
relations, and on the success achieved by many countries in their efforts to give a reasonable standard
of living to their populations. It is in this great task
of bridging the gap between the rich and the poor
that we join our efforts to dedicate ourselves, together with other Member states forming part of this
Assembly.

To conclude, aUow me on behalf of my delegation and my country to renew our pledge to carry out
our obligations under the United Nations Charter and
our firm determination to stand by the great principIes which inspire this comity of nations in its pursuit
of peace and happiness.
105.

106. The PRESIDENT (translated from French):
1 th!l-nk the Prime Minister of Mauritius for his statement.
107. 1 should like to inform the Assembly that the
flag of the new Member State will be hoisted at a
ceremony scheduled to take place tomorrow nt
2.45 p.m., in front of the delegates r entrance.

The meeting rose at 4.45 p.rn.

Litho in U.N.,
77001-October 1970-2,300
