A /75/PV.81

United Nations

General Assembly

Official Records

Seventy-fifth session

81st plenary meeting

Wednesday, 16 June 2021, 5.20 p.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Bozkir  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (Turkey)

The meeting was called to order at 5.20 p.m.
Agenda item 35
Protracted conflicts in the GUAM area and their
implications for international peace, security
and development
Report of the Secretary-General (A/75/891)
Draft resolution (A/75/L.99)
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Georgia to introduce draft
resolution A/75/L.99.
Mr. Imnadze (Georgia): The agenda item
under consideration today is entitled “Protracted
conflicts in the GUAM area and their implications
for international peace, security and development”.
GUAM is an organization for democracy in and the
economic development of four countries: Georgia,
Ukraine, Azerbaijan and the Republic of Moldova. The
GUAM countries continue to be affected by conflict,
hampering their development and the livelihoods of
their people, and in that regard today I will be talking
about the situation in Georgia.
Without going too much into the history of the
conflict, let me mention that since the early 1990s, in
direct violation of a number of ceasefire agreements,
the Georgian population and other ethnic groups have
been targeted and expelled en masse from Abkhazia,
Georgia’s most culturally diverse region, which, as
a matter of fact, was also reflected in the Security
Council resolutions of that time.

More than 80 resolutions, presidential statements
and communiqués have unanimously reaffirmed “the
commitment of all Member States to the sovereignty,
independence and territorial integrity of Georgia within
its internationally recognized borders”, stressing the
necessity “to address seriously the need for a dignified
return of internally displaced persons and refugees,
including their security and human rights concerns”
(resolution 1716 (2006)).
Unfortunately, in 2009 the Russian Federation
brazenly used its veto power to block the United
Nations Observer Mission in Georgia. The same can
be said with regard to the Organization for Security
and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE) mission in the
Tskhinvali region/South Ossetia. That came after
Russia’s full-scale military aggression against my
country in 2008, when the presence of the United
Nations was most needed. Despite the 12 August
ceasefire agreement, to this day Russia refuses to
allow the only existing monitoring mechanism — the
European Union Monitoring Mission — to exercise its
mandate over the occupied territories that the Russian
Federation exercises effective control of.
The Russian Federation has yet to fulfil the
commitments that it undertook under the ceasefire
agreement, namely, the withdrawal of its military, a
pledge on the non-use of force and the establishment of
international security arrangements.
Instead, the Russian occupying authorities have
been carrying out a policy of creeping annexation
through so-called borderization by the installation of

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of speeches
delivered in other languages. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only.
They should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

21-15598 (E)

*2115598*

A/75/PV.81

razor-wire fences, border signs and other artificial
barriers. As a result, the people living in the occupied
regions endure continuous deprivation in terms of their
basic human rights, isolation and discrimination.
The most recent report of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Human Rights, based on the Human
Rights Council resolution entitled “Cooperation with
Georgia” (A/HRC/RES/43/37), speaks about the various
forms of discrimination that ethnic Georgians continue
to face in both regions, including violations of the
right to life, deprivation of liberty, arbitrary detention,
infringement of the right to property, violations of the
right to health, restrictions on education in one’s native
language, and the continuous practice of the demolition
of the ruins of houses belonging to internally displaced
persons and the building of landfills on the site of
demolished houses in the Tskhinvali region/South
Ossetia, Georgia.

16/06/2021

internally displaced persons and refugees to return to
their homes and concluded that it has an obligation to
enable inhabitants of Georgian origin to return to their
respective homes, pursuant to its obligations under
the Convention.
The issue has different aspects, but today we will be
considering a draft resolution (A/75/L.99) that relates
only to the humanitarian and human rights aspects of
the issue. The draft resolution on the status of IDPs and
refugees has been considered in the General Assembly
since May 2008.
The draft resolution aims to reaffirm the right of
return in safety and with dignity; reconfirm the property
rights of the forcefully displaced population; reaffirm
the unacceptability of forced demographic changes;
and ensure access for international humanitarian
organizations to the populations in need.

The report also underlines the fact that not a single
person has been held accountable “for the four cases
of arbitrary deprivation of life that occurred between
2014 and 2019 in Abkhazia and South Ossetia”. The
High Commissioner stresses that it “contributes to
a climate of impunity, which could lead to further
tensions and violence”. The situation of human rights
and the humanitarian situation on the ground have been
further exacerbated by the outbreak of the coronavirus
disease pandemic.

The draft resolution reaffirms and supports the
pivotal role of the Geneva international discussions
and calls on all participants to engage in good
faith in negotiations to find a peaceful and lasting
solution. It calls for the elaboration of a concrete
timetable for the return of IDPs and refugees and for
the reporting instrument to be maintained in order to
keep the international community informed about the
implementation of the resolution through the annual
reports of the Secretary-General.

Discrimination on ethnic grounds in both regions
continues to be a gruesome reality, and the practice
of the illegal detention and kidnapping of Georgian
citizens intensifies every year. The recent decision
of the authorities exercising effective control in the
Tskhinvali region to illegally detain and imprison the
Georgian citizen Zaza Gakheladze is just the latest
example of many.

Almost 400,000 forcibly displaced persons,
irrespective of the length of their displacement, are
still anticipating and hoping for a safe, dignified
and sustainable return to their places of origin, and
they expect the international community to act in
accordance with the Charter of the United Nations and
the principles of international law.

It is particularly alarming that during the past
several years, none of the United Nations special
procedures mandate-holders, the OSCE or Council of
Europe officials were allowed to visit the occupied
Abkhazia and Tskhinvali region, which have remained
completely closed to international monitoring
mechanisms since 2009.
The European Court of Human Rights, in its
ruling of 21 January on the case of Georgia v.
Russia (II), legally established the responsibility of
Russia — as the authority exercising effective control
over the regions — for the violation of the right of
2/8

While the draft resolution before the Assembly
refers to the situation in a single country, Georgia, the
issue at stake is an integral part of a global challenge:
forced displacement. To address it, we need to be
principled and not bound by a narrow regional scope.
Today, therefore, I am standing at this lofty rostrum
to introduce draft resolution A/75/L.99, entitled “Status
of internally displaced persons and refugees from
Abkhazia, Georgia, and the Tskhinvali region/South
Ossetia, Georgia”, under agenda item 35, “Protracted
conflicts in the GUAM area and their implications
for international peace, security and development”,
sponsored by Albania, Andorra, Antigua and Barbuda,
21-15598

16/06/2021

Australia, Austria, Belgium, Bulgaria, Canada, Costa
Rica, Croatia, the Czech Republic, Denmark, Djibouti,
Estonia, Finland, France, Georgia, Germany, Greece,
Hungary, Iceland, Ireland, Italy, Japan, Kiribati, Latvia,
Liberia, Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Malta,
the Marshall Islands, Micronesia (Federated States of),
Monaco, Montenegro, the Netherlands, New Zealand,
North Macedonia, Norway, Papua New Guinea, Poland,
Portugal, the Republic of Moldova, Romania, San
Marino, Slovakia, Slovenia, Solomon Islands, Spain,
Sweden, Tonga, Turkey, Tuvalu, Ukraine, the United
Kingdom, the United States of America and Vanuatu; I
am asking for the support of members.
In this House, we all should recognize the utterly
humanitarian nature of the principle of return.
Therefore, we appeal to members to apply the very
same principle to IDPs from Georgia. They, too, are
the part of our global endeavour to leave no one behind.
Therefore, I once again urge members to vote in favour
of draft resolution A/75/L.99.
The President: Members are informed that we
will first take action of the draft resolution, along with
explanations of vote before and after the voting. The
debate on the item will be held immediately thereafter.
We shall now proceed to consider draft resolution
A/75/L.99. Before giving the floor to speakers for
explanations of vote before the voting, may I remind
delegations that explanations of vote are limited to
10 minutes and should be made by delegations from
their seats.
Mr. Altarsha (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in
Arabic): The delegation of my country, the Syrian Arab
Republic, would like to explain its position on agenda
item 35, which is before the General Assembly; the
draft resolution contained in document A/75/L.99; and
the report of the Secretary-General (A/75/891).
My delegation had expected a genuine change to
be made by the penholders and sponsors of the draft
resolution with regard to addressing the situation of the
internally displaced persons and refugees who were
compelled to leave their regions of Abkhazia and South
Ossetia. But the reality is quite different. What we see
before us today is a draft resolution that is politicized at
all levels based on the narrow points of view of certain
parties and not others. It relied on sources that lack
the minimum standards of credibility, impartiality and
integrity. We are seeing attempts by some countries
to divert the attention of the international community

A/75/PV.81

from irresponsible and reckless acts. The draft
resolution before us also ignores the true concerns
of the inhabitants of Abkhazia and South Ossetia. Its
adoption will only exacerbate the situation of internally
displaced persons and refugees.
Rather than looking at the root causes of those
problems, the delegations of certain countries prefer
to continue to submit this biased draft resolution
for political motives. Their futile efforts not only
undermine trust but also have a negative impact on
humanitarian work.
Accusing certain parties of making coercive
demographic changes and referring to a humanitarian
situation created by an armed conflict not out of fear
for civilians but, rather, as a pretext to point fingers
at parties and not others is completely unacceptable.
Consequently, we urge the delegations of Member States
not to play a role in the politicization of the work and
resolutions of the Organization. As we always say, if a
country or Government is not targeted today, it will be
a target tomorrow. Therefore, my country’s delegation
will vote against the draft resolution and calls on others
to do the same.
Mr. Kuzmin (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): The Russian Federation will vote against
draft resolution A/75/L.99, introduced by the Georgian
delegation. I will now explain why.
These humanitarian trappings and this illusory
concern for refugees and internally displaced persons
hides yet another attempt by Tbilisi and its protectors
to undermine the normalization process in the region,
to apply pressure on the sovereign states of Abkhazia
and South Ossetia and to impose their will upon them.
Such abuse of the issue of refugees only undermines
the practical steps being taken to resolve the existing
humanitarian problems in the region. That initiative
also harms the Geneva discussion process and fuels
divisions between the representatives of the various
nationalities living in Georgia, Abkhazia and South
Ossetia. We strongly urge Georgia and its partners to end
that practice of baseless attacks against Tskhinvali and
Sukhumi in international forums and, finally, to begin
working towards peaceful coexistence, thus showing
their will to constructively discuss humanitarian issues.
The delegation of the Russian Federation requests
a vote on draft resolution A/75/L.99, and we call on all
delegations that opposed the politicization of the work
of the General Assembly to vote against the draft.

21-155983/8

A/75/PV.81

Mr. Espinosa Cañizares (Ecuador) (spoke in
Spanish): Following instructions from my Government,
the delegation of the Republic of Ecuador is taking the
floor to explain its vote on this issue.
On the issue of displaced persons and refugees
from Abkhazia, Georgia, and South Ossetia, Ecuador
reiterates its support for compliance with the
provisions of the Charter of the United Nations and
the corresponding norms of international public law,
pursuant to which we condemn all violations of human
rights, wherever they happen or against whom they
are committed.
Ecuador does not prejudge the rights of the
parties affected by the conflict around the question
of Abkhazia and South Ossetia. Those are regions
that have proclaimed their independence and whose
independence has been recognized by certain countries.
My country recognizes the right of all internally
displaced persons and refugees and their descendants,
regardless of their ethnic origins, who have had to
abandon their homes because of a conflict to return
home in peace and security.
We urge all parties to respect the human rights and
fundamental freedoms of persons and peoples from the
regions in conflict, including the effective realization
of the right to peace and development, inter alia, the
need to respect their right to property and the need for
humanitarian assistance to reach them unhindered.
Ecuador supports the need for this and all conflicts
to be resolved through peaceful means, and we
reiterate the need for the replacement of language on
accusations and sanctions with language on cooperation
and dialogue.
My country supports the need to encourage
international dialogue in Geneva on security and
stability in the Caucasus as the most suitable way of
maintaining contacts between Abkhazia, South Ossetia
and Georgia, with the mediation of Russia and the
United States of America, under the auspices of the
United Nations, the Organization for Security and
Cooperation in Europe and the European Union.
Finally, we urge all parties involved in this conflict
to abstain from participating in unilateral actions that
could undermine the validity of international public law
and weaken multilateral initiatives, which we believe to
be the most appropriate means of tackling this problem.
4/8

16/06/2021

The President: We have heard the last speaker in
explanation of vote before the voting.
The Assembly will now take a decision on draft
resolution A/75/L.99, entitled “Status of internally
displaced persons and refugees from Abkhazia,
Georgia, and the Tskhinvali region/South Ossetia,
Georgia”.
I now give the floor to the representative of
the Secretariat.
Mr. Nakano (Department for General Assembly
Affairs and Conference Management): I should like
to announce that since the submission of the draft
resolution, and in addition to those delegations listed
in the document, the following countries have also
become sponsors of A/75/L.99: Japan, Liberia, New
Zealand and Solomon Islands.
The President: A recorded vote has been requested.
A recorded vote was taken.
In favour:
Albania, Andorra, Antigua and Barbuda, Australia,
Austria, Azerbaijan, Bahamas, Barbados, Belgium,
Belize, Bulgaria, Canada, Costa Rica, Côte d’Ivoire,
Croatia, Czech Republic, Denmark, Djibouti,
Estonia, Finland, France, Gambia, Georgia,
Germany, Ghana, Greece, Guatemala, Guyana,
Haiti, Honduras, Hungary, Iceland, Ireland,
Italy, Jamaica, Japan, Kiribati, Latvia, Liberia,
Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Maldives,
Malta, Marshall Islands, Mexico, Micronesia
(Federated States of), Monaco, Montenegro,
Netherlands, New Zealand, North Macedonia,
Norway, Palau, Poland, Portugal, Republic of
Moldova, Romania, Rwanda, Saint Kitts and Nevis,
Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines,
Samoa, San Marino, Singapore, Slovakia, Slovenia,
Solomon Islands, Spain, Sweden, Tonga, Trinidad
and Tobago, Turkey, Tuvalu, Ukraine, United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland,
United States of America, Uruguay, Uzbekistan,
Vanuatu
Against:
Belarus, Burundi, Comoros, Cuba, Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea, Lao People’s Democratic
Republic, Nicaragua, Russian Federation, Sri
Lanka, Sudan, Syrian Arab Republic, Venezuela
(Bolivarian Republic of), Viet Nam, Zimbabwe
21-15598

16/06/2021

Abstaining:
Algeria, Angola, Argentina, Bahrain, Bangladesh,
Bhutan, Bolivia (Plurinational State of), Bosnia
and Herzegovina, Botswana, Brazil, Brunei
Darussalam, Burkina Faso, Cabo Verde, Cambodia,
Cameroon, Chad, Chile, China, Colombia,
Cyprus, Dominican Republic, Ecuador, Egypt, El
Salvador, Eritrea, Ethiopia, Fiji, Guinea-Bissau,
India, Indonesia, Iraq, Israel, Jordan, Kazakhstan,
Kuwait, Kyrgyzstan, Lebanon, Libya, Madagascar,
Malaysia, Mauritania, Mongolia, Morocco,
Mozambique, Namibia, Nepal, Niger, Nigeria,
Pakistan, Panama, Paraguay, Peru, Philippines,
Qatar, Republic of Korea, Sao Tome and Principe,
Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Serbia, South Africa,
Suriname, Switzerland, Tajikistan, Thailand, Togo,
Tunisia, Uganda, United Arab Emirates, Yemen,
Zambia
Draft resolution A/75/L.99 was adopted by 80 votes
to 14, with 70 abstentions (resolution 75/285).
The President: We shall now begin the debate on
the item under consideration.
Mr. Kyslytsya (Ukraine): I have the honour to
speak on behalf of the Organization for Democracy and
Economic Development-GUAM and its member States:
Azerbaijan, Georgia, the Republic of Moldova and my
own country, Ukraine.
This year once again, the GUAM member States
are presenting a united position in support of resolution
75/285, entitled “Status of internally displaced persons
and refugees from Abkhazia, Georgia, and the
Tskhinvali region/South Ossetia, Georgia”.
The resolution addresses the issue of protracted
displacement in the GUAM area, especially in Georgia,
where hundreds of thousands of men, women and
children from the Abkhazia and Tskhinvali regions of
Georgia have remained forcibly displaced as a result
of the conflict and several waves of ethnic cleansing
since the early 1990s. As a humanitarian resolution,
the text focuses solely on forced displacement and calls
for respect for the right to return, property rights and
humanitarian access to the affected regions of Georgia.
We regret that despite the calls made by the
international community, hundreds of thousands of
internally displaced persons (IDPs) and refugees from
the Georgian regions of Abkhazia and Tskhinvali/
South Ossetia, fleeing from ethnic cleansing, continue

A/75/PV.81

to be deprived of their fundamental right to return
to their homes in safety and dignity. Moreover, the
deterioration of the humanitarian and human rights
situation on the ground not only further impedes that
return but also poses the imminent threat of a new wave
of forced displacement.
As highlighted in the Secretary-General’s report
A/75/891, no major changes were observed during the
reporting period with regard to internally displaced
persons and refugees exercising their right to return.
The human rights situation in those occupied regions
of Georgia remains a cause for serious concern. Illegal
detentions and kidnappings along the line adjacent to
the occupied territories, intensified ethnically targeted
human rights violations, deprivation of the right to
life, prohibition of education in the native Georgian
language, violations of the right to health, restriction of
rights related to freedom of movement, residence, and
property, illegally erected razor wire and other artificial
obstacles continue to affect the everyday life of the
local population. The human rights and humanitarian
situation has been further exacerbated owing to the
adverse impact of the coronavirus disease pandemic.
The situation is particularly alarming given that no
international monitoring mechanisms are allowed to
monitor the situation on the ground.
In that context, we welcome the adoption of the
resolutions on cooperation with Georgia by the Human
Rights Council that express serious concern over the
human rights and humanitarian situation within the
Abkhazia and Tskhinvali/South Ossetia regions of
Georgia and call for immediate and unimpeded access
by the Office of the High Commissioner for Human
Rights and other international and regional human
rights mechanisms to those territories.
We reiterate our support for the process of the
Geneva International Discussions, which is a unique
platform for participants to discuss security and
stability and humanitarian issues, including in relation
to the return of refugees and IDPs. We regret the fact
that discussions on the most essential humanitarian
issue within the discussions have been constantly
undermined through concerted disrespect of the issue
by the relevant participants. We view the present
resolution as an important tool to further encourage the
participants in the Geneva International Discussions to
redouble their efforts to address the issues within their

21-155985/8

A/75/PV.81

16/06/2021

respective mandate, including the creation of conditions
conducive to a voluntary return in safety and dignity.

of the Abkhazia and Tskhinvali/South Ossetia regions
of Georgia.

The GUAM member States reiterate their
unwavering support for the sovereignty and territorial
integrity of Georgia within its internationally
recognized borders.

Mr. Paulaskas (Lithuania): I have the honour
to speak on behalf of the Baltic and Nordic States:
Denmark, Estonia, Finland, Iceland, Latvia, Norway,
Sweden and my own country, Lithuania.

The resolution is an opportunity for the States
Members of the United Nations to reconfirm our
commitment to the fundamental right to the safe and
dignified return of IDPs and refugees and express
solidarity to forcibly displaced persons around the
world. We therefore voted in favour of the resolution
and called on others to join us in supporting this cause.

The following States — Austria, Bulgaria, the Czech
Republic, the Republic of Moldova, the Netherlands,
Poland, Romania, Slovakia and Ukraine — align
themselves with this statement.

With that I conclude my statement on behalf of
GUAM. I would like to add some comments in my
national capacity.
This year the European Court of Human Rights
in its ruling unequivocally confirmed the occupation
of and exercise of effective control over the Georgian
territories by the Russian Federation as well as Russia’s
responsibility for the killing, torture, ill-treatment
and arbitrary detention of Georgian civilians and
military personnel.
Ukraine fully condemns those violations and abuses
committed by the occupying Power. We are deeply
concerned about the lack of progress on substantive
issues, in particular internally displaced persons and
returnees, the non-use of force and international security
arrangements. We strongly condemn the fact that a
large number of IDPs have been deprived of the right
to return to their homes in a safe and dignified manner.
I urge the Russian occupying authorities to end
their illegal practices and respect their obligations as an
occupying Power under international humanitarian law.
I would also like to draw the attention of the States
Members of the United Nations that 13 years after
the beginning of its aggression and occupation of the
Georgian territories, the Russian Federation still refuses
to implement the European Union-mediated 12 August
2008 ceasefire agreement, in particular to withdraw its
military and security forces and armaments from both
regions and to allow the establishment of international
security mechanisms on the ground.
Ukraine calls upon the Russian Federation to fulfil
those obligations and to stop the temporary occupation
6/8

First, we avail ourselves of this opportunity to
reiterate our strong support for the sovereignty and
territorial integrity of Georgia within its internationally
recognized borders. Unfortunately, the territorial
integrity of Georgia continues to be violated by the
Russian Federation, which is occupying the Georgian
regions of Abkhazia and Tskhinvali/South Ossetia.
It is a deplorable fact that Russia remains in serious
breach of the European Union-mediated ceasefire
agreement of 12 August 2008 and the implementing
measures of 8 September 2008. Russia continues its
illegal military presence and activities on Georgian soil
and is strengthening its control over parts of Georgia’s
territory, as seen, inter alia, from last year’s decision
to create a so-called common socioeconomic space
between Russia and the Georgian region of Abkhazia.
Moreover, in its landmark judgment of 21 January,
the Grand Chamber of the European Court of Human
Rights clearly stated that while it is in effective control
of the illegally occupied Georgian territory, Russia
is responsible for the grave human rights violations
committed there.
It includes the administrative practice of the killing
of civilians, torture, inhuman and degrading treatment,
violations of the right to liberty and security, as well
as violations of the right to freedom of movement and
respect for private and family life.
That important ruling reminds us that so far, more
than a decade after the first adoption of the resolution
on internally displaced persons and refugees from
Abkhazia and Tskhinvali region/South Ossetia in
Georgia, no progress has been achieved with regard to
the voluntary, safe, dignified and unhindered return
of internally displaced persons (IDPs) and refugees
on the basis of international law and internationally
recognized principles. Hundreds of thousands of IDPs
continue to be deprived of their right to a safe, dignified
21-15598

16/06/2021

and voluntary return to their places of origin and their
property rights.
The same conclusion is drawn in the SecretaryGeneral’s comprehensive report on the implementation
of last year’s resolution 74/300, on IDPs and refugees
from the Abkhazia and Tskhinvali region/South
Ossetia in Georgia (A/75/891). We fully concur with the
findings of that thorough analysis.
Resolution 75/285, which was adopted today,
commits us all to continuing to work to provide
protection and assistance to those who have been
forcibly displaced from the Abkhazia and Tskhinvali/
South Ossetia regions of Georgia, and to ensure that
they are able to exercise their fundamental right to a
safe and dignified return.
In that context, we commend the continued efforts
by the Georgian Government, in close cooperation
with international organizations, to implement durable
alternative solutions that provide the opportunities for
IDPs to integrate locally or, in separate cases, resettle
elsewhere in the country, in the absence of the option
for IDPs to return to the Abkhazia and Tskhinvali/
South Ossetia regions of Georgia. We also highlight
the efforts of the Government to assist the affected
population as much as possible by providing free access
to health care, education and other social benefits for
all residents of Abkhazia and Tskhinvali/South Ossetia.
The continually deteriorating human rights
situation in those occupied regions of Georgia
remains a cause for serious concern. We are deeply
concerned by the impunity surrounding the grave
human rights violations committed in conflict-affected
areas. Kidnappings, arbitrary detentions and arrests,
some of them with a lethal outcome, prolonged and
unprecedented restrictions on freedom of movement,
lack of access to health care and to education in their
native language have a direct negative impact on the
daily lives of the hundreds of thousands of people
affected by that protracted conflict. The process of
“borderization” contributes to the further deterioration
of the human rights situation in the occupied regions of
Georgia. In recent years the situation has been further
affected by the coronavirus disease pandemic.
The adoption of the resolution on cooperation with
Georgia at the forty-sixth session of the Human Rights
Council (A/HRC/RES/46/30) clearly demonstrated
that the international community remains seized of
the matter. The need to address the grave violations

A/75/PV.81

of human rights and humanitarian issues faced by
the persons forcibly displaced from the Abkhazia and
Tskhinvali region/South Ossetia in Georgia was clearly
expressed therein.
In that context, we remain concerned that over
the past several years no international human rights
monitoring mechanism has been granted unrestricted
access to the regions of Abkhazia and Tskhinvali/South
Ossetia. We therefore call for immediate access by the
Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for
Human Rights and other international and regional
human rights mechanisms.
We reiterate our support for the process of
the Geneva International Discussions and join the
Secretary-General’s call to all relevant stakeholders
to step up efforts to make tangible progress on
key security and humanitarian issues in order to
meet the pressing humanitarian concerns of the
affected population, including IDPs. We remain
concerned about the continued refusal by Russia and
participants from Tskhinvali and Sukhumi to engage
on the topic of refugees and displaced persons in
the Geneva International Discussions, although that
topic is at the core of the mandate of the Geneva
International Discussions.
To conclude, given the lack of progress on the
ground, we call for the continuous engagement of the
United Nations. As in previous years, we voted in
favour of the resolution.
The President: I now give the floor to the observer
of the European Union.
Mr. Dvořák (European Union): I have the honour
to speak on behalf of the European Union (EU) and its
member States.
The candidate countries Turkey, the Republic of
North Macedonia, Montenegro and Albania, as well as
Ukraine and the Republic of Moldova, align themselves
with this statement.
The EU reaffirms its firm support for the
sovereignty and territorial integrity of Georgia
within its internationally recognized borders. The EU
remains committed to supporting peacebuilding and
conflict resolution in Georgia, including through its
co-sponsorship of the Geneva International Discussions
and the EU Monitoring Mission on the ground.

21-155987/8

A/75/PV.81

The EU expresses its deep concern about the state
of play in the breakaway regions of Abkhazia and
South Ossetia and at the continuous deterioration of the
human rights situation in those regions.
The EU underlines the importance of the right of
refugees and internally displaced persons (IDPs) to
choose a durable solution, including a voluntary, safe
and dignified return, as well as to be able to exercise
property rights. The EU regrets that so far no progress
has been achieved on those issues and recalls that
addressing issues related to refugees and IDPs is a core
task of the Geneva International Discussions.

8/8

16/06/2021

The EU welcomes the progress made by the
Georgian Government in respect of durable housing
solutions as well as in terms of the socioeconomic
integration of IDPs. Likewise, we encourage the
Government to address the remaining difficulties with
respect to access to drinking and irrigation water,
heating and livelihoods, as well as access to social and
medical infrastructure.
The President: We have heard the last speaker for
this meeting. We will hear the remaining speakers at a
date to be announced.
The meeting rose at 6 p.m.

21-15598
