A

UNITED
NATIONS

General Assembly
Distr.
GENERAL
A/RES/52/227
27 April 1998

Fifty-second session
Agenda item 116
RESOLUTION ADOPTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY
[on the report of the Fifth Committee (A/52/744/Add.2)]
52/227. Integrated Management Information System
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 43/217 of 21 December 1988,
Having considered the ninth progress report of the Secretary-General on the Integrated Management
Information System project1 and the related report of the Advisory Committee on Administrative and
Budgetary Questions,2 as well as the report of the Board of Auditors on the updated special audit of the
Integrated Management Information System project,3
1. Notes the difficulties inherent in the implementation of the Integrated Management Information
System project;
2. Expresses concern that the magnitude and complexity of the Integrated Management Information
System project were underestimated from its inception;

1

A/52/711.

2

A/52/828.

3

A/52/755, annex.

98-77245

/...

A/RES/52/227
Page 2

3. Also expresses concern that the recommendations of the Board of Auditors contained in its report
of 21 November 1994 on the special audit of the Integrated Management Information System project4
have not been fully implemented;
4. Expresses its deep concern at the findings of the Board of Auditors contained in its report on
the updated special audit;3
5. Endorses the observations and recommendations of the Board of Auditors contained in its report
on the updated special audit;
6. Takes note of the corrective actions taken by the Administration concerning the recommendations
made by the Board of Auditors;
7. Requests the Secretary-General to take immediate action for the full implementation of the
recommendations of the Board of Auditors and to report thereon to the General Assembly at the main part
of its fifty-third session;
8. Expresses its deep concern about the time and cost overruns for the completion of the Integrated
Management Information System project;
9. Requests the Secretary-General to ensure strict adherence to the Financial Rules and Regulations
of the United Nations in matters concerning control over expenditure on the Integrated Management
Information System project, with particular reference to contractual costs, and to ensure that adequate
administrative support is provided for the project in accordance with the recommendations of the Board
of Auditors in paragraphs 25 and 27 of the annex to its report;3
10. Also requests the Secretary-General to determine contractor responsibilities in the changes in the
Integrated Management Information System in order to limit unnecessary payments by the Administration;
11. Further requests the Secretary-General to entrust the Office of Internal Oversight Services with
conducting a comprehensive analysis of the reasons for the increase in costs of the contract and to submit
a report thereon to the General Assembly no later than the end of the main part of its fifty-third session;
12. Requests the Secretary-General to have independent experts conduct a forward-looking study of
the Integrated Management Information System, to be financed from available resources of the Department
of Management of the Secretariat, with no effect on the implementation of its mandate, and to submit a
report thereon to the General Assembly, together with his comments, through the Advisory Committee,
no later than the end of the main part of the fifty-third session, the purpose of the independent study
being:
(a) To assess the System from a technical point of view, in terms of both design and operations,
taking into account the specific requirements of the United Nations;
(b) To advise on the long-term maintenance and operational requirements of the System in terms
of the number and qualifications of staff, infrastructure and communications;

4

A/49/680, annex.
/...

A/RES/52/227
Page 3

(c) To advise on possible strategies for improving the System and optimizing maintenance costs;
13. Also requests the Secretary-General to include in his tenth progress report a detailed plan of
action and the final level of resources needed to resolve all outstanding problems so as to make the
Integrated Management Information System fully operational, taking into account the main observations
of the two reports referred to in paragraphs 11 and 12 above;
14. Further requests the Secretary-General to reduce the dependency on the current contractor by
limiting additional work to the minimum required to facilitate the implementation of the Integrated
Management Information System project at offices away from Headquarters and to take the necessary
measures to have additional work performed by United Nations staff or by a contractor selected after
competitive bidding;
15. Calls upon the Secretary-General to ensure that a comprehensive programme for Integrated
Management Information System training is included as part of the ongoing training programme offered
to staff at all duty stations concerned;
16. Requests the Secretary-General to ensure that adequate and qualified staff are assigned to the
implementation and operation of the Integrated Management Information System at all duty stations.
82nd plenary meeting
31 March 1998
