S/2003/930*

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
29 October 2003
Original: English

Letter dated 1 October 2003 from the President of the Security
Council to the Secretary-General
I have the honour to inform you that the members of the Security Council have
decided to send a mission to Afghanistan from 31 October to 8 November 2003,
which will be led by Ambassador Gunter Pleuger. The members of the Council have
agreed on the terms of reference of the mission (see annex).
Following the consultations with the members, it has been agreed that the
composition of the mission will be as follows:
Germany (Ambassador Gunter Pleuger, head of mission)
Angola (Counsellor Candido Pereira dos Santos Van-Dunem)
Bulgaria (Ambassador Stefan Tafrov)
Cameroon (Minister Counsellor Mathieu Blaise Banoum)
Chile (Counsellor Armin Andereya)
China (Minister Counsellor Jingye Cheng)
France (Ambassador Jean-Marc de La Sablière)
Guinea (Minister Counsellor Boubacar Diallo)
Mexico (Ambassador Adolfo Aguilar Zinser)
Pakistan (Ambassador Masood Khalid)
Russian Federation (Ambassador Gennadi Gatilov)
Spain (Ambassador Inocencio Arias)
Syrian Arab Republic (Counsellor Bassam Sabagh)
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland (Ambassador Emyr
Jones Parry)
United States of America (Ambassador John D. Negroponte)
I should be grateful if you could have the Secretariat make all the necessary
arrangements to facilitate the work of the mission.
(Signed) John D. Negroponte
President of the Security Council
* Reissued for technical reasons.

03-53952* (E) 281003

*0353952*

S/2003/930

Annex
Terms of reference of the Security Council mission
to Afghanistan
1.
The members of the Security Council have decided to send a mission to
Afghanistan. The visit will take place from 31 October to 7 November 2003. The
mission will visit Kabul, Herat, Kandahar and Mazar-i-Sharif.
2.

The mission has the following objectives:
• To underscore the international community’s unwavering commitment to the
peace and reconstruction process in Afghanistan and to promote further
international and regional support to this end.
• To review the progress achieved so far and to encourage the Afghan
Transitional Administration to further strengthen the implementation of the
Bonn Agreement, inter alia, with respect to security sector reform,
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration, and the election process.
• To observe the operations of the United Nations Assistance Mission in
Afghanistan (UNAMA), including its role in assisting the Afghan Transitional
Administration in preparing for the elections and in implementing the
constitution and in coordinating all United Nations activities.
• To observe the operations of the International Security Assistance Force in
Afghanistan (ISAF), to discuss ways to improve the security situation and to
expand the authority of the Afghan Transitional Administration throughout the
country, and, in this context, to obtain a fuller understanding of the role of the
provincial reconstruction teams.
• To review the humanitarian and human rights situation, in particular with
regard to women, children, refugees and internally displaced persons, and to
assess the status of rehabilitation and reconstruction efforts.
• To review the implementation of the Kabul Declaration on Good Neighbourly
Relations of 22 December 2002.
• To convey a strong message to regional and factional leaders about the need to
reject all violence, condemn extremist, terrorist and illegal drug activities,
ensure public order and safety, promote inter-ethnic reconciliation and support
the implementation of the Bonn Agreement and fully cooperate with the
Afghan Transitional Administration in line with the agreement of 22 May 2003
and UNAMA to these ends.

2
