III.

2. Renews the mandate of the Ad Hoe Committee;
3. Requests the Ad Hoe Committee to maintain close
contact with the representatives of the States possessing
nuclear weapons in order to remain currently informed of
their attitudes, as well as with all other States. and to consider any possible relevant proposals and observations which
might be made to the Committee. especially having in mind
paragraph 122 of the Final Document of the Tenth Special
Session of the General Assembly:
4. Requests the Ad Hoe Committee to report to the
General Assembly at its second special session devoted to
disarmament and at its thirty-seventh ses~ion:
f"'c:cides to include in the provisional agenda of its
tt :.. y-seventh session the item entitled ··world Disarmament Conference·'.
9 I st plenarv meeting
9 December /9XI

36/92.

Review of the implementation of the recommendations and decisions adopted by the General Assembly at its tenth special session
A

UNITED NATIONS PROGRAMME OF FELLOWSHIPS ON
DISARMAMENT

The General Assembly,
Recalling its decision, taken at the tenth special session,
the first special session devoted to disarmament, to establish
a programme of fellowships on disarmament, 35
Recalling also its resolution 35/ 152 A of 12 December
1980, in which it requested the Secretary-General to make
adequate arrangements relating to the programme for 1981
in accordance with the guidelines approved by the General
Assembly at its thirty-third session,
Expressing its satisfaction at the fact that Governments,
particularly those of developing countries, have continued
to manifest serious interest in the programme,
Having considered the report of the Secretary-General on
the implementation of the United Nations programme of
fellowships on disarmament for 1981, 36
I. Decides to continue the United Nations programme
of fellowships on disarmament;
2. Requests the Secretary-General to make adequate
arrangements relating to the programme for 1982 in accordance with the guidelines approved by the General Assembly at its thirty-third session;
3. Also requests the Secretary-General to submit to the
General Assembly at its second special session devoted to
disarmament a report containing an assessment of the United
Nations programme of fellowships on disarmament since
its inception in 1979;
4. Commends the Secretary-General for the diligence
with which the programme has been conducted;
5. Expresses its appreciation to the Governments of the
Federal Republic of Germany, Hungary and Sweden for
inviting the fellows to their capitals to study selected activities in the field of disarmament, thereby contributing to the
fulfilment of the over-all objectives of the programme, as
well as providing additional information sources and practical knowledge for the fellows.
91 st plenary meeting
9 December /98/

B
REPORT OF THE DISARMAMENT COMMISSION

The General Assembh,
Having considered the report of the Disarmament
Commission, 37
Emphasizing again the importance of an effective followup to the relevant recommendations and decisions adopted
at the tenth special session of the General Assembly. the
first special session devoted to disarmament.
Considering the important role that the Disarmament
Commission has played and the significant contribution it
has made in examining and submitting recommendations
on various problems in the field of disarmament and in the
promotion of the implementation of the relevant decisions
of the tenth special session,
Recalling its resolutions 33/71 Hof 14 December 1978,
34/83 H of 11 December 1979 and 351152 F of 12 December
1980,
I. Takes note of the report of the Disarmament
Commission;
2. Notes that the Disarmament Commission was not
able to conclude its consideration of the items on its agenda;
3. Requests the Disarmament Commission to continue
its work in accordance with its mandate, as set forth in
paragraph 118 of the Final Document of the Tenth Special
Session of the General Assembly, 38 and to continue consideration of the items included in the agenda of its session
in 1981 and, to that end. to meet for a period not exceeding
four weeks during 1982;
4. Requests the Disarmament Commission to submit a
substantive report on its work to the General Assembly at
its second special session devoted to disarmament, to be
held from 7 June to 9 July 1982;
5. Requests the Secretary-General to transmit to the
Disarmament Commission the report of the Committee on
Disarmament,w together with all the official records of the
thirty-sixth session of the General Assembly relating to disarmament matters, and to render all assistance that it may
require for implementing the present resolution;
6. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its
thirty-seventh session the item entitled "Report of the Disarmament Commission'·.
91 st plenary meeting
9 December !9XJ

C
WORLD DISARMAMENT CAMPAIGN

The General Assembly,
Recalling that, in the Final Document of the Tenth Special
Session of the General Assembly. 38 the first special session
devoted to disarmament, it stressed the importance of mobilizing world public opinion on behalf of disarmament.
Recalling its resolution 35/ 152 I of 12 December 1980.
in which, for the achievement of that purpose, it requested
the Secretary-General to carry out a study on the organization and financing of a World Disarmament Campaign
under the auspices of the United Nations,
Having examined the study transmitted by the SecretaryGeneral as an annex to his report of 17 September 1981, 40
,-, 0//icial Records o( 11,,· (;c11era/ A.11<·111hlr. Thirrr-si,rh s,,.1.1io11. Sul'1'inne111 No. 42 iA/36/42)

Resolution S-10/2
''0ffical Records o( the ( ll'llt'ral it,.,t'mhlr. Thirtr-.,ilth Session ..\up/J/emenl No. 27 (A'36: 27l
,,. A 1t,;4'i8
h

1

'·' Resolution S- I0/2, para. I 08.
'" A/36/606.

61

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the First Committee

1

General Assembly-Thirty-sixth Session

62

1. Notes with satisfaction the contents of the study on
the World Disarmament Campaign and commends its
conclusions;
2. Expresses its appreciation to the Secretary-General
and to the experts who assisted him for the prompt and
effective manner in which the study was prepared;
3. Invites all Member States to transmit to the SecretaryGeneral, not later than 15 April 1982, the suggestions and
comments which they deem appropriate to formulate for the
implementation of the recommendations contained in the
study;
4. Requests the Secretary-General to transmit to the
General Assembly at its second special session devoted to
disarmament both the study on the World Disarmament
Campaign and-the opinions thereon received from Governments, in order that the Assembly may take the decisions
it considers advisable for the solemn launching of the Campaign, including a pledging conference to take place at the
initial stage of the special session.
91 st plenary meeting
9 December 1981

D
INTERNATIONAL CO-OPERATION FOR DISARMAMENT

The General Assembly,
Stressing again the urgent need for an active and sustained
effort to intensify the comprehensive implementation of the
recommendations and decisions unanimously adopted at its
tenth .special session, the first special session devoted to
disarmament, as contained in the Final Document of that
session, 38
Convinced that, to this end, effective, constructive and
continuing co-operation among all States at all levels, including the highest, on the basis of mutual confidence and
political will, is essential,
Deeply concerned over the growing danger of a new round
of the arms race, which would seriously jeopardize international stability and increase the danger of a nuclear
catastrophe,
Convinced that the halting of the arms race and adoption
of effective disarmament measures, particularly in the field
of nuclear disarmament, would release considerable financial and material resources to be used for the economic and
social development of all States, in particular developing
countries,
Taking into consideration the central role and primary
responsibility of the United Nations in combining efforts
and in supporting and developing active co-operation among
States aimed at the solution of disarmament problems.
Recalling in this context the Declaration on International
Co-operation for Disarmament. of 11 December 1979. 41
Noting that that Declaration may play a positive role in
concerting efforts for the achievement of effective measures
in the implementation of the goals set forth to this end in
the Final Document of the Tenth Special Session.
I. Calls upon all States to observe the principles and
make active use of the ideas contained in the Declaration
on International Co-operation for Disarmament so as to secure a constructive mutual dialogue aimed at limiting armaments, particularly nuclear weapons, through the
conclusion of agreements, keeping in mind the ultimate
objective of general and complete disarmament under effective international control;
41

Resolution 34/88.

2. Calls upon Member States to be guided in all disarmament negotiations by the generally recognized principles of international law and to submit and constructively
to consider, with full responsibility and in the spirit of cooperation. proposals and initiatives aimed at promoting
speedy progress in disarmament negotiations and facilitating
the achievement of mutually acceptable concrete disarmament measures:
3. Calls upon Member States to refrain from any action
that could hamper. complicate or render impossible the disarmament negotiations which are under way, the opening
of new negotiations or the achievement of specific disarmament agreements and, in particular. not to hinder possible
progress in negotiations on disarmament by the discussion
of unrelated issues:
4. Recommends that the Preparatory Committee for
the Second Special Session of the General Assembly Devoted to Disarmament should make active use of the Declaration on International Co-operation for Disarmament in
the preparations for the special session:
5. Calls upon Member States to disseminate widely.
in connection with Disarmament Week. the principles of
international co-operation designed to achieve the goals of
disarmament.
9 l st pfenarr meeting
9 December /9X/

E
NUCLEAR WEAPONS IN ALL ASPECTS

The General Assembly,
Reaffirming once again that nuclear weapons pose the
most serious threat to mankind and its survival and that it
is therefore essential to proceed with nuclear disarmament
and the complete elimination of nuclear weapons,
Reaffirming also that all nuclear-weapon States, in particular those which possess the most important nuclear arsenals, bear a special responsibility for the fulfilment of the
task of achieving the goals of nuclear disarmament.
Stressing again that existing arsenals of nuclear weapons
alone are more than sufficient to destroy all life on earth,
and bearing in mind the devastating results which nuclear
war would have on belligerents and non-belligerents alike,
Recalling that at its tenth special session, the first special
session devoted to disarmament, it decided that effective
measures of nuclear disarmament and the prevention of nuclear war had the highest priority and that it was essential
to halt and reverse the nuclear-arms race in all its aspects
m order to avert the danger of war involving nuclear
weapons,
Recalling further that, in its resolution 351152 B of 12
December 1980, it noted with alarm the increased risk of
a nuclear catastrophe associated both with the intensification
of the nuclear-arms race and with the adoption of the new
d_octrine of limited or partial use of nuclear weapons giving
nse to illusions of the admissibility and acceptability of a
nuclear conflict,
Noting with alarm that this dangerous doctrine leads to
a_ new twist in the spiral of the arms race, which may senously hamper the reaching of agreement on nuclear
disarmament,
Noting, in this connection, an urgent need for the cessation of the development and deployment of new types and
systems of nuclear weapons as a step on the road to nuclear
disarmament,
Stressing again that priority in disarmament negotiations
should be given to nuclear weapons, and referring to para-

Ill.

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the First Committee

graphs 49 and 54 of the Final Document of the Tenth Special
Session of the General Assembly, 38
Recalling its resolutions 33/7 I H of I 4 December I 978.
34/83 J of 11 December 1979 and 35/ 152 B and C of 12
December 1980,
Noting that the Committee on Disarmament, during its
session held in 1981, discussed the question concerning the
cessation of the nuclear-arms race and nuclear disarmament
and, inter alia, the establishment of an ad hoe working
group for negotiations on the subject,
Taking note of the proposals and statements made in the
Committee on Disarmament, both during its formal and
informal meetings, on the cessation of the nuclear-arms race
and nuclear disarmament, and. inter alia, on prerequisites
for the conduct of negotiations on nuclear disarmament.
Noting with regret that the Committee on Disarmament,
during its session held in 1981, was not able to reach agreement on a basis for multilateral negotiations on nuclear
disarmament or on prerequisites for such negotiations,
Convinced that the Committee on Disarmament is the
most suitable forum for the preparation and conduct of the
negotiations on nuclear disarmament,
. I: Believ~s necessary to initiate, as a matter of high
pnonty, negot1at1ons on the cessation of the production of
nuclear weapons and on the gradual reduction of their stockpiles up to and including their total destruction, in accordance with the provisions of paragraph 50 of the Final
Document of the Tenth Special Session of the General
Assembly;
2. Notes the decision of the Committee on Disarmament to resume intensive consideration, at its session in
1982, of the item on the cessation of the nuclear-arms race
and nuclear disarmament; 42
3. Calls upon the Committee on Disarmament, as a
matter of priority and for the purpose of an early commencement ~f the negotiations on the substance of the problem, to contmue consultations in which to consider, inter
alia, t~e establishment of an ad hoe working group on the
cessation of the nuclear-arms race and on nuclear disarmament with a clearly defined mandate;
4. De_ems it appropriate, as envisaged in paragraph
50 of the F~nal Document of the Tenth Special Session, that
the Committee on Disarmament should proceed, as a first
step, to the consideration of stages of nuclear disarmar.1ent
and their tentative content, inter alia, the content of the first
stage;
5. Also deems it appropriate to consider, within the
framework of the discussion on the content of measures to
be c~ed out during the first stage, the question of the
cessation of the development and deployment of new types
and systems of nuclear weapons;
6. Requests the Committee on Disarmament to report
on the results of those negotiations to the General Assembly
at its thirty-seventh session.
9 I st plenary meeting
9 December I 98 I

!t

F
REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE ON DISARMAMENT

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 34/83 B of 11 December 1979
and 35/152 J of 12 December 1980,
Having considered the report of the Committee on
Disarmament, 43
42 Official Records of the General Assembly, Thirty-sixth Session, Supplement No. 27 (A/36/27), para. 85.
"Ibid., Supplement No. 27 (A/Jo/27).

63

Affirming that the establishment of ad hoe working groups
offers the best available machinery for the conduct of multilateral negotiations on items on the agenda of the Committee on Disarmament and contributes to the strengthening
of the negotiating role of the Committe'e on Disarmament,
Regretting that, despite the ex.pressed wish of the great
majority of members of the Committee on Disarmament,
the establishment of ad hoe working groups to undertake
multilateral negotiations on nuclear disarmament and on
prohibition of all nuclear-weapon tests was prevented during
the session of the Committee in 1981 .
Expressing its deep concern that the Committee on Disarmament has not thus far been able to achieve concrete
results on disarmament issues which have been under consideration for a number of years.
Convinced that the Committee on Disarmament. as the
single multilateral negotiating body on disarmament. should
play the central role in substantive negotiations on priority
questions of disarmament and on the implementation of the
Programme of Action set forth in section III of the Final
Document of the Tenth Special Session of the General Assembly ,44 the first special session devoted to disarmament.
Stressing that negotiations on specific disarmament issues
conducted outside the Committee on Disarmament should
in no way serve as a pretext for preventing the conduct of
multilateral negotiations on such questions in the Committee.
I. Urges the Committee on Disarmament to continue
or undertake, during its session in 1982, substantive negotiations on the priority questions of disarmament on its
agenda, in accordance with the provisions of the Final Document of the Tenth Special Session of the General Assembly
and the other relevant resolutions of the Assembly on those
questions and, in order to reach that goal, to provide the
existing ad hoe working groups with appropriate negotiating
mandates and to establish, as a matter of urgency, ad hoe
working groups on the cessation of the nuclear-arms race
and nuclear disarmament and on the prohibition of all
nuclear-weapon tests:
2. Requests the Committee on Disarmament to complete, during the first part of its session in 1982. the elaboration of a comprehensive programme of disarmament and
to submit the programme in time for consideration and
adoption by the General Assembly at its second special
session devoted to disarmament, to be held from 7 June to
9 July 1982:
3. Also requests the Committee on Disarmament to
intensify its negotiations on priority questions of disarmament, so that it may be in a position to contribute, through
concrete accomplishments, to the success of the second
special session devoted to disarmament:
4. Invites the members of the Committee on Disarmament involved in separate negotiations on specific priority
questions of disarmament to intensify their efforts to achieve
without further delay a positive conclusion of those negotiations for submission to the Committee and, at the same
time, to submit to the Committee a full report on their
separate negotiations and the results achieved in order to
contribute most directly to the negotiations in the Committee
in accordance with paragraph I above;
5. Further requests the Committee on Disarmament
to submit to the General Assembly at its second special
session devoted to disarmament a special report on the state
of negotiations on the various questions under consideration
by the Committee and also to submit a report on its work
to the Assembly at its thirty-seventh session;
"' Resolution S-1 ll; 2

General Assembly-Thirty-sixth Session

64

6. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its
thirty-seventh session the item entitled '' Report of the Committee on Disarmament".
9 I st plenary meeting
9 December 1981
G
STUDY ON THE RELATIONSHIP BETWEEN DISARMAMENT
AND DEVELOPMENT

The General Assembly,
Recalling paragraph 94 of the Final Docume~t of ~he
Tenth Special Session of the General Assembly ,44 m which
it decided to undertake a study on the relationship between
disarmament and development and requested the SecretaryGeneral to carry out the study with the assistance of a group
of qualified governmental experts,
Having examined the report of the Secretary-General containing the study, 45
l. Welcomes with satisfaction the report of the Secretary-General and the study contained therein;
2. Expresses its thanks to the Secretary-General and to
the Group of Governmental Experts on the Relationship
between Disarmament and Development, as well as to the
Governments, international organizations and non-governmental organizations that have rendered assistance in the
preparation of the report;
3. Commends the report, its conclusions and its recommendations to the attention of all Member States;
4. Requests the Secretary-General to make the necessary arrangements for the reproduction of the report as a
United Nations publication 45 and to give it the widest possible distribution;
5. Invites all Member States to inform the SecretaryGeneral, not later than 15 April 1982, of their views regarding the report and, in particular, its recommendations;
6. Decides to transmit the report to the General Assembly at its second special session devoted to disarmament for
its substantive consideration and appropriate action;
7. Requests the Secretary-General to transmit the report
to the Committee on Disarmament and recommends that it
be taken into account in future disarmament negotiations;
8. Notes with appreciation that arrangements have been
made for the preparation of a short version of the report
aimed at a mass audience;
9. Recommends to all Governments the widest possible
distribution of the report, including, where appropriate, its
translation into their national languages, so as to acquaint
public opinion in their countries with its content, and invites
specialized agencies and national and non-governmental
organizations to use their facilities to make the report widely
known.

91 st plenary meeting
9 December 1981

H
STATUS OF MULTILATERAL DISARMAMENT AGREEMENTS

The General Assembly.
Recalling the Final Document of the Tenth Special Session of the General Assembly ,44 the first special session
devoted to disarmament.
Having in mind that a number of multilateral disarmament
agreements have been concluded so far.
" A/36/356 and Corr. I. The report was subsequently issued with the
title The Relationship herween Disurmmnen1 and Development (United
Nations publication. Sales No. E.82.lX. I l

Considering that the participation in _the ~bove-me~tio~ed
agreements of as many States as _poss_1ble 1s of special importance to the attainment of thetr obJect1ves,
Taking note with satisfaction of the special supplement
to the United Nations Disarmament Yearbook, entitled Status of multilateral arms regulation and disarmame~t agreements, 46 as well as of the information on this matter included
in the yearbooks,
I . Reaffirms the importance of the provisions CO!l,cerning the question of the universality of multilateral disarmament agreements contained in the Final Docu!Ilent ?f the
Tenth Special Session of the General Assembly. m particular
paragraph 40;
2. Requests Member States depositorie~ of ~uch agr~ments to furnish the Secretary-General with mformat1on
regarding their status by the beginning of each regular session of the General Assembly;
3. Further requests the Secretary-General to prepare ~or
each regular session of the General Assembly a compos!te
table of signatories of and parties to such agreement~ with
a view to enabling the Assembly to take up the questton of
their status, if it deems it appropriate.
91 st plenary meeting
9 December 1981
I
NON-USE OF NUCLEAR WEAPONS AND PREVENTION OF
NUCLEAR WAR

The General Assembly,
Alarmed by the threat to the survival of mankind and to
the life-sustaining system posed by nuclear weapons and by
their use, inherent in concepts of deterrence,
Convinced that nuclear disarmament is essential for the
prevention of nuclear war and for the strengthening of international peace and security,
Recalling its declaration, contained in the Final Document
of the Tenth Special Session of the General Assembly, that
all States should actively participate in efforts to bring about
conditions in international relations among States in which
a code of peaceful conduct of nations in international affairs
could be agreed upon and which would preclude the use or
threat of use of nuclear weapons, 47
Recalling its resolutions 1653 (XVI) of 24 November
1961 33/71 B of 14 December 1978, 34/83 G of 11 Decem~r 1979 and 35/ 152 D of 12 December 1980,
Taking note of the Comprehensive Study on Nuclear
Weapons 48 prepared by the Secretary-General with the assistance of a group of experts,
I Declares once again that:
(a) The use of nuclear weapons would be a violation
of the Charter of the United Nations and a crime against
humanity;
(b) The use or threat of use of nuclear weapons should
therefore be prohibited, pending nuclear disarmament;
2. Urges the consideration, at the second special session
of the General Assembly devoted to disarmament, of the
question of an international convention on the non-use of
nuclear weapons and prevention of nuclear war or some
other agreement on the subject, taking into account the
proposals and views of States in this regard;

4

" United Nations publication. Sales No. E.78.lX.2.
'" Resolution S-10/2. para. 58.
" United Nations publication. Sales No E.81.1.11.

III.

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the First Committee

3. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its
thirty-seventh session the item entitled "Non-use of nuclear
weapons and prevention of nuclear war".
91st plenary meeting
9 December 198 /

J
WORLD-WIDE ACTION FOR COLLECTING SIGNATURES IN SUPPORT OF MEASURES TO PREVENT NUCLEAR WAR, TO CURB
THE ARMS RACE AND FOR DISARMAMENT

The General Assembly,
Deeply concerned over the growing threat of a nuclear
war and the continuation and escalation of the arms race,
Conscious of the need to mobilize world public opinion
on behalf of disarmament, as called for in the Final Document of the Tenth Special Session of the General Assembly, 44 the first special session devoted to disarmament,
Considering that world-wide action for collecting signatures in support of measures to prevent nuclear war, to
curb the arms race and for disarmament would be an important manifestation of the will of the world public and
would contribute to the creation of a favourable climate for
achieving progress in the field of disarmament,
Considering also that it is desirable to carry out such
world-wide action under the auspices of the United Nations
and with the active participation of non-governmental organizations and other public institutions,
1. Invites Member States to communicate to the Secretary-General their views and suggestions concerning
world-wide action for collecting signatures in support of
measures to prevent nuclear war, to curb the arms race and
for disarmament;
2. Requests the Secretary-General to prepare a report
on the most appropriate format and methods of carrying out
such world-wide action under the auspices of the United
Nations, taking into account the views and suggestions of
Member States, and to submit it for consideration to the
General Assembly at its second special session devoted to
disarmament.
91 st plenary meeting
9 December /98/

K
PROHIBITION OF THE NUCLEAR NEUTRON WEAPON

The General Assembly,
Recalling paragraph 47 of the Final Document of the
Tenth Special Session of the General Assembly. 44 in which
it is stated that nuclear weapons pose the greatest danger
to mankind and that it is essential to halt and reverse the
nuclear-arms race in order to avert the danger of war involving nuclear weapons,
Stressing that the termination of the qualitative arms race
and the use of scientific and technological achievements
solely for peaceful purposes are in the interest of all States
and peoples,
Sharing the world-wide concern over the production and
intended deployment of nuclear neutron weapons expressed
by numerous Member States and by many non-governmental organizations,
Considering that the introduction of the nuclear neutron
weapon in the military arsenals of States escalates the nuclear arms race and significantly lowers the threshold of
nuclear war, thereby increasing the danger of such a war,
Aware of the inhumane effects of that weapon, which
constitutes a grave threat. particularly for the unprotected
civilian population,

65

Recalling the proposals for the prohibition of the production, stockpiling, deployment and use of nuclear neutron
weapons,
Desiring to contribute to halting the arms race, particularly in the field of weapons of mass destruction,
I . Requests the Committee on Disarmament to start
without delay negotiations in an appropriate organizational
framework with a view to concluding a convention on the
prohibition of the production, stockpiling, deployment and
use of nuclear neutron weapons;
2. Requests the Secretary-General to transmit to the
Committee on Disarmament all documents relating to the
discussion of this question by the General Assembly at its
thirty-sixth session:
3. Requests the Committee on Disarmament to submit
a report on this question to the General Assembly at its
thirty-seventh session;
4. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its
thirty-seventh session an item entitled "Prohibition of the
nuclear neutron weapon· · .
91 st plenary meeting
9 December 1981

L
PROGRAMME OF RESEARCH AND STUDIES ON DISARMAMENT

The General Assembly.
Taking note with appreciation of the report of the Secretary-General on the work of the Advisory Board on Disarmament Studies in 1981 .49
Requests the Secretary-General to submit that report to
the General Assembly at its second special session devoted
to disarmament for further consideration.
91 st plenary meeting
9 December /98/

M
IMPLEMENTATION OF THE RECOMMENDATIONS AND
DECISIONS OF THE TENTH SPECIAL SESSION

The General Assembly,
Having reviewed the implementation of the recommendations and decisions adopted by the General Assembly at
its tenth special session, the first special session devoted to
disarmament,
Recalling its resolutions S-10/2 of 30 June 1978, 34/83
C of 11 December 1979, 35/46 of 3 December I 980 and
35/152 E of 12 December 1980,
Reaffirming the importance of the Final Document of the
Tenth Special Session of the General Assembly ,44 which
constitutes a comprehensive basis for further efforts towards
promoting international security, halting and reversing the
arms race, and the achievement of general and complete
disarmament untler effective international control,
Considering it imperative to achieve genuine progress in
all negotiations dealing with disarmament issues,
Convinced that the success of disarmament negotiations.
in which all peoples of the world have a vital interest, would
be achieved through the active participation of Member
States in such negotiations, thereby contributing to the maintenance of international peace and security,
Reaffirming that the United Nations has a central role and
primary responsibility in the sphere of disarmament.
Deeply concerned about the continuing arms race and,
in particular. the nuclear-arms race. which constitutes a
growing threat to international peace and security.
49

A/36/654.

General Assembly-Thirty-sixth Session

66

Mindful of a growing awareness among States and peoples
of the dangers of the continuing arms race, in particular the
nuclear-arms race, and of the need to eliminate the danger
of the outbreak of a nuclear war,
Calling attention to the tasks set forth in the Declaration
of the 1980s as the Second Disarmament Decade, 50 which
demand intensified efforts to be taken in the Committee on
Disarmament and other appropriate forums.
Stressing the need to promote the development, strengthening and intensification of international co-operation designed to achieve general and complete disarmament, as
defined by the General Assembly at its tenth special session,
Noting with concern the lack of tangible progress with
respect to the implementation of the measures set forth in
the Programme of Action in section III of the Final Document of the Tenth Special Session of the General Assembly.
Bearing in mind that at its second special session devoted
to disarmament, to be held from 7 June to 9 July 1982, the
General Assembly will undertake a review of the progress
made in the implementation of the recommendations and
decisions of the first special session on disarmament,
Conscious of the need to contribute to the success of the
second special session through concrete accomplishments
in the field of disarmament, thereby maintaining and further
intensifying the momentum generated by the first special
session,
I. Expresses its deep concern about the continued arms
race, in particular the nuclear-arms race, and about the constantly growing military budgets, which bear negative consequeJ1ces and pose a growing threat to international peace
and security as well as to the development of States, particularly developing countries;
2. Urgently calls upon all States, in particular nuclearweapon States and other major military Powers. immediately to take steps in order to promote international security
and lead to the effective halting and reversing of the arms
race and to disarmament;
3. Urges those States also to intensify their efforts to
bring to a successful end the negotiations which are currently
taking place in the Committee on Disarmament and other
international forums and to proceed to or resume negotiations on effective international agreements on items of the
highest priority as laid down by the first special session of
the General Assembly devoted to disarmament;
4. Recommends that the Committee on Disarmament
should concentrate its work on the substantive and priority
items on its agenda with a view to achieving tangible results
in order to contribute to the success of the second special
session of the General Assembly devoted to disarmament
and to the accomplishment of the tasks set forth in the
Declaration of the 1980s as the Second Disarmament
Decade;
5. Calls upon all States to refrain from any actions
which have or may have negative effects on the implementation of the relevant recommendations and decisions of the
first special session devoted to disarmament;
6. Invites all States which are engaged in disarmament
and/or arms limitation negotiations outside the framework
of the United Nations to keep the General Assembly and
the Committee on Disarmament informed of the results of
such negotiations in conformity with the relevant provisions
of the Final Document of the Tenth Special Session of the
General Assembly;
7. Also calls upon States engaged in such negotiations
outside the framework of the United Nations to implement

>0 Resolution 35/46.

the results achieved, so as to create favourable conditions
for further progress;
8. Recommends that the General Assembly should keep
under review at its forthcoming sessions the implementation
of its recommendations and decisions on disarmament
issues.
9 I st plenary meeting
9 December I 98 I

36/93.

United Nations Conference on Prohibitions or
Restrictions of Use of Certain Conventional
Weapons Which May Be Deemed to Be Excessively Injurious or to Have Indiscriminate Effects

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 32/ 152 of 19 December 1977,
33/70 of 14 December 1978, 34/82 of 11 December 1979
and 35/153 of 12 December 1980.
Recalling the successful conclusion of the United Nations
Conference on Prohibitions or Restrictions of Use of Certain
Conventional Weapons Which May Be Deemed to Be Excessively Injurious or to Have Indiscriminate Effects, which
resulted in a convention and three protocols, 51 adopted by
the Conference on 10 October 1980, namely, the Convention on Prohibitions or Restrictions on the Use of Certain
Conventional Weapons Which May Be Deemed to Be Excessively Injurious or to Have Indiscriminate Effects. the
Protocol on Non-Detectable Fragments (Protocol I), the
Protocol on Prohibitions or Restrictions on the Use of Mines.
Booby Traps and Other Devices (Protocol II) and the Protocol on Prohibitions or Restrictions on the Use of Incendiary Weapons (Protocol 111),
Reaffirming its conviction that the suffering of civilian
populations and of combatants would be further significantly
reduced if general agreement could be attained on the prohibition or restriction for humanitarian reasons of the use
of specific conventional weapons, including any which may
be deemed to be excessively injurious or to have indiscriminate effects,
Taking note with satisfaction of the report of the Secretary-General, 52 in which indication was given that many
States had already signed the Convention, which was .:ipened
for signature in New York on 10 April 1981 .
I. Urges those States which have not yet done so to
exert their best endeavours to sign and ratify the Convention
on Prohibitions or Restrictions on the Use of Certain Conventional Weapons Which May Be Deemed to Be Excessively Injurious or to Have Indiscriminate Effects and the
Protocols annexed thereto as early as possible so as to obtain
the entry into force of the Convention, and ultimately its
universal adherence;
2. Notes that, under article 8 of the Convention, conferences may be convened to consider amendments to the
Convention or any of the Protocols annexed thereto, to
consider additional protocols relating to other categories of
conventional weapons not covered by the existing annexed
Protocols, or to review the scope and operation of the Convention and the Protocols annexed thereto and to consider
any proposal for amendments to the Convention or to the
existing Protocols and any proposals for additional protocols
relating to other categories of conventional weapons not
covered by the existing annexed Protocols;
3. Requests the Secretary-General, as depositary of the
Convention and the three Protocols annexed thereto, to in"See A/CONF.95115 and Corr.I, annex I.
" A/36/406.
