UNITED
NATIONS

S
Security Council
Distr.
GENERAL
S/1997/257
27 March 1997
ORIGINAL:

ENGLISH

LETTER DATED 26 MARCH 1997 FROM THE SECRETARY-GENERAL
ADDRESSED TO THE PRESIDENT OF THE SECURITY COUNCIL

I have the honour to convey the attached communication, dated
24 March 1997, which I have received from the Secretary-General of the North
Atlantic Treaty Organization.
I would appreciate your bringing it to the attention of the members of the
Security Council.

(Signed)

97-08495 (E)

270397

Kofi A. ANNAN

/...

S/1997/257
English
Page 2

Annex
Letter dated 24 March 1997 from the Secretary-General of
the North Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO) addressed
to the Secretary-General

In accordance with Security Council resolution 1088 (1996), I attach the
third monthly report on Stabilization Force (SFOR) operations. I would
appreciate your making this report available to the Security Council.
The report describes recent violence associated with the attempted return
of refugees and displaced persons in the zone of separation, particularly in
Gajevi. This is a disturbing development that must not be allowed to continue.
SFOR will play its role in providing general area security, but this is not
enough. The international community must put political pressure on the parties
to ensure that they fulfil their obligations under the Peace Agreement with
respect to returns. In addition, there is a need for a comprehensive strategy
for returns that is coordinated with economic reconstruction and informed by the
security advice of SFOR and the International Police Task Force (IPTF). The
United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees will play an important role in
this regard.
Finally, the local police must be retrained, restructured and made to carry
out their responsibilities for local law and order. A strengthened IPTF is an
essential first step in this regard, and I fully back your request to the
Security Council for an increase in the authorized strength of the force. A
second key element is the effective implementation of the extensive training and
resources programme established by the conference that you chaired in Dublin
last September. I would hope that a way could be found to focus the attention
of the international community on the urgent need to provide the necessary
resources.

(Signed)

Javier SOLANA

/...

S/1997/257
English
Page 3

Appendix
Monthly report to the United Nations Security Council
on SFOR operations

SFOR operations
1.
Approximately 31,000 SFOR troops are currently deployed in Bosnia and
Herzegovina, with contributions from all the NATO nations and, with Slovenia
joining SFOR on 24 February 1997, from 19 non-NATO countries. Concepts are now
in place for the use and exercising of operational reserves from within the
theatre and strategic reserves from outside the theatre in order to give the
force enhanced flexibility and to reinforce its deterrent role.
2.
Over the past month, SFOR has continued to conduct area reconnaissance and
surveillance through ground and air patrols across the region, and to make
random inspections of cantonment sites. Increased patrolling has taken place in
Mostar in the wake of last month's violence there, and SFOR, in cooperation with
the International Police Task Force (IPTF), has removed a number of illegal
checkpoints in the city. Patrolling was also increased in a number of villages
in and around the zone of separation as a result of recent violations by the
parties of the procedure established for the return of refugees.
Cooperation and compliance by the parties
3.
The parties are assessed as continuing to be in general compliance with the
military provisions of the Peace Agreement. However, as noted above, there has
again been violence associated with the attempted return of refugees in the zone
of separation, and all parties appear ready to use coercion to shift the ethnic
balance in "their" areas, or to deter minority return.
4.
Since 21 February, SFOR troops conducted over 500 compliance inspections
and monitored over 150 authorized movement and training activities and over
70 demining activities by the parties.
5.
The first phase of the temporary suspension of the SFOR confiscation policy
for previously undeclared arms (para. 4 of last month's report refers (see
S/1997/193)) came to an end on 15 February. The next step, which lasted until
15 March, was the approval process for the final storage sites for the weapons
and ammunition. The last step, which required extension until 15 April, is the
organized movement and monitoring of the weapons and ammunition. The total
number surrendered is still being verified by SFOR, but the parties have
declared a wide range of weapons, including tanks, grenades, ammunition, small
arms and mines.
6.
Prior to the Brcko arbitration decision on 14 February, SFOR imposed a
temporary ban on training and movement activities conducted by the parties'
military units. This ban was lifted on 10 March, although the parties still
have to apply for permission to move and train their units. SFOR will examine
each request individually before granting permission. Similarly, the ban on the
call-up of reservists, which was also imposed by SFOR in the lead-up to the
/...

S/1997/257
English
Page 4

Brcko decision, has now been lifted, although any party wishing to call up
reserves must forward its request to SFOR three weeks in advance.
7.
With respect to freedom of return, there were serious disturbances over the
reporting period associated with the return of refugees to the village of
Gajevi, in the zone of separation near Celic. These disturbances were
apparently triggered by the arrest of a Bosniac by the Bosnian Serb police on
26 February. On 26 February, four Bosniac prefabricated houses in Gajevi were
completely demolished by a series of explosions. Later that same day, 3 Bosnian
Serbs were kidnapped and beaten by 15 armed Bosniacs, in apparent retaliation
for the arrest of the Bosniac. In the early hours of 1 March the three were
released and were taken to the SFOR position just outside Celic.
8.
On 2 March, a group of about 150 Bosnian Serbs then moved into Gajevi from
the nearby area of Koraj and set fire to nine prefabricated Bosniac houses in
the village. SFOR troops linked arms and blocked the crowd from destroying the
two remaining prefabricated houses. Bosnian Serb police subsequently arrived on
the scene, too late to prevent the destruction. Tensions escalated still
further on 3 March when approximately 50 Bosniacs gathered at the west end of
the Gajevi bridge and prevented a small group of SFOR troops from crossing,
demanding their return to their headquarters. Subsequently, the SFOR troops,
with IPTF assistance, succeeded in dispersing the crowd without further trouble.
9.
On 4 March, additional SFOR troops moved into the area, setting up a
security cordon and imposing a temporary restricted zone around Celic, Koraj and
Gajevi. All resettlement and construction activity in Gajevi was prohibited for
seven days. However, at the end of that period, on 11 March, the last remaining
Bosniac homes in Gajevi were set afire and destroyed by a crowd of around
30 Bosnian Serbs. IPTF has now begun an investigation into the events in
Gajevi.
10. In a further development with respect to freedom of return, the Bosnian
Serbs announced in early March that Bosniac returnees in the Sapna Thumb area,
near Zvornik, would be required to carry Bosnian Serb identity cards. The
Bosnian Serb police began issuing the identity cards to Bosniacs living in the
towns of Jusici, Dugi Dio and Mahala, and the Zvornik police chief was ordered
to evict any resident not in possession of the card by 10 March. Although this
procedure is in line with agreed zone of separation resettlement procedures,
Bosniac returnees to villages along the zone of separation have insisted in the
past on retaining their original identification cards. Aware of the potential
for further tension, observers from SFOR and IPTF supervised the Bosnian Serbs'
delivery of the cards and persuaded Serb officials to give the Bosniacs more
time to get the proper identification. Federation identification cards
surrendered to the Bosnian Serb police will be handed over to IPTF for final
disposal.
11. In Mostar, the situation remains tense but calm in the wake of last month's
violent confrontations between Bosniacs and Bosnian Croats. Following the
violence, SFOR's presence in the city was strengthened, patrolling was increased
and checkpoints were introduced. SFOR continues to work closely with IPTF in
the city and on 9 March, nine illegal police checkpoints (eight Bosnian Croat
and one Bosniac) were discovered and subsequently dismantled.
/...

S/1997/257
English
Page 5

12. The Parties have made some progress with respect to demining, and have
complied with the decisions taken at the mid-January meeting of the Joint
Military Commission, defining targets for demining activity. Since 21 February,
over 70 demining activities were monitored by SFOR.
Cooperation with international organizations
13. SFOR continues to provide support within its capabilities to the
international civil organizations in theatre. As noted above, there is close
daily coordination with IPTF. In addition, following the violence in Mostar, it
was agreed that senior officials from SFOR, the Office of the High
Representative and IPTF should meet daily in Sarajevo as a "Mostar Security
Coordination Group". It was also agreed that there should be a joint 24-hour
command post at the office of the High Representative in Mostar. Building on
existing operational liaison and communications arrangements, these initiatives
have strengthened coordination and improved responsiveness.
14. SFOR will establish a close working relationship with the new Deputy High
Representative for Brcko appointed at the Brcko Implementation Conference in
Vienna on 7 March. SFOR will also coordinate closely with the enhanced IPTF
presence in Brcko and will work with the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees and other organizations involved in order to implement
procedures for the phased and orderly return of refugees and displaced persons.
15. SFOR continues to cooperate closely with the Organization for Security and
Cooperation in Europe (OSCE) in its preparations for the municipal elections,
which have now been moved to September 1997. SFOR will continue to support OSCE
in its role of ensuring compliance by the parties with the corresponding
commitments under the Peace Agreement. The temporary suspension of SFOR's
weapons confiscation policy (referred to in para. 5 above) resulted in the
declaration by the parties of a number of weapons which fall under the
responsibility of OSCE. Once the figures involved have been fully verified,
they will be provided separately by SFOR to the Personal Representative of the
OSCE Chairman-in-Office.

-----
