S/PV.8933

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-sixth year

8933rd meeting

Wednesday, 15 December 2021, 3.15 p.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Abarry. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Niger)

Members:

China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Estonia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
India . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ireland. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kenya. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Mexico. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Norway . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Saint Vincent and the Grenadines. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Tunisia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Viet Nam . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Sun Zhiqiang
Mr. Lipand
Mrs. Gasri
Mr. Raguttahalli
Ms. Byrne Nason
Mr. Olanda
Mr. Gómez Robledo Verduzco
Mr. Heines
Ms. Evstigneeva
Ms. Mark
Mr. Ben Lagha
Mr. Roscoe
Mr. Mills
Mr. Pham

Agenda
Central African region
Report of the Secretary-General on the situation in Central Africa and the
activities of the United Nations Regional Office for Central Africa (S/2021/975)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

21-39623 (E)
*2139623*

S/PV.8933

Central African region

The meeting was called to order at 3.15 p.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Central African region
Report of the Secretary-General on the
situation in Central Africa and the activities of
the United Nations Regional Office for Central
Africa (S/2021/975)
The President (spoke in French): In accordance
with rule 39 of the Council’s provisional rules of
procedure, I invite Mr. François Louncény Fall, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General and Head of
the United Nations Regional Office for Central Africa,
to participate in this meeting.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I wish to draw the attention of Council members to
document S/2021/975, which contains the report of the
Secretary-General on the situation in Central Africa
and the activities of the United Nations Regional Office
for Central Africa.
I now give the floor to Mr. Fall.
Mr. Fall (spoke in French): At the outset, I welcome
the fact that today’s briefing on the report on the United
Nations Regional Office for Central Africa (UNOCA)
is taking place under your presidency, Mr. President.
It is my great fortune to have this opportunity to pay
a well-deserved tribute to your country as its mandate
on the Security Council draws to a close. Your term
at this post of high diplomacy, your mandate for world
peace, including in Central Africa, and the themes you
have chosen over the past two years — specifically, the
situations in the Sahel and the Lake Chad basin and
climate security — are of great interest to the region.
(spoke in English)
It is my pleasure to brief the Security Council today
on the situation in Central Africa and the activities
of UNOCA.
Central Africa has continued to grapple with a
worsening situation related to the coronavirus disease
(COVID-19) pandemic. The vaccination campaign in the
subregion has remained generally slow and asymmetric.
According to official data, as of 16 November, nearly
2/17

15/12/2021

3 per cent of people have been vaccinated across Central
Africa. Meanwhile, 438,000 cases have been reported,
including 7,047 people who have lost their lives since
the beginning of the pandemic — a 100 per cent
increase, compared to the situation in June. I call upon
the international community to continue supporting
Central Africa in its efforts to contain the pandemic
and mitigate its impact.
After a severe economic recession, I am encouraged
by the prevailing optimism, as countries embark on
economic recovery. I commend regional, continental
and international financial institutions, which, through
their renewed and generous financial and technical
commitment, have been supporting the countries of
the region to address the impact of the dual health and
economic crisis.
While showing the resilience of the States of Central
Africa, the management of COVID-19 has also exposed
some protracted governance challenges that need to be
addressed for the subregion to prevent, mitigate and
successfully resolve future crises. Indeed, governance
gaps continue to hamper subregional efforts to chart a
course for sustainable peace and development.
Elections remain a key feature of governance.
Since my last briefing (see S/PV.8787), a peaceful and
orderly presidential election took place in Sao Tome
and Principe, further consolidating the country’s
track record of democratic transitions. I would like to
commend the people of Sao Tome and Principe and
their political leaders for placing the national interest
before partisan politics during the presidential election.
However, sustaining democratic gains would entail
helping the political class to implement key governance
and electoral reforms and providing the country with
the resources that would enable it to achieve key
development objectives so that the population could
harness the “democratic dividend”.
As the subregion prepares for crucial elections in
2022 and 2023, including in Angola, Chad, the Congo,
the Democratic Republic of the Congo, Equatorial
Guinea, Gabon and Sao Tome and Principe, renewed
commitment to peaceful and democratic electoral
processes remains paramount for regional stability.
This requires the timely provision of adequate support
to enable the creation of conditions conducive for
credible, inclusive and peaceful elections, and to prevent
election-related violence. I will pursue good offices on
behalf of the Secretary-General, wherever required, to
21-39623

15/12/2021

Central African region

encourage inclusive and meaningful political dialogue
in countries preparing for elections. The support of the
Security Council will be crucial in that regard.
The Economic Community of Central African
States (ECCAS) has stayed the course in the
implementation of its institutional reform, including
through the operationalization of the newly established
Committee of Permanent Representatives and the
regular convening of statutory meetings. I would like
to commend ECCAS for its continued engagement in
Chad and the Central African Republic, and its support
for the electoral process in Sao Tome and Principe. I
am also encouraged by efforts undertaken by ECCAS
to tackle governance issues. In cooperation with the
African Union, and with the support of UNOCA,
ECCAS has been working towards the establishment
of a subregional governance architecture. UNOCA will
continue to mobilize the entire United Nations system to
support ECCAS in consolidating its role as the primary
regional peace and security actor in Central Africa.
A strong ECCAS is needed to help its member
States address the many challenges facing Central
Africa. These include, inter alia, terrorism and violent
extremism, particularly in the Lake Chad Basin,
maritime insecurity in the Gulf of Guinea, the weak
participation of women in peace and political processes,
and the impact of climate change on peace and security.
The activities of terrorist groups in the Lake Chad
Basin, including Boko Haram and the Islamic State
West Africa Province (ISWAP), has remained a source
of great concern. During a joint high-level visit that I
recently undertook to the Lake Chad Basin with Special
Representative of the Secretary-General Annadif of the
United Nations Office for West Africa and the Sahel
(UNOWAS), we were informed that security and
humanitarian dynamics were evolving rapidly, owing
to the reconfiguration of Boko Haram and ISWAP, and
leading to additional threats to the populations.
As a result of the intensification of military
operations by the armies of the affected countries, the
terrorist groups have adapted their modus operandi,
resorting to more sophisticated and deadlier methods
of warfare. As Boko Haram and ISWAP seem to
have been weakened by military operations and their
own infighting, it is the right moment to increase
international support for national and regional efforts
aimed at defeating these groups. The Multinational
Joint Task Force and the concerned national armies

S/PV. 8933

are in dire need of technical and material assistance,
particularly in the clearance and disposal of improvised
explosive devices, which have become one of the main
causes of death in their ranks. International support
is also needed in disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration, as the weakening of Boko Haram and the
death of its leader Abubakar Shekau have resulted in
the defection of thousands of former associates.
Furthermore, ISWAP, which seems to have gained
the upper hand over Boko Haram, mainly targets
defence and security forces while also trying to win
the hearts and minds of the local populations through
preaching and providing some basic social services to
fill the gap created by the absence of State authorities.
It is therefore equally urgent to scale up international
support for the implementation of the Regional
Strategy for the Stabilization, Recovery and Resilience
of the Boko Haram-affected Areas of the Lake Chad
Basin Region, which addresses the root causes of
the crisis and responds to the needs of the affected
communities, including women and youth, to prevent
their radicalization and enrolment into terrorist groups.
In the Gulf of Guinea, organized maritime crime
has remained a threat to State and human security,
despite an overall decrease in piracy incidents. UNOCA
and UNOWAS will continue to prioritize maritime
security in their joint engagement and cooperation.
In this regard, I welcome the commitment reiterated
by stakeholders during the conference of the Group
of Seven Friends of the Gulf of Guinea Group, held
in November, to enhance regional and international
cooperation and partnerships in order to promote
free trade and fight maritime insecurity in the Gulf
of Guinea.
The women and peace and security agenda remains
a key regional priority. The participation of women in
political and peace processes remains limited despite
recent progress and the relevant political will in parts of
the subregion. Meanwhile, States have pursued efforts
to adopt and roll out their respective national action
plans for the implementation of resolution 1325 (2000),
while also launching national chapters of the African
Women Leaders Network. UNOCA and ECCAS
will continue to bolster their support for countries in
those endeavours.
As highlighted at the twenty-sixth Conference of
the Parties to the United Nations Framework Convention
on Climate Change, held in Glasgow, the impact of

21-396233/17

S/PV.8933

Central African region

climate change requires us all to make bold and robust
commitments. In Central Africa, the impact of climate
change is exacerbating tensions among communities
as competition for ever-depleting natural resources is
causing more frequent and lethal conflicts.
I am encouraged by the commitment of the
subregion to address climate security challenges, as was
reiterated during the fifty-second ministerial meeting
of the United Nations Standing Advisory Committee on
Security Questions in Central Africa (UNSAC), held in
Libreville last month. UNOCA will continue to devote
its attention to this global priority and its linkages to
peace and security, in partnership with the African
Union, ECCAS, Governments, the relevant United
Nations entities and other actors in the subregion.
(spoke in French)
Several countries in Central Africa have continued
to face political and security challenges with actual or
potential negative impacts on neighbouring countries
and regional stability. Chad has made significant
progress in reaching key transitional milestones
despite significant challenges. I welcome the statement
published at the outcome of the fifty-second UNSAC
ministerial meeting, which reaffirmed the Committee’s
unwavering support for Chad’s efforts to complete a
peaceful and democratic transition within 18 months.
The strong support expressed by the Peacebuilding
Commission at its meeting on Chad’s transition, held
on 2 December, is also encouraging, as it helps garner
international support for a peaceful, inclusive and
rapid completion of the transition. That sends a strong
message to both Chadian stakeholders and international
partners, as the contribution of all is needed for ensuring
a successful transition that will also lay the foundation
for a lasting peace.
The transition authorities decided two weeks
ago to grant amnesty to certain members of armed
groups within the framework of efforts to encourage
them to participate in the dialogue and reconciliation
processes, which will strengthen their inclusive
nature. The proposed inclusive national dialogue also
represents a historic opportunity. We hope that it will
be fully inclusive, meaningful and transparent, and I
wholeheartedly commend all the efforts of the Chadian
stakeholders in that regard.
The next steps of the transition — the national
dialogue, the elections and the disarmament,
4/17

15/12/2021

demobilization and reintegration envisioned for
Chadian combatants returning to their country — will
require significant additional international support,
especially as Chad continues to struggle with a dire
socioeconomic situation. It will also be important to
step up efforts to strengthen the social contract and
fabric in the context of the transition and beyond.
Concerning the situation in the Central African
Republic, my consultations with national authorities and
international partners, in close coordination with the
Special Representative for the Central African Republic
and Head of the United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in the Central African
Republic (MINUSCA), Mr. Mankeur Ndiaye, on the
regional dimension of the conflict highlighted the
region’s continued efforts to help the country chart a
path leading towards lasting peace. I am convinced
that concerted, coherent and coordinated regional
engagement, particularly within the framework of
the road map adopted in Luanda in September, is
imperative to supporting the effective implementation
of the Political Agreement for Peace and Reconciliation
in the Central African Republic, which remains the
only viable path to lasting stability.
In Cameroon, violence has continued in the NorthWest and South-West regions of the country, including
against civilian targets. The conflict is increasingly
taking on a regional dimension, with non-State armed
groups that are reportedly forging alliances with foreign
entities and deploying more sophisticated weapons and
tactics. Unfortunately, initiatives to resolve the conflict
peacefully have made limited progress.
In that context, I welcome new local initiatives to
promote a bottom-up approach that should ultimately
help create an environment conducive to resolving the
crisis through dialogue. I also call on all parties to
take genuine and decisive steps towards a negotiated
political solution. We encourage the country’s key
actors and the diaspora to act on the need for further
constructive dialogue in complementarity with the
recommendations of the major national dialogue to
achieve a peaceful and lasting resolution to the crisis.
Consistent and coordinated international support will
continue to be crucial to that end.
I would like to conclude by saying that this is my
first time briefing before the Council since the renewal
of the UNOCA mandate. I am convinced that the Office,
which celebrated its tenth anniversary this year, can,
21-39623

15/12/2021

Central African region

S/PV. 8933

with the Council’s support, continue to help Central
Africa overcome its multiple security, political and
economic challenges, which have been compounded by
the impact of COVID-19, and contribute to creating the
necessary conditions for creating lasting regional peace
and stability.

United Nations country teams in the subregion.
We know that Special Representative Fall is doing
that and is working to convene them, but we think a
particular focus on the delivery of agreed plans and
strategies and encouragement in that regard could be
incredibly helpful.

The President (spoke in French): I thank Mr. Fall
for his briefing.

Turning to individual countries in the region, as
the Special Representative has just done, the United
Kingdom would like to reiterate its support to Chad as
it undergoes its transition to civilian and constitutional
rule. The United Kingdom joins the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General in welcoming
the positive steps towards that transition, including the
appointment of a largely civilian Cabinet and ongoing
talks with armed opposition groups. We encourage
the Government of Chad to continue to lead an
inclusive process to facilitate a peaceful and successful
political transition.

I shall now give the floor to those members of the
Council who wish to make statements.
Mr. Roscoe (United Kingdom): I want to
begin by expressing our heartfelt thanks to Special
Representative of the Secretary-General Fall for his
insightful briefing today and, more significantly, for
his continued efforts to support peace, stability and
security in Central Africa. Although your modesty will
not appreciate this, Sir, I want to join Mr. Fall in his
tribute to you with regard to your own commitment
and leadership in the work of the Security Council and
beyond on these issues and in the region.
In terms of the work of the United Nations
Regional Office for Central Africa (UNOCA) itself,
we particularly welcome the collaboration between
the Office and the recently established Economic
Community of Central African States Commission,
which, I know, has been incredibly constructive for
Special Representative of the Secretary-General Fall
during the recent reporting period. We are also very
encouraged by the links between Mr. Fall’s Office and
the United Nations Office for West Africa and the Sahel
and other major United Nations Offices in the region.
As Special Representative of the Secretary-General
Fall has set out today, Central Africa continues to face
serious political, economic, humanitarian and security
challenges. It therefore remains important that the
countries in the region work together with the support
of the United Nations to strengthen regional peace
and security, protect civilians in conflict and promote
human rights and resilient economic recovery.
In that regard, I commend UNOCA’s ongoing work
on conflict prevention, and particularly Mr. Fall’s
mediation efforts across Central Africa. The Special
Representative of the Secretary-General’s work to
highlight and support inclusive and meaningful
dialogue in countries preparing for elections is
particularly welcome. We welcome and encourage
even greater coordination between UNOCA and

The United Kingdom remains deeply concerned
by the ongoing crisis and continued human rights
violations in the North-West and South-West regions
of Cameroon. The impacts on civilians continue to
be profound, as we have heard. The conflict in that
region has driven around 650,000 people from their
homes and forced almost 70,000 people to seek refuge
in neighbouring Nigeria. The continued closure of two
thirds of schools, now for a fifth year, means 700,000
children are not receiving an education. We know what
that means with regard to being a driver of conflict.
The United Kingdom has allocated a further
$6 million in humanitarian aid to Cameroon this year,
which will provide vital assistance, including food,
medical supplies and sanitation provisions. What
Cameroon desperately needs is the dialogue that the
Special Representative has just spoken about, which we
hope he will do all he can to encourage, as will we.
The United Kingdom also strongly condemns the
terrorist attacks on civilians in Cameroon’s Far North
region and across the wider Lake Chad basin area. We
welcome the efforts of the Multinational Joint Task
Force to tackle Boko Haram and the Islamic State West
Africa Province in the region, but we have also heard
just how complex that situation is. We need to continue
to focus on that. The United Kingdom Government
continues to support regional stabilization efforts
through its support to the Regional Stabilization Facility
for the Lake Chad Basin, working with international
partners and Governments of the region.

21-396235/17

S/PV.8933

Central African region

Turning to Burundi, we welcome the efforts by
the Government to re-engage with the international
community and demonstrate a greater commitment
to human rights. To that end, we continue to urge the
Government of Burundi to engage with the United
Nations human rights monitoring mechanisms,
including the new Special Rapporteur on the situation
of human rights in Burundi, and to ensure that the needs
and rights of refugees, other displaced people and host
communities are recognized.
The United Kingdom remains concerned about
the ongoing violence in the Central African Republic,
which continues to take a distressing toll on the civilian
population, compounding an already acute humanitarian
situation. We commend President Touadera for his call
for a unilateral ceasefire and continue to underline the
importance of an inclusive peacebuilding process.
We regret to hear further reports that the Russian
private military company Wagner Group continues to
commit human rights abuses in the Central African
Republic. The Wagner Group drives conflict and profits
and capitalizes on instability for its own interests.
It does not offer long-term security answers in the
Central African Republic or elsewhere in Africa, while
undermining the work of international peacekeepers.
May I conclude by thanking Special Representative
Fall. We recognize the huge challenges across the
region, and we are grateful to him for his energetic and
personal commitment to help guide the efforts aimed
at achieving peace and security in the region. We are
fortunate to have him.
Mr. Heines (Norway): I thank Special
Representative Fall for his comprehensive briefing.
Even when the work of the United Nations Regional
Office for Central Africa (UNOCA) is not very visible,
we know it continues to play a key role in the region.
Let me start today on the coast, where the menace
of piracy and armed robbery persists. Every year, piracy
and armed robbery in the Gulf of Guinea has direct,
indirect and opportunity costs for the surrounding
regions — to the amount of almost $2 billion. That
figure was one of the findings of a Norwegian-funded,
United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime-supported
cost analysis report for the coastal States launched
last week.
If we add to that monetary cost the human cost of
risks to seafarers, then maritime security in the Gulf
6/17

15/12/2021

of Guinea clearly deserves more focus. To that end,
Norway, in close cooperation and consultation with
incoming members Ghana and Gabon and other regional
countries, intends to introduce a draft resolution to
address the issue.
The utility of such a draft resolution would be
threefold: first, it would increase attention around that
important issue in the region and beyond; secondly,
it would encourage the ongoing and commendable
national, regional and international efforts in that
regard; and thirdly, as we approach the 10-year mark of
the previous resolution (resolution 2018 (2011)) and the
Yaoundé Code of Conduct, a new draft resolution is an
opportunity to take stock of what works and what can
be improved.
Moving onshore, let me highlight three other key
issues, namely, preventative diplomacy, the protection
of education and climate and security.
First, on preventive diplomacy and mediation, even
when countries in the region are not formally on the
Security Council’s agenda, it is important that we heed
the warning signs and use all our tools to act early to
prevent them from ending up there. The Council’s role
cannot be reduced to that of a firefighter, rushing to
scenes after the fact. Instead, we must make the best use
of mitigating measures, including UNOCA’s preventive
tools, many of which are well described in the report
of the Secretary-General (S/2021/975) and deserve our
support. As always, one of the most effective ways
to ensure ongoing sustainable peace is to ensure the
inclusion of all stakeholders, not least women.
Secondly, as stressed in recently adopted resolution
2601 (2021), the destruction of educational facilities
and denial of access to education have immediate and
long-term negative impacts on the lives of children and
young people, as well as their communities and societies.
Norway strongly condemns the reported continued
attacks against schools and education facilities in
parts of Cameroon, as well as in other countries in
the region. We are pleased that the recent extension of
the mandate of the United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in the Central African
Republic includes strong language on the importance of
protection and the continuation of education in conflict.
Thirdly, and finally, we can no longer ignore the
fact that climate change increases security challenges,
including in Central Africa. In Burundi, as of August,
there were more than 96,000 internally displaced
21-39623

15/12/2021

Central African region

persons due to natural disasters. In Cameroon and
Chad, intercommunal clashes between herding and
farming communities, compounded by climate change,
led to deaths and injuries. While the Council continues
to catch up to that reality, Norway will maintain its
support for UNOCA’s climate and security project. We
are happy to see that that project has now moved into a
second phase.
In conclusion, in an increasingly complex security
landscape, the answers are often closer cooperation
across borders and regional initiatives, which are all
the more important in light of the coronavirus disease
pandemic. On all of the issues I have mentioned today,
UNOCA plays a key role in bringing actors like the
Economic Community of Central African States, the
African Union, the United Nations Office for West
Africa and others together to act. Norway will continue
to strongly support those efforts.
Mrs. Gasri (France) (spoke in French): I would
also like to thank Mr. François Louncény Fall, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, for his
briefing and for his concerted action as the Head of
the United Nations Regional Office for Central Africa
(UNOCA). I would like to underscore three points.
First, it is essential to support the political dialogues
in the region.
In the Central African Republic, France welcomes
the mediation efforts, in particular the commitment
of Angola and Rwanda. With the work of the Special
Representative in support of the Special Representative
for the Central African Republic, those efforts
should lead to a political settlement of the crisis. The
“dialogue républicaine”, announced at the beginning
of the year, must begin as soon as possible and in a
conducive environment.

S/PV. 8933

the crisis in the North-West and South-West regions,
where violence is increasing.
This brings me to my second point. Efforts must
be redoubled to protect the population and respond to
humanitarian needs.
In the Central African Republic, France calls on
all actors to respect the ceasefire and to guarantee
the safety of the population. Wagner must stop its
abuses, predation and violation at the expense of
Central Africans. France will continue to provide
humanitarian support and recently allocated €6 million
in humanitarian and food assistance.
France is maintaining its support to the populations
in the North-West, South-West and Far North regions
of Cameroon through humanitarian assistance and
stabilization projects. Attacks on schools, humanitarian
and medical personnel are unacceptable. France
welcomes the assistance provided by the Office of the
United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees to
displaced persons and those who fled to Chad following
last week’s communal violence in the Far North region
of Cameroon.
France will continue to support the Multinational
Joint Task Force of the States bordering Lake Chad,
notably through the coordination and liaison unit, as
well as with €50 million in financial support from
Europe. We will continue our humanitarian and
stabilization support to the Lake Chad basin.

In Chad, the steps taken since the adoption of a
transitional road map at the end of July are encouraging.
We welcome the consultation process with the inclusion
of all active forces with a view to the timely launch of
an inclusive national dialogue. It is important that the
elections planned for September 2022 be held in a free,
transparent and inclusive manner.

Finally — and this is my last point — the States of
the region must continue to mobilize, with the support
of the UNOCA, in favour of inclusive governance.
Elections continue to be a source of tension in Central
Africa. Several States of the region, as the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General mentioned,
including Angola, Gabon, Equatorial Guinea, the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, the Republic of the
Congo and Sao Tome and Principe, will hold elections
in the coming years. It is essential that these elections
take place in a context that allows all actors to take
part in them. We will pay particular attention to the
full participation of women and young people as voters
and candidates.

In Cameroon, France is pursuing its interaction
with the authorities and its support for mediation
initiatives in order to support the path of dialogue. That
is how it will be possible to find a political solution to

On all these aspects, UNOCA provides
indispensable support, which France welcomes. Its
work with regional and subregional organizations
must be strengthened, in conjunction with the other

21-396237/17

S/PV.8933

Central African region

United Nations regional offices and all relevant Special
Representatives and Special Envoys.
The Special Representative knows that he can
continue to count on France’s support to prevent
conflicts and strengthen peace in the region.
Mr. Lipand (Estonia): I join others in thanking
Special Representative Fall for his comprehensive
briefing.
Estonia welcomes the efforts of the United Nations
Regional Office for Central Africa (UNOCA) and
countries across the Central African region towards
establishing peace, security and stability in the region.
The region continues to confront several challenges
at the political, economic and security levels. We note
there is a need for consolidation of democracy. In this
connection, we encourage Chad to continue its peaceful
and civilian-led transition to democratic processes. We
also underline the important role of further prioritizing
peaceful, inclusive and credible electoral processes that
would contribute to a greater representation of women
in public life.
We remain concerned over the lack of improvement
in the security situation this year. The number of
incidents in Cameroon and Chad, the increased use
of improvised explosive devices and attacks against
civilians remain serious threats to the stability of
the region. The targeted attacks on schools and
schoolchildren, as well as United Nations personnel
and humanitarian workers, are particularly alarming.
That also applies to the Central African Republic,
where Estonia strongly condemns these attacks and
any hampering of the ability of the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in
the Central African Republic to deliver its mandate
in the country. The role of the Wagner group has been
particularly destabilizing. In this regard, we call on
the countries of the region to address accountability
for these human rights violations and abuses and make
further progress in the fight against impunity.
We firmly believe that greater cooperation and
regional integration are vital to peace and development.
Therefore, we underscore the continued improvements
in bilateral and regional cooperation among the
countries of the region in support of the peace
processes. Cooperation is even more indispensable at
the time of the coronavirus disease pandemic, as well
as in addressing the effects of the climate change that
8/17

15/12/2021

pose a serious threat to international peace and security
and have magnified already complex consequences of
the humanitarian situation.
I would like to conclude by commending the
continued efforts of the Special Representative, in
collaboration with other United Nations entities, key
actors of the region and other international partners, in
facilitating efforts towards durable peace and stability
in the region.
Mr. Pham (Viet Nam) (spoke in French): I thank
Mr. François Louncény Fall, Special Representative of
the Secretary-General, for his briefing.
(spoke in English)
My delegation takes note with encouragement of
the efforts of countries of the region in maintaining
stability and promoting development, both nationally
and regionally. However, the road to long-term peace
and stability continues to face enormous security and
socioeconomic, challenges, which have been aggravated
by the impact of the coronavirus disease (COVID-19)
pandemic for almost two years now.
Viet Nam shares the concerns over persistent
insecurity due to the activities of armed groups and
terrorists in certain parts of the region, particularly in
the Lake Chad basin. We are also troubled by maritime
insecurity in the Gulf of Guinea and especially the
reported expansion of the Islamic State West Africa
Province, which threatens stability in the wider region.
The unceasing violence in the North-West and SouthWest regions of Cameroon necessitates renewed
dialogue efforts towards finding a lasting solution.
As a result of conflict, epidemic, floods and
climate change, the humanitarian situation in Central
Africa remains dire. Civilians, particularly women,
children and other vulnerable groups, are the ones
who suffer the most. Generous support is much needed
to fund the humanitarian response plans to alleviate
the predicaments of people in the region, especially
millions of displaced persons, as well as to ensure
COVID-19 vaccination for all.
We also take this opportunity to reiterate our
strong condemnation of attacks against civilians,
as well as humanitarian personnel, and call on all
parties to strictly comply with their obligations under
international humanitarian law.
21-39623

15/12/2021

Central African region

Long-term peace, stability and development can
come only when underlying and deeply seated causes
of instability are fully addressed. The current situation
continues to require the enhancement of collective
efforts to address security threats posed by armed
groups and terrorists, strengthen the governance of
natural resources, promote reconciliation at the national
and regional levels and enhance integration to create
economic opportunities for all people.
In this regard, we would like to highlight the
importance of regional cooperation. We welcome the
efforts of the regional countries to cope with political
and security challenges. The Economic Community
of Central African States (ECCAS) has made great
efforts in advancing institutional reform and the
implementation of strategic priorities for 2021-2025.
The International Conference on the Great Lakes
Region has made significant contribution in promoting
the peace process in the Central African Republic;
the ceasefire declared by President Touadera will be
a critical step towards a dialogue in that country. We
also welcome the efforts of the region in response to the
impact of COVID-19, especially through the ECCAS
regional response strategy.
The efforts of regional countries and organizations
should be coupled with international assistance. We
fully support the important contribution of the United
Nations Regional Office for Central Africa and
Special Representative of the Secretary-General Fall
towards peace and stability in Central Africa through
good offices, preventive diplomacy and mediation
efforts. The fruitful and constructive collaboration
between regional and subregional organizations and
United Nations entities, including the Peacebuilding
Commission, is always greatly beneficial in supporting
efforts towards peace and stability. At the same time,
my delegation calls on international partners to provide
sustained technical and financial assistance to the
countries in the region during this challenging time.
As this is Viet Nam’s last statement on the Central
African region during its current Security Council
tenure, let me emphasize our strong support for peace,
stability and development for the people of Central
Africa. We will continue to follow and support all
efforts to that end.
Mr. Raguttahalli (India): I thank Special
Representative of the Secretary-General François
Louncény Fall for his briefing on developments in the

S/PV. 8933

Central Africa region and the activities of the United
Nations Regional Office for Central Africa (UNOCA). I
will focus my intervention broadly on three points, that
is, the political, security and humanitarian situation in
the region.
While some countries of the region, such as the
Central African Republic and Chad, are currently facing
uncertain political and security situations, overall the
region has remained politically stable and peaceful.
That positive trend shows that electoral democracy is
gradually and firmly taking root in the region. That is
also evident from the successful conduct of presidential
elections in Sao Tome and Principe. We congratulate
Sao Tome and Prince on consolidating the gains of the
past years by holding peaceful elections.
The progress made in recent months in the Central
African Republic also deserves the collective support
of the international community. We hope that the
unilateral ceasefire announced in October will further
strengthen peace and stability and that all parties will
work together to advance the implementation of the
2019 Political Agreement for Peace and Reconciliation
in the Central African Republic. We also welcome the
commitment of Chad and the Central African Republic
to addressing the border tensions through dialogue.
In Chad, there has been progress towards transitional
milestones through the national dialogue process, the
setting up of the National Transitional Council and
with regard to holding elections. We welcome those
positive developments, and we encourage the United
Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization
Mission in the Central African Republic, UNOCA and
the Economic Community of the Central African States
(ECCAS) to continue assisting the State authorities.
Despite those positive trends, there exist
challenges in the region. Inclusivity in governance
and decision-making is the cornerstone of democracy,
with dialogue and reconciliation as key ingredients.
The countries of the region will need to persevere
in finding lasting solutions to some of the persisting
political challenges.
The complex intersection of challenges in the
Central Africa region requires a multifaceted response,
including an inclusive political process with electoral
reforms and the strengthening of national capacities
and local administrations to promote socioeconomic
development. The international community must

21-396239/17

S/PV.8933

Central African region

support the countries of the region in their aspirations
for economic growth.
On the security front, the continuing spread of
terrorism in Central Africa, including in the Lake
Chad basin, remains a matter of serious concern. The
expansion of the Islamic State West Africa Province
and the continued killings perpetrated by Boko Haram
are worrisome signs and deserve our unequivocal
condemnation. We commend regional efforts that
contribute to tackling such matters — for example, the
Multinational Joint Task Force and the quadripartite
agreement among Chad, Libya, the Niger and the
Sudan to secure the common border and resolve crossborder issues.
We welcome the convening of the third meeting
of the Lake Chad Basin Governors’ Forum and the
launch of eight territorial action plans of the Regional
Strategy for the Stabilization, Recovery and Resilience
of the Boko Haram-affected Areas of the Lake Chad
Basin Region. Local ownership and leadership will be
key to the implementation of those territorial plans.
The international community must continue to support
those efforts.
Maritime security in the Gulf of Guinea continues
to be a matter of serious concern. The SecretaryGeneral’s report (S/2021/975) mentions eight incidents
in the Gulf of Guinea, with five of them in the ECCAS
maritime space. There is an urgent need to increase
surveillance for maritime security in the Gulf of Guinea
through increased international collaboration to ensure
that the problem is dealt with decisively.
It is evident that the coronavirus disease (COVID-19)
pandemic has halted some of the progress in the region,
with resources being shifted to meet urgent pandemic
response needs. We reiterate our call for the equitable
distribution of COVID-19 vaccines, including to the
countries of the Central Africa region. The international
community must work collectively towards supporting
initiatives that ensure the speedy and equitable
distribution of vaccines to the most disadvantaged
populations. India also recently announced that it
stands ready to support affected countries in Africa in
dealing with the Omicron variant.
India has cordial, friendly bilateral relations with
countries in Central Africa. In recent years, India has
further expanded its diplomatic footprint in the region.
This year, we opened a resident mission in Sao Tome
and Principe, continuing the initiatives that we took
10/17

15/12/2021

in previous years, such as the opening of missions in
Equatorial Guinea, Cameroon and the Republic of
Congo. We will soon open our diplomatic mission in
Chad. India has also extended development cooperation
assistance by way of soft loans worth $2 billion for
projects in agriculture, transport, power and water
supply. This year, India provided medicines to several
countries of the region to fight the COVID-19 pandemic.
India has also extended relief to Central African
countries under the Debt Service Suspension Initiative
of the Group of 20. We will continue to engage closely
with Central Africa and be steadfast in our support for
its peace and prosperity.
Mr. Gómez Robledo Verduzco (Mexico) (spoke
in Spanish): Like other speakers before me, I wish to
thank Special Representative François Louncény Fall
for his briefing.
My delegation acknowledges the positive steps
taken in Chad to move towards a democratic transition.
We welcome its commitment to adopting a new
Constitution and to holding elections in 2022. The
inclusion of women in the committee in charge of
organizing the national dialogue is also good news.
We hope that that is a first step towards an electoral
process that is open to the participation of all sectors of
Chadian society.
However, my country reiterates its concern about
the violence that continues to claim victims in the
North-West and South-West regions of Cameroon.
We particularly condemn the attacks on schools and
education personnel, as they deprive new generations
of their right to education and perpetuate the cycle
of violent conflict. We also view with alarm recent
reports of alleged links between separatist groups in
Cameroon and Nigeria. All that is detrimental to the
territorial integrity of those States and the unity of
the continent. We urge that dialogue be prioritized
with the involvement of regional organizations and, of
course, the United Nations Regional Office for Central
Africa (UNOCA). There is still time to prevent the
effects of violence from spreading even further in an
uncontrollable manner.
In the case of the Central African Republic, we call
on UNOCA to resolutely support the implementation
of the road map for peace adopted at the summit of the
International Conference on the Great Lakes Region,
which, fortunately, led to the unilateral declaration of a
ceasefire last October. However, it is worrisome to learn
21-39623

15/12/2021

Central African region

of the release of Hassan Bouba, accused of war crimes.
States parties to the International Criminal Court must
respect the principle of complementarity and must
therefore investigate the alleged perpetration of such
crimes, or hand over the accused to the International
Criminal Court.
We believe that UNOCA can, and should,
redouble its efforts to promote a regional approach in
responding to the various challenges facing the region.
My delegation would like to respectfully make some
recommendations to UNOCA.
First, the proliferation and illicit trafficking of
small arms and light weapons remain a threat to
civilians and the stability of the Governments. Despite
the fact that most countries of the region are signatories
or parties to the Arms Trade Treaty and the Central
African Convention for the Control of Small Arms and
Light Weapons, Their Ammunition and All Parts and
Components That Can Be Used for Their Manufacture,
Repair and Assembly, and despite the existence of various
initiatives to address the problem, weapons continue to
cross borders freely and indiscriminately and further
deteriorate the security and humanitarian situation.
UNOCA must play an active role in ensuring that a
regional strategy is adopted to combine and harmonize
existing efforts and make the international and regional
commitments of the Central African States a reality.
Secondly, electoral processes are a recurrent source
of political instability and conflict. In coordination
with regional organizations, the institutional and
legal scaffolding of Central African States in electoral
matters should be strengthened. In that regard, we
welcome the sending of an electoral observation mission
by the African Union and the Economic Community
of Central African States (ECCAS) to São Tomé and
Principe in July. We hope that this practice will be
extended to other elections in 2022.
Finally, Mexico believes that prevention should be
at the heart of UNOCA’s priorities. In a context marked
by numerous actors, the work of UNOCA should focus
on strengthening regional governance by supporting
existing institutions, in particular ECCAS and the
International Conference on the Great Lakes Region.
Mr. Sun Zhiqiang (China) (spoke in Chinese): I
thank Special Representative of the Secretary-General
François Louncény Fall for his briefing.

S/PV. 8933

For some time, countries in Central Africa have
taken active measures to maintain political stability
and restore socioeconomic development, demonstrating
strong resilience and vitality. The stability of Central
Africa bears on the overall security in Africa. The
United Nations and the international community should
heed the voices of the countries in the region, respect
their wishes, support their efforts to strengthen unity
and cooperation and work together towards regional
prosperity and stability. In that connection, China
would like to underline three points.
First, we must support countries of the region
in taking a development path that fits their national
conditions. This year, the President of the Central
African Republic, Mr. Touadera, announced a
unilateral ceasefire and continued efforts to improve
the security situation. Chad adopted a transitional road
map, established transitional national institutions and
held a national dialogue, resulting in positive progress.
The Government of Cameroon adopted important
measures in areas such as decentralization; local
institution-building; disarmament, demobilization
and reintegration; and culture and education in order
to firmly safeguard national unity and security and
stability in the South-West and North-West regions.
These examples clearly show that only development
paths that suit national realities and historical, cultural,
economic and social conditions can truly contribute to
stability and development.
Importing democratic transformation, imposing
development models or wilfully applying frequent
pressure and sanctions will not only fail, but also
backfire. Many Central African countries will hold
elections next year. The international community
must respect the sovereignty and ownership of those
countries while providing electoral assistance. It must
also encourage and support regional organizations in
playing an important role.
Some countries turned a blind eye to the efforts
and progress made by Burundi in the promotion and
protection of human rights, ignored the strong views
of the Government of Burundi and forced through the
appointment of a Special Rapporteur to monitor the
situation of human rights in Burundi. China expresses
its strong rejection and calls on those countries to stop
intervening in Burundi’s internal affairs.
Secondly, we must support regional unity and
cooperation. We welcome the nineteenth Conference

21-3962311/17

S/PV.8933

Central African region

of Heads of State and Government of the Economic
Community of Central African States (ECCAS), which
adopted a series of important resolutions on regional
connectivity, economic and trade integration, securitymechanism building and more. At the same time,
it is concerning that the Islamic State West Africa
Province and other terrorist groups continue to spread
in the region. Maritime security in the Gulf of Guinea
remains a pressing issue. The humanitarian situation
in the region has deteriorated, with a spike in refugees
and displaced persons. The international community
should support the building of a regional security
mechanism, enhance the region’s capacity to maintain
stability and counter terrorism and to address crossborder challenges such as piracy and drug smuggling in
the Gulf of Guinea. We must help countries in Central
Africa to improve their governance capacity, achieve
sustainable development, promote social inclusion and
cohesion and eliminate all potential breeding grounds
for extremist forces and terrorism.
Thirdly, we must support the region’s fight against
the coronavirus disease pandemic. With the pandemic
still raging worldwide and a low vaccination rate in the
Central African region, we cannot ignore the pandemic’s
negative impact on the region’s political, economic and
social stability. This is the most pressing challenge
for the countries in Central Africa. The international
community should support those countries in their
pandemic responses and step up assistance for early
and broad access to safe and affordable vaccines. We
call on countries to effectively honour their official
development assistance commitments, scale up their
assistance, actively provide finance, technology and
capacity-building and help countries in the region to
eradicate poverty, expand employment and improve
their livelihoods.
At the recent eighth Ministerial Conference of
the Forum on China-Africa Cooperation, President Xi
Jinping announced nine projects of practical cooperation
with Africa and set out policies and measures in that
regard, such as providing 1 billion vaccines to Africa
and promoting Africa’s exports to China, debt relief,
investment and climate response. That will inject new
impetus to the pandemic response and post-pandemic
recovery for African countries.
Through close cooperation with ECCAS and
ongoing communication with the countries of the
region, Special Representative Fall has helped the
United Nations Regional Office for Central Africa
12/17

15/12/2021

carry out its work effectively. As he provides targeted
help, we hope that he will consider the circumstances
on the ground in the region and heed the wishes of the
host countries, as mandated by the Security Council.
China will continue to support his work.
Ms. Byrne Nason (Ireland): I would like to thank
Special Representative Fall for his briefing today. I
would also like to join other speakers in recognizing
your contribution, Mr. President, on these issues during
your term on the Security Council. Your efforts have
been very important to our work here in the Council.
Ireland would like to commend the extensive
activities being carried out by UNOCA to maintain
and improve regional cooperation, including with
the Economic Community of Central African States
(ECCAS) and other regional organizations. We applaud
the efforts to pursue peace and security, to combat
hate speech and to address the socioeconomic impact
of the coronavirus disease pandemic by advancing
vaccination campaigns.
Ireland would like to thank Special Representative
Fall in particular for his participation in regional
stabilization,
peacebuilding
and
sustainable
development meetings, and we greatly welcome his
work during the joint visit to Cameroon, Chad and
Nigeria, alongside Special Representative Annadif
of the United Nations Office for West Africa and the
Sahel. We know that Mr. Fall assessed the impact of
the crisis in the Lake Chad basin in the course of that
visit. For us, that is the type of practical cooperation
between United Nations regional missions that is truly
critical in addressing the many cross-border security
and humanitarian challenges facing the region, which
were mentioned throughout this meeting. We very
much welcome that ongoing cooperation.
Earlier this week, Ireland and the Niger brought a
draft resolution (S/2021/990) on climate and security
to a vote at the Security Council (see S/PV.8926).
The draft resolution attracted 113 co-sponsors from
the Organization’s membership. We believe that text
would have been an important first step in establishing
a strengthened framework for future action.
Unfortunately, despite the broad support, the draft
resolution was not adopted by the Council. We continue
to see its value, not least in discussions like the one we
are having here today.
We cannot ignore the reality and impact of
climate-related security risks. Last week, the Council
21-39623

15/12/2021

Central African region

heard from almost 60 Members of the United Nations
(see S/PV.8923), who, under the able presidency of
President Bazoum of the Niger, debated the topic
of security in the context of terrorism and climate
change. It was truly striking that the briefers referred
to the interlinkages between the adverse impacts of
climate change and recruitment by terrorist groups,
including Boko Haram, particularly in the Sahel and
Lake Chad basin. The activities of Boko Haram and the
expansion of Islamic State West Africa Province are a
concern. Ireland strongly supports efforts to address
root causes of conflict and remains firmly committed
to the implementation of a triple-nexus approach.
Intercommunal clashes around the Lake Chad basin
are troubling. According to the Office of the United
Nations High Commissioner for Refugees, in recent
decades, the climate crisis has heightened tensions
along the tributaries of Lake Chad, where the reduction
in water levels is sparking violent clashes between
fishermen and herders. This fighting has caused the
displacement of thousands of people to Cameroon and
Chad. We are concerned that this displacement also has
a disproportionate impact on the most vulnerable in
society, namely, women and children, and is likely to
further exacerbate existing tensions, and, as we have
heard today, create new ones.
Ireland is pleased to note that UNOCA has
collaborated with the United Nations Climate Security
Mechanism and other partners to conduct an analysis on
the key security risks and threats aggravated by climate
and environmental changes in the subregion, including
a field visit to Cameroon. Ireland is a proud supporter
of the Climate Security Mechanism, and we very much
look forward to the presentation of the findings of this
analysis, including its recommendations.
Ireland commends the holistic, regional, approach
taken by UNOCA, ECCAS, the African Union and
the Peacebuilding Fund in supporting the important
transition process in Chad, but we remain concerned
by the significant security, political and humanitarian
challenges in the country and, indeed, their impact
on the wider region. Ireland also commends the
International Conference on the Great Lakes Region for
its work leading to the adoption of the joint road map
for peace in the Central African Republic and welcomes
the subsequent ceasefire. However, we continue also
to have concerns about the humanitarian and human
rights situation in the country. We echo the SecretaryGeneral’s call for the ceasefire to be respected and

S/PV. 8933

a return to the 2019 Political Agreement for Peace
and Reconciliation.
We have heard again today of the dire humanitarian
situation in Central Africa and the staggering numbers
in need of humanitarian assistance. At the same time,
attacks against humanitarian, health and education
personnel and facilities continue with impunity. We
condemn such attacks and call for the perpetrators of
violations of international humanitarian law and of
human rights abuses to be held accountable and brought
to justice.
Finally, Ireland welcomes the work that UNOCA
is carrying out to further the women and peace and
security agenda across the region. The role of women in
governance, mediation and peacebuilding processes is
fundamental for advancing the stability and prosperity
of the region. Engagement with women-led civil society
and ensuring that those women are engaged directly in
diplomatic and political processes — in the room and
at the table, as I always say — is crucial to bringing
about peace and security in Central Africa. We urge all
of the Governments in the region to further embed this
approach in their own work. It is the smart thing to do.
Ms. Evstigneeva (Russian Federation) (spoke
in Russian): We thank the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General François Louncény Fall for
sharing his assessment of the situation in the Central
African subregion.
Russia has unfailingly supported the activities of
the United Nations Regional Office for Central Africa,
which it considers to be an important instrument of
preventive diplomacy. We believe that the good offices
of Special Representative Fall are extremely useful.
The situation in Central Africa remains complex.
The main threat emanates from the activities of
numerous armed criminal groups and terrorist
organizations, primarily Islamic State West Africa
Province and Boko Haram. Fighters are maintaining
their capacity and continue to carry out attacks on the
militaries of Nigeria, Chad, the Niger and Cameroon
and terrorize local populations. They are using rear
bases in hard-to-reach areas to conduct raids deep into
the territory of neighbouring States.
The low combat-capability of the armed forces
of States in the region and insufficient military
coordination, as well as a lack of reliable intelligence
data, prevent them from effectively resisting well-

21-3962313/17

S/PV.8933

Central African region

15/12/2021

organized criminal groups, which use guerrillawarfare tactics and often enjoy the support of local
residents, who are forced to coexist with the militants.
The ideology of radical Islam is gaining more and more
popularity, especially among youth.

plans to make a voluntary contribution to the Global
Programme’s fund for technical assistance to Gabon
and Equatorial Guinea, and, in 2020, Russia allocated
a special contribution to provide technical assistance to
the coast guards of Ghana and Nigeria.

One particular feature of the region is its porous
borders through which both peaceful civilians and
goods, on the one hand, and militants and contraband
goods, on the other hand, move freely. In this regard,
we believe it is necessary to step up States’ efforts to
swiftly identify and block channels fuelling terrorists
with ideological, logistical, financial and human
resources. It is also necessary to strengthen cooperation
with African partners on counter-terrorism issues both
bilaterally and through international forums. For our
part, we are ready to share our experience in this area
and implement capacity-building projects to help the
continent’s States fight terrorism and extremism.

In addition, in October this year, a detachment of
ships of the northern fleet was on active duty in the
waters of the Gulf of Guinea to carry out antipiracy
exercises. We note the successful operation carried
out by our navy to prevent pirates from seizing the
vessel MSC Lucia. Taking into account the very
significant regional differences in manifestations of
piracy and related criminal activity, we advocate the
swift implementation of President Vladimir Putin’s
initiative to establish a specialized universal entity
under the auspices of the United Nations to address the
entire range of issues of combating maritime crime in
various regions.

The socioeconomic situation of the local populations
in the subregion is of grave concern. It can be described
as close to critical. Hundreds of thousands of people
have been left homeless, the number of refugees and
temporarily displaced persons is growing, and there
is an acute shortage of food and drinking water. The
coronavirus, which has aggravated the already difficult
socioeconomic situation of the populations, continues
to persist in the region.

With regard to the accusations voiced by a number
of countries against Russia, there is absolutely nothing
new in those attempts. We draw the Council’s attention
to the fact that all of the States that have spoken out
and those that might touch upon this topic after
me have a very sad history of destabilizing other
countries — not only in Africa — committing mass
crimes against entire peoples. Even today, they are
far from being perfect in terms of human rights. As a
result of their military interference, large numbers of
civilians often die. Reports in the media on the topic are
increasingly frequent.

The safety of navigation in the Gulf of Guinea
is also of great concern, in particular, the increasing
number of cases of hostage-taking for ransom affecting
merchant seamen. Establishing broad international
cooperation, particularly for the purposes of regularly
monitoring the situation at sea and creating a system
for identifying and accompanying ships and providing
early warning with regard to potentially hazardous
objects on sea transport routes could help reduce the
risks of pirate attacks.
We welcome the establishment in July this year of
the Gulf of Guinea Maritime Collaboration Forum, a
new platform for communication and coordination for
antipiracy military operations. We are ready to take an
active part in the work of this mechanism and provide
assistance to our regional partners.
We note the activities of the United Nations
Office on Drugs and Crime’s Global Maritime Crime
Programme, which has already made a significant
contribution to collective efforts to normalize the
situation off the Horn of Africa. This year, Russia
14/17

We therefore cannot consider the statements
concerning the Central African Republic by those
colleagues on the Council as anything but a hypocritical,
envious and coordinated information campaign. I recall
that the main driver of instability in the Central African
Republic is the activity of illegal armed groups and that
the country, just like others in Africa and elsewhere,
has every sovereign right to choose its partners to
combat security threats.
Mr. Mills (United States of America): I thank
Special Representative of the Secretary-General Fall
for his briefing.
Today I will raise four country-specific situations
and two regional threats.
First, the United States would like to express its
gratitude to the African Union for appointing a High
Representative for Chad to encourage continued
21-39623

15/12/2021

Central African region

reforms and steps towards a democratic transition. We
support the High Representative’s efforts and join the
calls for a peaceful, timely and civilian-led transition to
a democratically elected Government in 2022.
The report of the Secretary-General (S/2021/975)
shows advancement on key milestones. We hope to
see more progress towards a timely and inclusive
national dialogue. To that end, we were heartened by
the November 29 decision by the Transitional Military
Council to grant amnesty to almost 300 members of
armed groups, positioning them to constructively
engage in the national dialogue. Women and civil
society must be included in the dialogue. Moving
forward, we hope to see a concrete plan and a timeline
for legislative and executive elections. A representative
and democratically elected Government is the best path
to long-term prosperity and stability in Chad.
Secondly, like others, we remain concerned about
the continued violence in Cameroon, including the
Far North, North-West and South-West regions of the
country. We agree with the Secretary-General’s report
that dialogue between the Government and armed
separatists in the anglophone regions has not gained
sufficient momentum. We support the role of the
United Nations Regional Office for Central Africa in
promoting inclusive political dialogue in Cameroon and
call for the immediate cessation of attacks on United
Nations convoys and humanitarian workers.
Thirdly, in the Central African Republic, we call on
all parties to respect the ceasefire declared by President
Touadera, as well as the February 2019 Political
Agreement for Peace and Reconciliation in the Central
African Republic and the International Conference
on the Great Lakes Region road map. We again urge
all security actors to coordinate their operations
with the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated
Stabilization Mission in the Central African Republic
and to end human rights abuses.
Fourthly, in Burundi, the United States recognized
positive developments by terminating its bilateral
sanctions programme and related visa restrictions on
18 November. The United States remains concerned
about reports of human rights violations and abuses
that threaten to undermine progress, but our decision
reflects changed circumstances in Burundi since 2015
and the President of Burundi’s pursuit of reforms across
multiple sectors. United States sanctions are responsive,

S/PV. 8933

always, to the situation on the ground and were lifted in
Burundi following concrete positive steps.
With regard to two regional situations, the
United States condemns all attacks by Boko Haram
and the Islamic State West Africa. The United States
Government supports the efforts of the countries of the
region to effectively address terrorism in support of a
holistic approach to peace, stability and security.
Finally, the United States continues to offer a
reward of up to $5 million for any information that leads
to the arrest, the transfer or the conviction of Lord’s
Resistance Army leader Joseph Kony. We urge anyone
with knowledge of Kony’s whereabouts to contact our
War Crimes Rewards Program and help bring him
to justice.
The President (spoke in French): I shall now make
a statement in my capacity as the representative of the
Niger. I have the honour to make this statement on
behalf of the three African members of the Security
Council — Kenya, the Niger and Tunisia — as well as
Saint Vincent and the Grenadines (A3+1).
We thank Mr. François Louncény Fall, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General and Head of
the United Nations Regional Office for Central Africa
(UNOCA), for his comprehensive and informative
briefing. We commend his work in promoting peace
through mediation and preventive diplomacy through
support for electoral processes, conflict resolution,
peacebuilding and the economic recovery of the region.
The political situation in the region is seeing
significant positive progress, for which we commend
the efforts of the UNOCA, together with the African
Union and the Economic Community of Central
African States (ECCAS), as well as regional partners
that continue to encourage concerted efforts to promote
peace and stability in the region.
The work of the Office to promote strengthening
and integrating peace and security in the region has
had a visible impact. In that regard, we advocate the
effective implementation of the decisions adopted at
the nineteenth Conference of ECCAS Heads of State
and Government, which was held in a virtual format,
to advance regional integration and security and
the initiatives that resulted from the outcome of the
third mini-summit of the International Conference
on the Great Lakes Region, held on 16 September.
Both meetings contributed to the unilateral ceasefire

21-3962315/17

S/PV.8933

Central African region

declaration made by President Touadera in the Central
African Republic.
We reiterate that a truly inclusive national dialogue
will be key to revitalizing the 2019 Political Agreement
for Peace and Reconciliation in the Central African
Republic. We therefore call for a coordinated and
coherent regional process, with a view towards making
concrete progress in the peace and reconciliation
process in the country. In that regard, we welcome the
good offices and political support of the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission
in the Central African Republic. Such a collaborative
approach is critical to comprehensively addressing
the issues, most of which are cross-cutting, affecting
neighbouring States and regions.
One concrete example involves the issue of
foreign fighters in the southern part of Libya and their
potentially destabilizing effect on neighbouring States
and regions. In order to address the situation with the
priority it deserves, we encourage UNOCA to pursue
its cooperation with the other regional United Nations
Offices, including the United Nations Office for West
Africa and the Sahel (UNOWAS) and the Office of the
Special Envoy of the Secretary-General for the Great
Lakes Region.
We welcome the progress in the transition process
in Chad and encourage the country’s authorities to
spare no effort to further guarantee the inclusivity of
the national dialogue process, including the process
under way to adopt a new constitution. We encourage
the momentum launched by the country’s authorities in
opening up democratic space to the political opposition
and politico-military groups and in safeguarding the
promising role of women in the process to restore peace
and security.
Furthermore, the A3+1 welcome the assumption
by the High Representative of the African Union
and Special Representative of the Chairperson of the
African Union Commission for Chad of his duties on
28 July and calls for support to the International Group
of Partners for Support to the Transition in Chad, made
up of Chad’s major regional and international partners,
to promote the process under way.
In Cameroon, we encourage pursuing the
efforts made by the authorities to move forward the
decentralization process, in accordance with the
recommendations arising from the 2019 major national
dialogue, which — we must say — has been delayed by
16/17

15/12/2021

persistent violence on the ground. We encourage them
to strengthen the role of women in political spaces to
promote peace in line with Cameroon’s first-ever
Women’s National Convention for Peace, which was
held from 29-31 July. The good offices of the Special
Representative in that regard are to be applauded.
We are deeply concerned by the deteriorating
security climate in the region, marked by the activities
of illegal terrorist and extremist armed groups in the
Lake Chad basin. Likewise, we are extremely troubled
by the suspected collusion between separatist armed
groups in Cameroon and active armed groups in certain
neighbouring countries.
We reiterate here our call for support for
coordinated action among the countries in the region
against persistent attacks from the Islamic State West
Africa Province wing of Boko Haram, as well as for the
joint action of UNOCA, UNOWAS and other United
Nations entities. Support, analysis and advocacy
must be provided to those joint programmes aimed at
mitigating the impact of Boko Haram across the region.
We echo the Secretary-General’s call for the
expedited implementation of the Regional Stabilization,
Recovery and Resilience Strategy for Areas Affected
by Boko Haram in the Lake Chad Basin Region, so as
to alleviate the suffering of the affected populations, in
particular the most vulnerable, including women and
young people.
We further support the recommendations of the
Secretary-General in calling for urgent cooperation
within multilateral and bilateral bodies to resolve
the issue of maritime piracy in the Gulf of Guinea,
which continues to pose an additional threat to global
maritime security.
The humanitarian situation across the region
remains worrisome due to persistent conflicts and
natural disasters. Statistics provided by the United
Nations have remained practically unchanged since the
previous report in June (see S/2021/517). The same goes
for this year’s humanitarian response plan.
Violations of human rights and international
humanitarian law, including the use of improvised
explosive devices, attacks against schools and teachers
and sexual and gender-based violence committed by
armed groups remain alarming and are driving the
displacement of hundreds of families.
21-39623

15/12/2021

Central African region

Here, we call on international partners to support
the efforts of the countries in the region, as well
as UNOCA, to address the humanitarian situation.
The United Nations Peacebuilding Commission also
requires support in its work accompanying regional
efforts in favour of economic cooperation. development
and peacebuilding across the region.
In conclusion, the A3+1, which calls for the
resumption of negotiations in order to achieve the
swift adoption of a presidential statement on UNOCA,
is encouraged by the developments in regional
cooperation and diplomatic initiatives carried out by
leaders in the region. At the same time, we welcome the
efforts of the African Union and UNOCA to support

S/PV. 8933

regional cooperation and call for support for the
ECCAS Commission in its efforts to coordinate with the
International Conference on the Great Lakes Region.
We warmly commend and encourage the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for his
continued and active engagement to promote peace and
security in the region.
I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.
There are no more names inscribed on the list
of speakers.
The meeting rose at 4.45 p.m.

21-3962317/17
