S/PV.7174

United Nations

asdf

Security Council

Provisional

Sixty-ninth year

7174th meeting

Wednesday, 14 May 2014, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Oh Joon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

(Republic of Korea)

Members:

Argentina . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Australia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Chad . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Chile . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Jordan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Lithuania. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Luxembourg . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Nigeria . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Rwanda . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . . 
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. De Antueno
Ms. King
Mr. Mangaral
Ms. Sapag Muñoz de la Peña
Mr. Zhao Yong
Mr. Araud
Prince Zeid Ra’ad Zeid Al-Hussein
Mrs. Kazragiene
Ms. Lucas
Mr. Laro
Mr. Iliichev
Mr. Gasana
Mr. Shearman
Ms. Power

Agenda
The situation in Burundi

14-01613 (E)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-506.

*1401613*

S/PV.7174

The situation in Burundi

The meeting was called to order at 10.05 a.m.

Given that the Council has been closely monitoring
the situation in Burundi over the past few weeks, I will
limit my briefing to only a few significant developments.

Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in Burundi
The President: In accordance with rule 37 of the
Council’s provisional rules of procedure, I invite the
representative of Burundi to participate in this meeting.
On behalf of the Council, I welcome His Excellency
Mr. Edouard Nduwimana, Minister of the Interior of
Burundi, who is joining today’s meeting via videoteleconference from Bujumbura.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite Mr. Parfait
Onanga-Anyanga, Special Representative of the
Secretary-General and Head of the United Nations
Office in Burundi, to participate in this meeting.
On behalf of the Council, I welcome Mr. OnangaAnyanga, who is also joining today’s meeting via
video-teleconference from Bujumbura.
Under rule 39 of the Council’s provisional rules
of procedure, I invite His Excellency Mr. Paul Seger,
Permanent Representative of Switzerland and Chair
of the Burundi configuration of the Peacebuilding
Commission, to participate in this meeting.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I give the floor to Mr. Onanga-Anyanga.
Mr. Onanga-Anyanga: It gives me pleasure, Sir,
to see you presiding over the Council for the month
of May. Congratulations to you and your country, the
Republic of Korea.
I am here today with His Excellency Mr. Edouard
Nduwimana, Minister of the Interior of the Republic
of Burundi, and other senior Government officials,
including the Permanent Secretary of the Ministry of
External Relations, Ambassador Albert Shingiro.
Allow me to greet Ambassador Niyonzima,
Permanent Representative of Burundi to the United
Nations, and Ambassador Paul Seger, Chair of
the Burundi configuration of the Peacebuilding
Commission (PBC).

2/7

14/05/2014

During the reporting period, the United Nations
Office in Burundi (BNUB) made progress on its
mandated tasks, including promoting and facilitating
dialogue; strengthening judicial and parliamentary
institutions; supporting the establishment of transitional
justice mechanisms; and promoting the protection of
human rights.
In addition, pursuant to resolution 2137 (2014),
BNUB began the process of transitioning to a United
Nations country team. I was asked to prepare and
submit to the Security Council a joint transition plan
by 15 May. I am pleased to report that, thanks to the
outstanding cooperation and support of the Government
of Burundi and the keen participation of all members of
the transition steering group, we have been able to meet
that important goal.
The plan, which contains details on the transition,
including the transfer of tasks to the relevant
stakeholders and on possible gaps following BNUB’s
withdrawal, is before the Council today. In many ways,
this is a historic moment, as it marks the beginning of the
end of a stand-alone United Nations political presence
in Burundi in order to focus on development activities
through a strengthened United Nations country team.
(spoke in French)
Burundi has made considerable progress since the
signing of the Arusha accords. That has enabled the
country to leave behind its murderous conflict, which
has killed its people for many decades. In general,
security prevails throughout the national territory,
even if there is a relatively growing number of grenade
attacks and incursions by armed elements. Burundi has
become an important troop contributor to peacekeeping
operations. That has won it the admiration and
appreciation of all as a result of the successful reform of
its national forces. Burundi can also be congratulated
on its strong representation of women in political life.
On the socioeconomic front, the Government’s
actions are guided by the ambitious strategic
framework — the second poverty reduction strategy
paper, which the international community supports, in
particular through the Geneva conferences and with the
valuable support of Ambassador Seger. Furthermore, a

14-01613

14/05/2014

The situation in Burundi

significant reform process is under way to clean up the
private sector and to promote private investment, which
is key to development. That remains one of Burundi’s
major challenges, in particular in the area of youth
unemployment.
However, a certain number of concerns remain. On
the political front, the situation is still tense. Mistrust
and a lack of constructive and inclusive dialogue
between the Government and opposition parties do
not help matters. The political space remains limited.
The Government insists on the need to respect the
laws in place, while the opposition, civil society
associations and the media condemn the represssive
laws. Unfortunately, it must be recognized that such
a context is not conducive to respect for and the best
protection of human rights.
Moreover, with the approaching electoral period,
there is a trend towards political violence and clashes
among youths affiliated with political parties, which
reflects the prevailing hostile political climate. That
phenomenon is of particular concern since it also affects
young supporters of the ruling party. I encourage the
Government to persevere in its efforts to counter such
agitation.
In order to prevent deterioration, we have in
particular to recommended that the authorities
strengthen initiatives to promote better political
governance through dialogue and tolerance, while
putting an end to impunity. However, it is also urgent to
continue efforts to significantly reduce the security risk
posed by illicit weapon flows.
Mistrust, which is dividing the Burundi political
class, has been evident since the negotiations and the
adoption in April of the law establishing a truth and
reconciliation commission. It is regrettable that the
adoption of that important law to set up transitional
justice mechanisms has not made it possible to
overcome sectarian divisions. We must now do our
utmost to prevent such differences from compromising
the credibility and the functioning of the commission
and from casting doubt over the long-term prospect for
reconciliation towards a stronger national cohesion.
Despite such worrisome factors, mentioned here to
demonstrate the extent of the path to cover, I remain
confident about the capacity of Burundian political
actors to overcome their differences and together deal
with their common challenges. They must overcome
the political intolerance within and among the political

S/PV.7174

parties and accept diverging views without creating
enemies. That is still possible.
The adoption on 25 April of the new electoral code,
which reflects the recommendations of the March 2013
consensus road map and the conclusions of the Kayanza
workshop on the May 2013 electoral code, is a step in
the right direction in that regard. All actors should
commit to preserving the prevailing spirit of consensus
at the time of adopting the electoral code in order to
restore mutual confidence, improve the political climate
and establish suitable conditions for free, transparent,
inclusive and peaceful elections in 2015.
It is crucial that Burundians and Burundi maintain
the calm. Despite the difficult outlook and their
immense challenges, they possess all the advantages
to build a rich and promosing future that is free of
violence.
(spoke in English)
As the Council can see, there are reasons to believe
that, with the right amount of political will from all
political actors and the implementation of courageous
and just measures, Burundi can stay the course and avoid
a reversal of its commendable gains. I am optimistic
that the upcoming workshop being jointly organized
by the Government of Burundi and BNUB, due to take
place on 20 May in implementation of the March 2013
road map, will help to further advance dialogue and
improve the political environment ahead of the 2015
elections, including averting political violence.
BNUB is determined to do its utmost up to the
end of its mandate in December. We are committed
to helping advance the cause of peace and respect for
human rights and democratic values, consistent with the
aspirations of the Government and people of Burundi.
That is the strong foundation upon which lays the
partnership that binds together the United Nations and
the Government of Burundi. It entails working together
to proactively address any potentially damaging threat
to peace and security in Burundi. We are grateful to the
Government of Burundi for its continued collaboration.
I would like to sincerely thank the Chair of the
Burundi configuration of the PBC, my dear friend
Ambassador Paul Seger, for his excellent cooperation
and support to the Government and people of Burundi.
Allow me also to express our gratitude to SecretaryGeneral Ban Ki-moon, who has tirelessly led us in

14-016133/7

S/PV.7174

The situation in Burundi

shouldering our responsibilities. We could not have
been better guided than by Under-Secretary-General
Feltman and his team from the Department of Political
Affairs.
The President: I thank Mr. Onanga-Anyanga for
his briefing.
I now give the floor to Mr. Seger.
Mr. Seger (spoke in French): Allow me first of all to
thank the Council for having invited me to this briefing,
I would also like to thank the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General, Mr. Parfait Onanga-Anyanga,
and his entire team for their outstanding work with
regard not only to the transition plan that he has just
presented but also their tireless efforts in balancing the
dual burden of continuing to implement the mandate
of the United Nations Office in Burundi (BNUB) until
the end of the year and of ensuring a smooth transfer
of BNUB’s remaining tasks to the country team. I also
take this opportunity to welcome the Minister of the
Interior and the Permanent Secretary of the Ministry of
External Relations and to the Government of Burundi
for its very constructive and positive cooperation
thoughout our relationship.
I will limit my statement today to two points. First,
I will sum up the essential aspects of the configuration’s
efforts to assist Burundi, in particular in the light of the
current situation, and to inform the Council about my
upcoming visit to the region from 21 May to 1 June.
Secondly, I will raise the idea of convening a followup meeting to the Geneva conference of 2012 to assess
progress in the implementation of the second poverty
reduction strategy paper and the mutual commitments
agreed upon at the meeting in Geneva.
As the Council has heard, the current situation in
Burundi is difficult and tense. Without dwelling on
developments since the adoption of resolution 2137
(2014), which the Council has followed closely by
meeting three times in closed consultations, I now
note a growing lack of trust on two levels. Internally,
the perspective of the 2015 elections is giving rise
to a significantly increased tension. Exacerbated by
an absence of dialogue, the political space is clearly
limited, leading to mutual mistrust between the ruling
party and the opposition parties. In the same vein, recent
events on the political front in Burundi have raised
great concern at the international level, as underscored
by the various statements and visits by bilateral and
multilateral partners and institutions. The international

4/7

14/05/2014

community’s increased attention to Burundi clearly
demonstrates its strong bond with the country and its
people. We have to further intensify our common efforts
in favour of a frank and open — but also respectful and
friendly — dialogue between Burundi and its partners.
I have therefore focused my efforts of recent
months on exploring options for ending the current
impasse while continuing to appeal for a smooth
transition towards the post-BNUB phase and beyond.
In that context, I met with United Nations Development
Programme (UNDP) Administrator Helen Clark, highlevel officials from the Department of Political Affairs,
a ministerial delegation from Burundi and a few
bilateral partners. Administrator Clark has assured me
of UNDP’s full commitment to continuing the work of
peacebuilding after BNUB’s departure. I also had the
pleasure of participating in the first two meetings of
the transition steering group via video-teleconference.
Furthermore, following the configuration’s meeting
on 12 March, I continued my informal exchanges with
key configuration members to share our respective
analyses and cooperate with the Government through
its Permanent Representative in New York. Yesterday, I
also met with the World Bank Vice President for Africa,
Mr. Makhtar Diop. I will come back to that visit later.
As BNUB’s mandate is coming to an end, as we
know, on 31 December, I intend to continue to engage in
dialogue with the various stakeholders over the coming
months to ensure continued or even increased political
commitment on the part of the international partners in
Burundi. The countries of the subregion have a central
role to play. I welcome the efforts of neighbouring
States and regional organizations in the context of the
current situation and call upon them to become even
further involved.
Given recent developments, the Burundian
Government has invited me to move my visit up to the
month of May. I have gladly complied and have planned
my visit for 21 May to 1 June. Contrary to my usual
practice, I will stay in Bujumbura for only two days
and will devote some of my time to visits to Brussels,
Paris, Kigali and Arusha, United Republic of Tanzania.
The goal of my stopovers in Europe and Burundi’s
neighbouring States is to discuss recent developments
with high-level representatives from the various
countries and regional organizations, in particular the
European Union and the East African Community, in
order to explore the best options to engage with Burundi
and define their respective roles, in particular after

14-01613

14/05/2014

The situation in Burundi

S/PV.7174

BNUB’s departure. In my opinion, that last point is of
particular importance, given that Burundi’s partners
will have to fill the gaps left by BNUB’s withdrawal.
Indeed, the transition plan just presented by the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General clearly reflects
those gaps.

undertaken in Geneva. Such a meeting would have
several objectives: to counter the risk of an economic
and political relapse; to rekindle what I would call
“the spirit of Geneva”; and to review the progress in
the implementation of the second poverty reduction
strategy and the mutual commitments.

My initial intention was to include Addis Ababa
and Dar Es Salaam in my itinerary in order to meet
with African Union and Tanzanian officials, but due to
time constraints I was unable to do so. I will, however,
make up for that on one of my upcoming trips, during
which I will also seek to enhance my contacts with
other important partners in the region, in particular
Kenya and Uganda.

Ideally, the roundtable meeting would take place
sooner rather than later — namely, in the summer or
early autumn — and would include a limited number of
high-level representatives of the main partners and the
Government in order to encourage open communication
in an informal setting. Finally, such a roundtable would
also respond to the Council’s call contained in paragraph
19 of resolution 2137 (2014) of 13 February. During the
informal discussions, high-level representatives of the
Burundian Government supported the idea of such a
roundtable. I thus intend to officially present this idea
during my exchanges in Burundi, so as to then present
a concept paper to the concerned stakeholders. As per
usual, I will send a report on my visit to the Council.

The programme for my two-day stay in Bujumbura
is being finalized, and I would like to take this
opportunity to thank BNUB’s staff in advance for their
preparatory work. As usual, I will meet with highlevel representatives from the Government, including,
I hope, the President, and representatives of various
political parties, civil society and the international
community. I also plan to participate in the first meeting
of the joint steering committee that will support the
implementation of the Peacebuilding Fund’s new
priority plan, which has been allotted $11.65 million
and covers four priority areas: social cohesion, youth,
human rights and property development.
My upcoming trip has a more concrete objective
as well. Within the configuration, we have been
discussing the idea of convening a roundtable meeting
as a follow-up to the 2012 Geneva conference. That
issue was also at the core of yesterday’s discussion in
Washington, D.C., with Assistant Secretary-General
Judy Cheng-Hopkins and the World Bank’s Vice
President for Africa, Mr. Makhtar Diop. The Geneva
conference, as the Council knows, was organized on
the basis of the principle of mutual commitments and
responsibilities. International partners committed to
supporting Burundi financially within the framework
of the second poverty reduction strategy, and Burundi
committed to embarking on important reforms in the
political and the socioeconomic sectors.
We must admit that the Geneva conference’s
momentum has slowed over the past few months and
given way to an increasing lack of trust, as I mentioned
at the beginning of my statement. We have reached the
midpoint of the second poverty reduction strategy, and
that provides us with an opportunity to come together
again and take stock of the mutual commitments

Given its painful history, Burundi has made
remarkable progress towards stability in a very short
period of time. We must stay the course and prevent
any backsliding into the past. The international
community’s involvement in Burundi is still very
much needed — perhaps now more than ever. It is in
this spirit that I welcome the attention the Security
Council is giving to the situation in Burundi. It is now
up to us, as Burundi’s partners, to pick up the BNUB
torch and consolidate its extraordinary achievements
by enhancing our involvement. The joint expressions
of concern by the Council and other forums regarding
recent developments, in my opinion, have above all
shown that the international community cares about
Burundi. In my view, that is an important message that
we must build on.
The President: I thank Mr. Seger for his briefing.
I now give the floor to the Minister of the Interior
of Burundi.
Mr. Nduwimana (Burundi) (spoke in French):
I too wish to greet, on behalf of the Government of
Burundi, all the members of the Security Council, and
in particular you, Mr. President. I congratulate you
on your country’s accession to the presidency of the
Council for this month.
I would like to begin my statement by recalling
that, on 13 February, the Security Council adopted
resolution 2137 (2014), by which the mandate of the

14-016135/7

S/PV.7174

The situation in Burundi

United Nations Office in Burundi (BNUB) is to come to
an end by 31 December 2014 in order to effect a transfer
of responsibilities to a United Nations country team.
The resolution calls on the Government of Burundi,
BNUB, the Peacebuilding Commission and bilateral
and multilateral partners to create a transitional
steering group to draw up a plan for international
support to Burundi after BNUB’s final departure and
the establishment of the country team, and requests
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General to
draw up a transition plan by 15 May 2014.
The Council also urged BNUB to carry out its
mandate, the core of which is laid out in resolution 2090
(2013), and which covers the following main points:
promoting and facilitating dialogue between national
actors and supporting the mechanisms for broad-based
participation in political life, including those aimed at
ensuring a conducive, free and open environment for
the run-up to the 2015 elections; strengthening the
independence of judicial and parliamentary institutions;
supporting efforts to fight impunity, particularly
through the establishment of independent and impartial
transitional justice mechanisms; promoting and
protecting human rights; and supporting the efforts of
the Government and the international community to
focus on the socioeconomic development of women and
youth and the socioeconomic reintegration of conflictaffected populations.
In addition, resolution 2137 (2014) calls for BNUB
and its international partners to support the Government
of Burundi in making the reforms necessary for
improving the political, economic and administrative
climate, for professionalizing the defence and security
forces, and for creating an environment conducive
to implementing constitutional reforms with the
involvement of the political parties and all the relevant
stakeholders, while also establishing transitional justice
mechanisms such as a credible and agreed-on national
truth and reconciliation commission.
As has already been stated many times, including
in the General Assembly at the start of the work
of transitioning from the United Nations Office in
Burundi to the country team in March, the Government
of Burundi is aware that the programme I have just
mentioned constitutes the be-all and end-all of these
activities and concerns, and has continued to improve
on the results that have already been achieved in the
aforementioned areas. These are also laid out in most
of the principal strategic programme tools in Vision

6/7

14/05/2014

Burundi 2025 and the second Strategic Framework for
Growth and the Fight against Poverty, as the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General mentioned.
With regard to the 2015 elections, which require
the creation of a conducive environment before, during
and after, the Government has already met part of its
obligations, as evidenced by the holding of a workshop
that produced the electoral road map adopted in
March 2013, organized by the United Nations Office
in Burundi and the United Nations system, in close
coordination with the Government of Burundi. We
should also note that the road map is being fully
implemented, primarily through the holding of a
meeting in Kayanza and through broad consultations
open to all, in the spirit of the 2000 Arusha accords,
organized on 19 and 20 December in Kigobé by the
Burundian Parliament, which were commended by all
the actors involved for being constructive and broadly
representative, and which culminated in the adoption of
an agreed-on electoral code which was recently enacted
by Parliament.
Concerning the establishment of a truth and
reconciliation commission in accordance with resolution
1606 (2005) and the Arusha Peace and Reconciliation
Agreement for Burundi of 28 August 2000, and as a
result of the technical work and national consultations
held in 2009, it should be noted that remarkable progress
was achieved with Parliament’s enactment in April of
a law on the subject. The members of these structures
will be nominated very shortly and their nomination
will take into account the requirements of the relevant
Security Council resolutions.
I cannot conclude this statement without mentioning
the third phase of the priority peacebuilding plan for
Burundi, to which the Peacebuilding Support Office
has just approved the allocation of $11.65 million.
I should add that the budget is part of the support
package provided to Burundi by the Peacebuilding
Fund, amounting to $50 million over the past few years
and covering the first two phases of peacebuilding in
my country. The areas covered in the plan are focused
on Government programmes, including those directed
towards social cohesion and political dialogue, young
people’s participation in political and social life,
reconciliation initiatives, the democratic exercise
of human rights and the peaceful settlement of land
disputes. I take this opportunity to request that all
the funds pledged to the implementation of all these

14-01613

14/05/2014

The situation in Burundi

programmes be speedily released so that the people
concerned can benefit from them as soon as possible.
Regarding the joint plan of transition from the United
Nations to Burundi, I wish to confirm that it reflects a
permanent arrangement between the Government and
the United Nations Office in Burundi. The content of
the document and the establishment of the transition
steering group have been carried out in accordance
with paragraph 3 of resolution 2137 (2014), whose main
goal is to provide high-level strategic direction aimed at
implementing the resolution, including by facilitating
the transition process and supporting the effective
fulfilment of the mandate of the United Nations Office
in Burundi through 31 December.
The Government would like to take this
opportunity to thank the Special Representatives of
the United Nations in Burundi, and its other bilateral
and multilateral partners involved in significant
activities in the transition process in the five priority
areas of the joint transition plan, for their willing

S/PV.7174

collaboration, and to thank them in advance for their
efforts in implementing it. It should be recalled that the
programmes covered include democracy, governance
and institution-building; human rights and transitional
justice; the rule of law, security and stability; and
economic and social development.
The Government of Burundi would again like
to thank the United Nations and its bilateral and
multilateral partners for their commitment to supporting
the Government’s programme for the comprehensive
development of the Burundian people. For its part, the
Government will spare no effort in fulfilling the role
assigned to it. In taking this road, hand in hand we will
leave behind and conquer the poverty that has dogged
and bemired the people of Burundi.
The President: There are no more names inscribed
on the list of speakers. I now invite Council members
to informal consultations to continue our discussion on
the subject.
The meeting rose at 10.35 a.m.

14-016137/7
