S/PV.8554

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-fourth year

8554

th meeting
Wednesday, 19 June 2019, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Alotaibi. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Kuwait)

Members:

Belgium. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Côte d’Ivoire . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Dominican Republic. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Equatorial Guinea. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Germany . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Indonesia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Peru. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Poland . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
South Africa . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Pecsteen de Buytswerve
Mr. Wu Haitao
Mr. Adom
Mr. Singer Weisinger
Mr. Esono Mbengono
Mrs. Gasri
Mr. Schulz
Mr. Syihab
Mr. Horna
Mr. Lewicki
Mr. Kuzmin
Mr. Molefe
Mr. Allen
Mr. Simonoff

Agenda
Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

19-18339 (E)
*1918339*

S/PV.8554

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

The meeting was called to order at 10 a.m.

alleged crimes and related suffering the victims have
endured. I also join the Council in regretting the lives
lost during the recent violence.

Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and
South Sudan
The President (spoke in Arabic): In accordance
with rule 37 of the Council’s provisional rules of
procedure, I invite the representative of the Sudan to
participate in this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite Ms. Fatou
Bensouda, Prosecutor of the International Criminal
Court, to participate in this meeting.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I give the floor to Ms. Bensouda.
Ms. Bensouda: Allow me to begin by offering my
congratulations to Kuwait for holding the presidency
of the Security Council for the month of June and
presiding over this briefing on the situation in Darfur,
pursuant to resolution 1593 (2005).
As we are all aware, following months of
anti-Government protests and the removal from power
of Mr. Omar Hassan Ahmad Al-Bashir on 11 April,
the Republic of the Sudan is in an uncertain period of
political transition. While I do not underestimate the
complexity and fluidity of the events unfolding in the
Sudan today, I have a clear message to convey: now
is the time to act. Now is the time for the people of
the Sudan to choose law over impunity and ensure that
the International Criminal Court (ICC) suspects in
the Darfur situation finally face justice in a court of
law. The Council is now being presented with a unique
opportunity to decisively and effectively address
the impunity that has plagued Darfur. It must seize
this moment.
As Prosecutor of the International Criminal Court,
I am deeply concerned by the reports of recent violence
perpetrated against civilians, including alleged sexual
and gender-based crimes. Related violence has also
spread to other regions of the country, including
Darfur. I join the members of the Council in calling for
the immediate cessation of violence against civilians,
their robust protection, and full accountability for the
2/16

19/06/2019

It is imperative that allegations of violence
against civilians, including sexual and gender-based
violence, be promptly and effectively investigated by
the Sudanese authorities and that those responsible be
brought to justice. On my part, within the scope of my
mandate and jurisdiction under the Rome Statute, I am
committed to continuing to do all that I can to secure
accountability in the Sudan. I also call for the full
cooperation of all States parties to the Rome Statute.
States parties must consistently and meaningfully fulfil
their statutory obligation to cooperate with the Court in
the investigation and prosecution of the Darfur cases.
As for the Sudan itself, it is now at a crossroads,
with the opportunity to depart from its previous
policy of complete non-cooperation with my Office
and embark upon a new chapter by signalling a new
commitment to accountability for the victims in the
Darfur situation. From our side, we are ready to engage
at the appropriate time if there is genuine will to bring
perpetrators to account.
All five ICC arrest warrants in the Darfur situation
remain in force. The circumstances, however, have
changed dramatically. The former status quo is over.
Mr. Al-Bashir has been deposed, arrested, detained and
charged with domestic offences. Two other suspects
in the Darfur situation, Mr. Abdel Raheem Hussein
and Mr. Ahmad Harun, are also reportedly being
detained in Khartoum. The Sudan remains under a
legal obligation to transfer those suspects to the ICC
to stand trial, unless it can demonstrate to the judges
of the Court that it is willing and genuinely able to
prosecute them for the same cases. Consistent with the
bedrock principle of complementarity enshrined in the
Rome Statute, I am ready to engage in dialogue with
the authorities in the Sudan to ensure that the Darfur
suspects face independent and impartial justice, either
in a courtroom in The Hague or in the Sudan. Continued
impunity is not an option. The victims of the Darfur
situation deserve to finally have their day in court.
There is an early history of cooperation between
my Office and the Sudan that we can and must resume.
From 2005 to 2007, with the cooperation of the
Government of the Sudan, my Office undertook several
missions to that country. Since that time, there has been
no cooperation whatsoever from the Sudan. Taking into
19-18339

19/06/2019

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

account the complexity of the situation on the ground in
the Sudan, I am nonetheless ready to pursue cooperation
between my Office and the Sudanese authorities in
order to fulfil my mandate. In that endeavour, I must be
able to count on the full support of the Council. I invite
all stakeholders in the Sudan, including the relevant
Sudanese authorities and civil-society organizations, to
engage with my Office.

S/PV. 8554

absence of accountability, security forces, including
aligned militias, allegedly continue to commit crimes
against civilians, undeterred.

In its inaugural address on 11 April, the Transitional
Military Council made a commitment to honour all
treaties, charters and conventions — local, regional and
international. That pledge must include a commitment
to the Charter of the United Nations, pursuant to which
the Sudan is bound by the decisions of the Council,
including resolution 1593 (2005).

Most recently, in Khartoum, the Sudan’s security
forces, including the Rapid Support Forces (RSF),
allegedly attacked civilian protestors on 3 June. As
recently noted by the spokesperson for the United
Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights, the
RSF includes members of the former Janjaweed militias
linked to systematic human rights abuses in the Darfur
region from 2003 to 2008. Those abuses include the
crimes alleged in a number of the arrest warrants
of the suspects in the Darfur situation. It is simply
intolerable that reported attacks on civilians in Darfur
and elsewhere in the Sudan continue to be perpetrated.

The judgment of the Court’s Appeals Chamber on
6 May in relation to Mr. Al-Bashir’s visit to Jordan
in March 2017 unequivocally confirmed the legal
obligation of State parties to arrest Heads of State
subject to ICC jurisdiction. While Mr. Al-Bashir may
no longer attempt to avail himself of immunity as
Head of State, the Appeals Chamber confirmed that
the Sudan’s obligation to cooperate fully with and
provide any necessary assistance to the Court and the
Prosecutor, as mandated by paragraph 2 of Council
resolution 1593 (2005), is legally binding. The law is
clear, as is the opportunity to subject those who for so
long evaded justice, so that they finally answer to the
people of the Sudan and the world for the serious crimes
for which they stand accused before the International
Criminal Court.

I join the Council in strongly condemning the
recent violence in the Sudan. The Sudanese authorities
have announced 61 fatalities following the 3 June
attack, while civil society organizations in the Sudan
refer to the deaths of more than 100 protestors. Those
attacks also resulted in sexual and gender-based
violence and arbitrary arrests. That was the latest
of a series of reported attacks by security forces on
demonstrators in the Sudan, including in Darfur, since
mid-December 2018. The Office of the United Nations
High Commissioner for Human Rights reported that, as
of 9 April, those attacks had resulted in the deaths of
70 people. It is of particular concern that, according to
the Executive Director of the United Nations Children’s
Fund, at least 19 children have reportedly been killed in
the crackdown on protestors.

This legal obligation to cooperate fully includes an
obligation to surrender those Darfur suspects already in
custody in the Sudan and to arrest and surrender those
still at large — Mr. Ali Kushayb and Mr. Abdallah
Banda. It must also include the obligation for the Sudan
to provide my Office safe and unfettered access to the
Sudan and Darfur in particular. My expectation is that
the Sudan, with the support of the Council, will engage
in dialogue with my Office to discuss the feasibility of
a mission by my Office to the Sudan in the very near
future to resolve those issues.

The 3 June attack prompted widespread calls,
including by the Secretary-General and the Office of
the United Nations High Commissioner for Human
Rights, for an investigation into the use of excessive
force by security forces against civilian protestors. I
am aware that the Transitional Military Council has
stated that it is investigating those events, and I urge it
to ensure that the investigation is promptly conducted
by independent experts and that it include all reported
human rights violations against peaceful protestors
throughout the Sudan, including in Darfur.

Together with members of the Council, past
and present, I have repeatedly stressed that ending
impunity for alleged Rome Statute crimes in Darfur
is essential to the maintenance of peace and security
in Darfur and beyond. As recent events in Darfur
sadly demonstrate, those are not empty slogans. In the

Attacks against civilian populations in Darfur have
continued during the reporting period and appear to be
increasing in severity. For example, in January a militia
attack in Kura, which I refer to as Katur in my report,
resulted in the killing of two civilians and the burning
of almost 50 houses. More recently, an attack on Deleij

19-183393/16

S/PV.8554

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

market an 9 June reportedly resulted in the killing of
a number of civilians. Once again, such attacks are
unacceptable and must stop.
The approximately 1.64 million internally displaced
persons in Darfur remain especially vulnerable, and
sexual and gender-based violence continues to restrict
the freedom of movement of women and girls in camps
for internally displaced persons and areas of return.
Attacks against peacekeeping personnel also continue
in Darfur.
I share the deep concern expressed by the African
Union (AU) Peace and Security Council on 13 June
that security and political developments in the Sudan
have contributed to the recent deterioration of the
security situation in Darfur. I trust that the Council will
support the AU Peace and Security Council’s call on
the international community to continue to support the
population in need in Darfur.
I also note with concern reports that the RSF have
allegedly seized facilities and assets previously held by
the African Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation
in Darfur (UNAMID). In that context, I support the
AU Peace and Security Council’s resolve to extend
UNAMID’s mandate for a period of 12 months and its
request to the Security Council to do the same, as well
as its rejection of the Transitional Military Council’s
call for UNAMID to hand over assets to the RSF, and
its request that those assets be handed over to civilian
authorities. With respect to recent alleged crimes in
Darfur, let me be clear that I will continue to monitor
events closely, and I will not hesitate to investigate and,
where appropriate, prosecute those most responsible
for alleged crimes that fall under the jurisdiction of the
International Criminal Court.
Before concluding my remarks, I wish to
acknowledge the support that my Office has received
from many States, including members of the Council,
which have publicly called for the Sudan’s cooperation
with the ICC following recent developments in the
Sudan. Similarly, I want to thank all those individuals
and organizations that support my Office, including
those inside and outside the Sudan, calling for the arrest
and surrender of the Darfur suspects to the ICC. I also
express my sincere appreciation to those who continue to
provide my Office with valuable information in relation
to events in the Sudan. Their continued dedication to
ensuring justice for victims in the Darfur situation is
truly inspirational.
4/16

19/06/2019

My Darfur team will keep working, and I will
continue to do everything in my power to obtain justice
for the victims in the Darfur situation, but my Office
cannot secure the arrest and surrender of the suspects
without support. To secure renewed cooperation
between my Office and the Sudan, the Council must
provide strong and effective support. In a press
statement issued on the 11 June (SC/13836) — more
than 14 years after referring the Darfur situation to
my Office — the Council once again emphasized the
importance of accountability and justice in the Sudan.
With the Council’s support, and the cooperation of
the authorities in the Sudan, there is an opportunity now
to make real progress in the pursuit of accountability
and justice for the victims in the Darfur situation. The
current reported violence against civilians in Darfur
must stop and all the ICC Darfur suspects must stand
trial. We must not squander this opportunity.
Now is the time to act. The victims of the Darfur
situation have waited far too long to see justice done.
We must not fail them. I thank members of the Council
for their attention, and I trust that the Council will take
decisive action in support of ensuring accountability in
this situation.
The President (spoke in Arabic): I thank Prosecutor
Bensouda for her briefing.
I shall now give the floor to those members of the
Council who wish to make statements.
Mr. Pecsteen de Buytswerve (Belgium) (spoke
in French): At the outset, I thank Prosecutor Fatou
Bensouda for her report presented to the Council
and the exceptionally informative briefing that she
just delivered.
In 2005, following the report of the International
Commission of Inquiry on violations of international
humanitarian law and human rights law in Darfur (see
S/2005/60), the Security Council, acting under Chapter
VII of the Charter of the United Nations, adopted the
historic resolution 1593 (2005) by referring a situation
for the first time to the International Criminal Court
(ICC). In doing so, the Council sent a strong message
not only to the victims of those horrible crimes, but also
to their perpetrators, to whom it must be clear that they
will not escape justice, wherever they may be.
Last December, despite the significant progress
made in the investigation, the situation, as presented
by the Prosecutor to the Council, remained unchanged
19-18339

19/06/2019

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

from that with which we had been familiar for several
years. Due to the lack of cooperation of States, including
the Sudan, none of the five suspects in the situation in
Darfur had been arrested or surrendered to the Court.
Following developments in the Sudan in recent
months, the transitional Government has an opportunity
to finally bring justice to the victims. The political
transition process, which began following the arrest
of former President Al-Bashir on 11 April, makes it
possible to envisage a new chapter in the history of
relations between the International Criminal Court and
the Sudan.
The legal framework underpinning the cooperation
that the Court must receive from the Sudanese
authorities is very clear. As the Prosecutor recalled,
in its judgment of 6 May the ICC Appeals Chamber
unequivocally confirmed that the Sudan is required, in
accordance with resolution 1593 (2005), to cooperate
fully with the Court and the Prosecutor. It is therefore
the responsibility of the Sudanese authorities, now and
in the future, to carry out the arrest warrants issued by
the ICC against persons wanted in connection with the
situation in Darfur.
However, that situation is unprecedented. For
the first time since the issuance of the various arrest
warrants, several of the suspects are now in detention.
In addition to Mr. Al-Bashir, it appears that two of the
four other suspects wanted by the Court, Mr. Harun
and Mr. Hussein, were also arrested on 11 April. As the
Office of the Prosecutor rightly points out in her report,
the principle of complementarity — the cornerstone of
the Rome Statute, which established the ICC — entails
that suspects could perfectly well be prosecuted in
the Sudan, provided that the principles set out in the
Statute are upheld. In such circumstances, Belgium
strongly encourages the Sudanese authorities to set an
example by respecting their international obligations
and responding positively to the Prosecutor’s invitation
to engage in a dialogue to ensure that persons subject
to an arrest warrant are brought to justice, either before
the ICC or in the Sudan.
For Belgium, the situation in Darfur cannot be
isolated from the situation in the rest of the Sudan. The
ongoing violations of human rights and international
humanitarian law, in particular sexual and genderbased violence, in the region are unacceptable. In the
current context, the Security Council’s support for the
Court, which remains competent to prosecute all the

S/PV. 8554

most serious crimes committed in Darfur since 1 July
2002, is therefore paramount.
The fight against impunity is rightly at the heart
of the aspirations of the Sudanese people. Indeed, it
is clear that justice will be an indispensable part of
any lasting solution to achieve peace in Darfur, as in
the rest of the Sudan. Even today, victims of crimes
committed in Darfur are attending this briefing with
the Prosecutor from the public area of the Chamber.
Let us not disappoint them. It is our duty to do our
all to ensure that when the Prosecutor’s next report is
presented in six months, significant progress will have
been made and justice can at last be delivered to them.
Mr. Allen (United Kingdom): Let me thank the
Prosecutor for her twenty-ninth report on the situation
in Darfur pursuant to resolution 1593 (2005) and
her briefing to the Security Council today. I would
particularly like to commend the Prosecutor and her
staff on their continued dedication and hard work on
the investigations in Darfur.
Let me take this opportunity at the outset to
reaffirm the United Kingdom’s strong support for the
work of the International Criminal Court (ICC), both
as a State party to the Rome Statute and as a member
of the Council. We take note of the judgment of the
ICC Appeals Chamber on 6 May, dismissing Jordan’s
appeal against the Pre-Trial Chambers’ findings of
non-cooperation for its failure to arrest former President
Al-Bashir, and the United Kingdom renews its call on
all States parties to cooperate with the ICC in that case,
as, of course, must the Sudan.
I will focus my intervention on two issues: the
situation in Darfur and the wider situation in the
Sudan and its relevance to justice and accountability
for Darfur.
The situation in Darfur was the first case to ever be
referred to the ICC by the Council. In the 14 years since
our referral, the situation in Darfur has shown signs
of improvement. In particular, the United Kingdom
welcomes the reduction in large-scale conflict between
armed movements and the Sudanese security forces.
Despite that improvement, we should not forget the
reasons for our referral — a conflict that, according to
the United Nations, left 300,000 dead and 2.5 million
people displaced. We must not overlook the concerns
that remain in Darfur today.

19-183395/16

S/PV.8554

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

As we have heard from the Prosecutor, violence
targeting the displacement of civilians continues in
Darfur, particularly in the Jebel Marra area. Moreover,
as we heard from Assistant Secretary-General Andrew
Gilmour last Friday (see S/PV.8549), the human rights
situation in Darfur has been alarming in recent months,
with increased reports of killings, abductions and the
burning of villages.
Today, on the International Day for the Elimination
of Sexual Violence in Conflict, let us not forget that
sexual violence continues to be perpetrated at alarming
rates in Darfur, often by State security forces and — I
am afraid — often with complete impunity.
In addition to those worrying trends, there have
also been negative impacts on the security situation
in recent months. The African Union-United Nations
Hybrid Operation in Darfur (UNAMID) has verified
the deaths of at least 17 people during an incident
of intercommunal in Central Darfur, reportedly
involving militias and the Rapid Support Forces.
Humanitarian supplies at UNAMID’s headquarters
in West Darfur have been looted. The United
Kingdom urges all actors to respect international
humanitarian law and allow unfettered humanitarian
access. Sustainably addressing the situation in Darfur
requires commitment and investment. For our part, the
United Kingdom is committed to ensuring long-term
peace in Darfur, including through development and
humanitarian assistance.
As the Prosecutor highlighted, her briefing comes at
a time of political uncertainty in the Sudan. The United
Kingdom condemns the brutal attacks and violence by
the Sudanese security forces against peaceful protesters
in the streets of Khartoum. Those attacks are not the
actions of responsible and credible authorities and they
do not represent the will the Sudanese people.
In that regard, let me reiterate what I have said in
my recent statements on the Sudan, which is indeed
at a crossroads. The Transitional Military Council
has a choice. It has a choice to build a new future for
the Sudan, backed fully by long-term and extensive
support from the international community, including
for strengthening institutions, resolving conflict
and dealing with a legacy of long-term economic
mismanagement. The Transitional Military Council
should make the right choice, which would also bring an
end to the brutal cycle of violence, to which the people of
Darfur have been subject. The United Kingdom stands
6/16

19/06/2019

with the people of the Sudan in calling for the swift and
inclusive transfer of power to civilian leadership.
We know from conflicts and post-conflict
situations across the world that accountability is a
key element in ensuring sustainable peace and giving
people confidence in the institutions that are then
developed. We therefore remain hopeful that the
Sudan’s political transition will result in a civilian
administration that is committed to ensuring justice for
the crimes committed against the people of Darfur that
were referred to the Court by the Council. We stand
ready to support a civilian administration as it seeks to
build the rule of law across the Sudan and ensure that
the horrors experienced by the people of the Sudan are
never experienced again.
Let me conclude by again thanking the Prosecutor
and her Office for their dedication to this case and their
pursuit of justice for the victims in Darfur.
Mrs. Gasri (France) (spoke in French): I, too,
want to thank the Prosecutor, Ms. Fatou Bensouda, for
presenting her twenty-ninth report on developments in
the Darfur investigation. On behalf of my country, I also
want to commend the vital work done by the Prosecutor
and her teams under resolution 1593 (2005) for almost
14 years now. It is necessary not only to ensure justice
for the victims of the serious crimes committed in
Darfur, but also to enable the emergence of the rule of
law in the Sudan and the stabilization of the country.
In that respect, France roundly condemns the
violence that has taken place in the Sudan in recent
weeks. Peaceful protests have been repressed with
immense brutality. Such a disproportionate use of force
is unacceptable. We urge all the actors involved to
show restraint and to refrain from the use of violence.
We recall that the Transitional Military Council is
responsible for the security of all the Sudanese people.
France asks that light be shed on the abuses that have
been committed, including acts of sexual violence,
which were described by Pramila Patten in her very
worrisome communiqué last week. The perpetrators
must answer for their actions. In this respect, we
deplore the postponement sine die by the relevant
Sudanese committee of the publication of the results
of the investigation into the violence that took place on
3 June in Khartoum. We call for that outcome to be
made known as quickly as possible.
What is at stake now is the resumption of a political
dialogue between the generals of the Transitional
19-18339

19/06/2019

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

Military Council and the opposition, with a view to
achieving a negotiated, consensus-based, civilian-led
transition. France commends the determined stance
of the African Union in this respect. We hope that the
United Nations will fully support the mediation efforts
undertaken by the African Union and supported by
Prime Minister Abiy Ahmed of Ethiopia. It is vital
that the African Union-led mediation be supported
at every level and by all parties. While all efforts are
welcome, it is also important that they be coordinated
and harmonized with those of the African Union.
We are also extremely worried by the reports of
violence in Darfur in recent weeks, notably in Jebel
Marra, as mentioned previously, which make clear
once again the volatility of the situation in the region.
We know that Darfur is an unstable region and that
the root causes of the conflict there, including access
to land and the future of 2 million displaced persons,
have not truly been resolved. We must do everything
we can to prevent the region from spiralling once again
into violence and conflict. The presence and protection
provided by the African Union-United Nations Hybrid
Operation in Darfur are essential in this respect.
The fight against impunity is also key, and the
Sudan must fulfil its responsibilities in this area. It
is now more vital than ever that the Sudan allow the
International Criminal Court (ICC) to conclude its
investigation. The Sudan must cooperate with the Court
in accordance with resolution 1593 (2005), and among
other things that involves the execution of the arrest
warrants issued by the ICC and the transfer of suspects
to the Court.
In the context of the obligation to cooperate, France
would like to recall that the immunity enjoyed by
representatives of States under customary international
law, which is crucial to the good conduct of international
relations and to which there can be no exception, can be
removed only by an express renunciation of the States
concerned, just like the one to which the States parties
to the Rome Statute consented, which applies also to
non-States parties whose situation has been referred to
the Court by the Security Council.
By transferring to the Court suspects who are
subject to an ICC arrest warrant and who are already
in detention, the Sudanese authorities would be not
only fulfilling their international obligations but
also sending a strong message to the international
community that they are determined to put an end to

S/PV. 8554

impunity. We also call on the Sudanese authorities
to allow the Prosecutor’s teams access to Darfur to
gather the necessary information, as she called for
earlier. Such developments would constitute a concrete
demonstration of the will of the Sudan to take a decisive
step towards justice, peace and an acknowledgement of
the crimes committed in Darfur. It would also be a very
important stage in the country’s political transition
and stabilization.
Mr. Kuzmin (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): I will be brief this morning. We have still not
seen any progress in the investigation into the situation
in Darfur, and the status of the accused has remained the
same. Nor will we comment on the internal situation in
the Sudan. The Security Council has other, appropriate
formats for those purposes, which, as we know, function
perfectly effectively without the participation of the
Prosecutor of the International Criminal Court (ICC).
What are we seeing? During the reporting period
the Court continued its academic and practical
experiments on the States parties to its Statute. On
6 May, with regard to the appeal brought by Jordan,
the Court came to a conclusion about the existence
of customary standards of international law based on
which a Head of State has no immunity vis-à-vis a
competent international court. That is strange, since all
the previous experience of the hunt for Omer Al-Bashir
testified to the exact opposite, which was that all the
States that he had to visit in his capacity as President
of the Sudan recognized that immunity and refused to
arrest him.
Historical perspective is important in establishing
international custom. The representative of the United
Kingdom mentioned an important date, and as it
happens I too would like to point out that this month, a
few days from now, we will mark the 100th anniversary
of the signing of the Treaty of Versailles. Under article
227 of the Treaty, the Allied Powers arraigned the
German Kaiser, Wilhelm II of Hohenzollern, for “a
supreme offence against international morality and the
sanctity of treaties” and provided for the creation of a
special international tribunal. That never came about,
however. The monarchy of the Netherlands, a State that
today is extremely active in the area of international
justice, categorically refused to surrender the former
German Emperor.
The position of the Russian Federation on the
question of the immunity of senior State officials is

19-183397/16

S/PV.8554

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

well known. The ICC’s position that the subject of
immunity does not even arise in this case is pernicious
and dangerous. Existing international law provides
for State officials’ immunity vis-à-vis foreign States’
criminal jurisdiction, without regard to the subject of
the jurisdiction of international criminal tribunals. In
that situation, in limiting the freedom of an official of
a foreign State, the State exercising that jurisdiction
unavoidably intrudes on the dimension of relations
between States, and in that context must act in strict
compliance with the norms of international law on
immunity from foreign criminal jurisdiction. We
therefore call on the States parties to the ICC to act
sensibly and to refrain from any steps that could create
friction between States.
Mr. Adom (Côte d’Ivoire) (spoke in French): I
would like to thank Ms. Fatou Bensouda, Prosecutor of
the International Criminal Court (ICC), for her useful
and informative briefing.
In adopting resolution 1593 (2005), which referred
the situation in Darfur since 1 July 2002 to the Prosecutor
of the International Criminal Court, the Security Council
expressed its resolve to translate its commitment to
the principle of accountability into concrete action,
with a view to having crimes of genocide and serious
violations of human rights punished in international
courts of law. Since then, it must be recognized that,
despite the difference in views and the contention that
this issue raises among Member States, the Council has
consistently supported initiatives aimed at bringing the
persons or organizations convicted of massive human
rights violations and crimes against humanity before
the competent international courts.
In fact, the mass crimes perpetrated in certain
hotbeds of conflict around the world, which challenge
our collective conscience, justify more than ever the
need for the Council to remain seized of these serious
events and to promote the appropriate legal responses.
The security and humanitarian situation in Darfur, as
well as the recurring violence endured by civilians at
the hands of armed groups, is in perfect alignment with
this Security Council concern. My country therefore
subscribes to the urgent appeals of the international
community to identify and bring to justice before the
competent international tribunals, in particular the
International Criminal Court, the persons or armed
groups responsible for such serious acts.
8/16

19/06/2019

It is undeniable that the sociopolitical crisis that
the Sudan has experienced in recent weeks, with its
eruptions of violence, is likely to affect the region of
Darfur, which is already facing many security and
humanitarian challenges. Côte d’Ivoire, a signatory
to the Rome Statute, therefore strongly hopes that the
mediation efforts under way will inevitably converge
and bear fruit in the near future, protecting the Sudan
from instability that could undermine the foundations
of peace in that country and the region.
Côte d’Ivoire deplores recent disgraceful events,
which have led to the loss of much human life and
left hundreds of civilians wounded, and sincerely
hopes that appropriate measures will be taken by the
Sudanese authorities to investigate the events of 3 June,
in accordance with the recommendations of the African
Union Peace and Security Council, issued at the end
of its 854th meeting. We call for the full protection of
civilians and respect for human rights and fundamental
freedoms in Darfur and throughout the Sudan, as
recommended by the Peace and Security Council.
In paragraph 4 of resolution 1593 (2005), the
Security Council encourages the International
Criminal Court to support, in accordance with the
Rome Statute, domestic efforts to promote the rule
of law, protect human rights and combat impunity. In
paragraph 5, the Council also emphasizes the need to
promote reconciliation and encourages in this respect
the creation of inclusive institutions, such as truth and/
or reconciliation commissions, in order to complement
judicial processes. Côte d’Ivoire is of the opinion that
this approach has the virtue of being able to contribute
to the restoration of lasting peace, with the support of
the African Union and international institutions, as
stipulated in the aforementioned resolution.
In the light of the foregoing, my country believes
that cooperation between States and the ICC will be
constructive only if, and only if, the fog of unnecessary
suspicion and fantasy surrounding the International
Criminal Court is dispersed. That, in any case, is
the wish of Côte d’Ivoire concerning how the ICC
approaches the Sudanese question, which should be
based on the imperative need to apply the principle of
accountability and, above all, on the will of the two
parties to work together to promote the strengthening
of national judicial institutions.
After several years of conflict in Darfur and
amid persisting sociopolitical tensions in the Sudan,
19-18339

19/06/2019

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

S/PV. 8554

my country wants to believe in possible cooperation
between Sudan and the ICC. On that optimistic note, I
conclude by reiterating the full support of Côte d’Ivoire
for Ms. Fatou Bensouda, Prosecutor Office of the
International Criminal Court, and for her Office for the
quality of the work done.

primacy of African-led initiatives in the search for a
lasting solution to the crisis in the Sudan. It is important
that the Sudanese people chart their own path of peace,
devoid of interference. That is also vital for ensuring
that the substantial progress in peacebuilding achieved
in Darfur is not reversed.

Mr. Molefe (South Africa): At the outset allow
me to thank Ms. Fatou Bensouda, Prosecutor of
the International Criminal Court (ICC), for her
comprehensive briefing on the situation in the Sudan.

South Africa urges all stakeholders in the Sudan
to engage in constructive dialogue in order to restore
peace and stability in the country. That is also vital for
regional stability.

South Africa continues to support resolution 1593
(2005), which referred the situation in Darfur since
1 July 2002 to the ICC, mandating it to investigate war
crimes and crimes against humanity. South Africa is
deeply concerned about the continuing violence and
loss of life in Darfur, as indicated by the Prosecutor in
her report. South Africa deplores the fact that violence
has been directed at civilians in particular.

Mr. Schulz (Germany): Let me first thank
Ms. Bensouda, Prosecutor of the International Criminal
Court (ICC), for her briefing today. I thank her and her
entire team for their dedicated and tireless efforts over
all these years.

While we note the significant progress achieved in
the peacekeeping and peacebuilding efforts in Darfur,
South Africa is concerned by the persistent security
challenges and human rights violations, as highlighted
in the special report of the Chairperson of the African
Union Commission and the Secretary-General of the
United Nations on the strategic review of the African
Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur
(S/2019/445). What is of particular concern is the fact
that women and children remain the most vulnerable to
and affected by sexual violence, which continues to be
used as a weapon of war in Darfur.
South Africa calls on the military and security
forces to ensure the full protection of civilians and
respect for human rights and freedoms in Darfur. In
that regard, in line with the 13 June communiqué of
the Peace and Security Council of the African Union
and the 3 June press statement issued by the African
countries represented on the Council, we strongly
condemn and lament the tragic and unjustified loss of
life and remind the transitional authorities in the Sudan
of their obligation to protect civilians and respect their
fundamental rights.
We urge the Transitional Military Council, the
Declaration of Freedom and Change Forces and all
other parties to return to the internal dialogue with
the aim of responding to the legitimate aspirations
of the Sudanese people. Furthermore, we call on the
Transitional Military Council to return to the framework
established by the African Union. We underline the

Like South Africa, we are also gravely concerned by
the escalation of violence and the excessive use of force
against civilian protesters, as well as the detention of
hundreds of civilians. In its press statement (SC/13836),
the Security Council called for accountability for those
events, and we echo this call. Germany urges the
authorities in the Sudan to work towards a peaceful
and transparent transfer of power to an inclusive
and civilian-led transitional Government and free
elections in order to fulfil the democratic aspirations
of the Sudanese people. Otherwise, we fear that lasting
stability cannot be achieved.
Germany strongly supports the International
Criminal Court (ICC) with regard to the investigations
concerning all serious crimes committed since 2005.
We concur with the Prosecutor that accountability
for crimes under the Rome Statute and full respect
for the rule of law are indispensable prerequisites of
sustainable peace, stability and development in the
Sudan. We encourage the authorities in the Sudan to
move forward by dealing with the past through ensuring
accountability. We fully concur with the assessment
of the Prosecutor that now is the time to act and that
continued impunity is not an option. We call on the
Sudanese authorities to fully cooperate with the ICC
and the Office of the Prosecutor. Ending impunity for
the most serious crimes is critical to preventing further
grave crimes and to bringing peace and security to the
country. The democratic aspirations of the Sudanese
people likewise include Sudan-led transitional justice.
Initiating criminal proceedings against exPresident Al-Bashir, Mr. Harun and Mr. Hussein,
who have recently been imprisoned in the Sudan, with

19-183399/16

S/PV.8554

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

regard to their responsibility for the situation in Darfur
would be an important step in the right direction. In line
with the principle of complementarity, it is the primary
responsibility of States to investigate and prosecute
crimes under the Rome Statute. We encourage the
competent authorities to fulfil that responsibility now
and ensure accountability for all crimes, especially
the most serious crimes under international law. It
is necessary for all States to fully implement the
Security Council’s resolutions and to comply with their
obligation to cooperate with the Court. That includes
arresting and surrendering suspects for whom arrest
warrants have been issued. States are also obligated
to implement sanctions against individuals on the
sanctions list of the Committee established pursuant to
resolution 1591 (2005) concerning the Sudan.
On a more general note, I would like to take this
opportunity to reiterate Germany’s continued support
for the ICC, its independence and effective functioning,
and the integrity and values of the Rome Statute.
The ICC is a crucial element of a strong rules-based
international order. We call on all United Nations
Member States, particularly those on the Security
Council, to keep up their support for the Court in order
to end impunity and ensure accountability. We also call
on those that have not yet joined the Rome Statute to
consider doing so now.
Mr. Singer Weisinger (Dominican Republic) (spoke
in Spanish): We welcome Prosecutor Fatou Bensouda to
the Council. As usual, we thank her for her work on the
ground and for her interesting briefing today.
The situation in the Sudan is undoubtedly very
worrisome. As the Prosecutor said, acts of violence
continue and dialogue between the relevant parties to the
conflict has come to a halt. The continued occurrence
of incidents of gender-based sexual violence, including
the rape of internally displaced women and girls, has
led to restrictions on their freedom of movement in
reception centres and areas of origin.
The courage and bravery of the Sudanese people
have been tested in recent months, leading to farreaching changes that will certainly change the history
of the Sudanese people. The people of the Sudan
long for justice, a fair trial and the prosecution of the
perpetrators of crimes. That will require a safe justice
system in which impunity is a thing of the past and
legal responsibility makes way for a new present and a
hopeful future for all victims of the terrible crimes that
10/16

19/06/2019

took place during Al-Bashir’s regime and, regrettably,
continue to occur.
To that end, the Sudanese authorities must recall
their international obligation to cooperate fully with the
International Criminal Court, as set out in resolution 1593
(2005). We therefore call on the Sudanese authorities to
cooperate with the Office of the Prosecutor, beginning
by allowing their representatives access to Darfur in
order to conduct effective, impartial and independent
investigations. In addition, we encourage the authorities
to hand over criminals being prosecuted by the Court,
without prejudice to the principle of complementarity,
in particular if it proves impossible for them to be
granted a fair and impartial trial.
The Dominican Republic applauds the recent
decision of the Appeals Chamber, which establishes
that States have the obligation to arrest Heads of State
wanted by the Court, despite the immunity that their
office provides. Impunity is an evil that corrupts a
society’s progress and can be eliminated only through
the prosecution of those responsible for criminal acts,
regardless of their functions or position. The time
has come for the people of the Sudan to move to new
leadership that bolsters respect for human rights and
the protection of civilians. There must be zero tolerance
for crimes committed against civilians and groups of
demonstrators, such as those that occurred during recent
events. The perpetrators must be brought to justice.
Lastly, we call on the members of the Council to
stand united in the struggle to alleviate the burdened
people of the Sudan. Let us foster cooperation and
encourage dialogue among the relevant actors. Let us
support the work of the Court, a strategic ally in our
common goal. The fight against impunity is key in the
maintenance of peace and security.
Mr. Syihab (Indonesia): Let me first join others in
thanking Ms. Fatou Bensouda for her briefing.
We have taken note of the twenty-ninth report of
the Prosecutor of the International Criminal Court
(ICC) on the investigation of the situation in Darfur,
submitted pursuant to resolution 1593 (2005).
My statement today will focus on three key issues,
namely, the situation in Darfur, accountability for
human rights violations and ICC proceedings.
With regard to the first issue, the security
situation in Darfur remains relatively stable, with little
disruption to the trends that have emerged since 2016.
19-18339

19/06/2019

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

Intercommunal clashes continue to decline, thanks to
the extension of State authority and mediation efforts
by local authorities and the African Union-United
Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur (UNAMID).
Meanwhile, Darfuri rebel groups have already
lost their foothold. One remaining armed group
inside Darfur has been gradually fragmented and
its operational capabilities have been significantly
reduced. The special report of the Chairperson of
the African Union Commission and the SecretaryGeneral on the strategic assessment of the African
Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur
(S/2019/445) attests to those facts. Of course, we are
cognizant of the many persistent challenges, many of
which we raised in the Council’s briefing on UNAMID
a few days ago (see S/PV.8549).
The Darfur peace process is stalling. Several
conflict drivers are yet to be addressed. Internally
displaced persons (IDPs) are confronted by security
challenges, as well as a lack of access to land and
economic opportunities. My delegation continues
to observe very carefully developments in the Sudan
and their potential impact on the security situation
in Darfur.
Secondly, Indonesia stresses the need for the
protection of civilians and the strict observance of
international human rights and humanitarian law. It
is deeply troubling that human rights violations and
abuses continue to occur across Darfur, targeting those
who are most vulnerable, including IDPs, women and
children. We note with concern reports that such abuses
tend to be underreported due to fear and restricted
access. My delegation will never tolerate the use of
violence against innocent civilians. We extend our
deepest sympathies and solidarity to the victims for
their suffering, as well as to the people of the Sudan,
who continue to face the impact of the conflicts in their
country. We particularly see the need to ensure that the
Sudanese regain their confidence in law enforcement
and judicial institutions. To that end, accountability
must always be upheld. No efforts should be spared to
bring the perpetrators of human rights violations and
abuses to justice.
That brings me to my third point. Efforts to
pursue justice must pay due regard to the wider efforts
to achieve peace in Darfur. While peace cannot be
complete and sustainable without justice, justice
cannot prosper in the absence of peace. Actions taken

S/PV. 8554

by the international community must not jeopardize
the ongoing dialogue among Sudanese stakeholders.
We recognize and underline the responsibility of the
Security Council to ensure that the Government of the
Sudan complies with the provisions of resolution 1593
(2005). At the same time, in accordance with the Rome
Statute, the role of the ICC should be complementary to
national criminal jurisdiction.
In that regard, it is also imperative for the
international community to continue to support the
Government of the Sudan through various capacitybuilding measures in the area of the justice system. My
delegation believes that the referral of the situation in
Darfur and actions taken by the Prosecutor shall neither
nullify the principle of complementarity nor prevent the
Sudanese national court from invoking its jurisdiction
against the perpetrators of human rights violations
and abuses. Indonesia therefore calls on the Sudanese
Government to take up those responsibilities promptly
and properly.
Mr. Horna (Peru) (spoke in Spanish): We thank
you, Mr. President, for convening this meeting. We
also thank Ms. Fatou Bensouda, Prosecutor of the
International Criminal Court, for her briefing.
Peru regrets the recent events in the Sudan and
their repercussions on the grave humanitarian and
human rights situation. We condemn in the strongest
terms the increasing repression and violence, which
have resulted in nearly 100 deaths since 9 April.
All that must cease and those responsible must be
brought to justice in accordance with the principle of
complementarity. The International Criminal Court
today provides an opportunity by complementing the
primary responsibility of the State to prevent the most
serious crimes from going unpunished. In that regard,
we reiterate our support for the work of the Prosecutor
and her team and encourage her to continue her efforts
in fulfilling her mandate and the principles of the
Rome Statute.
We also urge the authorities of the Transitional
Military Council to fulfil their obligation to arrest and
surrender suspects of crimes against humanity, war
crimes and genocide. We must ensure punishment for
the crimes of which former President Omar Al-Bashir
and other suspects against whom there are arrest
warrants — Abdel Hussein, Ahmad Harun and Ali
Kushayb — are accused. We also reaffirm the need for
States, including the Council members, to cooperate

19-1833911/16

S/PV.8554

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

with the International Criminal Court and its Prosecutor
in order to achieve justice for the crimes committed
in Darfur.
However, we regret that States parties to the Rome
Statute have not complied with the arrest warrants
of the Court against suspects who have entered their
countries. We remind them, as recently established
by the Court’s Appeals Chamber in the Jordan case,
that they, like Sudan itself, must comply with the
Court’s orders and ensure their timely and effective
cooperation. We also recall our support for initiatives
to provide the Council with specific procedures in
cases of non-compliance and lack of cooperation, with
a view to holding the States concerned accountable for
their inaction.
In conclusion, Peru believes that the mandates
and functions of the Security Council and the
International Criminal Court seek to fulfil similar
objectives, expressly aimed at achieving the purposes
and principles enshrined in the Charter of the United
Nations. The primary responsibility of this organ for
maintaining international peace and security and the
jurisdiction of the Court over the most serious crimes
must be understood and executed as complementary
and interdependent tasks. That is what the Sudan and
the victims of the atrocities in Darfur expect of us today.
Mr. Esono Mbengono (Equatorial Guinea) (spoke
in Spanish): At the outset, my delegation thanks
Ms. Fatou Bensouda for her briefing on her twentyninth report pursuant to resolution 1593 (2005).
In taking the floor on behalf of the Republic of
Equatorial Guinea, I must say that we condemn the
horrific attacks in Khartoum on 3 June. We extend our
condolences to the families of the deceased and wish
the wounded a speedy recovery.
We also express our concern about the violent
incidents that have been taking place in the Sudan since
mid-December 2018 in various cities in the country,
which, according to the report of the United Nations
High Commissioner for Human Rights, have led to the
deaths of approximately 70 people up to 9 April.
We note the figures mentioned in the report we
just heard, whereby the African Union-United Nations
Hybrid Operation in Darfur states that the situation
in the country is relatively calm, with fewer incidents
reported against civilians as compared to the previous
reporting period.
12/16

19/06/2019

The Republic of Equatorial Guinea supports the
position and efforts of the African Union in the Sudan
to resume dialogue and to restore peace and normality
throughout the country, particularly in the Jebel Marra
area, where there are sporadic clashes between the
security forces and the Sudan Liberation Army.
It is important that the dialogue initiated by the
Transitional Military Council and the Sudanese parties
involved on the parameters and political content of
the Sudanese transition continue. We therefore urge
the parties to take all political and security measures
necessary for a speedy resumption of negotiations in
order to reach a consensual agreement for the transition
to a civilian-led consensus Government with full
respect for the will and aspirations of the people of the
Sudan, the region and the continent in accordance with
the statement issued in that regard by the African Union
Peace and Security Council and the press statement of
3 June of the African members of the Council. We call
on all parties involved in the conflict to respect the
human rights of all people.
In conclusion, with regard to the requirements of
the International Criminal Court, the position of the
Republic of Equatorial Guinea is well known and has
not changed. My country is not a party to the Rome
Statute because we do not recognize its jurisdiction.
Mr. Wu Haitao (China) (spoke in Chinese): China
listened closely to the briefing by Prosecutor Bensouda.
China’s position on the work of the International
Criminal Court (ICC) in relation to Darfur remains
unchanged. The international community should
fully respect the judicial sovereignty of the Sudan,
avoid interference in its internal affairs and heed the
legitimate demands of the Sudanese Government and
the African Union regarding the work of the ICC on
Darfur in the Sudan.
Currently the situation in Darfur has significantly
improved. We hope that the international community
will make joint efforts to provide more assistance with
a view to achieving lasting peace and security and
sustainable development in Darfur. That would serve
the common interests of the Sudan and the countries in
the region.
China is ready to work together with the
international community to play a constructive role
towards peace, stability and development in Darfur.
19-18339

19/06/2019

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

Mr. Simonoff (United States of America): I thank
the Prosecutor of the International Criminal Court
(ICC) for her briefing.
Civilian-led protests in April led to the removal
of President Omar Al-Bashir, whose regime was
synonymous with genocide, war crimes, crimes against
humanity and human rights violations and abuses. For
months, protesters have gathered together, united by a
vision for a peaceful, democratic Sudan. But rather than
welcoming dialogue and discussion, those in power
have responded violently.
The Transitional Military Council’s reprehensible
attacks on demonstrators in Khartoum have led to
more than 100 deaths and hundreds injured. Reports of
security forces beating and sexually assaulting protesters
and throwing victims into the Nile must be fully and
fairly investigated. The Military Council’s grotesque
display of violence against peaceful demonstrators in
Khartoum was not an isolated incident.
The Government has also used excessive violence
against internally displaced persons (IDPs) in Darfur
to stop peaceful rallies. We are all too familiar with
the unthinkable violence to which Darfuris have been
subjected since 2003. Ongoing armed clashes in the
Jebel Marra region between the Sudan Liberation
Movement/Abdul Wahid rebel group and the Sudan
armed forces, along with intercommunal violence in
other parts of Darfur, serve as reminders of the ongoing
security challenges that plague the region.
Darfur’s security situation has become further
challenged following delays in the transition to a
civilian-led Government in Khartoum. Those delays
have had a negative impact on human rights throughout
the Sudan and obstructed the implementation of
policies to support the return of internally displaced
persons, including to Darfur. We are concerned by
increasing violence in IDP camps. Sexual violence,
rape, harassment and other intimidation against women,
girls and boys in Darfur remains prevalent. It is for that
reason that the mission of the African Union-United
Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur (UNAMID)
continues to be important.
We support the African Union (AU) Peace and
Security Council’s 6 June communiqué, which
announced the immediate suspension of the Sudan from
all AU activities until the establishment of a civilianled transitional authority. We call on the Sudan’s
interim military authorities to cease attacks against

S/PV. 8554

civilians, withdraw all undue restrictions on media and
civil society, restore access to the Internet and ensure
unhindered access for medical-care providers. We
also urge them to respect human rights, including the
freedom of expression and fair trial guarantees.
In that vein, we urge the Transitional Military
Council to agree to the request of the Office of the
United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights
for the rapid deployment of a United Nations human
rights monitoring team. The United Nations should also
make promoting respect for human rights the heart of
its efforts in the Sudan, whether through UNAMID or
the United Nations country team.
Long-term stability in Darfur and throughout the
Sudan depends on resolving the underlying causes of
the protracted conflict. That includes strengthening the
Sudan’s judicial system to ensure accountability at the
local and national levels. It includes the establishment of
a fully functional civilian-led national Government that
is committed to reform. And it includes a commitment
by Khartoum to pursue a durable peace agreement
in Darfur.
There will be no lasting peace in the Sudan until
there is genuine accountability for the crimes that have
been committed against the Sudanese people. The
United States has historically been, and will continue
to be, a strong supporter of meaningful accountability
and justice for victims of atrocities through appropriate
mechanisms. Perpetrators of atrocity crimes must face
justice, but we must also be careful to recognize the
right tool for each situation.
I must reiterate our long-standing and principled
objection to any assertion of ICC jurisdiction over
nationals of States that are not party to the Rome
Statute, absent a Security Council referral or the
consent of such States. The United States remains
concerned about illegitimate attempts by the ICC to
assert such jurisdiction.
We also note our disagreement with a number of
aspects of the recent decision of the Court’s Appeals
Chambers in the Jordan appeal, including the analysis
and conclusions regarding customary international law
and the interpretation of Security Council resolutions.
But our concerns about that decision, and the Court
more generally, in no way diminish our commitment to
supporting accountability for atrocity crimes.

19-1833913/16

S/PV.8554

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

Mr. Lewicki (Poland): I thank Prosecutor Fatou
Bensouda for her briefing on the recent, very troubling
developments in Khartoum. As many other delegations
have done today here in the Chamber, let me start by
reiterating Poland’s full support for the International
Criminal Court (ICC) and the work of the Prosecutor.
We support her not only because we believe in
international justice, but also because we believe that
fighting impunity and providing accountability remain
a central pillar of conflict prevention and resolution,
which means that her work lies at the core of a Security
Council mandate. We could not agree more with the
Prosecutor when she said today that
“ending impunity for alleged Rome Statute crimes
in Darfur is essential to the maintenance of peace
and security in Darfur and beyond.”
As noted in the Prosecutor’s report, her Office relies
on the cooperation of States and others to gain safe
access to the territory where alleged crimes occurred in
order to gather evidence and to apprehend, arrest or force
the surrender of the persons against whom warrants of
arrest have been issued. We note that, pursuant to the
resolution 1593 (2005), the Government of the Sudan
and all other parties to the conflict in Darfur remain
under a legally binding obligation to cooperate fully
and provide any necessary assistance to the Court and
the Prosecutor. In that regard, we hope to see progress
soon and encourage the parties to engage in dialogue
with the Office to ensure that the suspects face justice,
either at the ICC or in the Sudan, in accordance with
the principles of complementarity, fair trial and due
process. Moreover, Poland echoes the recent position of
the Court’s Appeals Chamber in noting that the Sudan,
as a party to the 1948 Convention on the Prevention and
Punishment of the Crime of Genocide, is legally bound
“to undertake to prevent and punish genocide”. We
further note that the Court’s second arrest warrant for
Mr. Omar Al-Bashir includes the charge of genocide.
Let me now refer to the situation in Darfur in
particular, and the recent developments in Khartoum
and in the Sudan in general. We recognize that in the
past six months the overall security situation in Darfur,
except for the Jebel Marra area, has reportedly remained
relatively stable. However, reports of crimes, violations
and abuses, including killings, sexual and genderbased violence, arbitrary detentions, displacements,
destruction and theft of property, are a source of the most
serious concern. We strongly condemn the targeting,
including by Government security personnel and Rapid
14/16

19/06/2019

Support Forces, of the civilian population, especially
the most vulnerable — women, children and internally
displaced persons (IDPs). The still very high number
of IDPs, instances of denial of access to humanitarian
organizations and the African Union-United Nations
Hybrid Operation in Darfur, as well as the reported
looting and vandalizing of the mission’s headquarters,
are also of great concern and cannot be tolerated.
Poland urges the parties to the conflict in Darfur
to stop the hostilities and violence, fully respect
international law, including international humanitarian
law and human rights law, as well as the relevant Security
Council resolutions and allow for the safe return of
IDPs. We call on all to work towards resolving the root
causes of the conflict and finding a sustainable solution.
Ending impunity and the establishment of truth,
justice, the rule of law and reconciliation must be a
part of it. Accountability for crimes, the protection
of civilians and respect for their fundamental rights,
as well as deterring further crimes and abuses, are of
the utmost importance for the achievement of durable
peace in Darfur, as rightly noted by the Prosecutor.
Poland encourages the redoubling of efforts aimed at
achieving the aforementioned goals. This opportunity
for effecting positive change cannot be wasted.
The events in Darfur must be perceived in the
wider context of the situation in the entire country.
Poland strongly condemns the latest use of violence
by the Sudanese security forces against demonstrators
in Khartoum, which led to many deaths and injuries
among civilians. There is no justification for the use of
force against peaceful protesters. All violence against
the Sudanese people, including extrajudicial, arbitrary
and summary killings, beatings and sexual and genderbased violence, arrests and disappearances, must stop.
I must add that sexual violence and abuse, including
the rape of women and girls, are extremely abhorrent
and must stop. Only a few months ago, we adopted
resolution 2467 (2019) on ending sexual violence
in conflict. Although it is not considered a serious
violation of international law, it is inhuman.
All human rights violations and abuses must be
investigated in an independent and transparent manner,
and the perpetrators should be held accountable. We
expect the Transitional Military Council, which is
currently responsible for ensuring security and the
rule of law in the country, to respect the aspirations of
Sudanese society and enable freedom of expression and
assembly, freedom of the media, civic space and access
19-18339

19/06/2019

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

to the Internet without any threat or use of violence,
and to prioritize consensus to allow for the transfer of
power to a civilian-led authority.
As the Prosecutor observes in her report,
“Sudan is at a crossroads. Victims in the Darfur
situation have long sought justice for the horrific
crimes that they suffered. They desire to ensure
alleged perpetrators are held accountable ... The
eyes of the world are fixed once again on Sudan
and justice for the victims in the Darfur situation
can be within reach.”
In conclusion, Poland shares the hope of the
Prosecutor and her Office that the Sudan’s new
Administration will decide to open a new chapter of
cooperation with the ICC. We reiterate the call on the
Council and the States parties to lend their full and
unequivocal support to the Sudanese people, the Office
of the Prosecutor and all stakeholders committed to
ensuring peace and accountability for atrocity crimes
in Darfur. Those people, and in particular Darfur’s
victims and witnesses, to whom we pay tribute, deserve
no less. They have been waiting too long.
The President (spoke in Arabic): I shall now
make a statement in my capacity as the representative
of Kuwait.
At the outset, I thank Ms. Fatou Bensouda,
Prosecutor of the International Criminal Court (ICC),
for her briefing, and we take note of the twenty-ninth
report of the Court on the Sudan.
The Security Council must be consistent and
integrated when addressing the situation in Darfur,
especially given the latest developments in the region,
which saw the end of conflict and the beginning phase
of peacebuilding. The Council has frequently welcomed
the improvements in the security situation there and
encouraged the settlement of intercommunal disputes
through the efforts of the Sudanese Government and
the peacekeeping mission. The Council has also
encouraged States to contribute to the transition process
involving peacebuilding.
We consequently hope that the ICC procedures do
not stand in the way of efforts to bring peace to the
Sudan. The Sudanese people themselves should ensure
the successful outcome of the transitional political
process, while fostering security and stability in the
Sudan so as to meet the hopes and ambitions of its
brotherly people.

S/PV. 8554

The judgment of the ICC against former President
Omer Al-Bashir of the Sudan did not enjoy the
support of international organizations to which the
Sudan is a State party, such as the League of Arab
States, the African Union and the Organization of
Islamic Cooperation. Those organizations are part
of the regional and international partnerships of the
United Nations, as provided for under Chapter VIII of
the Charter.
As the sole Arab member of the Security Council,
the State of Kuwait recalls once again decision 514,
adopted at the twenty-second Arab League Summit
held in Sirte, Libya, in 2010. The decision outlines
the Arab position on ICC procedures and rejects the
politicization of the principles of international justice
or their use to undermine State sovereignty, unity
and stability.
In conclusion, we renew our commitment to
respecting the principles of the Charter, including
those that call for respect for the sovereignty of States
and non-interference in their internal affairs. We stress
the importance of respecting the sovereignty and
independence of States.
I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.
I give the floor to the representative of the Sudan.
Mr. Ahmed (Sudan) (spoke in Arabic): Let me
begin by expressing our pleasure at seeing the sisterly
State of Kuwait presiding over the Security Council
this month.
I would like to make the following remarks.
First, the Sudan is not a party to the Rome Statute of
the International Criminal Court (ICC), and as Council
members are aware, the Court is not an organ of the
United Nations. Despite the change in the political
situation in the Sudan, the Court remains unchanged in
terms of statutes and practices. Our position therefore
has not changed. We have no commitments to the Court
and our statement is addressed to the members of the
Council. However, we note that the report’s reference
to the issue of complementarity, albeit late, is positive.
Secondly, since December 2018 the Sudan has
witnessed notable positive developments that provide
for a new political reality which will undoubtedly lead
to the establishment of a regime in which the values
of freedom, justice and the rule of law will prevail.

19-1833915/16

S/PV.8554

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

We have already begun a serious process to establish
sustained civilian democratic rule in which there will
be no place for impunity. In that regard, it is necessary
to emphasize the professionalism, independence and
competence of the Sudanese judiciary and its ability
to achieve justice under national law, international
criminal law and international humanitarian law.
The public prosecutor in the Sudan has begun
investigations in the case of the detained former
President Omer Al-Bashir, as well as Abdel Rahim
Mohammed Hussein and Ahmad Harun. Former
President Omer Al-Bashir will receive a fair trial before
the national judiciary. As announced, the trial will
begin next week, thereby underscoring the willingness
and competence of the national judiciary to bring about
justice and combat impunity.
Thirdly, although the report acknowledges the
continued improvement of the situation in Darfur, it
nevertheless contains inconsistencies and contradictions.
Proof of that is the incorrect information, numbers and
events included in it. In paragraphs 25 through 31 of
the report, events are mentioned that either did not take
place or were exaggerated.
Such information contradicts the reports of
the Secretary-General and the last report of the
strategic review team, which confirmed the continued
improvement of the situation in Darfur. As a result of
that improvement, the report, which was endorsed by
the African Union Peace and Security Council as well
as the Secretary-General, recommended the continued
drawdown of the African Union-United Nations Hybrid
Operation in Darfur (UNAMID) within the agreed time
frame. I would also like to mention the valuable and
updated input of the UNAMID Force Commander of
in the Council’s meeting yesterday on the measures

16/16

19/06/2019

that have been taken to implement the transition from
peacekeeping to peacebuilding and achieving stability
in Darfur (see S/PV.8552).
Fourthly, the judgment of the ICC Appeals Chamber
in the case of the Hashemite Kingdom of Jordan, as
indicated in the report, was based on political more
than legal interpretations. The judgment violates many
well-established international treaties. It even violates
article 10 of the Rome Statute itself, which states that
“Nothing in this Part shall be interpreted
as limiting or prejudicing in any way existing or
developing rules of international law ...”
The judgment furthermore violates international
customary law, as the judges of the Court opted for
what suited their interests only. A significant number
of legal experts believe that resolution 1593 (2005)
does not provide for an exemption of being committed
to the principle of respecting immunity. In accordance
with international law and international jurisprudence,
immunity in this case is a right of the State, and not the
individual with immunity. Nobody may act on behalf
of the State in that matter. The person targeted by such
judgments in that case remains entitled to immunity and
can invoke it before the Court. Any attempt to interpret
otherwise would be an evident error and misjudgement
by the Appeals Chamber judges.
In conclusion, we emphasize that fighting impunity
is a noble cause of justice. It is not a subject of contention,
and it falls primarily within the responsibilities of the
relevant national investigative and judicial institutions,
in line with their competencies as stipulated in the
national legislation.
The meeting rose at 11.30 a.m.

19-18339
