A

UNITED
NATIONS

General Assembly
Distr.
GENERAL
A/RES/48/184*
31 March 1994

Forty-eighth session
Agenda item 93
RESOLUTION ADOPTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY
[on the report of the Second Committee (A/48/719)]
48/184. International cooperation for the eradication of poverty
in developing countries
The General Assembly,
Reaffirming its resolutions 43/195 of 20 December 1988, 44/212 of
22 December 1989, 45/213 of 21 December 1990, 46/141 of 17 December 1991 and
47/197 of 22 December 1992 related to international cooperation for the
eradication of poverty in developing countries,
Reaffirming also its resolutions S-18/3 of 1 May 1990 and 45/199 of
21 December 1990, as well as all the declarations, commitments, plans and
programmes of action containing provisions related to the eradication of
poverty in the framework of activities of the United Nations system,
Reaffirming further the Rio Declaration on Environment and
Development, 1/ in particular principle 5 thereof, Agenda 21, 2/ in particular
chapter 3 thereof entitled "Combating poverty", the Non-legally Binding
Authoritative Statement of Principles for a Global Consensus on the
Management, Conservation and Sustainable Development of All Types of
__________
*

Reissued for technical reasons.

1/
Report of the United Nations Conference on Environment and
Development, Rio de Janeiro, 3-14 June 1992 (A/CONF.151/26/Rev.1 (Vol. I,
Vol. I/Corr.1, Vol. II, Vol. III and Vol. III/Corr.1)) (United Nations
publication, Sales No. E.93.I.8 and corrigenda), vol. I: Resolutions adopted
by the Conference, resolution 1, annex I.
2/

Ibid., annex II.
/...

A/RES/48/184
Page 2

Forests, 3/ in particular principle 7 (a) thereof, and all other decisions and
recommendations adopted by the United Nations Conference on Environment and
Development relating to the eradication of poverty,
Underlining that the eradication of poverty, especially in developing
countries, is one of the priority development objectives for the 1990s,
Recognizing that poverty is a complex and multidimensional problem with
origins in both the national and international domains, and that its
eradication constitutes an important factor in ensuring sustainable
development,
Recognizing the central role that women play in the eradication of
poverty and the necessity of addressing the needs of women in poverty
eradication programmes,
Considering that the efforts made at the national and international
levels need to be enhanced to ensure the eradication of poverty, in particular
in the least developed countries, the countries in sub-Saharan Africa and
other countries that have areas of concentrated poverty,
Reaffirming the need for the organs, organizations and bodies of the
United Nations system to coordinate better and harmonize their activities in
the field of the eradication of poverty, bearing in mind the relevant
paragraphs of General Assembly resolution 47/199 of 22 December 1992, in
particular the paragraphs dealing with mechanisms and instruments of
coordination at the field level,
Taking note of the report of the Secretary-General, 4/
1.
Stresses the importance of domestic policies, including effective
budgetary policies, to mobilize and allocate domestic resources for the
eradication of poverty through, inter alia, the creation of employment and
income-generating programmes, the implementation of food security, health,
education, housing and population programmes and the strengthening of national
capacity-building execution programmes;
2.
Reaffirms that a supportive international economic environment
which takes into account resource flows and structural adjustment programmes,
in which social and environmental dimensions are integrated, is vital to the
success of efforts of developing countries, in particular, to deal with the
eradication of poverty;
3.
Invites all countries to undertake national strategies and
programmes for the eradication of poverty that are, inter alia, sensitive to
gender considerations, taking into account cultural, religious and social
particularities, and that involve more active participation by the targeted
communities, as well as by the most vulnerable groups, in initiating,
implementing, following up and evaluating specific projects;
__________
3/

Ibid., annex III.

4/

A/48/545.
/...

A/RES/48/184
Page 3

4.
Reiterates its request to the international community to adopt
specific and effective measures designed to increase financial flows to
developing countries, and urges the developed countries, which have reaffirmed
their commitment to reach the accepted United Nations target of 0.7 per cent
of gross national product for official development assistance, to the extent
that they have not yet achieved that target, to agree to augment their aid
programmes in order to reach that target as soon as possible, some developed
countries having agreed to reach the target by the year 2000, while other
developed countries, in line with their support for reform efforts in
developing countries, agree to make their best efforts to increase their level
of official development assistance;
5.
Invites the international community and the organs, organizations
and bodies of the United Nations system to continue to support development
programmes in developing countries, including the implementation of the
decisions and recommendations of the United Nations Conference on Environment
and Development related to the eradication of poverty, particularly chapter 3
of Agenda 21 2/ entitled "Combating poverty";
6.
Requests the Secretary-General to urge the organs, organizations
and bodies of the United Nations system, in the framework of the help they
give to developing countries, to strengthen their institutional capacities for
implementing their poverty eradication programmes and to adopt a coordinated
and integrated approach that takes into account, inter alia, the role and
needs of women, with attention to social services, income generation and the
increased participation of local communities;
7.
Invites preparatory bodies and all relevant forthcoming major
meetings and conferences of the United Nations system, particularly the
International Conference on Population and Development, the World Summit for
Social Development, the Fourth World Conference on Women: Action for Equality,
Development and Peace and the United Nations Conference on Human Settlements
(Habitat II), to take specific measures and decisions to meet, by the early
part of the twenty-first century, the challenge of the eradication of poverty;
8.
Requests the Secretary-General to submit to the General Assembly
at its forty-ninth session an updated report focusing, inter alia, on the
development of appropriate inputs to country programmes by relevant agencies
and organizations of the United Nations system, based on exchange of
information on and analysis of the operations of actual programmes and on the
identification of constraints and weaknesses of operational and coordinating
capacities owing to a lack of resources, as well as focusing on elements for
the elaboration of multisectoral strategies;
9.
Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its forty-ninth
session the item entitled "International cooperation for the eradication of
poverty in developing countries".
86th plenary meeting
21 December 1993
