S/PRST/2003/20

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
13 November 2003
English
Original: English and French

Statement by the President of the Security Council
At the 4857th meeting of the Security Council, held on 13 November 2003, in
connection with the Council’s consideration of the item entitled “The situation in
Côte d’Ivoire”, the President of the Security Council made the following statement
on behalf of the Council:
“The Security Council urges all Ivorian political forces to implement
fully, without delay or precondition all the provisions of the Linas-Marcoussis
Agreement as well as those of the agreement reached in Accra on 8 March
2003 (“Accra II”) with a view to open, free and transparent elections being
held in Côte d’Ivoire in 2005.
“The Security Council notes with satisfaction the progress made since the
statement by its President on 25 July, in particular the appointment of
Ministers of Interior and Defence, the adoption of the amnesty bill by the
National Assembly, the reopening of the border with Mali and Burkina Faso,
and the decisions taken by the Council of Ministers on 16 October to restore
public order and reform the statute of Ivorian radio and television (RTI).
“The Security Council expresses its serious concern, however, that the
implementation of the Linas-Marcoussis Agreement has slowed down. It
emphasizes in particular the importance of the entire Government of National
Reconciliation meeting as soon as possible in order to implement fully the
content of the Linas-Marcoussis Agreement. It reaffirms in this context the
urgency of carrying out the cantonment operations of the forces involved, to
allow the beginning of disarmament and demobilization, accompanied by
measures for reintegration into the regular army or civilian life.
“The Security Council further emphasizes the urgent need to begin
reforming land law and electoral rules, restore public services and the authority
of the State throughout the territory of Côte d’Ivoire, and end the use of
mercenaries and the illicit purchase of weapons in violation of national laws.
“The Security Council condemns firmly the grave human rights
violations. It further condemns the murder of a French journalist on 21 October
in Abidjan. The Security Council calls for a full investigation by the Ivorian
authorities of this crime and punishment of the perpetrators in accordance with
the law. It also calls on them to ensure that organs of the press and groups
which sponsor them refrain from encouraging any remark that might incite
hatred or violence.

03-61188 (E)

131103

*
0
3
6
1
1
8
8
*

S/PRST/2003/20

“The Security Council expresses its concern for the grave humanitarian
situation in the field. In this context, the Council supports the activities of all
United Nations agencies aimed at assisting the Ivorian people.
“The Security Council further condemns the hostile acts against United
Nations personnel in Bouaké and Man on 24 and 25 October last, and recalls
that all the parties are obliged, by resolution 1479 (2003), to cooperate with the
special political mission established by the Security Council, the United
Nations Mission in Côte d’Ivoire (MINUCI), and to ensure freedom of
movement of its personnel.
“The Security Council reiterates its full support for the efforts of the
Economic Community of West African States (ECOWAS), France and the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General with a view to stabilizing the
country and seeking a peaceful settlement of the conflict. The Council
welcomes in particular the recent initiatives of the Presidents of Ghana and
Nigeria and the holding of a regional summit in Accra on 11 November 2003
to address security problems in the region.
“The Security Council commends the action of the forces of ECOWAS
and France, and that of MINUCI and pays tribute to the commitment and
dedication shown by their personnel. It also welcomes the efforts of the United
Nations Office for West Africa and of all United Nations Missions in the
region to coordinate their action in order to address regional issues in an
appropriate manner. It expresses its intention to examine the recommendations
by the Secretary-General on ways to facilitate peace and stability in Côte
d’Ivoire.”

2
