i
TWENTY-EIGHTH

NEW

YEAR

YORK

CONTENTS
Page

Provisional

agenda (S/Agenda/l

748/Rev. 1) , . . , . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . , _ . . . .

1

Adoption

of the agenda.

, .. , .. ,. . . . , , . . . . , . . . . . , , . . , . ., ,. . , ,..

1

The situation in the Middle East:
Letter dated 7 October 1973 from the Permanent Representative of the United
States of America to the United Nations addressed to the President of the
Security Council (S/l 1010) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . , . . . . . . . . . . . a . . I . .

1

S/PV.l74C

NOTE
Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined with
figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United Nations document.
Documents of the Security Council (symbol S/. . .) are normally published in quarterly
Supplements of the Official Records of the Security Council. The date of the document
indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which information about it is given.
The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a system
adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Resolutions and Decisions of the
Security Council. The new system, which has been applied retroactively to resolutions
adopted before 1 January 1965, became fully operative on that date.

SEVENTEEN

HUNDRED

Held in New York

AND

on Tuesday,

President: Sir Laurence MCINTYRE (Australia).

23 October

MEETING

1973, at 4 p.m.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. E. Ogbu (Nigeriu)
and ilJr. J. Baroody (Saudi Arabia) took the places reserved
for them at the side of the Council chamber.

Resent: The representatives of the following States:
Australia, Austria, China, France, Guinea, India, Indonesia,
Kenya, Panama, Peru, Sudan, Union of Soviet Socialist
Republics, United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern
Ireland, United States of America and Yugoslavia,

3. The PRESIDENT: The first name inscribed on the list
of speakers is that of the representative of Egypt, on whom
I now call.
4. Mr. EL-ZAWAT
(Egypt): A lot of precious time has
already been lost since we asked that the Council should
meet. I do not therefore propose to lose any more time. We
have asked for a meeting of the Council to consider the
non-implementation
of its resolution 338 (1973), the
breaking down of the cease-fire ordered by the Council.

Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/l748/Rev.l)
1. Adoption

FORTY-EIGHTH

of the agenda.

2. The situation in the Middle East:
Letter dated 7 October 1973 from the Permanent
Representative of the United States of America to
the United Nations addressed to the President of
the Security Council (S/ 11010).

5. Mr. President, if you would allow me, I would defer any
remarks until the Council has taken a stand on this subject.
6. The PRESIDENT:

The meeting was called to order at 4.35 p.m.

I call on the representative of Israel.

7. Mr. TEKOAH (Israel): Before the vote on Security
Council resolution 338 (1973) I declared at the meeting of
21 October, in conveying the positive response of the
Government of Israel to the proposal made by the United
States of America and the Union of Soviet Socialist
Republics, that “the Government of Israel hopes that the
bloodshed and hostility which have tormented the Middle
East for so many years will be replaced by an era of peace
and co-operation between all the States in our region”
f I 747th meeting, para. 1$4j.

Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in the Middle East:
Letter dated 7 October 1973 from the Permanent
Representative of the United States of America to the
United Nations addressed to the President of the
Security Council (S/l 1010)

8. Bloodshed has not stopped because those who started
the bloodshed on Yom Kippur of 6 October are continuing
it. The attitude that the parties would take to the Security
Council’s cease-fire call was evident from the very beginning
of the Egyptian-Syrian aggression.

I. The PRESIDENT:
In accordance with the decision
taken at the 1743rd meeting, I propose now, with the
consent of the Council, to invite the representatives of
Egypt, Israel and the Syrian Arab Republic to take their
places at the Council table in order to participate in the
discussion without the right to vote.

9. It was no secret that the Security Council on 12
October suspended its week-long discussions of the renewed
fighting, unable to reach any decision on the cessation of
hostilities, because Egypt and Syria and their supporters did
not want any such decision. It is no secret that the
Security Council did not meet for nine days between 12
October and 21 October, while the fighting was raging,
because the Arab aggressor States and their followers
wanted the bloodshed and destruction to continue. The
attitude of the partics to a cease fire was also evident at our
last meeting. At that meeting Israel expressed its readiness
to comply with the proposed cease-fire on the understanding that it would be accepted and observed by all the
States taking part in the fighting. The Syrian representative
remained silent. The Egyptian Foreign Minister had some

At the invitation of the President, Mr. M. H. El-Zayyad
(Egypt), Mr. Y. Tekoah (Israel) and Mr. H. Kelarzi (Syrian
Arab Republic) took places at the Council table.
2. The PRESIDENT: In accordance with further decisions
taken at previous meetings, I propose also, with the consent
of the Council, to invite the representatives of Nigeria and
Saudi Arabia to participate in the discussion without the
right to vote. I shall ask them to take the places reserved for
them at the side of the Council Chamber, on the understanding that they will be called upon to take a place at the
council table when it is their turn to address the Council.
1

comments about my statement, but did not respond to the
cease-fire call.

15. At 2230 hours he announced that Egyptian forces had
opened fire on Israel forces at several points along the
cease-fire line. And’early this morning, 23 October, at 0050
hours, we announced that the cease-fire had not been
observed; that the Egyptians were shooting with all kinds of
weapons in almost all sectors of the Egyptian front.

after the adoption of resolution
10. Immediately
338 (1973) the Government of Israel announced that it
agreed to the cease-fire in accordance with that resolution.
Iraq was first among the Arab Governments to reject the
cessation of hostilities. It was followed by Libya, Algeria
and others of the 10 Arab States participating in the
aggression against Israel. Syria did not respond to the
cease-fire call at all. Jordan made some positive affirmations, but announced that the Jordanian armed forces on
the Syrian front were under Syrian command and would
abide by Syria’s orders. A few hours before the cease-fire
was to enter into force the Egyptian Government
announced that it agreed to it.

16. At 0555 hours the communiq&
stated that the
Egyptians had opened artillery and other fire on Israel
forces towards the end of the night of 22-23 October; at
0800 hours, early this morning, that the Egyptians had
opened heavy fire on Israel forces on the west bank of the
Suez Canal; and at 0900 hours, that the Egyptian forces
were continuing to violate the cease-fire in the southern
sector of the Suez Canal.
17. Facing this situation, the Israeli defence forces were
ordered to continue fighting in this SeCtOr Of the front.

1 I. The Government of Israel responded immediately with
the following communiqu&:

18. It is clear who accepted the cease-fire and who
rejected it, who has observed it and who has violated it. Of
all the 10 Arab States attacking Israel, there was only one
that was willing to announce that it would order its forces
to cease hostilities. However, even this announcement has
thus far proved to be spurious.

“The Government of Israel has been informed that the
Government of Egypt has instructed the armed forces of
Egypt to cease hostilities in accordance with the Security
Council resolution concerning a cease-fire. Following on
this, the Government of Israel has given orders to the
Israel defence forces to stop the fighting on the Egyptian
front at 1852 hours this evening local time, provided it is
confirmed that the Egyptians have indeed ceased hostilities. The cease-fire will therefore come into effect at the
end of the 12-hour period stipulated in the Security
Council resolution.”

19. In the light of the developments, Egypt’s announcement yesterday that it accepted the cease-fire appears to
have been nothing but a propaganda move under the cover
of which the Egyptian forces expected to continue their
attacks in places of their own choosing and in the hope that
the Israeli forces would remain restrained by the cease-fire
orders. It was inevitable that such a design should misfire. It
was inevitable that the Israeli forces should react to
Egyptian aggression.

12. It soon became apparent, however, that Egypt’s
professed acceptance of the cease-fire was not being
translated into action. Those who followed the news from
the area yesterday as the hour of the cease-fire was
approaching and then after the cease-fire deadline recall that
there was virtually no time during which the Egyptian
forces stopped shooting. The cease-fire never became
effective. One report after another carried by international
news agencies and correspondents at the front, broadcast
over the radio and television, gave information of continued
Egyptian attacks in violation of the cease-fire.

20. That, and only that, is what has been happening since
last night. Israel cannot acquiesce in the notion that the
Egyptian forces should be free to attack us and to inflict
casualties while the Israeli defence forces should remain
passive, confined to their positions, and should refrain from
taking all the action necessary for self-defence.
21. The fact of Egyptian aggression is the cause of Israel’s
military actions since yesterday, and it is the fact that wilE
determine the Israel Government’s attitude towards any
draft resolution or resolutions submitted to the Security
Council.

13. The shooting became particularly violent at 2038
hours when Egyptian forces opened fire on the Israel
bridgehead on the west bank of the Suez Canal from the
east and from the north. At 2056 hours the Egyptians
opened fire on the Israel bridgehead from north of
Devcrsoir. Later, Israeli forces were shelled from bazookas.
At 2123 hours Egyptians again opened fire on the Israeli
bridgehead. At 2132 hours there was bazooka shelling, and
at 2134 hours the bazooka shelling of Israeli forces
intensified and was extended in area. While this was taking
place the spokesman of the Israel defence forces repeatedly
drew attention to these Egyptian attacks.

22. Israel’s position remains as expressed in my statement
to the Security Council on 21 October. Israel is prepared to
cease fire immediately, provided Egypt ceases fire. As I
emphasized in my statement at the last meeting, Israel
accepted the cease-fire in the hope that all the Arab States
would acceptit and all the partieswouId observeit.
23. The problem which together with the actual obscrp
ante of the cease-fireweighsmost heavily upon us isthe
question of prisoners of war. Our experience in the past
compelsus to feel seriousconcern regardingthe situationof
Israeli prisonersof war and to strive for their speedy release
in the framework of a generalexchangeof prisonersof war.
We have taken note of the undertaking expressed at the
Council meetingof 21 October on behalf of the sponsors
of

14. At 20 hours local time, only one hour and eight
minutes after the cease-fire hc announced:
“Egyptian artillery fire at the area of Israel’s bridgehead
north of the Bitter Lake. Artillery fire on Israel forces in
the northern section of the front. Egyptian fire on Israel
forces in the area of Ismailia.”
2

resolution 338 (1973) that “there should be an immediate
exchange of prisoners of war” [ibid., para. lo]. As I
declared on that occasion, we regard the release of all
prisoners of war now held in the countries invo1ve.din the
conflict as an indispensable condition of any cease-fire
agreement. Israel expects that urgent action will be taken to
bring that about.

30. The PRESIDENT: I still have on the list of speakers
the names of some representativeswho wish to speak
before any voting takesplace,The next speaker31. I call on the representativeof the Soviet Union on a
point of order.
32. Mr. MALIK (Union of Soviet Socialist Republics)
(hmdation from Russian):I have formally proposedthat
the draft resolution be put to the vote. I wish to put
forward my procedural proposalthat the draft resolution
submitted by the Soviet Union and the United States
shouldbe voted on immediately.

24. Mr. SCALI (United States of America): I have been
authorized by my Government to sponsor with the Soviet
Union a draft resolution [S/11039] which reads as follows:
“The Security Council,
“Referring
1973,

to its resolution 338 (1973) of 22 October

33. The PRESIDENT: I call on the representativeof China
on a point of order.

“I. Confirms its decision on an immediate cessation of
all kinds of firing and of all military action, and urges that
the forces of the two sides be returned to the positions
they
occupied at the moment the cease-fire became
effective;

34. Mr. CHIAO Kuan-hua (China) (interpretation from
Chinese):Mr. President,the Chinesedelegationwould like
to speak. We cannot allow any impositionof view. May I
speaknow?
35. Mr. MALIK (Union of Soviet Socialist Republics)
(translation from Russian):I wish to speakon a point of
order.

“2. Requests the Secretary-General to take measures
for immediate dispatch of United Nations observers to
supervise the observance of the cease-fire between the
forces of Israel and the Arab Republic of Egypt, using for
this purpose the personnel of the United Nations now in
the Middle East and first of all the personnel now in
Cairo.”

36. The PRESIDENT: The representativeof the Soviet
Union has raised a point of order. Could 1 ask the
representativeof China to wait while we hear the point of
order that is raised by the representativeof the Soviet
Union?

25. I should like to reserve the right to comment briefly at
a later stage of the proceedings.

37. Mr. MALIK (Union of Soviet Socialist Republics)
(translation from Russian): There is no question of
imposinganything. We have herea draft resolution, a very
simple resolution, with which a11membersof the Security
Council became acquainted a few hours ago. Israel, the
27. For the present I wish to state that the Soviet
aggressor,hasviolated the decisionof the Security Council
delegation, jointly with the United States delegation, is
on the cease-fire,and Egypt, asthe victim of aggression,
has
introducing a draft resolution, the aim of which is to
proposed to the Security Council that it should convene
confirm the decisiontaken by the Security Councilon 22
urgently. The meeting was scheduledfor 12 o’clock.
October for an immediate cease-fireand the withdrawal Becauseof various manipulations,the meeting started, in
fact, only at 4.30 p.m. This is an urgent matter and the
without delay of troops to the positionsthey occupiedat
situation is critical. According to rule 34 of the provisional
the time when the Council ordered the cease-firewhich
came into force on 22 October 1973.
rules of procedure, 1am proposingthat this draft resolution
should be voted upon andthat we shouldhold a discussion
28. This draft resolution alsoprovidesthat the Secretary- after that. I am accordingly presentingthe formal motion
General be requestedto dispatchUnited Nations observers that my proposal on the vote on the draft resolutionshould
be put to the vote for a decisionby the Security Council.
immediately to the cease-firearea.I shouldparticularly like
to emphasizethat both sponsorsof the draft resolution,the
Soviet Union and the United States, considerthat the
38. The PRESIDENT: I askthe representativeof Chinato
troops of the parties should be returned to the positions state what 1 understandishis point of order.
they occupied at the time the cease-fireadopted in resolution 338 (1973) cameinto force-that is, their positionsat
39. Mr. CHIAO Kuan-hua (China) (interpretation from
1250 hours New York time on 22 October.
Chinese): Mr. President, the statementjust made by my
colleague, Mr. Malik, is completely unreasonable.Before
29. The Soviet delegation would urge membersof the
the United Statesand Soviet draft resolution is eventabled,
Council to take a decisionimmediatelyon the basisof the
you allow no one elseto speak.This is the wrong attitude.
We are firmly opposedto that. The United Nationsis not a
draft resolution before it, and I formally proposethat, in
view of the urgency of this questionand the situationon
tool to be manipulatedby the two super-Powers.
the spot, the draft resolution should be put to a vote
immediately and all delegationswishing to speakshould 40. This morning the Presidentof the Security Council
have an opportunity to do so after adoption of the draft
informed the Chinesedelegationthat an urgent meetingof
resolution.
the Security Council would be held to discussthe so-called

26. Mr. MALIK (Union of Soviet Socialist Republics)
(translation from Russian): I should like to reserve my right
to speak on the substance of.the question somewhat later.

3

violation of the cease-fire in the Middle East. After we
arrived at the conference hall the Chinese delegation was
told that there would be no Security Council meeting and
that the United States and the Soviet Union would reach an
agreement, which would then be transmitted through
consensus to the Secretary-General for implementation.

urgent resolution to restrain the aggressor is in fact helping
the aggressor. Therefore, I insist that the draft resolutioawhich has been placed before a meeting of the Security
Council that was convened urgently at the request of the
victim of aggression-should
be put to the vote immediately.

41. The Chinese delegation firmly opposes such a malicious practice of using the United Nations Security Council
as a tool to be juggled with by the two super-Powers at will.
In our opinion, this also shows utter disrespect for the
other States members of the Security Council. The Chinese
delegation cannot tolerate such a practice, We have something to say. We believe that the other States members of
the Security Council also have something to say from the
bottom of their hearts.

At this point a number of representatives, without havirtg
been called upon by the President, made interjections
simultaneously from their places at the Council tabIe, and
others at the side of the Council Chamber culled out.
51. The PRESIDENT:
Order, please. This meeting is
suspended for ten minutes.
like meeting was suspended at 5. IO p.m. and was resumed
at 5.30 p. in.

42. Now the Chinese delegation would like to state once
again our views on the Middle East situation and on the
manipulation of the Security Council by the two supcrPowers, the United States and the Soviet Union.

52. The PRESIDENT:
China.

I call on the representative of

53. Mr. CHIAO Kuan-hua (China) (interpretution frotn
Chinescl: Mr. President, my statement was interrupted. I
should like to express my dissatisfaction. I should like to
voice my protest.

43. Since 6 October the broad masses of the army men
and people of Egypt, Syria and Palestine have won a series
of brilliant victories in their heroic fight against Israeli
aggression. Egyptian national flags have again fluttered over
the territories on the eastern bank of the Suez Canal which
had been occupied for more than six years. The Syrian
army men and people have inflicted heavy casualties on the
enemy troops at the Golan Heights. The Palestinian
guerrillas have also launched attacks valiantly. The sacred
fight against aggression-

54. On 21 October the Soviet Union and the United States
concocted a draft resolution allowing no one the time for
consideration and allowing no one the time to report to and
ask for instructions from their respective Governments,
trying to railroad the draft resolution through the Council,
Such imposition is intolerable. As far as the Chinese sideis
concerned, taking into consideration the over-all situation,
we refrained from vetoing it and adopted the method of
not participating in the vote. Originally we couId have
vetoed it. Why not? Why cannot a United States and Soviet
draft resolution be vetoed? However, our goodwill has
been abused.

44. Mr. MALIK (Union of Soviet Socialist Republics)
[translation from Russian): I wish to speak on a point of
order.
45. Mr. CHIAO Kuan-hua (China) [interpretation from
Chinese): This is unreasonable, Mr. President. It is unreasonable for the representative of the Soviet Union to
interrupt my statement. Why should he have such a
privilege?

5.5. Today, before the draft was introduced and even up to
now we still do not have the Chinese text. How can we
vote? Now, there is talk that we should take a vote right
away. Does the world belong solely to the United States and
the Soviet Union? It does not. The Chinese have the right
to speak. The other members of the Council have the right
to speak. Because you interrupted my statement, Mr. President, I should like to start from the beginning.

46. The PRESIDENT:
1 must say to the representatives of
China that it is, I think, the normal practice of this Council
when a point of order is raised by a member to give that
member the opportunity-

56. I know that my colleague, Mr. Malik, has something to
say. Of course, Mr. Malik, but please wait. What does it
matter? If you have truth on your side, what does it matter
if you wait a few moments? Is that not right? You should
do things with style. Show your style. Why the hurry?
There is no hurry. It does not matter. If you have
something to say, you can say it. There is place for you to
say it. You can say it here. Please wait, do not be in such a
hurry. I have known you for decades. You have never
changed your old habits. Why do you not change your ways
a little bit?

47. Mr. CHIAO Kuan-hua (China) (interpretation from
Chinese): Mr. Presiclcnt, I did not interrupt his statement.
He should aIlow me to finish my statement. Mr. Malik, you
can speak when it is your turn to do so. Could you not wait
a little while?
48. Mr. MALIK (Union of Soviet Socialist Republics)
(interpretation jkom Russian): Point of order.
49. The PRESIDENT: Could I appeal to the represCntative
of the Soviet Union to allow-

57. NOW, Mr. President, I should like to start from the
beginning, and I ask for your indulgence.

50. Mr. MALIK (Union of Soviet Socialist Republics)
(translation from Russian): I wish to speak on a point of
order. I should like to point out that anyone delaying with
futile talk the adoption by the Security Council of an

58. This morning the President of the Security Council
informed the Chinese delegation that an urgent meeting of
4

-

would be held to discuss the so-called
the cease-fire in the Middle East. After we
arrived at the conference hall the Chinese delegation
was
t&l that there would be no Security Council meeting
and
that the United States and the Soviet Union would reach an
Weemellt
Which would then be transmitted through
consensus to the Secretary-General for implementation,
the

Security

ViOhtiOll

i
y

COUnCil

Israeli Zionist aggression and provocations witi the support
and connivance of the two super-Powers. After Israel
unleashed the recent new provocations, the two superPowers have successively supplied arms to the belligerent
parties. Here it must be pointed out that in supplying arms
to the Arab countries the purpose of the Soviet Union is bY
no means to give true support to them in resisting
Israeli Provocations, but to control the development of the
Middle East situation so that it will not go beyond
the
limits it has agreed to with the other super-Power,

Of

59. The Chinese delegation firmly opposes SUC]~a mdiciOUs practice Of using the United Nations Security Council
as a tool to be juggled with by the two super-Powers at will.
In our opinion, this also shows utter disrespect for the
other States members of the Security Council. The Chinese
delegation cannot tolerate such a practice. We have something to say. We believe that the other States members of
the Security Council also have something to say from the
bottom of their hearts.

65. The Soviet Union also made a big hue and cry that the
Arab peoples’ struggle against aggression had confronted
detente with a “dangerous development of events” and that
the development of the situation “ran counter to” the
easing of tension recently attained.
66. What does this show? This shows that what the Soviet
Union calls “ditente” is based on the submissive prostra.
tion of all oppressed nations and peoples before the
condominium of the two super-Powers. The United States
and the Soviet Union, contending as well as colluding with
each other, have blamed and obstructed in every possible
way the just struggle of the Egyptian, Syrian and Palestine
people against aggression and are trying by all possible
means to strangle it, for the purpose of stopping the
struggle of the Palestinian and other Arab peoples, biting
their hands and leaving them at the mercy of the two
super-Powers.

60. Now, the Chinese delegation would like to state once
again our views on the Middle East situation and on the
nYanipuIation of the Security Council by the two superPowers, the United States and the Soviet Union.
61. Since 6 October the broad masses of the army men
and people of Egypt, Syria and Palestine have won a series
of brilliant victories in their heroic fight against Israeli
aggression. Egyptian national flags have again fluttered over
the territories on the eastern bank of the Suez which had
been occupied for,more than six years. The Syrian army
men and people have inflicted heavy casualties on the
enemy troops at the Golan Heights. The Palestinian
guerrillas have also launched attacks valiantly.

67. In order to further divide up spheres of influence in
the Middle East and re-impose the situation of “no war, no
peace” on the Arab pepples, the two super-Powers, after
hectic bargaining behind the scenes for their respective
interests, produced a draft resolution at the Security
Council early on the morning of 22 October in an attempt
to use the United Nations and the Security Council as their
hired tool to rubber-stamp the dirty deal of the two
super-Powers.

62. The sacred fight against aggression and for the
recovery of occupied territories waged by the army men
and people of Egypt, Syria and Palestine has broken
through the situation of “no war, no peace”, deliberately
created by the two super-Powers in the Middle East for
their respective interests, exploded the myth about the
“invincibility”
of Israel and demonstrated the strong
fighting will of the Arab and Palestine people, who have
been greatly encouraged. At the same time, many Arab
countries have successively sent out their troops to the
front of war against aggression and fought shoulder to
shoulder with the army men and people of Egypt, Syria and
Palestine.

68. All people with a discerning eye will see clearly that
that so-called draft resolution is even more ambiguous than
resolution 242 (1967) and is a scrap of paper, a fraud,
which can solve no problems. Basically speaking, the
Chinese delegation was not in favour of this so-called draft
resolution. However, it was only taking into consideration
the desire of certain countries concerned that the Chinese
delegation refrained from voting against it and did not
participate in the voting, As we have foreseen, as Soon as
that draft resolution was adopted, the Israeli Zionists
immediately and flagrantly continued to expand their
aggression against Egypt and Syria. It can thus be seen that
what the Soviet Union calls justice is partiality towards
Israel.

63. Many other Arab countries and people are giving
active support and assistance by various means to this war
against aggression, demonstrating the unprecedented militant unity of the Arab countries in their common fight
against the enemy, The facts prove that the Arab and
Palestinian people are heroic people and that the struggle
they have been waging since 6 October is perfectly just. The
United Nations and all justice-upholding and peace-loving
countries and people of the world are duty bound to give
the most active support and assistance to it, and no one has
any right to engage in obstructions and sabotage.

69. We firmly support Egypt and Syria in their just
denunciation of Israel’s expanded aggression. No matter
what measures the Egyptian, Syrian and Palestinian People
may take on their own occupied soil for the recovery of
their lost territories, they are all just, whereas any slight
provocation made bY Israel constitutes a criminal act.

64. However, we have to point out with indignation here
that the two super-Powers have played a most inglorious
role t/~rougllout the incident. It is known to all that the
dangerous development of events in the Middle East is
caused not by the Arab and Palestinian people but by the

70. We maintain that the two super-Powers, which have al1
along been obstructing and sabotaging the just struggle of
5

surmount all kinds of obstructions and difficulties and
carry on the just struggle against aggression. The great Arab
people will certainly win liberation.

the Army men and people of Egypt and Syria and which
have concocted the said draft resolution must be held fully
and unshirkably responsible for the recent expanded aggression by Israeli Zionism.

76. The PRESIDENT: There are no further names in.
scribed on the list of speakers. I take it, therefore, that the
members of the Security Council are now prepared to
proceed to the vote on the draft resolution in document
s/11039.

71. Following the resolution of 22 October, the United
States and the Soviet Union have today introduced a new
draft resoluticm on what they call supervising the cease-fire.
This is a fresh insult to the United Nations. Like the
previous resolution, this draft resolution is a mere scrap of
paper which makes no condemnation of Israel’s expanded
aggression, puts Ihe aggressor and the victim of the
aggression on a par, and still fails to make the slightest
mention of the demand for the immediate withdrawal of
the Israeli aggressors from all rhc occupied Arab territories.

A vote was taken by show of hands.
One member (China) did not participate in the voting
The draft resolution was adopted by I4 votes to uone.1

72. Fundamentally
speaking, the Chinese delegation is
opposed to this Idraft resolution.

77. The PRESIDENT: I shall now call upon representatives wishing to speak in explanation of vote after the
vote.

73. I deem it also necessary to point out that lhe
evolution of the United Nations to the present state of
affairs has reached intolerable limits. What is the need for
the Uni’ted Nations? Would it not suffice to have the
condominium
of the United States and the Soviet
Union plus a Secretary-General?
Nevertheless, out of
respect for the countries concerned, we would give considcration to this draft resolution. Rut we will’never allow it
to be imposed on us. They want to force through the draft
resolution before it is distributed. What on earth kind of
logic is this? If the countries concerned-I
repeat, the
countries concerned-want
such a thing, we have no
alternative, but the maximum WC can do is to refrain from
opposing it. But we arc deeply convinced that the broad
masses of the Arab pcoplc will never allow themselves to be
controlled by the two super-Powers perpetually. History is
long. The people will invariably carry on the struggle and
live on. All this will be nothing but an interlude when we
look back after a few decades.

78. Mr. SCALI (United States of America): I should like
to put on record my delegation’s deep regret that our
proceedings were interrupted by unfortunate disorder. I
wish also to compliment our President, Ambassador
McIntyre, on his patient efforts to maintain and restore
order in the chamber. This wrangle was particularly
regrettable because of the urgency of the issue before us.
The issue is peace, and while we speak men are dying.
79. My delegation, for its part, was prepared to allow the
representative of China to speak. We did not believe he
would speak for an unreasonable period of time. The issue
has been resolved, and we fervently hope that we may be
spared further interruptions in the future.
80. The United States joined with the Soviet Union in
introducing the draft resolution adopted by the Council
because of its concern that the cease-fire ordered by the
Council on 22 October be made fully effective at the
earliest possible moment.

74. Fundamcntaily speaking, the days are gone when the
two super-Ijowcrs
could manipulate and dominate the
affairs of the world. Neither one super-Power nor the two
super-Powers combined can impost their will on the people
of the world, on the third world countries and other States
members of the Security Council. The Palestinian and other
Arab peoples are politically conscious people with a strong
will. Tested and tempered in the struggle against aggression
over the past years and in the recent clays, they will still less
docilely allow themselves to be manipulated and duped by
the two super-Powers. The 700 million Chinese people and
the numerous third world countries and peoples, as well as
all those upholding justice, sympathize with and support
them.

81. There have been charges from each side of violations
allegedly committed by the other. It is obviously impossible
at this moment to determine the accuracy of those charges.
No third-party
evidence from an objective source is
available to us.
82. The resolution just adopted confirms the Council’s
decision of 22 October on an immediate cessation of all
kinds of firing and of all military action, and it urges that
the forces of the two sides be returned to the positions they
occupied at the moment the cease-fire became effective.
The resolution also suggests that the Secretary-General take
measures to dispatch United Nations observers immediately
to supervise the observance of the cease-fire, using person.
nel of the United Nations now in the Middle East and first
of all the personnel in Cairo.

75. So long as the national rights of the Palestinian people
are not restored and the lost territories of the Arab
countries arc not recovered, there can be no lasting peace in
the Middle East. The heroic Arab and Palestinian people
will certainly draw the necessary lessons from what the two
super-Powers have done, continue to break through the
situation of “no war, no peace” which the two superPowers try to reimpose on them, continue their persistent
struggle, enhance their unity, act independently and on
their own initiative, ceaselessly strengthen thcmsclves,

83. We consider the central features of the resolution to
be those in which the Council confirms its position for a
cease-fire and in which it provides for the stationing of
observers between the forces of Israel and the Arab
1 Seeresolution 339 (1973).
6

obtain a military advantage of flouting Security Council
decisions, and this time bringing into question the assurances, explicit or implied, given by the sponsors that all
could expect the resolution to be respected. We have now
received fresh information of Israel’s armed forces attempting to proceed with their operations on the West Bank of
the Suez canal while, on the other front, again attacking
Syria with renewed and intensive fire in clear violation of
the cease-fire in Security Council resolution 338 (1973),
thus causing the cease-fire, which seemed to have taken
hold, to break down quickly.

Republic of Egypt. The former provision will put an end to
bloodshed; the latter will result in the creation of a clear line
of demarcation separating the forces of the two sides.
84. We have agreed, for reasons of principle, with the
provision of the resolution urging the forces to return to
the positions they occupied when the cease-fire became
effective. We put forward the principle of return to
positions occupied before hostilities broke out in the
statement I made in this chamber on 8 October [17’3rd
meeting]. At that time the principles did not receive
support from the Council. Consistent with our view at that
time, we agree today that forces should return to the
positions occupied at the time the cease-fire became
effective. But we must point out that there will be great
difficulty in establishing actual cease-fire lines and in fixing
the positions of forces which have been manoeuvring in the
desert. I hope that this will not become our central
preoccupation as we search for a just and durable peace.

89. The Security Council and all responsible international
parties, especially those directly involved in the attempts to
influence the situation in the Middle East so directly,have
an obligation and a duty under the Charter to make Israel
stop its firing and all its military activities, and to stop
violating the cease-fire and immediately to start implementing Security Council resolution 242 (15X7), as requested in
paragraph 2 of resolution 338 (1973), in all its parts. The
withdrawal of Israel’s occupation forces from all Arab
territories seized in the 1967 war back to the lines of
5 June 1967 is one of the basic provisions of resolution
242 (1967), and its immediate implementation means that
Israel must start its withdrawal now.

85. It is important that the United Nations resume at once
the function of observation of the forces of the parties.
Fortunately, the United Nations has in the area officers of
the United Nations Truce Supervision Organization who
can proceed quickly to the cease-fire area. With the
adoption of this resolution we would expect the SecretaryGeneral, through the Chief of Staff of the truce supervision
organization, to put observers in place at once and to
receive immediately reports from them on events in the
areas of contact between the two sides. These reports
would, of course, be transmitted to the Security Council
forthwith.

90. Instead, we have a situation very reminiscent of our
past painful experience of every cease-fire, which resulted
in Israel’s expanding its territorial hold, which has always
meant the sowing of the seeds of new wars in the Middle
East. Are we now to conclude that so soon after we
adopted the Soviet-American draft, so soon after resolution
338 (1973) was to be implemented without delay, instead
of moving to peace and to a just and lasting settlement,
despite all assurances which were made in order to enable
the Council to adopt its important decision of 21 and 22
October, that so soon after that, all we have is another
repetition of Israel’s thwarting of any promise of peace
because Israel covets other people’s territories, which
means war?

86. Finally, we must look to the future, Our paramount
task is to bring about an effective cease-fire and to halt the
bloodshed. WC are therefore glad that the Security Council
gave prompt consideration to the United States-Soviet
resolution,
SO that the fighting may be stopped and
negotiations can begin, looking towards a just and lasting
peace.
87. Mr. MOJSOV (Yugoslavia): It was very late, last
Sunday night and early Monday morning, when the
Security Council had been convened for an extremely
urgent meeting, on the 21st and 22nd of this month, that
we were asked to adopt the joint Soviet-American draft
resolution calling for an immediate cease-fire in place and
for the immediate implementation of Security Council
resolution 242 (1967). We have adopted that draft resolution which has now become Security Council resolution
338 (1973). That resolution is now only two days old. We
expressed the hope then that following the cease-fire peace
would finally come to save not only the lives of the fighters
involved in the war operations but also future generations
from the same tragic events. Peace was our sincere hope and
we truly would not like this hope to be transformed again
into an illusion.

91. My delegation, aware of the urgency of the situation
in the field which called for prompt action on the part of
the Security Council, voted in favour of the draft resolution
contained in document S/l 1039.
92. Mr. KHALID (Sudan): When we accepted the ceasefire resolution we did so in trust, and therefore refrained
from discussing its implications. We marked the hasty
manner in which it was conceived, we marked the hasty
manner in which it was presented to us, we marked OUI
rejection, as loyal members of this Organization and as a
non-aligned country of any concept of condominium that
reduces this Council to a rubber stamp. We observed that it
would be a supreme insult to this Council-and indeed to
the United Nations-if
the term “appropriate auspices”
meant anything other than this Organization. But, on the
other hand, we were ready to forgo all those considerations
if that would help stop blood-letting.

88, ‘The cease-fire in place was to take effect and all
military activities were to end, 12 hours after the adoption
of the resolution. By a special communiquC of 22 October
1973, Egypt accepted the resolution. But less than 40 hours
have elapsed and once again we arc confronted with Israel’s
usual behaviour-that
of utilizing cease-fires in order to

93. Unfortunately
it now appears that we have not
achieved much of that by simply adopting resolution
338 (1973).
7

this situation, it is the Council’s duty to call once nlore
upon all parties to the present fighting to stop all military
activity immediately.

94, One would not like to pose as being wise after the
event. It is a fact, though, that whatever is now happening
on the battlefield is due to the lack of an instrument to
enforce the will of this Council. One would have hoped that
the Powers, or their interlocutors, who had worked out the
resolution would have also worked out the instruments to
enforce its aims. We cannot talk of a cease-fire without
talking of modalities of supervision and control, and if our
fears are proven right on this point our worst fears on the
whole question are yet to come. What is the machinery for
the immediate implementation of resolution 242 (1967)
referred to in paragraph 2 of resolution 338 (1973)? What
is the machinery for negotiations referred to in paragraph 3
of that resolution’? We are told that such negot’iations and
the implementation of resolution 242 (1967) shall be
concurrent with the cease-fire, that is, that it would take
place side by side with it, if words are to be given their
plain dictionary meaning.

98. My delegation also welcomed the fact that &e
resolution which we have just adopted provides for the
immediatedispatch of IJnited Nations observersto super.
vise the cease-firein Egypt. I agreewith the Prime Minister
of the Sudan that, with the advantage of hindsight, it is
unfortunately clear that a cease-firein such a complex
military situation could not have been self-policing, If tile
cease-fire is to be maintained, there must be proper
arrangementson the ground to superviseit, of the sort
which have been tested and have on the whole proved
effective over the years. In this connexion, it seemsto my
delegation that the number of existing United Nations
observersmay be inadequate for the task they are being
called upon to perform, and that this number may well
have to be increasedif they are to be able to provide this
Council with the comprehensivecoverage which will be
needed.If this should prove to be the case,my delegation
would see no objection to the Secretary-General’stakilrg
the necessaryaction, in consultationwith the Chief of Staff
of the Truce SupervisionOrganization.

95. However, there is no way for us to run away from our
responsibilities. It is the duty of this Council to supplement
immediately its resolution with a decision to reinforce the
United Nations observers who are already there and entrust
them with the job of observing and controlling the
cease-fire. The Powers who conceived the resolution may
now call upon the Secretary-General to help in the
translat.ion of the Council’s resolution into action. We have
entrusted him with this task under Security Council
resolution 242 (1967) and we reaffirmed our support for
that resolution only yesterday. If we call upon the parties
to implement resolution 242 (1967) in all its parts, we
cannot in the same breath violate the same resolution by
diluting if not negating the role of the Secretary-General
and of the Security Council. It was in this spirit that we
voted positively for the draft resolution in document
S/l 1039.

99. If in what I have said I have concentrated on the
cease-fire,this is not becausemy delegationdoesnot attach
the highest importance to the earliest possiblestart of tllc
negotiationsreferred to in paragraphs2 and 3 of resolution
338 (1973), which are designedto bring about the implymentation of resolution 242 (1967). Rather the reverse:it
is becausewe feel that a start should be made at onceon
the difficult and delicate task of achieving a settlemeat,
that we believe that the cease-firemust be made effectivi!
without delay.

96. We do not believe that Security Council resolution
338 (1973) is an open sesame. It cannot, by itself silence
the shooting. Let us all back our words with deeds and let
us not deceive ourselves, and for an obvious reason. The
silencing of war machinery will not mean peace. It is only
the point of departure for peace and the road is long, very
long in fact. A lot of goodwill is needed, goodwill that not
only should be there but should be seen to be there. It is
needed even if human genius can settle the question of
withdrawal and of boundaries. It will take another long and
camest heave to set people’s minds at rest. The mind of the
area was poisoned for more than half a century, and peace
is predominantly an attitude of mind. This cannot be
achieved through gimmickry. It cannot be achieved through
hopeful procrastination, and it shall certainly not be
achicvcd through vague compromises
concludedby Powers
outside this Organization andbrought to us only to haveus
cloak them with the garbof respectability.

100. Mr. MALIK (Union of Soviet Socialist Republics)
fionz Russins j: The Security Council hasolet
today at the requestof the Government of Egypt, because
of the extreme urgency of consideringthe question of tllc
violation by Israelof the decisionof the Council concerning
a cease-fire, the decision adopted by the Council in
resolution338 (1973), on 22 October.
(translation

101. The statement made by the representative of Egypt
in the Council has outlined the concrete facts, namelythat
Israeli armed forces, in violation of that decision of the
Council on a cease-fire,have renewed hostilities against
Egypt, with the participation of large military units, in
order to expand the territories they have scizcd. Thusthe
Council has once again been confronted with a nc\v
challengeby Israel, in contempt of the Council’s decisions
on a cease-fireand in continuation of its aggression
in tllc
Middle East.
102. The Council is well aware of the cynical aad
contemptuousattitude of Israel towards decisionstaken by
the Council and decisionsof the United Nations asa whole.
Only recently, at the last meeting of the Security Council,
the representativeof Israel engagedin abusive,provocatiw
and contemptuoustirades againstthe United Nations.‘IIre
Security Council has on many occasionsconsideredthe
questionof violations by Israel of decisionsof the United
Nations and has sternly condemnedIsrael for such violi&

97. Sir Donald MAITLAND (United Kingdom): My delegation voted in favour of the draft resolution which the
Council hasjust adoptedsinceit wasclearto usthat ‘fitrther
action was urgently required to back up resolution
338 (1973), adopted by this Council ycstcrday. While we
welcome the fact that both Egypt and Israelhaveaccepted
the call to end the fighting, the cease-fireis clearly not yet
fully effective; in certain areasfighting is still continuing.In
8

tions. No State Member of the United Nations has been so
frequently condemned by the Council and by the General
Assembly as has Israel for its aggressive actions against the
Arab States.

108. In connexion with this violation by Israel of Ihc
Security Council cease-fire decision, the Soviet Government
today published a special, urgent statement, which 1 shall
read out here for the information of the members of the
council:

103. Israel’s distaste-Israel’s hatred, even-for the United
Nations is entirely understandable. The aggressors and
racists whose politics have been so frequently condemned
in the United Nations did not and do not find these United
Nations decisions to their liking. But, as we all know, the
United Nations was created for the establishment and
strengthening of peace and for guaranteeing international
security and restraining aggressors, and an aggressor is
obliged to bow to the decisions af the Security Council and
carry them out faithfully. Yet we have once again, at the
present moment, a repetition of the usual story of Israel’s
actions. At this very moment, while this meeting of the
Security Council is proceeding, the armed forces of Israel
are continuing their attempts to extend their incursions
further into Egyptian territory.

‘“The entire world was gratified and relieved to hear of
the decision of the Security Council on 22 October on a
cease-fire and a cessation of all hostilities in the Middle
East.
“The Egyptian leaders have started their readiness to
fulfil this decision of th,e Security Council and to put an
end to hostilities on the Egypt-Israel front.
“The Government of Israel also announced its agreement with the Security Council decision. However, the
Tel Aviv statement was actually a blatant falsehood under
the cover of which the Israeli military treacherously
threw itself on the positions of the Egyptian troops and
also on populated civilian points in Egypt. These actions
on the part of Israel arc a gross flouting of the Security
Council’s decisions and a challenge to the peoples of the
entire world. For these gross violations of the Security
Council’s decision the Government of Israel must bear
full responsibility.

104. As you know, the Government of Egypt declared
that it accepted and supported the decision of the Security
Council for a cease-fire and cessation of hostilities in
accordance with the time-limit laid down by the Council in
its resolution 338 (1973). However, Tel Aviv, in pursuance
of its policy of aggression and expansion in the Middle East,
decided to take advantage of the fact that Egypt was
observing the Security Council resolution and treacherously
to deal new blows in order to seize new strategic positions
and enlarge its beacli-heads.

“The Soviet Government and the entire Soviet people
voice their angry protest at this treacherous act on the
part of the Israeli Government and demand that Israel
should immediately cease firing and all military hostilities
against the troops of Arab States and withdraw its troops
to the cease-fire line of 22 October, in accordance with
the Security Council decision of 22 October 1973.

105. In the extremely grave situation now developing in
the Middle East, fraught as it is with danger for the
maintenance of international peace, the Soviet delegation
considered it necessary that the Security Council should be
immediately convened, and accordingly at once gave full
support to the proposal to that effect made by the
Egyptian delegation, in the persons of the Minister for
Foreign Affairs, Mr. El-Zayyat, and the Permanent Reprcsentative of Egypt to the United Nations, Mr. Abdel
Meguid. We immediately took steps to ensure that the
Security Council should adopt a decision confirming its
previous resolution of 22 October and should make the
aggressor withdraw from the territories he had seized after
the coming into effect of the cease-fire.

“The Soviet Government warns the Government of
Israel”-1 would like the Israeli representative to heed this
statement-“of
the very serious consequences involved in
the continuation of its aggressive actions against the
Egyptian Arab Republic and the Syrian Arab Republic.”
109. And now a few words on the cynical anti-Soviet
statement of the representative of China. China, by
delaying the taking of a decision by the Security Council,
has helped the aggressor to continue for some time his
violation of the cease-fire.
110. The rules of procedure enable the Council to vote on
the proposal without prior discussion. This was an
extremely urgent matter, and a proposal was made by the
delegation of Egypt. The meeting was convened for 12
noon; then it was put off until 4.30 p.m.; and the Chinese
delegation has helped to drag out the meeting until almost
6 o’clock.

106. The Soviet delegation expresses its gratification that
the Council was able to take an urgent decision immediately and to request the Secretary-General to take effective
measures for the immediate dispatch of observers to the
cease-fire line, so as to compel Israel to respect the
decisions of the Council on the cease-fire and to withdraw
its troops from the territories it had seized after the
cease-fire came into effect.

1 Il. All members of the Security Council were aware of
the two main points in the draft resolution: it confirmed
resolution 338 (1973) and urged that the aggressor’s troops
be withdrawn
to the cease-fire lines of 22 October.
Members of the Council were well aware that a provision
was also included which requested the Secretary-General to
take measures for the immediate dispatch of United
Nations observers-those now in the Middle East, and first
of all the personnel now in Cairo -to the cease-fire lines.

107. The attempts on the part of Israel further to pursue
its policy of expansion in the Middle East by taking
advantage of the fact that Egypt is observing the decisions
of the Security Council are inadmissible and cannot be
tolerated by the Council. It is time to put an end to this
cynical attitude of Israel’s towards the decisions of the
Security Council.
9

anti-Soviet pronouncements
and its out-and-out antiSovietism, or the Soviet Union that gave them and taught
them to use those weapons. Let us look at the question that
way to understand what the Chinese representatives’
position is and what our position is. Who is helping the
aggressor, and who the victims of the aggression? We have
all been convinced that, in his statement, Mr. Chiao gave
vent to all his anti-Soviet anger and spleen. He used the
Council meeting to dole out the usual share of anti-Soviet
slander. We do not think it necessary to answer that; it has
become a habit of the Chinese representatives, just RS
Orthodox Christians recite the “Our Father”. Mr. Chiao
censured the United Nations and blamed it for its ineffectiveness. The day before yesterday, at the meeting of the
Council, we heard cynical and insulting attacks by the
Israeli representative against the United Nations and today
we heard similar attacks from the Chinese delegation. That
is what Israel and China have in common against the United
Nations-they criticize and slander it and blacken its image.
Their attitude in this matter is the same. Israel dots not like
resolution 338 (1973). Israel’s representative made wild
attacks against &heUnited Nations, and against resolutions
adopted by the Council supporting the victim of the
aggression and condemning the aggressor. And China does
not like these resolutions either. There again Israel and
China take a common stand. I think Israel should thank
China for taking that position. How has China helped the
United Nations in the last two years to become more
effective? What constructive
contribution
has China
made? I should like the members of the Council and
representatives to answer that question. China’s attitude in
the United Nations is to criticize and reject everything. But
that will not take the Chinese representatives very far. If
they seriously want to enhance the effectiveness of the
United Nations, let them act together with all the Members
of the United Nations. They must not think they are wiser
and more orthodox. In the past two years they have done
nothing constructive in the United Nations. The United
Nations is expecting some constructive proposals, some
useful initiatives in order to strengthen the United Nations
and make it into an effective instrument which would
strengthen peace and international security and would
protect the victims of aggression against the aggressor. So
far the Chinese representatives have confined themselves to
anti-Soviet gossip, fanatical anti-Sovietism, and they have
used the United Nations to make anti-Soviet attacks. But
that will not take them very far either. That is how matters
now lie.

112. Egypt requested an immediate vote on that draft
resolution, and the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Egypt
was willing to refrain from speaking before that vote was
taken. The fact that no one-no single member of the
Security Council, apart from China-addressed the meeting
speaks for itself. It shows that the members of the Security
Council understood the urgency of the issue, were aware of
the emergency situation prevailing, and preferred to express
their attitude toward the aggressor by voting for the draft
resolution. Only China held up the adoption for almost
another hour and a half, thereby enabling the aggressor t.o
continue to violate resolution 338 (1973) for a further
period of time.
113. The fact that Council members are speaking after the
vote and not before is the best possible object lesson and a
slap in the face for the Chinese delegation. It shows the
isolation of China in the Security Council, for no one
supported the Chinese representative in what he did. These
are the hard facts. And despite all the Chinese representative’s frantic efforts to invent anti-Soviet lies, these facts
are plain to the entire world and to the entire United
Nations.
114. Mr. Chiao should draw the appropriate lesson from
this-if he is able to realize the situation in which he finds
himself at this meeting of the Security Council. He spoke
because he is an apologist of chaos; his policy is: “the worse
it is, the better”. That is the essence of what he said. He
threatened to veto the previous resolution in June and July
and also the present draft resolution. Suppose the veto had
been applied. I should have liked to see Mr. Huang or
Mr. Chiao raise their hands and veto resolution 338 (1973)
and today’s resolution. Such a veto could have helped only
Israel, and Israel would have set up a monument to them in
Tel Aviv as a sign of gratitude for giving such assistance to
the aggressor. That is what China’s policy would lead to.
The fact that China decided not to use the veto only shows
the cowardly and unprincipled nature of its position in this
matter. It was impossible in this case to use the veto and
thereby help the aggressor. And instead of putting his hand
up, Mr. Chiao chose to hide it under the table. But such an
attitude also helps the aggressor.
115. If all the members of the Security Council had done
the same, who would have thanked us, Egypt or Israel?
116. If we ask that question, the answer is perfectly clear.
Israel would have thanked us for such an attitude on the
part of the Security Council and its members if they had
taken up the position adopted by the Chinese represcntative in this matter.

120. In conclusion, it should be noted that if China had
given the Arab world as many rifles, machine-guns, automatic weapons, tanks, rockets and planes as the Chinese
representatives have vented bile and anger here in the
Council against the Soviet Union, the Arabs would have had
more tangible help from China. The anti-Sovietism of the
Chinese delegation in the United Nations is of no help to
the Arabs as victims of aggression. On the contrary, it is
useful and profitable only to the Israeli aggressor.

117. Mr. Chiao spoke about the outstanding successes of
the Arab people and armed forces. Yes, WCare all delighted;
the Arab people and its armed forces have shattered the
myth created by Zionism throughout the world about the
“invincibility” of Israel.
118. The heroic armed forces of the Arab people have
shattered the myth that the Arabs do not know how to and
are unable to wage war.

121. Mr. de CUlRINGAUD
(France) (interpretation from
French): It is almost two days since we adopted resolution
338 (1973). Yet we are told that the fighting has not yet
stopped. In particular, military operations arc continuing
on the Israeli-Egyptian front, which is likely scrioltsly ta

119. But, Mr. Muang and Mr. Chiao-I am sorry he is not
here-1 should like to ask whether it was China, with its
10

jeopardize an early start of over-all negotiations on the
Middle East conflict. My delegation attaches the greatest
importance to those negotiations starting as soon as
possible. We therefore consider that it was up to the
Council to pronounce itself most clearly in favour of an
immediate cessation of all hostilities, in accordance with
resolution 338 (1973).

yesterday. The existing observers can be used straight away,
and if the parties show the willingness, which we have every
right to expect from them, to respect the cease-fire, these
observers may be adequate and may indeed be surplus. But
if, unfortunately, the number is not adequate for the task,
should the Secretary-General come to the decision that a
significant and substantial increase in the number of
observers is necessary, we would expect the Council to be
consulted as a matter of urgency. Secondly, WCwould hope
that the observers will be placed on both sides of the
opposing forces so that we are assured of the co-operation
of all sides and receive the best and most objective reports.

122. In that connexion the draft resolution which has
been submitted to us for a vote under the joint sponsorship
of the United States and the Soviet Union, and which we
have just adopted, seems to us to respond at least to the
immediate needs of the situation. Paragraph 1, on observing
the cease-fire, urges that the forces of the belligerents
withdraw to the positions they occupied at the moment the
cease-fire become effective. That specific statement seems
to be fully warranted.

127. So while we shall support all measures to enforce the
cease-fire, in our view such a cease-fire is only a prelude-a
most temporary prelude-to a search far a just and lasting
peace, We would urge, therefore, that while the cease-fire is
being made increasingly effective, negotiations should begin
immediately and simultaneously in order that the terms of
resoIution 338 (1973) are faithfully carried out. and the
seeds of conflict in the Middle East are eliminated with a
degree of assurance and permanence.

123. The last paragraph of the draft resolution refers to
the establishment of a system of observers along the new
lines occupied by the forces involved. The SecretaryGeneral is requested urgently to take measures by using the
UNTSO personnel available. In the event that such personnel were to be insufficient in number, because of the
responsibilities they would have to undertake and because
of the new cease-fire lines, doubtless it would be desirable
for the Secretary-General to be authorized to proceed to
the recruitment of an additional number of observers. The
desirability of setting up a satisfactory observation mechanism will be clear to all, I am sure.

128. Mr. ANWAR SAN1 (Indonesia): Two days ago we
were asked to vote on a draft resolution practically without
being given time to study it properly. Because my delegation did not want the fighting in the Middle East to
continue one second longer than necessary, we voted for
the draft resolution, although with some apprehensions as
many questions remained unanswered in our mind with
regard to the implementation of its provisions. If we had
asked at that time how the sponsors thought that the
provisions in paragraph 1 on the cease-fire were to be
implemented without providing an instrument for its
verification and observation, this stormy meeting perhaps
would have been avoided, although the meeting of two days
ago might have lasted a little longer.

124. Those considerations, which I need hardly prolong,
explain why my delegation voted in favour of the draft
resolution submitted to us, in the hope that it will put an
end once and for all to the fighting and thus make it
possible in a short time to begin genuine negotiations.
125. Mr. SEN (India): On the morning of 22 October
when we adopted resolution 338 (1973) I commented on
the circumstances and the procedure we were obliged to
follow. I do not consider it necessary or useful to repeat
those comments. However, when we adopted that resolution we had assumed-it seems wrongly-that
all parties to
the conflict had agreed in advance to respect the cease-fire
if it were decided upon by the Security Council, and to
make an immediate beginning on the implementation of
resolution
242 (1967) and undertake negotiations for
bringing about a just and durable peace. That resolution
had barely been put into effect, and only the paragraph 1
of it to begin with, when we were faced with complaints of
cease-fire violations.

129. Now wt? have voted for another draft resolution
submitted to us by the same two super-Powers because
apparently the provision for a cease-fire in paragraph 1 of
resolution 338 (1973) has not been respected by the
parties, My delegation has voted in favour of the draft
resolution for the same reasons that we did two days ago,
when we supported the adoption of resolution 338 (1973),
although this time again with some apprehensions. We
would have voted for the draft resolution with less
apprehension if the sponsors had given us some clarification
on paragraph 1 of the text, which reads:
“Confh~s
its decisionon an immediatecessationof all
kinds of firing and of all military action, and urgesthat
the forces of the two sidesbe returnedto the positions
they occupied at the moment the cease-firebecame
effective;“.

126. Today’s resolution, which has just been adopted,
became necessary, first, to ensure that the cease-fire would
be respected’and that any infringement would be brought
to our notice immediately so that remedial measures could
be taken at once. In voting for the draft resolution we were
guided by one consideration, and one alone: that the
parties, the parties which are actually fighting, accepted it.
This was also the supreme consideration in our mind when
supporting
resolution 338 (1973), adopted yesterday.
Obviously, in order to observe that the fighting is not
renewed, the United Nations observers will be necessary,
and probably we should have provided for them even

130. We are concernedabout the following: who is going
to determine where those positionsare exactly situated,
and how is it going to be done? Second,when wasthe
exact moment that the cease-firebecameeffective, as
fighting apparentlyhasnot ceasedsincethe adoptionof the
resolution? My delegationhopesthat the resolution WC
havejust adoptedwill be respectedandwill pavethe way to
the full implementation of resolution 338 (1973). My
11

delegation remains of the view that it is crucial for the
restoration of peace in the Middle East that paragraph 2 of
resolution 338 (1973) be implemented in accordance with
the only correct interpretation of resolution 242 (1967),
that is, immediate withdrawal of Israeli forces to the lines
they occupied before the June 1967 war, and discussions
on outstanding issues, including respect for the legitimate
rights of the Palestinian people.

enforcing its resolutions, it being understood that the
appropriate auspicesreferred to in resolution 338 (1973)
directly involve the United Nations through the SecretaryGeneralandthe Security Council.
138. Mr. HUANG Hua (China) (interpretation from
Chinese):The Soviet representative, Mr. Malik, just now
made a lengthy statement slanderingthe Chinese delegation.However,his statementhas completely ignored facts
and is filled with lies. I shouldlike to cite a few facts which
everyoneherehasseen.Who delayedthe proceedingsof the
Council? This morning the Chinesedelegation arrived in
the Security Council chamber on time, asnotified by the
President,and saidthat it wasready at all timesto take part
in the formal meeting of the Council to discussrelated
proposals. But we saw no draft resolution until this
afternoon. It was only after the formal meeting of the
Council had begun,in the processof the statementby the
Vice-Minister for Foreign Affairs of China, that the
representatives
receivedthe draft resolutionin English.

131, Mr. PEREZ de CUELLAR (Peru) (interpretation
from Spanish): In my statement on the night of 21
October, I stated that my delegation could not object to
the adoption of the draft resolution submitted by the
Soviet Union and the United States of America, which was
later adopted as resolution 338 (1973), despite its obvious
lack of clarity [ I747th meeting, para. 1221.
132. Now I am bound to say that my delegation deplores
the continuation of military action which has given rise to
this additional meeting. But we believe that its continuation
could perhaps be attributed precisely to the lack of clarity
in resolution 338 (1973) and also to the excessive speed
with which it was adopted.
133. Once again we have adopted, almost without considering it, a draft resolution submitted by the United
States and the Soviet Union. We agree with the view that
the situation on the battlefront makes it necessary for the
Council to take immediate action, and we have therefore
supported it. Nevertheless, we wish to state for the record
that recourse has not been had to the necessary prior
consultations called for.
134. We well know that the five permanent members of
the Security Council, becauseof the veto, are in a special

situation in the peace-keeping
machinerywhich the Council
is. But it is not the individualmembersbut the Councilasa
whole which, under the Charter hasprimary responsibility
for the maintenanceof international peaceand security.
That is why Article 28 of the Charter provides for the
permanentpresenceat Headquartersof the representatives
of all members of the Council. There is, therefore, no
excuse for not holding consultations among all the
memberswhether they representlargeor smallStates.

139. It was only after Mr. Malik interrupted the Chinese
Vice-ForeignMinister’s statementthat we receivedthe draft
resolution in Chinese. How can the Security Council
tolerate such an unreasonabledemand: we were askedto
take a vote before the representativeshad even seenthe
draft. This morning until the afternoon, becauseof the
differencesbetween you two, the United States and the
Soviet Union, the proceedingsof the Council weredelayed.
Behindthe scenesyou were making a dealand you did not
presentyour draft until after the afternoon meetingof the
Council had been convened. Is that not a fact known to
all? But Mr. Malik lied by saying that the Chinese
delegationknew about the content of the draft long ago
andthat the statementof the ChineseVice-ForeignMinister
had delayedthe Council’saction.

1
1

/

140. Secondly, Mr. M&k accusedthe Chinesedelegation
of creating disorder. This is all the more a deliberate
fabrication by Mr. Malik. You have put forth a totally
unreasonablepoint of procedure in order to deprive the
Chineserepresentativeof the right to speak.This disorder
was precisely created by Mr. Malik’s unreasonablebehaviour.

135 The text we arenow considering,in sofar asit refers
to resolution 338 (1973) of barely 40 hours ago, is
obviously just as unclear-and therefore entails the same
risks, However, we completelyagreewith paragraph1 since
it calls on the forces to return to the positions they
occupied at the momentthe cease-fire
becameeffective. We
hope that the provisionof paragraph2, namelythe dispatch
of United Nations observers,will contribute something
which may havebeenlackingtwo daysago.

141. Thirdly, who assisted Israel in its aggression?
Mr. Malik talked unabashedly about China and Israel
forming a so-calledalliance. This is making a mockery of
the commonsenseof the representatives.We, the People’s
Republic of China, have never had any diplomatic, economic or cultural relationswith Israel.And how about you?
It is precisely the Soviet Union that has long maintained
diplomatic, trade and cultural relations with Israel. After
the 1967 aggressionlaunched by Israel against the Arab
countries, you have stepped up sending immigrants to
136. It is our understandingthat the Council’sdecisionto
Israel, with over 30,000 per year, including technical and
shoulderits responsibilityand to statethat it isresponsible military personnel.What is your purpose? You are prefor the maintenanceof peace, meansthat the Security
paring to take over Israel in the future so that it can turn
Council will be continually seized of the matter. Our
from the ally of one super-Powerinto the ally of the other
decision,adoptedas it wasfor lack of somethingbetter, is
super-Power.
binding.
142. Take the draft resolution concocted by you two on
137. For its part, the delegation of Peru will fully
22 October. That resolution contains no reference whatco-operatein the Councilsothat it candischargeits duty in
soeverto the supervisionof the cease-fire.Could that be an
12

i

oversight? You have deliberately created such a situation
so as to enable Israel to expand its aggression. No one will
believe that this is an oversight on your part. You were
deliberately vague, so as to enable Israel to utilize it to
continue to expand its aggression. Of course, it will be
nothing but a fraud with or without the provision for
supervising the cease-fire.

against the two super-Powers’ ambition to establish their
condominium in the Security Council. We definitely must
not allow such ambitions to be realized.
148. The PRESIDENT: The Secretary-General has asked
to make a statement, and I now give him the floor.
149. The SECRETARY-GENERA],:
Yesterday, I submitted to the Security Council, in document S/7930/
Add.2210, a summary of the current status of the United
Nations Truce Supervision Organization (UNTSO) as of
1200 hours GMT on 22 October 1973. As I stated in this
report, pending a further directive from the Security
Council I have instructed the Chief of Staff of UNTSO to
hold the United Nations military observers in readiness in
their present locations.

143. The United States and the Soviet Union, at the
meeting of the Security Council on 22 October, after your
behind-the-scene deals, you hurriedly produced a draft
resolution allowing none of the other members of the
Council the time to hold consultations or to seek instructions from their respective Governments, and you asked for
an immediate vote on that draft. This is your arbitrary
attempt to establish a United States-Soviet condominium in
the Security Council. Such behaviour is an insult to the
Security Council. You have placed many members of the
Council in a very difficult position. All self-respecting
representatives
of sovereign States cannot tolerate such
gross and arbitrary manipulation of the Security Council.

150. Now that the Council has decided that the military
observers should be stationed to observe the cease-fire
called for by the Security Council in resolution 338 (1973)
of 22 October 1973, I shall immediately take steps to put
the military observers in place in the shortest possible time.

144. Marry members of the Council have expressed their
dissatisfaction
with your behaviour. Yet Mr. Malik has
shown
utter contempt for this just opinion. Today
Mr. Malik, even more openly and more flagrantly, asked the
Security Council to take a vote before the Council had even
seen the draft. What is the purpose of that? It is precisely
to prevent the Chinese Vice-Foreign Minister from speaking, because he is afraid that the Chinese Vice-Foreign
Minister
would expose the dirty deal made behind the
scenes between it and another super-Power, because in the
Security
Council he wishes to establish a new order of
manipulation of the Council by the two super-Powers. This
will never succeed. From the clumsy performance by
Mr. Malik at today’s Security Council meeting, people can
see that they have applied power politics of the superPowers to the Security Council.

15 1, As all members of the Council are aware, the active
functioning of military observers requires the active cooperation of the parties concerned and is based upon their
acceptance of the cease-fire.
152. I also wish to inform the Council that it will in all
probability be necessary to increase the number of military
observers now available in the area in order to carry out
effectively the intentions of the Security Council. The
Chief of Staff of UNTSO will be in immediate contact with
the military authorities concerned with a view to working
out the details of the observation operation. It goes without
saying that I shall keep the Council promptly informed of
further developments.
153. The PRESIDENT: I now call on the representative of
J%yP-

145. The Chinese people adhere to principles. We are not
afraid of your slanders. We shall definitely not allow YOU to
establish any kind of super-Power condominium in the
Security Council. Mr. Malik said that the Chinese delegation
had obstructed the realization of the cease-fire. YOU are
making a mockey of the common sense of the representatives around here. If you are truly concerned about the
Palestinian and other Arab people who have been displaced
for a long time and who have shed their blood in sacrifice,
then what have you done over the past six years?

154. Mr. EL-ZAYYAT (Egypt): I should like first to
thank our colleague Ambassador Sen of India for having
had the courtesy to offer to let me speak before him. I had
thought that I could put forward some remarks-brief
remarks, as always-which
would perhaps be of some
benefit to the Council. Of course I could have spoken at the
beginning of the meeting, but, because of my great respect
for human lives, I thought it would be much better to delay
speaking if by that we could indeed save some lives.

146, Israel has not withdrawn even for an inch. There is
still no trace of the national rights of the Palestinian people.
For the past six years, in order to contend with another
super-Power for hegemony, at one time you turn on the tap
and at another time you turn off the tap, saying that you
are concerned about the sacrifices of the Arab people,
saying that you have supported the struggle of the Arab
people. That is a hundred per cent hypocrisy. You are only
shedding crocodile tears. As the Chinese saying goes: “The
cat is crying over the death of the mouse”. That is sheer
hypocrisy.
In short, you are a downright hypocrite. That is
your true feature.

155. The Council has now adopted a resolution and has
confirmed again its decision of 22 October 1973 that “an
immediate cessation of all kinds of firing and of all military
action” should take place and urged “that the forces of the
two sides be returned to the positions they occupied at the
moment the cease-fire became effective”.
156. The cease-fire became effective 12 hours after the
adoption of the Council’s previous resolution, that is,
resolution 338 (1973). And if there were some doubts in
some minds, whether real or fictitious, the SecretaryGeneral knows that I replied to his letter to me at 1840
hours Cairo time, 1240 hours New York time, on 22

147. From today’s meeting, I hope that everyone will
draw a lesson: that is that they must heighten the vigilance
13

October, and the cease-fire became effective at 1852 hours
Cairo time.

But this resolution which has just been adopted by the
Council would have no meaning if indeed the cease-fire is
not respected as and when it became effective at the hour
and the day mentioned, in compliance with the Council’s
resolution,

157. ITI the letter of my Mission to the Secretary-General,
we annexed a declaration made by the President of Egypt
in which he said:

162. The second understanding, on the basis of which
Egypt made no objection to resolution 338 (1973)-which
resolution we accepted before the expiry of the I2
hours-was indeed that it was to begin the machinery for
putting into effect resolution 242 (1967), asking for
specific provisions in order to obtain peace in the area. Our
main objective was the withdrawal of all forces of occupation from our lands. I have said repeatedly, and I cannot
repeat too often, that occupation means resistance.
Resistance is war; and you cannot have war and peace; you
cannot have occupation and peace. We must remove this
occupation because this is the condition sine qua non. Shce
we fight for peace and insist on peace, we hope to solicit
the help of all members of the Council in this struggle. It is
our understanding that the responsibility of the two
super-States, the two permanent members which have
produced resolution 338 (1973), will be accepted. We hope
that the cease-fire will be respected.

“In view of all these considerations, the President, in his
capacity as Supreme Commander of Armed Forces, has
issued an order ta the High Command to cease fire at the
time fixed by the Security Council on the basis of
reciprocity.”
That letter and its annex were received, as I said, at 1240
hours New York time yesterday by the Secretary-General.
158. The President speaks in that declaration about
“considerations”
for his acceptance of resolution
338 (1973). Let me tell the Council and everyone here
what these considerations are.
1.59. It was the weight of the two countries proposing the
draft resolution, the United States of America and the
USSR, that guaranteed to us that whatever we were trying
to do by ourselves would indeed be done by the international community and the permanent members of the
Security Council, mainly responsible for the maintenance
of peace and order and having special responsibilities by
virtue of the veto power and other prerogatives they have in
this Council. Our target was simple, is simple, remains
simple, and will always be simple: liberating our occupied
territories and giving the Palestinian people the rights to
which they are entitled under the Charter and by virtue of
the Council’s resolutions,

163. I do not wish to take up the time of the Council, but
I can read communiques issued this morning-and
just
about one hour ago there was a last communique issued, at
2300 hours Cairo time or 5 o’clock New York time. And all
these communiques detail the sordid story of the Israeli
forces using the cease-fire to occupy further territory and
to attack civilians as well as military forces, as has been
mentioned by the representative of the Soviet Union,
Mr. Malik.

160. We are not fond of blood. We do not want to use it
or to spill it or sacrifice it if there is a way to avoid it under
international law, through the international community.
Our presence here in this Council, in this Chamber, in June
and July testifies to this. But in accepting the draft
resolution which was adopted by this Council on 22
October 1973, my Government had reason to understand
that the two countries proposing the draft resolution
indeed guaranteed that the cease-fire would take effect on
the spot at the given time and hour; that is, 1252 hours
New York time on 22 October 1973. Since this resolution
which has just been adopted urges that the forces be
returned to the positions they occupied at the moment the
cease-fire became effective, we refuse to take this as only
lip service to a principle. We think that it means what it
says, and we take it to mean that the forces must be
returned, to the positions which they occupied when the
cease-fire went into effect. This has been supported by
almost all the speakers around the Council table, the last of
whom was the representative of Peru; and I can mention
also the representative of France and many others. Indeed,
without this support, the voting would be in vain.

164. If our communiques are not sufficient, I have here
something from Senator Jackson saying that he has learned
from his sources that Israeli units drove freely over pontoon
bridges guarded by Egyptian soldiers, who waved at the
Israeli troops because they were in Syrian uniforms, in
Syrian tanks, and told them that they were coming back to
refuel. Mr. Jackson reported this from his sources-I can
assure the Council that they are not Egyptian sources. And,
again, this happened after the cease-fire.
165. We are not taking this Council lightly. We are indeed
living in historic moments, not only hours and not only
days. We are engaged in a generation’s struggle for peace.
For the sake of peace we accepted the draft resolution
offered by two permanent members of the Council, the
United States of America and the Union of Soviet Socialist
Republics. For the same reason we accept now and take
literally and seriously everything in this resolution which
has just been adopted by the Council, We hope that they
will live up to their responsibility. Indeed it is a source of
satisfaction to see that the Soviet Union has issued today
what seems to be a response to this responsibility.

161. The question of the principle of withdrawal, which
has been asserted by the representative of the United States
of America, really should have been explained as withdrawal to the lines from which the attack began, as referred
to in resolution 242 (1967)-that is, those of pre-5 June
1967. This is the principle, if a principle is to be respected.

166. Before I conclude, and before WC speak about
aggression and non-aggression and all that --ways of trying
to get more time to kill more people in the Middle East-I
mUSt
say that we arc grateful to those members of the
Council who have upheld our case in the Council; and not
14

only to them, but also to those Members of the General
Assembly who have themselves taken measures that really
show their displeasure and disgust at the continuing
aggression in the Middle East. Since this new aggressi.on
began on 6 October, the United Republic of Tanzania, the
Upper Volta, Dahomey, Madagascar and the Central
African Republic have broken their diplomatic relations
with Israel. Today we have heard with satisfaction that the
Emperor of Ethiopia has taken the same step, and since I
have begun many of my statements by quoting from the
Emperor, allow me to read a few lines from his latest
statement:

173. Mr. President.throuah you I want to appealto the
representativeof the Uniteh Statesto do someihing,if he
so chooses,in the sensethat the American people has
always shown fair play. After all, we are not talking to
ourselves;we aretalking to the world.
174. The United Nations Secretariatand alsomy office
have received many requestsfor copiesof my previous
statementbecauseon certain channelsthere wasstatic and
a commentatorwho wasspeakingat the sametime asme,
asthough my Englishis an enigmalike Einstein’stheory of
relativity. Is that the freedom of information the host
country has alwaysboastedof? Of coursethe United States
Governmentmight say, “We have freedomof the press”;Is
freedomof the pressthe freedomto distort the news?Is it
freedomof the pressto usestatic whenI speak,sothat the
peoplemay not get our message?

“Consistent
with her stand of opposing territorial
annexation . . . and because Israel has failed to withdraw
from the occupied territories, Ethiopia has decided to
sever her diplomatic relations with Israel until such time
as Israel withdraws from the occupied territories. We
express the hope that all nations will make their
maximum contribution
towards bringing permanent
peace in the Middle East.”

175. When he wasaddressing
this sameCouncila few years
agothey faded out Chief Adebo of Nigeriain the middleof
his speech.Then he learned, andmany otherslearned,that
it W;ISbecauseBaroody wasto speakafter him, andsomeof
the massinformation mediagavethe excusethat therewere
some technical difficulties, while others said the time
allotted to the United Nationshad run out.

167. The maximum contribution that all nations must
make is to exert all their efforts, to spare no efforts, in
order to implement at least this resolution religiously, and
not to say tliis is only put forward because of a principle
which does not happen to be applicable here or cannot be
applied with accuracy.

176. So let the American peopleto whom I am speaking
through you, the representativeof the United States,heed
so that the voice of justice-not necessarilymy voice; the
voice of others also-may prevail.And if you want to check
how the commentatorsare behavingnow-by omissionand
distortion-it is your privilege to do so. And you do not
have to report to me; you are not, after all, responsibleto
me. But you are my colleague,and I think I havethe right
to addressyou in a friendly manner.If you want to reply,
you can do so. If you do not want to reply, your silence
will be ominous.

168. Those who, as the representative of the United States
just said, think there is no evidence available as to who
attacked after 6 October certainly have ways and means of
informing themselves and, indeed, of informing the Council
concerning. who broke the cease-fire after it took effect at
the time fixed by the Council.
f69. We should like to consider it a test of good faith, a
test of a real effort to bring peace to a world that has been
hungry for peace for the last quarter-century, that the
resolution just adopted be applied by all. The observers
who are to go to the area cannot, indeed, push back the
forces of aggression
to the placesthey camefrom. But there
are forces in the Mediterranean and off our shoreswhich
have always been displayingtheir force and makinga show
of force everywhere. Let them-the two sponsorsof the
resoIution--make a joint effort to apply the resolutionjust
adopted. That is, let them get all forcesback to wherethey
were and should have stayed according to this Council’s
resolution of 22 October.

177. When I askedAmbassadorBennett, whenthere were
rumours,whetherit wastrue that your country wassending
armsto Israel, every member of the United States delegation avoided me. They saidthey would determinewhat
wasgoing on in Washington.I wasavoidedfor threedays.I
had askedfor that information because
I amresponsible
to
my Government to tell it what is going on in the United
Nations.And finally you madeit official. You weredoingit
surreptitiously, clandestinely-thinkingyou could get away
with it, blaming the Soviet Union, sayingthey had sent
armsto the Arabs.

170. That is the test of faith; that is the test of peace,the
test of whether or not our efforts in this Council and
everywhere else are going to be crowned will; success.
Failing that, I am afraid we shall haveto leavethis Council
with a message
of despair.
171. The PRESIDENT: I now invite the representativeof
Saudi Arabia to take a place at the Council table and to
make a statement.

178. So here you had your client. Or are you a client of
Israel? You were the client of Israel, or Israel wasyour
client. Becausethe Soviet Unionwasallegedlysendingarms
to the Arabs, you began to send Israel your most
sophisticatedarmsto preservewhat your senatorsclaimto
be the only democracyin the Middle East.
179. You have a monopoly on democracy,have you?
That democracy is by subscriptionand contribution, andI
want to tell you how it is by subscriptionandcontribution.
A few years ago an American friend went to an Arab
ambassadorto Washingtonand said,“YOU people do not
know what the power of lobbying is in this country”. He
thought, maybe, that we did not know. Weknow, but we

172. Mr. BAROODY (Saudi Arabia): Mr. President,thank
you for finally calling upon me. I now speakby the graceof
God and my very good friend Sir LaurenceMcIntyre.
15

do not know as much as you do. So he said, “Why don’t
you brief certain Senators who do not have too many
Jewish constituents and maybe they will see your point of
view”. Well, that was quite reasonable. So four Arab
ambassadors-and I am not going to mention their nameswere taken by that alleged friend to that Senator and they
briefed him on the Arab point of view. After 10 days or so
another meeting took place, and the gist of the Senator’s
statement was, in a not-too-low voice, “Now listen, the
Jews contribute $60,000 to my election campaign. How
much are you Arabs willing to contribute? ” They were
flabbergasted. This was democracy by subscription and
contribution, and I say to our American friends-using the
term loosely, because in international affairs, unfortunately,
when interests are in harmony then people call each other
friends; and when they are in disharmony they are no
longer friends-you want to establish a democracy? Demos’
bones would shake in his grave about what is taking place
nowadays with the false motivation of democracy.

talking to both of you, why at the expense of the people of
the Middle East? You mighty Powers, could you not have
at least stopped the usurping State of Israel from occupa.
tion? Any one of you could have. But I remember one
incident, and this is for history because it should be written
and made known not just to the American people but to
the whole world. In 1956-and I think that my good friend
and colleague, Ambassador de Guiringaud of France, may
bear me out or refute what I say, or keep silent-there was a
conflict in the Middle East and the French and the British
sent their troops and planes to the area allegedly in order to
separate the troops of Israel from those of Egypt. It was
then found out that there was collusion with Israel. 1 am
glad that both those States now see the light. Do you think
that the self-righteous, sanctimonious Mr. Dulles, the
expert on brinkmanship, did not know? But the Russian
Defence Minister, Mr. Bulganin-of course, upon instructions from Mr. Krushchev-said:
If YOU Western Powers
continue your bombardment of Port Said, rememberthat
Russianmissilescan reachParisand London.

180. The First World War was fought to save the world for
democracy, not to preserve the empires against the imperialistic incursions of the Germans of the Kaiser. But the
motivation was to save the world for democracy, and after
the First World War there was less democracy all over the
world than before it. So your motivation is wrong and you
cannot dupe anyone.

184. I am not taking old skeletonsout of closets,but I can
tell you that for two years I researchedwhether there was
an understandingby the United States with the Governmentsof Britain and France of thosedays.
185. After Mr. Bulganin-of course upon instructions, I
repeat,from Mr. Khrushchev-gave his warning, the holierthan-thou Mr. Dulles said that he was flabbergastedand
senta warning to Britain and Franceto withdraw from the
soil of Egypt. He acted as if Britain and France had not
consultedthe United Statesbefore that adventure. Canyou
imaginethat Britain and France, membersof NATO with
the United States,would have done that without the, if not
connivance,approval of the United States? I found out in
France and Britain-from the French and the British, not
from Arabs in Port Said, who were killed-that the United
Statesknew of the adventure. And finally, assessing
the
situation, the Governmentsof France and Britain cameto
the conclusion that it would be better to withdraw,
because,suppose-assomeof them thought-Russia wasnot
bluffing? Then you would not have to throw missilesat
Parisand London; a mere bomb, in those days, would have
been enough to drive the French and British people to
lynch their own Governments,after they had had five years
of war.

181. And you, my good friend, Sir Laurence: you should
have taken into account when I pleaded with you to allow
me to speak earlier than usual. You seem to have forgotten
that we are a party to this struggle. Our oil has been cut off.
Not from Russia; Russia has a lot of oil. You know from
whom. And Mr. Laird is shown in a cartoon asking the
people to sew sweaters; they will shiver. We do not want to
make you shiver. We lived without air-conditioning in the
desert of Saudi Arabia since the dawn of history. You can
do without the oil. Do not mix issues. Do not rattle your
weapons. You are not yet 200 years old-1776 to
1973-three more years to go. You arc a young nation
drunk with power. You left the shores of Europe so that
you would not be conscripted-drafted,
as they call it
here-and in order to find opportunities. It was a laudable
goal to pursue. And then the Zionists railroaded you into
the First World War and you have been in trouble ever
since. You grew to be a mighty power.
182. Phantoms-God ‘knows what else you are trying to
invent of diabolical weapons. You want to emulate the
Soviet Union, which also has weapons of mass destruction.
Maybe you are genuinely afraid of each other. The Soviet
Union-wrongly,
in your estimation-is trying to support
some Arab States which have been dealing with it. What
went on over that “hot line” between Mr. Nixon and
Mr. Brezhnev-or, perhaps, through Mr. Dobrynin, who, I
remember, used to sit over there? He was the UnderSecretary for Political Affairs, a very capable and
quiet man.

186. Why am I recalling this? I myself, you know,
thought the Soviet Union did very well then by the Arabs.
And Mr. Henry Cabot Lodge finally came with two draft
resolutions,one after the other, to liquidate the Palestine
questionand seeto it that Israel would becomeinvulnerable. The Arabs, well known for their good hearts, were
duped,just asthey may be dupednow. I think the Foreign
Minister of Egypt, Mr. El-Zayyat, isbeginningto sensethat
they are being duped, judging by the last statement he
made.This is in our tradition. Saladinwhen he laid hishand
on Richardthe Lion-Hearted-who camefrom a distanceof
3,000 milesto slaughterthe indigenouspeople of Palestine
on the pretext that the Western Europeansof that time
were goingto wrest the Holy Sepulchrefrom the handsof
the infidels-Saladincould have killed him. But he reprieved
him. Every time he fought battles with him after that, he
sent him fruits. This is all in our tradition. We are

183. Have you told the Soviet Union: Put your cards on
the table and we shall put ours? Why should we destroy
one another? Well, if I were the Soviet Union, I might act
to save themselves from a world conflict, but why at the
expense of the people of the Middle East? Now I am
16

a

sometimes too credulous. That tradition comes from-l am
not going into the sociology of the area-from the tribes.
They used to set up games, and later these flowered in
Western Europe in the codes of chivalry which they had
brought from the Middle East.
187. I am going to make you listen, my dear Sir-I know
how difficult a task has been given to you-because you are
my Secretary-General. Listen to this. And what assurance
do we have now that these two resolutions, adopted on 22
October and today, are not a sort of trap? Because they are
SOambiguous-worse
then resolution 242 (1967). As we say
in Aiabic, everything that is built on something that is
unjust is also unjust-of
course, I am paraphrasing in
translation, But mark my words, there will be no peace,
because these resolutions are traps designed to weaken the
Arab people.
188. it is the acme of cynicism that the two super-Powers
should meet in secret and concoct, as if in collusion, draft
resolutions, and keep us all in the dark-unless the two
super-Powers have taken their allies into their confidence. I
say this in view of the fact that Mr. Kissinger passed
through London and briefed Sir Alec Home, the British
Foreign Minister on the situation and on what he had done
with Mr. Brezhnev. I do not know whether any emissaries
were sent to France to disclose the Kissinger-Brezhnev plan;
but I think that if Mr. Kissinger had sent messengers to
France, he would have been discriminating. France should
be treated on an equal basis, to say the least, with Britain.
Kissinger goes to Sir Alec Home. Incidentally, it is written
H-O-M-E, but he is a Scotsman, so it is pronounced
“Hume”. Home, who when Layla Khalid, a highly-educated
Palestinian, tried to hijack a plane and did not succeed,
stood on the podium and called it “a barbaric act”-1 am
paraphrasing-“of
those Palestinians”. He forgot what
Balfour had done to the Palestinians. Then I immediately
took the floor. And nobody, Sir, delayed me so long from
taking the floor. The President immediately gave me the
floor for my right of reply. Today I had to wait three hours
to take the floor. When I took the floor then, I saw Sir Alec
Home, from the podium, making a bee-line toward the exit.
I said, “You go away, Mr. Alec Home. They will tell YOU
what I have said.” I said, “The frustrated Layla Khalid
hijacked that plane. We do not condone hijacking, but she
was frustrated, like all the Palestinians. They have no army,
nobody heeds them. You call her act a barbaric act, but
you hijacked a whole Empire-the whole Empire you
hijacked-and
that is a blessed act.” Poor Sir Alec DouglasHome: he is pmC; the man in the street knows how PUSS&
such statements are.
189. Is the detente between the two super-Powers based
on expediency and mutual accommodation, my good friend
Ambassador Malik? I would also put that question to our
good friend Scali, but I do not see him here. Is the detente
between the two super-Powers based on expediency and
mutual accommodation?

191. You correct me if I am wrong, my good colleague
from the United States: We had been told that we were to
appear here at 12 o’clock; yet all the time we were kept in
the dark about what was being concocted. I took a glance
and found Ambassador Scali huddled with Ambassador
Malik-not
in the Council President’s room but in the
secretary’s room: it seems there were certain articles or
commas that had been left out, or something. And then I
heard-and correct me if I am wrong-the United States
representative ask that the meeting be delayed until
4 o’clock. I may be wrong. But again we go by our
proverbs, which all come from experience. We have an
Arabic proverb which translated into English is: suspicion is
sinful; but, in some circumstances, suspicion is an indication of a quick mind. In that case, since you were all
concerned about the Arab people, why did you postpone
this meeting for Four hours and not give our colleague from
China the chance to take the floor? You wanted to vote,
you say.
192. Somebody told me: “You have no representation in
China”. I said: “But I support China in its request because
it is elementary justice that they should express their
views”. And I thought China was a permanent member of
the Security Council. But they were brushed aside, and you
know what happened. I will not go into the details.
193. I think the President made amends finally by
allowing China to take the floor before the vote. He acted
rightly, but he was confused. You cannot biame a confused
man when there are so many pressures upon him. It was the
United States, I heard, that asked for the postponement so
that the Israelis, who keep harking back to Yom Kippur,
may have a rationalized stand and say, “They deceived US,
so now it is time we deceived them”. Let us put things in
their proper perspective.
194. Beware: we Arabs-and, 1 presume, non-Arabsrefuse to be the stooges, marionettes and lackeys of the
super-Powers. The last two resolutions are like salads:
hurriedly prepared, perhaps without washing the ingredients, and dressed with a combined Russian-American
sauce. I do not know whether they conflict or not: I know
there is a French dressing, which everybody likes; there is
an Italian dressing-vinegar and olive oil-but I have not
heard of a sauce made up of Russian dressing mixed up
with American dressing. It may be bitter, it may be sweet,
but they would not even give the representative of China a
chance to see it or taste it.
195. That is arbitrary action, my good friend Ambassador
Malik. I think this time you were outmatched by Mr. Scali:
he kept silent as a mouse and made you do the talking. He
was very happy. Yes, laugh: it eases the tension; we should
laugh, yes.
196. Incidentally, for your information, a Jewish lady-1
can reply to her now-sent me a telegram because I
sometimes relieve the tension with a joke, Here it is:

190. We know that the stakes are high in the Middle East,
not only because oil-or petrol, as some call.it-and other
natural resources happen to be in great abundance, but also
because of the strategic position of the Middle East, lying as
it does at the crossroads of three continents.

“Representative Saudi Arabia, UN Council, 42nd Street
and First Avenue. Sir:“-at least she is polite-“You must
be the comedian of the century. I have been chuckling
ever since you spoke. If you believe and wrote all that
17

stuff ‘-she is suspicious that 1 am like Mr. Tekoah, whose
words are all prefabricated and handed to him; I speak
from my notes, but she was suspicious-“if you believe
and wrote all that stuff, go out and shoot yourself ‘-yes,
you would be happy if I shot myself; there would be no
Baroody to reply to you-“If
a subordinate wrote it,
shoot him. Your State has oil and has education”-1 could
not put those two words together myself-and it is signed
“Elizabeth Waldman”.
I am replying to you, Elizabeth Waldman. I stand on your
freedom to express yourself, although you might have been
hysterical at the time you sent this telegram. You live at 1.5
Dexter Road, Westport, Connecticut, Got my message? I
am not going to read you the 50 letters I have received
from non-Jews-and a few from Jews-thanking
me for
briefing the American people on the situation, because it
would be patting myself on the back to do so.
197. The policy of “no war, no peace” has backfired, but
that policy is still being pursued, I am afraid, to serve the
national interests of certain Powers. The major States--or
the super States, as they have rightly been called by our
Chinese colleagues since we began to hear their voice in the
United Nations-have been resorting to secret diplomacy.
What do we have the United Nations for? Let us scrap the
United Nations Charter and engagein secret diplomacy on a
bilateral basis. And then they come with all kinds of
solutions and impose them even on a permanent member of
the Security Council, a member that represents 700 million
to 800 million people. “Who are those Chinese? “, they ask.
They still have that colour complex, I am afraid. I do not
think this is true of the Russians, because they are mixed
up with the Mongols and things like that, but it is true of
those who came down from the Anglo-Saxons. “Who are
those Chinese? Who are those Arabs? Who are those
Africans? ” We know you.

Ambassadorof Ethiopia, and we met to seewhat we could
do to counteract Mussolini’sinvasion and his designson
Africa. I finally spotted some arms in Greece, and we
thought we would have those arms sent from Greece to
Ethiopia, and we almost chartered a ship. And while the
ConservativeGovernment of the United Kingdom and the
presswere maligning Mussolini and saying that he wasa
Fascist,none other than DameSylvia Pankhurst, who wasa
rabid socialist-I am usingthe word “rabid”; I learned it in
England-when I appeared with her on a platform near
RussellSquare in order to have money collected for the
Ethiopian Red Cross,and I was one of the speakers-said,
“Do you know what is happening?” I said, “No, I don’t
know what is happening.” She said, “NeviIle is sending
Austen.” I said, “Who is Neville? ” She said, “Neville
Chamberlain.His brother Austen is being sent secretly to
Mussolinito tell him that he can go and grab all he wants in
Ethiopia and elsewhereprovided he does not ally himself
with Hitler.” The greenlight for Mussolini to conquer and
subjugateEthiopia. From one corner of their mouths those
imperialiststalked about the freedom of peoplesand from
the other corner of their mouths they abetted in subjugating them. What assurancedo we have that this is still not
taking placein a different form?
202. Having addressedthe United States, I hope my good
friend Mr. Malik, whom I have admired and respectedsince
1948, will bear with me. What about the influx of Jews
from the Soviet Union into Palestine?I have tried and tried
to find the facts of that massimmigration. To us, it was
massimmigration. Of course there are 3 million Soviet
Jews,I am told, who are allegedlymaltreated in the Soviet
Union. My analysisis asfollows.
203. The Zionist massinformation media seemto have
succeededin tarnishing the Soviet Union in the Western
world and the United States of America. Otherwise, why
shouldthere be 78 Senatorsin the United States who seem
to be servilelypropitiating the Zionists by bringing pressure
to bear on the United States Government to allow
those
immigrantsto flock into Palestine?1 thought this was an
internal matter for the Soviet Union. ThoseJews areSoviet
citizens. Of course, Mr. Tekoah considersevery Jew, not
only in the Christian but also in the atheist world, a
national of Israel, because that is the philosophy of
Zionism.

198. I shall translate an Arab proverb for the benefit of
those who do not know Arabic: “If ever you see the
prominent teeth of the lion, never believe that the lion is
smiling at you-he may be ready to pounce on you,” There
are ways of pouncing on us. By secret diplomacy they
pounce. They are not lions, they are human beings, but that
is what it means.
199. After they lost their empire, they smiled at us; they
became agreeable. I am not talking of the common people.
The common people are sheep, they are sent to the slaughter
in wars.

204. Secondly, the Zionists have by various means influencedthe legislativebodiesof the United Statesand that
is why conditions are set for trade between the United
Statesand the Soviet Union.

200. Why, then, have the United Nations? Have you
forgotten what happened to the League of Nations? Those
of you who are old enough-as old as I am, and I observed
the League of Nations ex-officcio-wiIl remember the
Emperor of Ethiopia warned the League of Nations that it
was giving the green light to Mussolini to invade Ethiopia
and to continue his adventure in Africa.

205. Thirdly, I think the Zionist plan may be-though I
may be wrong-to seeto it that many Jewscome from the
Soviet Union and when the Soviet Union behavesaccording
to their code, the Zionist code, then there will be a sort of
bridge between the Jews of Israel and the Jews of the
Soviet Union. And remember,my good friend Mr. Malik,
how the Zionists turned their backs on the Soviet Union.
When they saw the Zionists turn their backs, the Soviet
Union beganto work with someof the Arabs. Not with
SaudiArabia. We do not have representationthere, but we
areon goodtermswith you asdiplomats,

201. And to brief members of the Council on how
diplomacy has been conducted-and I believe we have not
changed very much-I happened to be in London between
1929 and 1939 and I was involved in Arab and Asian
affairs. I had a very good friend none other than the
18

.

206. Do you have the assurance, United States of
America, that the Zionists will not turn their back on you
and begin to work their way through with the Soviet
Union? Because they are skilful, those Zionists. Don’t
think we are napping. This is what they will do. SO they
will make the two super-Powers do their bidding. They will
do it little by little. There is a saying: the dance begins by a
few steps. Are you sure some steps are not being taken so
that they might work through the Soviet Union once they
have squeezed all the Jews from the United States? They
are serving their own interests.

to Iran, and he began to negotiate for what was later known
as the oil consortium. And all of a sudden Mr. Mossadegh
fled from Iran. Later we heard that this oil man was a CIA
man. We are not impressed by the CIA and the terrorism
they use and the coups d’btat they resort to. I am talking
about the CIA, Mr. Malik, not about the KGB. They won’t
tell you anything, the KGB. The Americans like to write
books after they leave the CIA.
211. I was talking about Kermit Roosevelt who left the
Government because perhaps they did not pay enough of a
salary and joined the oil consortium and went to negotiate
with Mr. Mossadegh, you remember, who nationalized the
oil. He was the precursor of nationalization of resources in
our area. Incidentally, I saw Mr. Kermit Roosevelt in Saudi
Arabia at the airport. I said, “Why are you coming? ” He
said, “I am a public relations man.” I said, “Are you sure? ”
That is all I said.

207. All of you have referred to resolution 242 (1967).
The record speaks for itself. I was a dissenter of resolution
242 in 1967 because I thought it was a fraud, like these two
resolutions before you-and
I hope I am wrong-the
resolutions passed on 22 October and today. At least I have
someone of the same opinion, It is the delegation of China.
They are not my cousins. We have no ambassador in Peking,
but you should give them credit. Someone, in order to drive
a wedge between the Chinese and me said, “But you don’t
recognise them”. I said, “But if they arc right, we recognize
that they are right”. See how mischievous people can be.
They want to sow trouble between the Chinese and me.
Baroody stands for right. This is why, Mr. President, I asked
you to please let the representative of China speak before
the vote, because he was right. And although it suited the
Arabs-some Arabs, not all of the Arabs, because I have no
right to speak for all of them-that an immediate vote be
taken, but the Chinese were right. I am glad, Sir, that YOU
saw the light.

212. Look at the budget of the CIA. It is legitimate for
any intelligence agency to gather information from other
States, States which they think might have hostile designs
upon them. That was the classical role of intelligence
agencies. What are the big intelligence agencies doing now
but resorting to terrorism, coups d’gtat, bribery. But now
the CIA and other intelligence agencies will not succeed
because they cannot subdue the peoples of the world who
rise against them. By your CIA you have alienated many
peoples of the world. So don’t try any mischief again.
213. You may buy some people here and there, but you
will not succeed because you have alienated yourself-the
Government of the United States-from our people. WC did
not alienate ourselves, you alienated yourself from us.

208. We Arab people stand against the manipulation of
outside forces, We are not imposing our will on others and
we refuse that others should impose their will upon us,
whether they be super-Powers or any Power for that
matter. After all, we have occupied the area for centuries,
from the Atlantic to the Gulf, the confines of Iran, and
from Syria to the Sudan. We will survive all these conflicts,
as we have done in the past, even before some of us were
Arabized. Because Arabism is not something of blood or
race. It is a culture, a way of life, a common interest and a
common language. Above all, common interests.

I

214. Concerning the KGB, the Russians are very secretive
and they do not publish books by authors, so 1 cannot
comment.
215. My dear Ambassador Malik, you warned Israel
shortly about not obeying the cease-fire, and said that it
better do that. Well, I am sure you said that sincerely. But
are you sure your Government will do it, or will the
Government or Mr, Scali bring pressure on your Government not to do it? That is the question. I believe you when
you say something, but after all, like everyone of us, you
implement the policy of your Government, And many of us
believe now that there is collusion between the Soviet
Union and the United States. I hope I am wrong, because
we have to pay the price. As the Arabic proverb says:
“When the wind quarrels with the sea, it is the sailor in the
boat that pays the price.” And we are the sailors in the
boat. I hope that we will not suffer as the result of such
alleged collusion.

209. And don’t think, United States, you can intimidate
US, as you have done in our area. I am talking of the CIA
role in Iran. I witnessed what happened. There was a
gentleman who is the grandson of Theodore Roosevelt. His
name is Mr. Kermit Roosevelt. When I met him at receptions I would say, “How are you, Mr. Roosevelt? ” He was
a member of the Government of the United States. He
always was sympathetic and receptive to certain remarks I
made about this sad conflict between us and the Zionists.
One day I said, “How are you doing? ” He said, “I am no
longer with the Government.” I said, “Why? There is a
tradition among the Roosevelts, not only your grandfather
but President Franklin Roosevelt too, of service to the
people of the United States.” He said, “Well, I took a job
with one of the oil companies.” “Ah, they pay better.”
“Yes,” he said, “they pay better.” After all, he is human,
looking after his interests.

216. The cease-fire is tantamount to a fait accompli in
order further to weaken the Arab armies so that they can
be more easily manipulated by the United States.
217. And here, from the bottom of my heart, I want to
repeat what 1 have been saying again and again, in the
General Assembly and in the Security Council, that the
Zionist hierarchy unwittingly and inadvertently may pus11
things so far that the people of the United States and the

210. Then when Mossadegh came on the scene and I met
Mossadegh, we found that Mr. Kermit Roosevelt was sent
19

1

_

. ...---.-.
/
‘LJ

Western world may get fed up with this Arab-Israeli
question, to the extent that if anything goes wrong in the
United States they will pick on the innocent Jews who are
loyal American citizens, and the leaders of the Zionists here
will take to their heels. And I should not like to see anyone
made a scapegoat, whether he be Jew or gentile, belonging
to a minority as the Jews do, constituting only 3 per cent
of the population.
218. I am not the enemy of anyone, I hope, as a person.
Believe me, I harbour no hatred or rancour, even against
those who hurt us. I may be angry. The Arab people may
be angry. We are human. But as one who has worked for 26
years in this very Organization for the sanctity of the
human person, as it is spelt out in the Universal Declaration
of Human Rights and subsequently in the provisions of the
International Covenant on ‘Human Rights, I would be
saddened to see-and perhaps many of us would stand to
defend-any Jew who might be persecuted by this mighty
nation, the United States. The writing on the wall has
begun to appear. You Zionists, do not push the United
States too far. Inadvertently, unwittingly219. Mr. TEKOAH
indulgence-

(Israel): Mr. President, I beg your

220. Mr. BAROODY
this gentleman-

(Saudi Arabia): I never interrupted

221. Mr. TEKOAH (Israel): I must appeal that this forum
which is being watched now by millions of people-

232. The PRESIDENT: Can I ask the representative of
Saudi Arabia to proceed. How far has he still got to go?
233. Mr. BAROODY (Saudi Arabia): With all due respect
to you, you never ask Mr. Malik: “How far have you got to
7 ” when he makes his speech. You do not ask the
%e-Foreign Minister of China? Why do you ask me? If
you are taking advantage of my friendship with you, I will
yield. But if you are speaking as President, I will not take it.
I think it is an unwarranted criticism because I must be
treated equally. And I can take the floor more than the
others because you always ask me to yield to certain
requests to let others speak-and I do. And when I patiently
wait for two, three hours, you are suggesting diplomatically
that I should cut my statement short. I am going to finish,
It is uncalled for, with all due respect. Please address these
remarks to others: “How long are you going to speak? ”
234. The United States and the Soviet Union exercise
power. If they speak two words or they speak 2,000 words,
it is they who exercise power. But we, who do not exercise
power, should be given the right, each one in his style, to
express what he has to say on behalf of his Government,
For Heaven’s sake, Sir, you remember I told you: “Ask this
gentleman not to interrupt me because I never interrupted
him.” And now he is up to his tricks. He is afraid that my
words might have some effect. Why do you not tell him
something? I am waiting to see what you tell him. Ask him
not to interrupt me.
235. Mr. TEKOAH (Israel): You are resorting to antiSemitism-it is a disgrace for all of us to be listening to it.

222. Mr. BAROODY (Saudi Arabia): Shut up223. Mr. TEKOAH (Israel):-should
anti-Semitic market place-

not be turned into an

224. Mr. BAROODY (Saudi Arabia):
Semitic, you are against the Arabs.

You are anti-

225. Mr. TEKOAH (Israel): It is a shame and a disgrace
that no one interrupts the representative who is speaking
here226. Mr. BAROODY (Saudi Arabia): If you not stop that
man, I will stop him. Oh, shut up,
227. Mr. TEKOAH (Israel):-and
to put an end to this disgrace.

I ask you, Mr. President,

228. The PRESIDENT: Order.
229. Mr. BAROODY (Saudi Arabia): Order. Why does he
create disorder? I am not anti-Semitic. I am a Semite. He
said yesterday I was supporting the Hitlerites. Will you stop
him and not appeal to me? I never interrupt him. What
kind of interpretation is this?
230. The PRESIDENT: I must call the representative of
Saudi Arabia to order. I have a great temptation to suspend
this meeting again. But please231. Mr. BAROODY (Saudi Arabia): I must insist on my
right not to be interrupted.

236. Mr. BAROODY (Saudi Arabia): Why do you not ask
him now? Am I resorting to anti-Semitism? I am a Semite.
Why do you not ask him? Why do you not appeal to him?
You appeal to me. Do not take advantage. Are you giving
him the floor, Sir, or what? Please, I will abide by what
you say. I warned him the other day, through you, not to
interrupt me, and he drives himself-he is hurt to the quick,
and then he begins to interrupt me while 1 am sitting next
to him. I never say anything when he is speaking, although I
think many of the things he says are distortions. He has the
right to make them. But I do not say that they are
distortions until he has finished. If I want to say it, I say it
after he has finished. He has maligned the Arabs; he has
maligned the Egyptians; he has maligned the Palestinians,
He speaks of barbarians, and this and that. Why did not the
representative of the United Kingdom interrupt me when I
was referring to certain historical facts? Because he is
polite. Ask Mr. Tekoah to be a little more polite and then I
will not have to say “shut up”. Do you think I relish telling
him to shut up? But you cannot shut him up. Who wiil
shut him up? You are our President. Please appeal to him
to wait until I finish. Let him kindly be patient. May I
proceed? Will you kindly appeal to him not to interrupt.
Why do you appeal to me only’? Appeal to him and then I
will proceed. If you want to tell me to shut up, I will shut
up. Appeal to him.
237. The PRESIDENT: I ask the representative of Saudi
Arabia to proceed with his speech. Hc responded, if I may
say so, very gallantly and well to an appeal that I addressed
to him at a meeting a few nights ago and I think that

everybody
in the Council felt that his response was
admirable at that time. All I ask now is that he proceed
with his statement.
238. Mr. BAROODY (Saudi Arabia): If you do not want
to appeal to him in public, send hi one of your aides to
tell him not to interrupt me. I really feel sorry to have to
resort to such terms as “shut up”, but while I am getting
my thoughts togetherhe beginsto interrupt me andhe says
that I am an anti-Semite. Good Lord, many Jews are
personal friends of mine, but they are the Jewsof our part
of the world. Anyway, I predict that it will not be long
before innocent Jews-and their number is legion-may
become scapegoats,and wrongly so, becausethey are
pushing the super-Powers
too far.

of life and destruction of property, which can only
intensify the feelingsof enmity againstthe peopleand
States that have to live together in the sameregion. , ,
enter into immediatenegotiationswith a view to solving
the other outstandingproblemsof the contlict, including
the implementation of the principles enunciated in
Security Council resolution 242 (1967), givingdueattention to the rights of the Palestinianpeoples.This should
also include guaranteeingthe territorial inviolability and
politjcal independenceof every State in the areaand all
the other points stipul.atedin resolution242 (1967)”
[1746th meeting,para.21.1

244. The points containedin our proposalarereflectedin
resolution 338 (1973) wMch was brought to us 10 days
later. Instead of the super-Powers
taking heedat that time
239. My last words-and this is in order to respondto
and acting on those two points, they steppedup arms
Your appeal, Mr. President; I have another sheafof notes supplies,worth billionsof roublesandbillionsof dollars,to
which I will not use-are these:The Arab peoples-andI am the Middle East, supplieswhich have beenusedand are
talking now asone of the earliestPan-Arabs;that is why I
currently beingusedto inflict large-scale
deathanddestruchave the right to speakon behalf of the Arab peoples,asa tion and untold suffering, and also to causebitterness
Pan-Arab-will be generousif the Zionists relinquishtheir
amongpeople who are destinedto live togetherin that area.
dream of domination and restorethe rights of the Palestine It appears as if the super-Powers
took. action only when
people. And, ironically, many of them had beenJewsand their detente wasthreatened.
embraced Christianity, while someembracedIslam.Should
they curb their imperial plans and wish to abideamongst 245. The world looks to the Security Council to bring
US, whether they be the Semitic Jews of our area or the
about peacein the Middle East. The world is alsoblaming
Khazars who adopted a Semitic religion, they will be the Council for failure to do so. Under the Charter the
welcome. And there would be no needto talk of cease-fire, Council is chargedwith the primary responsibilityfor the
and there would be no need to let the super-Powers maintenance of international peace and security. This
interfere in our area.I amnot talking about today or a year responsibility is a collective one and Kenya would like to
or two from today; I am talking about the longer-range seeproper consultationsheld in future amongall members
of the Council; otherwise,this Councilwill be reducedto a
future,
membershipof only two.
240. I appeal to the super-Powersto take into account
246. Resolution 338 (1973) has not been implemented
what I have saidtoday. I appealto the Jewsof the world
becauseof the lack of enforcementmachinery.Wetherenot to be impressedby the Zionist doctrine, but rather to
fore join handswith those who have askedfor an increase
prevail on the political Zionists to cometo their senses
SO
that they, the Zionists, as Jews,and the Jewsof our area in the strength of the United Nations observercorpsto be
placedat the disposalof the Secretary-General
to enablehim
may live in that region in peace,without interferencefrom
to carry out effectively the decision of the Security
outside.
Council. He mustbe giventhe tools.
241. The PRESIDENT: I call on the representativeof
247. My delegationtruststhat the Councilwill not fail the
Kenya, who wishes to explain his vote on the draft
peoples of the Middle East, who must be yearning for a
resolution.
genuineand lastingpeacein their area.
242. Mr. MLJNGAI (Kenya): We voted affirmatively for
the &aft resolution which the Council hasjust adopted 248. Finally, may I appealto the partiesandthe negotiating machinery, when set in motion, to concentratetheir
because of our concernabout the livesthat arebeinglost in
efforts on the substanceandnot the form or the mechanics
the Middle East and the large-scaledestructionof property
of how to get startedon the substance.
It will be regrettable
that is being caused.We did not speakbefore the vote in
order to savetime, becausetime is of the essence.
However, and tragic if once again in the future we have to come
before this Council to discusswar andpeacein the Middle
we cannot fail to notice the manner in which the
East becauseof further frustrationsamongpartiesresulting
super-Powerssubmittedthesetwo draft resolutions.
from non-implementationof this andother decisions
of the
243. Last Sunday, 21 October 1973, the Council was Security Council,
urgently summonedand presentedwith a draft resolution
249. The PRESIDENT: I now give the floor to the
worked out by the United States and the Soviet Union.
Secretary-General,who wishesto makea statement.
Today, we havehad a similarexperience.Elevendaysagoin
this Council-that is, on 12 October 1973-I saidthat the
250. The SECRETARY-GENERAL (interpretation from
Council shouldenforce the following elements:
French]: I have just receiveda communicationdated 23
“First, an immediatecease-fireshouldcomeinto effect.
October 1973from the Deputy PrimeMinister andMinister
Such a cease-firewould obviate further unnecessaryloss for Foreign Affairs of Syria, who hasaskedme to inform
21

the Council as soon as possible of its contents. This
communication refers to the resolution which the Security
Council adopted yesterday. It reads as follows:
[The Secretary-General read out the te.xt of the cornnzunicatio~ contained in document S/l 1040. j
/The Secretary-General continued in English. J
251. Since I have the floor I wish to inform the Council of
a report which I have just received from the Chief of Staff
of UNTSO, General Siilasvuo. It is as follows.
252. As a first step, General Siilasvuo has instructed the
officer in charge of the Control Centre at Ismailia, in
co-operation with the Egyptian authorities, to deploy
immediately three observation teams: one in the northern
sector, one in the central sector, and one in the southern
sector of the Suez Canal area. The Israeli military authorities have been informed of this and the Chief of Staff is
discussing with them a similar observation operation based
on the Kantara Control Centre on the eastern side of the
Canal.
253. The PRESIDENT: I call on the representative of the
Soviet Union in exercise of his right of reply.
254. Mr. MALIK (Union of Soviet Socialist Republics)
(translation fiorn Russian): I have asked to speak to make a
point clear. The distinguished representative of Saudi
Arabia, my old friend Mr. Baroody, expressed doubts on
whether I have instructions to utter a stern warning to
Israel. Not only do I have such instructions but I received
the text of an official declaration, made by the Soviet
Government on 23 October which I brought to the notice
of the Security Council and its members. I shall repeat part
of it for Mr. Baroody’s information. “The Soviet Government warns the Government of Israel of the serious
consequences involved in the continuation of its aggressive
actions against the Egyptian Arab Republic and the Syrian
Arab Republic.” I hope this piece of information will dispel
Mr. Baroody’s doubts.
255. Obviously, the Chinese representative is in need of
some information as well. He stated that I was slandering
China’s position. That was not slander, but simply a reply
to slander.

our discussion of the situation in the Middle East in June
and July, on that occasion, too, at the initiative of Egypt
and its Minister for Foreign Affairs, Mr. El-Zayyat. There
was a great deal of time in June and July. Eight
non-permanent members of the Security Council, represen.
tatives of the third world, submitted a good draft resolution
which is contained in document S/10974. Mr, El-Zayyat
said it reflected the public opinion of the whole world,
Eight non-permanent members submitted this draft resolution which was supported by the Soviet delegation,
Consultations went on for a long time. Unfortunately, one
of the permanent members of the Security Council vetoed
this draft resolution, thereby bearing the responsibility and
guilt for its non-adoption.
257. And what did another permanent member do? It hid
its hands under the table as at today’s meeting. On this
occasion there was little time. There was some reason, some
pretext for hiding its hands under the table and not
voting-that is, voting neither for nor against nor abstaining,
as is the normal procedure in the Security Council. But at
that time the draft resolution was an excellent one. The entire
third world not only supported it, but had in fact worked
out and prepared it. It was acceptable to the Arab side, it
condemned the aggressor and it upheld the victims of the
aggression. And once again I should like to emphasize that
our friend Mr. El-Zayyat then stated that that draft
resolution was a reflection of world pubIic opinion since it
condemned the aggressor and supported the victims of the
aggression. But how did China vote? It again hid its hands
under the table. despite the consultations that had taken
place, despite the fact that it had been able to study the
draft resolution for a long time in detail and to apply for
instructions from Peking. But the situation then was just
the same. At that time the draft resolution was sponsored
by eight countries, while this resolution was sponsored by
two, but China’s position remains the same, so that this is
not a question of either time or consultations. The hands
remain under the table.
258. The PRESIDENT: I call on the representative of
China, who wishes to speak in exercise of his right of reply.
259. Mr. HUANG Hua (China) (interpretation
from
Chinese): From the statements of many members of the
Council, I think everyone can see clearly who is creating
confusion in the Security Council, who is trying to impose
on the Security Council a draft resolution concocted by the
two of them,

256. Who was it who delayed the entire meeting? The
Chinese representative should check his facts before attacking the Soviet Union with his slander. The fact that I
requested the immediate convening of the Security Council
to adopt a resolution can be borne out by our distinguished
President of the Security Council. Mr. Baroody, too, has
explained who delayed the conxlening of the Council.
Unfortunately,
there was little time, and we could not
delay. We heeded the request made by the Egyptian
delegation, which required an urgent meeting of the
Security Council at 12 noon and the adoption oPa decision,
and we were guided by the most honourable motives,
namely to help our Arab friends and not to hold up a
decision by the Security Council. Any delay would have
been inadmissible. But if there had been more time, would
the policy of China have changed? We all recall quite well

260. With regard to the draft resolution submitted at the
June meeting of the Security Council, the Chinese delegation acted in accordance with its position of principle and
did not participate in the voting. The Chinese delegation
long ago made an explanation of its position. Mr. Malik is
trying to use that to distort China’s position and sow
discord in the relations between China and Egypt and other
Arab countries as well as the third world. He will never
succeed.
261. The PRESIDENT: I call on the representative of the
Soviet Union, who wishes to speak in exercise of his right
of reply.
22

262. Mr. MALIK (Union of Soviet Socialist Republics)
(translation from Russian): I have nothing to add to what I
said about the position of the Chinese delegation. Everything is quite clear.
263. The PRESIDENT: I call on the representative of
Saudi Arabia, who wishes to exercise his right of reply.
264. Mr. BAROODY (Saudi Arabia): I am speaking in
exercise of my right of reply and to seek a clarification in
view of what my good friend Ambassador Malik said in
regard to the warning that emanated from his Government,
which he kindly read to us-specifically,
the warning to
Israel. Since he was kind enough to tell us that he is of
course acting on instructions from his Government, I want
to ask him to clarify-not necessarily now, but at a later
date-what
will happen if Israel, as in the past, does not
heed the warning of the Soviet Union? What will the Soviet
Union be able to do, when it knows perfectly well that the
United States can neutralize such a warning? And what if
the United States threatened the Soviet Union if it took
action-just
action-to implement that warning? These
warnings have been treated wantonly by Israel-not only
now, but for the last twenty years or so. So what comfort
does the warning just read by our good colleaguefrom the
Soviet Union bring the Arabs, when the United States,with
which the Soviet Union has a dhtente, still pursuesa policy
of seeing to it that Israel expands at the expenseof the
Arab peoples?

268. Mr. BAROODY (Saudi Arabia): I want to inform my
good friend and colleague AmbassadorMalik that Saudi
Arabia, ashe knows, is part andparcelof the struggle.I was
addressinghim as my colleague.To help only Syria and
Egypt and bypassus would be strange,because
we areall in
the struggle againstthe usurpersfrom EasternandWestern
Europeunder the banner of Zionism.
269. I think the Soviet Union is to be praisedfor all the
aid it has extended to Egypt and Syria. But what about the
avalanche of aid, the massiveaid that is still beingsent by
the United Statesthrough Portugal-or rather the Azores,
which is a PortugueseTerritory, whereit hasa base.Spain
refused it a base, What if the United Statespersistsin
sending another 2 or 3 billion dollars-worthof lethal
sophisticatedweaponsof massdestructionto Israel? Is the
Soviet Union ready to contest the injusticeof United States
action, or would the warning subsideandresolveitself into
wordswithout implementation?
270. I am saying this sincerely to my friend from the
Soviet Union. The United Stateshasbeendoingthis since
the days of Mrs. Roosevelt-who usedto tell me, “Whether
you like it or not, Arabs, Israel is there to stay.” And who
was Mrs. Roosevelt to be the arbiter of our fate? But that
is a fact.

271. So if the United Stateswantsto stay mumbecauseit
hasno answer,that is its business.
But is Ambassador
Malik
in a position to clarify how the warningcan be translated
into action in view of the United Statesstandingadamantly
on its aid to what we considerour foe? All wehavehere is
265. The PRESIDENT: I call on the representativeof the
words, words, words. And I think we areentitled to know.
Soviet Union, who wishesto speakin exerciseof his right
of reply.
But if for somereasonwe shouldnot know, of coursewe
cannot force any one of our colleagues
to sayanything for
266. Mr. MALIK (Union of Soviet Socialist Republics) which he might be consideredresponsible.
(tmrzslation from Russian): I think that Egypt and Syria
know clearly what the position of the Soviet Union is and 272. The PRESIDENT: I now proposeto adjourn this
what the possibilitiesopen to the Soviet Union are,moreSO
meeting. The Security Council will continue to give this
than Saudi Arabia.
situation its closest attention and will remainready to be
convened immediately, ascircumstances
demand.
267. The PRESIDENT: I call on the representativeof
The lneetirzgroseat 9.15 p.m.
Saudi Arabia, who wishesto exercisehis right of reply.

23

,’

HOW

TO OBTAIN

UNITED

NATIONS

PUBLICATIONS

Unitr I Nations
publications
may be obtained
from bookslorrs
throughout
the world. Consult your bookstore
or write to: Ilnitrtl
Section, New York or Geneva.

and di.rtritnrtors
Notions.
Salts

COMMENT

UNIES

SE PROCURER

LES

PUBLICATIONS

DES

NATIONS

Les publications
des Nations Unies sont en vente dam Its librairics
1st IW ~cn~s
depositaires
du monde entier. Informez-vous
aupr&s de votrc! lihmirr
ou II~~W.~RW.VOUR
A : Nations Unies. Section des ventes, New York ou GenPve.

Litho

in United

Nations,

New York

Price: $U.S. 2.00 (or equivalent

in other

currcrlcies)
