A /76/PV.18

United Nations

General Assembly

Official Records

Seventy-sixth session

18th plenary meeting

Monday, 11 October 2021, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Shahid  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (Maldives)

In the absence of the President, Mr. Afonso
(Mozambique), Vice-President, took the Chair.
The meeting was called to order at 10 a.m.
Agenda items 15, 119, 124 and 125
Integrated and coordinated implementation
of and follow-up to the outcomes of the major
United Nations conferences and summits in the
economic, social and related fields
Note by the Secretary-General (A/76/275)
Follow-up to the outcome of the Millennium Summit
Strengthening of the United Nations system
Note by the Secretariat (A/76/327)
United Nations reform: measures and proposals
The Acting President: We shall now begin our
joint debate.
Ms. Benziane (Morocco) (spoke in French): I thank
you, Mr. President, for organizing this joint debate. It
is crucial to the follow-up to the Secretary-General’s
report Our Common Agenda, which is a valuable and
fundamental road map for translating the 12 points of
the Declaration on the Commemoration of the Seventyfifth Anniversary of the United Nations into tangible
and concrete action. As highlighted in the SecretaryGeneral’s report, we are at an inflection point in history,
and we must implement the programme of action he
has recommended.

The implementation of this road map represents
a firm recognition that our Organization is the most
suitable framework for effective cooperation, as
well as the perfect platform for multilateral action to
meet global challenges and strengthen international
solidarity. The principles of the Charter of the United
Nations reflect our profound belief in the importance
of our Organization and its usefulness as a collective
reference and framework for the international
community’s effective and renewed solidarity in the
face of the challenges confronting us today. In order to
realize the 12 crucial commitments in the Declaration,
we need to strengthen our joint action to implement
the Sustainable Development Goals, conscious in the
knowledge that we are less than 10 years away from the
2030 deadline.
The coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic
has had a very negative impact on the entire planet and
is currently the main threat to human security. It has
revived international attention to the problem of climate
change, since the links between the areas of climate
change, biodiversity degradation and health safety
have become more evident. The overlap between these
two major global threats — the COVID-19 pandemic
and climate change — should be a catalyst for the
emergence of a new multilateral agenda based on a
holistic approach to such challenges. Morocco believes
that equitable and immediate access to vaccines
through a global immunization plan, as mentioned in
Our Common Agenda, is essential if we are to help all
countries, especially African countries and the least
developed, overcome this acute phase of the pandemic.

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of speeches
delivered in other languages. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only.
They should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

21-28190 (E)

*2128190*

A/76/PV.18

We fully support the Secretary-General’s commitment
to ensuring that vaccines are global public goods, as
well as the commendable efforts of the United Nations
and its agencies to see that they are safe, effective,
accessible and affordable for all, including through the
COVID-19 Vaccine Global Access (COVAX) Facility.
That is essential to an inclusive, sustainable and
equitable recovery.
Morocco, which supports the development of an
international treaty on epidemics within the framework
of the Organization, intends to organize an international
conference on pandemic preparedness and response in
2022, in cooperation with Rwanda, the World Health
Organization and the World Bank, with the aim of
uniting international efforts to build the capacity
of countries to deal with epidemics and emergency
preparedness. In accordance with the instructions
of His Majesty King Mohammed VI, Morocco has
implemented an ambitious project to manufacture
COVID-19 vaccines locally, which embodies our
policy on African solidarity through its contribution
to strengthening health safety in Africa by raising the
level of vaccination in our sister nations.
It is also important to continue strengthening the
United Nations and to enshrine its role as a space for
international understanding and consensus aimed at
promoting peace, achieving development, especially
in Africa, and disseminating and promoting the
universal values and principles of human rights,
gender equality and dialogue among cultures and
civilizations. We need a more open, effective, solid
and pragmatic multilateralism. In our view, we must
build a renewed and fair multilateral system in order
to strengthen the kind of international solidarity that
should guide a post-COVID-19 world. The Kingdom
of Morocco has repeatedly emphasized the need
for us to rethink multilateral action, develop new
approaches, define consensus concepts capable of
inspiring a new drive to confront our immediate and
future challenges and strengthen the effectiveness of
international institutions. In that context, we commend
the efforts of the Secretary-General and the leadership
and perseverance he has shown since the beginning
of the pandemic through his many calls to intensify
efforts for a stronger Organization and reinvigorated
multilateral action.
We also welcome the great interest that Our
Common Agenda shows regarding generations to
come and the future that we will leave them. We must
2/17

11/10/2021

therefore strengthen the solidarity between generations
and ensure that our actions and initiatives take full
account of the world we will leave to our children. We
must keep in mind that the consequences of our actions
will inevitably affect them. In that context, we welcome
the Secretary-General’s proposal to appoint a special
envoy for future generations. I would also like to
underscore the importance of ensuring that we Member
States continue our support for the reforms initiated
by the Secretary-General, particularly in the areas of
development, peace and security and the management
of the Organization, which have proved to be highly
effective and relevant. That is extremely important if
we are to strengthen our common agenda.
Morocco continues to contribute actively to the
discussions on Security Council reform and will
continue to persist in the work of revitalizing the
General Assembly and strengthening the Economic
and Social Council, while respecting the institutional
balance between the main organs of the United Nations,
as outlined in the Charter. In that context, I would like
to reiterate Morocco’s position in favour of reforming
and enlarging the Security Council in order to increase
the representativeness of both categories of members
in a manner that reflects the ongoing evolution of the
composition of the United Nations and ensures greater
representation for Africa within a reformed Security
Council. My delegation reaffirms its unwavering
support for the African Common Position laid down
in the Ezulwini Consensus and the Sirte Declaration,
which must continue to serve as the only viable option
reflecting Africa’s rights and aims that does justice to
our continent. The position calls for fair and equitable
representation for Africa, with a minimum of two
permanent seats with all the prerogatives and privileges
of permanent members, including the right of veto
as long as the veto remains in force, as well as five
non-permanent seats. Morocco also supports the Group
of Arab States’ demands for greater representation in an
expanded Security Council through a permanent Arab
seat, with all the associated prerogatives, as well as
sufficient representation in the non-permanent category.
Similarly, the process of revitalizing the General
Assembly is an essential component of the overall
reform of the United Nations. The goal is to make
the Assembly more relevant, effective and proactive
in addressing contemporary global challenges
such as the COVID-19 pandemic, climate change,
21-28190

11/10/2021

migration, counter-terrorism, violent extremism and
human trafficking.
Lastly, we reiterate Morocco’s position regarding
the need for a harmonious revitalization of the work
of the Main Committees in order to produce lasting
effects on the whole process. We emphasize the need to
redouble our efforts to increase synergies and coherence
by eliminating gaps, overlaps and duplications among
agenda items. It is also imperative that we promote the
alignment of the agenda of the General Assembly with
the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development.
The President can count on Morocco’s commitment
and my delegation’s active participation in our upcoming
meetings, including the one planned for 25 October
concerning the report on Our Common Agenda.
Mr. Raguttahalli (India): I would like to thank the
President for convening today’s joint debate. I want to
take this opportunity to briefly share our preliminary
perspectives on the Secretary-General’s report Our
Common Agenda, under agenda item 124.
The Declaration on the Commemoration of the
Seventy-fifth Anniversary of the United Nations
adopted by our leaders in September 2020 called
on the Secretary-General to report back with
recommendations. We thank and appreciate SecretaryGeneral Guterres for his report, which builds on the
12 commitment areas identified in the Declaration. We
also recognize the work done by the United Nations
Foundation and its partners in putting together the
report. We appreciate many of the important proposals,
thoughts and visions of the Secretary-General that the
report captures. The coronavirus disease (COVID-19)
pandemic has served as a wake-up call. We need to
truly realize a common agenda if we are to move ahead.
If we continue on our current path, which seeks to
divide us even more, we will end up even farther away
from our own ability to renew and recover. Our vision
should embrace reformed multilateralism, gender
issues, human rights, development, counter-terrorism,
climate change and the environment, financing, the
pandemic and vaccines, and peace and security, among
other priorities.
There are areas that need greater focus, of course.
For example, I am aware of the emphasis that the
Secretary-General has placed on combating terrorism,
and we commend the work of the Office of CounterTerrorism. But the report deals with terrorism as a
priority rather cursorily. In fact, the word “terrorism”

A/76/PV.18

appears only twice in the report, in contrast to the
phrase “climate change”, which appears more than 20
times, and the word “climate” which appears more than
70 times. I hope that this can be remedied sooner rather
than later, as terrorism remains the single most serious
threat to world peace and security and one of the biggest
obstacles to our achievement of our common agenda.
We also appreciate the focus on climate change.
There can be no doubt that it is going to define the
common agenda. But as we have emphasized, India is
the only one of the Group of 20 countries on track to meet
the Paris targets. We are nowhere close to $100 billion.
Further, the net-zero target has to be a global net-zero
target, where developed countries should in fact vacate
carbon space for developing countries by 2050. We
need a net-minus target for developed countries because
individual net-zero targets, without the application
of common but differentiated responsibility, will
disproportionately affect developing countries.
I am sure that these and other issues will be
discussed more thoroughly as the Assembly moves on
through the seventy-sixth session. Apart from taking
into consideration the inputs of various stakeholders,
such as civil society, academia, the private sector and
youth leaders, we must keep in mind that the approval
and implementation of these recommendations must
maintain the Member State-centric character of all
United Nations processes. We are confident that this will
be the case when we move forward, so that the priorities
of Member States, dictated by their own development
paths and circumstances, become the primary driver
of agreed outcomes. India will be a constructive and
active participant in that process, which will ensure
that Member States carefully consider each of the
specific proposals in the report with a view to reaching
inclusive and consensus outcomes in accordance with
established United Nations procedures.
Mr. Aidid (Malaysia): I would like to thank the
President for convening this meeting. My delegation
welcomes the efforts of the Secretary-General and
the publication of his Our Common Agenda report.
We also applaud his vision for the future of global
cooperation through inclusive, networked and effective
multilateralism, as set out in the report, to which I
would now like to provide a preliminary response.
First, on the Sustainable Development Goals and
climate action, we support the report’s overarching
theme of advancing sustainability for a greener, safer

21-281903/17

A/76/PV.18

and better future. Malaysia recently launched its
twelfth national plan for the period from 2021 to 2025
under the theme “A Prosperous, Inclusive, Sustainable
Malaysia”. It sets out our commitment to implementing a
nationwide shift to more sustainable economic practices
and lifestyles that value our natural endowments and
environmental health. This shift will address the issues
of climate change, unsustainable consumption and
production practices, the loss of biodiversity and lack
of coherence in the implementation of policies, among
other things.
We have also recently announced our goal to become
a carbon-neutral country by 2050. In supporting this, we
will also implement various economic instruments on
carbon pricing, such as a carbon tax and the emissions
trading scheme. We are also supportive of the proposal
to hold the biennial summit of the Group of 20 (G-20),
the Economic and Social Council, the SecretaryGeneral and the heads of international financial
institutions on working towards a more sustainable,
inclusive and resilient global economy. As a member of
the Global Governance Group, Malaysia looks forward
to continued engagement with the G-20 and the relevant
stakeholders to promote a more inclusive, accountable
and effective global governance framework.
Secondly, regarding human rights and social
protection, Malaysia supports the call to reinforce
global solidarity in addressing the pandemic and for
the vaccine to be considered a global public good.
We continue to call on Member States to advocate for
vaccine multilateralism so as to ensure vaccine equity
for all, especially for populations that have little or no
access to these life-saving shots. We further underscore
the need to increase vaccine production capacity to
meet the global target of ensuring that 70 per cent of the
populations of all countries are vaccinated by mid-2022.
We also support the call for the improved inclusion
and participation of women, young people and relevant
stakeholders such as civil-society organizations in
every area, particularly decision-making. In Malaysia
we have been working to encourage more youth
involvement in politics and decision-making processes.
In 2019 our Parliament approved a bill reducing the
voting age for general elections from 21 to 18 years
old. We believe that young people can and should
contribute to the democratic process and be part of
nation-building. As a member of the Commission on
the Status of Women, we are also supportive of the
proposal to explore a reassessment of the Commission’s
4/17

11/10/2021

role in further accelerating action on global gender
equality and its implementation.
With regard to the proposed business models, we
also urge Member States and relevant stakeholders
to take the necessary steps to ensure that no business
enterprises are involved in activities linked to human
rights violations such as those reflected in the report
on business and human rights in settlements in the
occupied Palestinian territory (A/HRC/22/63) issued by
the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for
Human Rights. On a related note, we hope that future
discussion of this report will also include the situation
in countries affected by unilateral coercive measures.
Malaysia views such measures as contravening the
norms of international law and the Charter of the United
Nations. Unilateral sanctions adversely affect free and
open business across borders and hamper the social
development of the general population. My delegation
continues to call for the lifting of unilateral sanctions in
order to protect human rights for all, especially during
the pandemic. This is a time for solidarity, not exclusion.
Thirdly, on peace and security, we welcome the
proposed “new agenda for peace” as presented in the
report. However, we would have liked to see greater
emphasis on conflict resolution, including mechanisms
to address the root causes of conflicts. We also note the
absence of any mention in the report of the appeal for
a global ceasefire that the Secretary-General advocated
in 2020. As the lead initiator of the joint statement on a
global ceasefire, supported by more than 170 countries,
we firmly believe that the appeal and momentum should
be further solidified in a spirit of pursuing our common
agenda for peace.
At the same time, we also call for dedicating
collective efforts and resources to our continuing efforts
to safeguard global peace and avoid major geopolitical
crises. While there has been no third world war or
nuclear-weapon detonation since the establishment of
the United Nations, we should remember that the risk of
such calamities has not been indefinitely removed. We
continue to call on Member States to implement their
obligations and their commitments to ensuring a world
free of nuclear weapons. We also need to make it clear
that the arms race is not and must not be part of our
common agenda. We must end the arms race in every
corner of the world. Everyone must refrain from taking
potentially provocative military action that might
escalate tension and spark conflict.
21-28190

11/10/2021

Fourthly, with regard to strengthening the United
Nations, we call on Member States to meet their
financial obligations in full and on time. That is not a
choice. It is a necessity for enabling our Organization
to perform its mandate in the most effective and
efficient manner possible. In that regard, Malaysia has
consistently fulfilled its important obligations, and we
are pleased to have been included on the honour roll
for the past few years. Malaysia is also pleased to be
playing its part in contributing to strengthening the
work of the General Assembly. Together with Ecuador,
Finland and the United Nations Institute for Training
and Research, we hosted the first transition workshop
between the Offices of the President of the General
Assembly last month in order to facilitate a smooth
transition and strengthen the Office’s institutional
memory so that it can better execute the mandates
of the Assembly. I should add that the reform of the
Organization would not be complete without reforming
the Security Council. After decades of deliberations,
we must make the Council more democratic in terms of
its membership and decision-making processes.
What I have presented today are some of our initial
reflections on the report, noting that we need to engage
more in the discussion on how to advance our common
agenda. My delegation stands ready to support that
process, including by engaging and working together
with Member States, the Secretariat and relevant
agencies and stakeholders in that regard.
Ms. Chan Valverde (Costa Rica) (spoke in
Spanish): Costa Rica would like to discuss the recent
report of the Secretary-General, Our Common Agenda,
under agenda item 124.
Perhaps the most important lesson to be drawn
from the current crises is the relative fragmentation
of our international system. We often forget that what
happens anywhere can affect all of us everywhere. If
we can ever hope for a better future, that future must
be based on the recognition that the well-being of one
community in one corner of the world is as important
as that of other communities in every other corner,
that our present and our future are intertwined and our
short-term actions have long-term consequences.
Our Common Agenda urges us to rebuild from
the current crises and work towards a more inclusive,
equitable and resilient world. It asks us not to forget the
lesson that interconnectedness, and the empathy it can
create, will be essential to our success. At this time,

A/76/PV.18

when so many outside this bubble seem sceptical about
our collective ability to step up, we must resolve to do
more to pave the way for the United Nations to rise
to the occasion and do all that it has the capacity and
determination to do in order to help the Organization
and our own countries change the course of our common
destiny — while there is still a destiny to change.
The 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development
is an essential component of our common agenda and
demands that we create a new social contract for a
new era. It reinforces the promises made to a planet
sick of conflicts, the effects of climate change and
now a pandemic. It is a new pact with the planet and
its people that we simply must decide to keep. But we
cannot keep these promises unless we all decide to do
so together. Costa Rica, as an active member of this
Organization, the UN75 Leaders Network and the
Alliance for Multilateralism, will continue to do its part
and more. We are doing that to ensure that our noblest
and biggest promises to our constituents, especially the
Sustainable Development Goals, remain at the centre of
our multilateral commitments.
This pandemic is serious and very likely to continue
in the form of variants arising in communities that we
have so far failed to vaccinate. But the pandemic is
not responsible for our inaction and ineffectiveness. It
does not excuse the abandonment of our human rights
obligations, the weakening of our democratic norms or
the promotion of hate speech or nationalistic fervour.
Nor is it responsible for the conflicts we fail to resolve,
the resolutions we adopt that have no teeth or the
warnings we hear but do not heed.
Now is the time to act. It is time to stand firm against
the fragility and even the collapse of ecosystems,
international financial systems, democratic ideals, our
now dangerously over-weaponized societies and the
waning vitality of our multilateral system. This is the
time to choose. Will we stay the course or forge a new
path? Will we live in isolation, looking only to our own
interests, or will we work together to solve pressing
global problems?
Let us choose the second option, the path that
offers no shortcuts but much promise. In this new
journey, we all have a role to play. Our Common Agenda
represents a call to us all — to the richest countries,
the middle-income countries and the most vulnerable
countries, to all of us who have been hit by climate
change, the barbarity of conflict, authoritarianism,

21-281905/17

A/76/PV.18

inequality and exclusion, to those who have not yet
been invited to the policy table to help make the world
a better place. It is a call to us all, without exception or
distinction, because we all deserve to occupy a more
dignified, empowered and healthy place under one sun.
The Acting President: I now give the floor to the
representative of the European Union in its capacity
as observer.
Mr. Pieper (European Union): I am delivering this
statement on behalf of the European Union (EU) and
its member States on item 124, related to the SecretaryGeneral’s Our Common Agenda report.
We would like to voice our appreciation to
the Secretary-General for consulting very broadly
and inclusively and delivering a rich report and
recommendations, which we are still digesting. Once
we have assessed the report in full, we stand ready to
engage actively in addressing our current and future
challenges as presented in the report, with the aim of
improving global governance.
The EU values the report as a tangible contribution
to strengthening multilateralism, with a stronger
and more inclusive United Nations at its core, which
responds to what leaders asked for in the Declaration on
the Commemoration of the Seventy-fifth Anniversary
of the United Nations. We also share the SecretaryGeneral’s frank and dire analysis of the state of the
world, the deficiencies of the global governance system
and the urgency of acting to avoid a breakdown scenario
and work towards a breakthrough. The EU is looking
forward to reconvening on 25 October in this Hall,
where we can discuss the proposals in Our Common
Agenda with the Secretary-General in more detail.
We note positively that the President of the General
Assembly has committed to treating this matter as a
top priority in this session and fully support a leading
role for him in the follow-up process. The immediate
next step is to agree on a framework that will enable
us to follow up on the report and its recommendations
and to articulate them within existing initiatives and
mechanisms while maintaining momentum on this
important matter. The EU would be supportive of a
short and concise procedural resolution to provide that
framework, which should allow for continuing the broad
and inclusive consultation with external stakeholders.
We stand ready to engage with all Members and our
partners as we move forward on this key matter.
6/17

11/10/2021

Mr. Romero Puentes (Cuba) (spoke in Spanish):
We would like to take this opportunity to congratulate
His Excellency Mr. Abdulla Shahid on his election as
President of the General Assembly at its seventy-sixth
session, during which he will have the full support of
my delegation.
We take note of the report of the Secretary-General
entitled Our Common Agenda and its presentation
on 10 September. We share the Secretary-General’s
call to strengthen multilateralism and international
cooperation as a solution to our current and future
global challenges.
Due to its programmatic nature, and taking
into account its large number of short-, mediumand long-term proposals, as well as the inclusion
of various concepts and terms that require further
intergovernmental consideration and elaboration, the
report deserves calm and comprehensive analysis by
Member States. Proposals such as the repurposing of
the Trusteeship Council, the creation of an emergency
platform and the adoption of new international
instruments that Member States have not yet agreed
on, to mention just a few of the most salient proposals,
would have a significant impact on the United Nations
system, the mandates and working methods of various
bodies and in some cases even their functions under
the Charter of the United Nations. Other ideas could
affect the roles of Member States and the Secretariat
or open up a new avenue for the involvement of other
actors in the work of the Organization. We therefore
need intergovernmental discussions to explore these
ideas further and achieve the consensus needed to
determine the feasibility of moving forward on each
of the proposals. While we agree that there we need
a stronger United Nations, we believe that we must
move in that direction on solid foundations and with
the agreement of all.
I would like to conclude by reiterating our
unwavering commitment to continuing to work with
the Organization and its Member States in the defence
of a more democratic and just international order, one
that responds to the demand for peace, development
and justice by all the peoples of the world and that
guarantees the preservation and strengthening of
multilateralism and international law.
Mr. Hermann (Denmark): I would like to thank the
President for convening this meeting. I am delivering
this statement on behalf of a cross-regional group of
21-28190

11/10/2021

countries — Fiji, Georgia, Mexico, Qatar, Rwanda,
Singapore, Sweden and my own country, Denmark.
It is our understanding that today’s plenary is
of a more procedural nature, primarily to allow the
General Assembly to formally register the SecretaryGeneral’s report Our Common Agenda at its seventysixth session. In that respect, we would like to welcome
the substantive debate in the General Assembly on
Our Common Agenda that has been scheduled for
25 October. It is our understanding that the President
of the General Assembly, as well as the SecretaryGeneral, will be present for that important debate.
We believe that the nature of the report and the
challenges it deals with merit the full and undivided
attention of the leaders of two principal organs of
the United Nations, the General Assembly and the
Secretariat. Equally important, the period until
25 October will give Member States more time to digest
both the analysis and the many recommendations of the
report, and, not least, to reflect on how we the Member
States may best take our deliberations and follow-up
on the report forward. We believe that the report and
the analysis and recommendations it contains deserve
serious and thoughtful reflection and follow-up.
We are facing unusual challenges that probably
require unusual processes and solutions. We look
forward to engaging with all our colleagues with a view
to ensuring that the General Assembly can send a clear
and unequivocal signal that we, the States Members
of the United Nations, are ready to be invested in the
various discussions, deliberations and concrete followup on the analysis and the many recommendations in
the Secretary-General’s report Our Common Agenda,
which we asked him to prepare and present to us.
Mr. Varganov (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We are grateful for the opportunity to have
another, more detailed discussion of the SecretaryGeneral’s report Our Common Agenda and its ideas
on the future direction of the Organization’s work and
international cooperation.
We believe that there is much in the report that
deserves close attention. We agree with its basic thesis on
the need to strengthen multilateralism in international
relations, which should become the basis of a more just,
multipolar world order. At the moment, unfortunately,
we are seeing a different trend. The divisions in the
international community are only growing, posing
a serious threat to efforts to address both traditional

A/76/PV.18

and new challenges in areas such as health care, the
digital space, climate and social stratification. In that
connection, we support the Secretary-General’s call for
solidarity and collective action. We also welcome his
focus on the interests of developing countries.
We would be ready to assist in strengthening the role
of the Economic and Social Council and its collaboration
with the Group of 20, promoting science-based
approaches to the work of this global Organization,
adopting an inclusive reform of the international taxation
system and the global economic governance system as
a whole, regulating artificial intelligence, limiting the
influence of technological giants and improving the
effectiveness of Internet governance. However, we feel
compelled to point out that in our view some of the
report’s conclusions are ambiguous and go beyond the
scope of the Organization’s work as provided for in its
core documents and agreed parameters.
In the context of issues relating to peace and
security, we consider the emphasis on human rights
and gender questions inappropriate. The notion that
climate and security are inextricably linked is also
counterproductive. We firmly believe that one of the
strengths of the United Nations system is in its principle
of the division of labour among its main bodies, whereby
each deals with its own affairs without encroaching on
the others’ mandates. Against that backdrop, it is clear
that mixing mandates can lead only to a duplication
of efforts and a reduction in our global Organization’s
overall effectiveness. In our view, while cases of poor
coordination among those executing overlapping
mandates are the result of individuals’ irresponsibility
or human error — nobody is perfect — but that is
certainly no reason to constantly revisit mandates and
reforms.
We do not agree with intrusive demands on States
with regard to combating climate change that fail to
take disparities in their socioeconomic development
levels into account and infringe on their sovereignty.
We do not consider it useful to pressure countries to
exceed their commitments under the Paris Agreement
on Climate Change or to apply economic disincentives
to national carbon-intensive industries or green
protectionism in trade. Attempts to achieve climate
goals in one fell swoop could lead to serious energy
imbalances of a sort that we have been witnessing in
recent weeks, or even to social upheaval.

21-281907/17

A/76/PV.18

Regarding disarmament, we are concerned about
the absence of calls for compliance with existing
agreements and for negotiating new agreements by
consensus, as well as the overemphasis on the Treaty
on the Prohibition of Nuclear Weapons, which does not
have universal support. While we hear the SecretaryGeneral’s call to mainstream approaches to disarmament
for the sake of individual, State and collective security.
However, the erosion of the current arms control,
disarmament and non-proliferation system has some
very concrete causes, above all the deliberate actions
by a number of States designed to undermine it in order
to give themselves a freer hand, including in terms of
coercive pressure.
Multilateral cooperation should first and foremost
be based on the decisions of the United Nations
Charter organs. As has already been the case with
many initiatives, the recommendations of various
so-called advisory bodies to the Secretary-General
composed of experts and former politicians may
be duplicative and even divisive. For example, the
initiative to create some kind of emergency response
platform to discuss urgent global problems, which
would involve non-governmental structures in addition
to States, raises questions. The idea conflicts with the
exclusive prerogatives of the General Assembly and
the Security Council, which have been able to convene
meetings successfully, including on an emergency
basis. Moreover, if even sovereign Governments have
failed to show the necessary level of solidarity in the
face of the common threat of the coronavirus disease
pandemic, how can more complex systems, such as the
proposed networking platforms, work together?
We have similar questions about a new consultative
structure made up of elders for preparing a so-called
Summit of the Future on the basis of a concept of
the global commons that has not been agreed on in
an intergovernmental format. We are not ready at
this stage to subscribe to its promotion in United
Nations documents before it has been discussed at
the interagency level within States and approved by
Member States.
With regard to the health-care arena, we want
to point out that while the report emphasizes the
recommendations of the Independent Panel for
Pandemic Preparedness and Response to the DirectorGeneral of the World Health Organization (WHO), they
are not the sole source of such efforts within the WHO.
8/17

11/10/2021

Neither can we support the tendency to gradually
equate Member States and non-State entities, including
non-governmental organizations, private corporations
and municipalities, in the so-called multi-stakeholder
approach. That runs the risk of diluting the inter-State
nature of this global Organization that is enshrined in
its Charter and of ruining the entire architecture of
contemporary international relations. We are convinced
that such innovations will only lead to a decline in the
effectiveness and functionality of the United Nations.
The views of other interested parties and experts are
of course a useful contribution to discussions, and we
can only welcome them, including through national
dialogues with them. At the same time, we must bear
in mind that it is States that are subject to international
law and, as such, make decisions and are responsible
for their implementation.
We hope that our colleagues in the Secretariat will
take our concerns and perspectives into account as they
move forward with the proposals in the report.
Mr. Costa Filho (Brazil): I would like to begin by
sincerely commending the Secretary-General for the
report before us, Our Common Agenda. I think he has
faithfully complied with the mandate we gave him in
the Declaration on the Commemoration of the Seventyfifth Anniversary of the United Nations by engaging,
as my colleague from the European Union highlighted,
in a process of broad consultations that has clearly
involved very deep thought and reflection on his part in
order to present us with ideas on how to keep the United
Nations relevant in the next 25 years.
This is obviously the beginning of the process,
not the end, as he has submitted the report to the
Member States and it is up to us to take the proposals,
consider them carefully and see how they can be
implemented within our priorities and mandates.
It is especially important that we avoid a pick-andchoose mentality. That is something that we have
unfortunately come to see in this Organization in the
past few years. One very clear example of something
that we are somewhat disappointed about is the way
the report tackles the issue of development. We should
all remember that the first commitment we all made
in the Seventy-fifth Declaration was to leave no one
behind. In that connection, there are very important
issues, particularly for the developing world, such as
fighting poverty, reducing economic inequalities and
promoting free trade. These issues do not seem to have
been addressed appropriately in the report. It seems
21-28190

11/10/2021

to us that the concept of sustainable development has
gone backwards by a few decades. I am not minimizing
the importance and urgency of climate change, but we
cannot revert to a situation where the environment,
in all its multiple aspects, is treated without making
the appropriate connections to economic and social
development. This is a concept that we have developed
and built up over many decades to ensure that we have a
common understanding of sustainable development and
its three pillars and it is something that we think has
to be addressed. Member States have to sit down and
discuss it as part of the way forward from the report.
On the issue of the pandemic, I think the diagnosis
and proposals put forward by the Secretary-General
are very much in line with our views. We must have
ways to prepare for and prevent future crises and avoid
what we have seen with coronavirus disease in terms
of inequality in access to vaccines, medicines and
medical products.
We would caution very strongly against the use
of the concept of global public goods. We understand
where the Secretary-General is going, but we need to
sit down and reach a common understanding on exactly
what a common public good is, because there is no
accepted definition so far. Let us therefore treat the
concept with a degree of caution.
Lastly, we are greatly encouraged by the SecretaryGeneral’s proposals for reform, which must indeed be
undertaken. We have to adapt the Organization to the
reality of the world today. Perhaps nowhere is that
more evident than in the issue of reform of the Security
Council. We are talking about the next 25 years, but
this has been a priority for the last 25 years and yet
it remains unimplemented. If the Secretary-General’s
report on our common agenda can also bring momentum
to the discussions on Security Council reform, we
would applaud that.
Ms. Andjongo (Cameroon) (spoke in French):
My delegation would like to thank the President
for convening this important joint debate on the
agenda items relating to integrated and coordinated
implementation of and follow-up to the outcomes of
the major United Nations conferences and summits
in the economic, social and related fields, the followup to the outcome of the Millennium Summit, the
strengthening of the United Nations system, the reform
of the United Nations, and other related measures and
proposals. My delegation thanks Secretary-General

A/76/PV.18

António Guterres for the clarity of his report entitled
Our Common Agenda and welcomes the relevance of
his recommendations on achieving our development
goals pursuant to resolution 70/1.
In his report, the Secretary-General speaks of
the urgent need to take action and calls on all to take
responsibility. We realize that we cannot continue to
ignore the major issues before us in the context of the
current multifaceted crisis. In that regard, my delegation
believes there are only two possible choices: collapse
and chaos on the one hand, and on the other, a new
beginning — promises kept to ensure the survival of
our planet and the advent of a prosperous and peaceful
world in accordance with the future we want.
Regarding the possibility of chaos, my delegation
is extremely concerned about the current situation.
The fact is that as long as the coronavirus disease
(COVID-19) pandemic continues, economies are being
destroyed and poverty and inequality are worsening,
leaving little hope for peoples who are drained and
deprived of access to basic goods and services such
as health care, security, drinking water, food and
education. In this race-to-collapse scenario, conflicts
continue to rage and worsen. The disastrous effects
of climate change, including famine, floods, fires
and heat waves, threaten our existence. Are chaos
and collapse that fundamentally undermine our wellbeing inevitable? Cameroon says no. But are the chaos
and collapse that seriously threaten the very future of
humankind accidental? We say no to that, too.
The fact is that rather than choosing resignation
and chaos we have the option to act. That is why
Cameroon continues to emphasize that the SecretaryGeneral’s Decade of Action is above all one of concrete
action, to the extent that it is a question of moving from
rhetoric and unfulfilled promises to commitments that
are actually honoured as part of the integrated and
coordinated implementation of and follow-up to the
outcomes of the major United Nations conferences and
summits in the economic, social and related fields,
including the Addis Ababa Action Agenda and the
Paris Agreement on Climate Change. In that regard, we
should focus on our efforts to revitalize multilateralism,
including through a reformed United Nations endowed
with the resources it needs to work in the interests of
the peace, security and prosperity of human beings, on
the one hand, and in the interests of the planet for future
generations, on the other.

21-281909/17

A/76/PV.18

In that context, Our Common Agenda is first and
foremost a programme of action that requires will,
ambition and audacity in order to enable us — nine years
away from the sustainable development agenda’s target
date of 2030 — to hasten the implementation of existing
agreements in the area of sustainable development
and to face the triple threat of climate change, loss
of biodiversity and pollution that is destroying our
planet. In order to provide concerted, sustainable
and comprehensive solutions to these challenges and
threats, Cameroon advocates for a strengthened and
inclusive multilateral system with as its cornerstone an
effective, visible and audible United Nations system, in
harmony with its goals and principles as set out in the
Charter of the United Nations.
Our peace and development agenda for providing
sustainable solutions to the world’s problems requires
reform of the United Nations focused on two major
issues — ensuring the legitimacy of the United
Nations through its representation and mandate as a
shared space and providing the Organization with the
appropriate means of action. That demands first and
foremost a reform of the Security Council whereby
Africa takes its rightful place with two permanent seats,
including all the associated rights, and two additional
non-permanent seats, as outlined in the Ezulwini
Consensus and the Sirte Declaration. It also requires
a reform of means, because the Secretary-General and
the United Nations system must be given the means to
act and the sufficient, predictable resources necessary
to fulfil the mandate of our institution.
It is a matter, lastly, of repositioning to better align
with the historical mandate of the United Nations. The
Organization’s system must be brought into line with
national priorities and realities based on the sustainable
development agenda as an action plan for humankind, the
planet and prosperity. It is undoubtedly unnecessary to
remind some United Nations partners that the mandate
in resolution 70/1 stipulates that eradicating poverty in
all its forms and dimensions, including extreme poverty,
is the world’s greatest challenge and an indispensable
requirement for sustainable development.
My country, which has ratified most of the
outcomes of the major United Nations conferences and
summits in the economic, social and related fields, is
working actively to apply them comprehensively as
relevant instruments for overcoming the crises and
challenges that affect and mobilize our international
society and our planet. The programme of reforms that
10/17

11/10/2021

we have undertaken, with the aim of ensuring their
fulfilment by 2035, reflects the spirit of the African
Union’s Agenda 2063 and is aligned with the economic,
social and environmental dimensions of the sustainable
development agenda. Faced with the choice that today’s
many challenges impose on us, and in acknowledgement
of the pivotal nature of the times, Cameroon is resolutely
committed to a path of peace, security and well-being
for all. We urge all Member States, institutions and
other development partners to firmly oppose the choice
of resignation, chaos and collapse, and we appeal for a
resolutely action-oriented stance and for international
solidarity and responsibility. That is the only way to
defeat the COVID-19 pandemic. Let us build back
better, which is how we can ensure that Africa’s
industrial development will have genuine benefits and
lead to the eradication of poverty. That is also how we
will ensure the survival of our planet.
Mr. Kassaye (Ethiopia): My delegation would like
to thank the Secretary-General for the reports contained
in documents A/75/982, on Our Common Agenda, and
A/76/275, on the Third Industrial Development Decade
for Africa.
For almost two years, the coronavirus disease
(COVID-19) pandemic and its effects on economic
activities, particularly global supply chains, have
affected the manufacturing and industrial sector in
Africa, the continent with the lowest manufacturing
added value in the world. That has been challenging
for the continent’s economy and has hindered its
regional and global economic integration process.
The Agreement Establishing the African Continental
Free Trade Area, which is an important milestone for
Africans, has seen delays in finalizing some of the
remaining negotiations, owing to the pandemic. But we
remain optimistic, and with the finalization of those
issues, the African Continental Free Trade Area will
enable us to increase the volume of intra-African trade
by more than 81 per cent, thereby raising income by
7 per cent. We therefore cannot overemphasize the
importance of steadfastness in implementing projects
under the Third Industrial Development Decade for
Africa, as that also contributes to the successful
implementation of the Agreement. Continued support
for the Agreement is crucial and should be aimed at
enabling African countries to build resilience and
greener economies and spare their population the
effects of COVID-19.
21-28190

11/10/2021

We in Africa are well aware that we have primary
responsibility for our own economic and social
development. It is also important to underline that our
development efforts need the support of an enabling
international economic environment and global
cooperation. The Government of Ethiopia has put
industrialization at the heart of its 10-year development
plan and is working tirelessly to ensure that the targets
are met within that time frame. In an effort to achieve
that lofty objective, we have forged and benefited from
various partnerships and cooperation. Despite these and
other supports, however, the share of the manufacturing
sector in Ethiopia’s gross domestic product remains
below 5 per cent, and that is a story that resonates with
other African countries. Much remains to be done to
bring about structural transformation and improve
productivity and competitiveness in this sector. Ethiopia
therefore calls on regional organizations — including
the New Partnership for Africa’s Development and,
specifically, the United Nations Industrial Development
Organization — to continue to provide the necessary
support for the effective and timely implementation of
programmes under the Third Industrial Development
Decade for Africa. This can also contribute to
achieving Africa’s Agenda 2063 and the Sustainable
Development Goals.
My delegation commends the Secretary-General for
his report entitled Our Common Agenda, which makes
the case that our challenges are interconnected and can
be addressed only through an equally interconnected
response. Indeed, we need a strengthened
multilateralism and the United Nations at the centre
of our efforts. As the report puts it, we are confronted
with a choice between a breakthrough or a breakdown
scenario. It is time to renew our social contract, put
the needs of the most vulnerable at the centre of our
quest for recovery from the pandemic, address pressing
development challenges, bring the internationally
agreed development goals to a successful conclusion
and build a better world for all.
Mr. Espinosa Cañizares (Ecuador) (spoke in
Spanish): I would like to thank the President for his
invitation to contribute to this important matter, and
I join in the acknowledgements of previous speakers.
On 10 September, Secretary-General António
Guterres presented to the Assembly the document
entitled Our Common Agenda. On that day, I thanked him
for his timely presentation and for the 12 commitments
formulated in the report. The Secretary-General’s

A/76/PV.18

report came ahead of what the President of Ecuador
described during the high-level general debate of this
seventy-sixth session (see A/76/PV.4) as a new era of
understanding with the planet, in which international
cooperation on the implementation of the 2030 Agenda
for Sustainable Development and global solidarity
are essential to world diplomacy. There will be an
opportunity to deepen the analysis of the report in
specific areas, such as the so-called new social contract,
the defence of facts and science as a weapon against
disinformation in the face of the widespread infodemic,
and new ways to measure progress and prosperity
beyond that of gross domestic product.
At the twenty-sixth session of the Conference of the
Parties to the United Nations Framework Convention on
Climate Change, in Glasgow, Ecuador will participate
at the highest level and will support the consideration
of issues raised in Our Common Agenda and others not
explicitly mentioned, such as the need for a balanced
approach to sustainable development that includes the
preservation of biodiversity and the sustainable use
of oceans. For all those reasons, I want to emphasize
Ecuador’s support for the deliberations that will arise
from the Secretary-General’s report.
The proposal of a new common agenda is a warning
drawing attention to several aspects of our current
situation. The tone of the proposal has the degree of
urgency it needs in order to elicit a positive reaction and
correct the course in several problem areas. However,
in our opinion, the Secretary-General’s report perhaps
suffers from a pessimistic point of view that ignores
many other things that are going well and that do
indeed form a basis for this new common agenda,
designed to create a favourable, solid environment and
enable us to uphold — not merely as a postulate but
as a deeply held belief — the validity of the purposes
and principles of the Charter of the United Nations,
as well as international law and justice and an order
based on the rule of law. These have underpinned the
international agenda for peace, development and human
rights for 76 years.
One particularly important aspect is the call for
ensuring that representatives of civil society, academia
and the private sector have sufficient opportunities to
contribute to deliberations in the United Nations system.
This is one of the key elements underpinning the values
of trust and solidarity in this new global diplomacy,
which must be nurtured by contributions from such
groups if States are to make informed decisions.

21-2819011/17

A/76/PV.18

However, the support of civil society is no substitute for
the responsibility of Member States to embrace this new
common agenda and make it our own. That begins at
home with our ongoing work, which is progressing very
slowly, whether we are talking about revitalizing the
General Assembly or reforming the Security Council
to expand its membership. The 12 commitments set out
by the Secretary-General in his report must be taken
up by the Organization’s membership as a whole. This
is not just a wake-up call or an ambitious plan. It is
an effective and pragmatic course of action that should
be discussed at meetings such as this one. I therefore
reiterate our thanks for the convening of this meeting,
as well as my delegation’s commitment to doing the
work that we know is necessary and can wait no longer.
Mr. Koba (Indonesia): Thank you, Mr. President,
for convening us to this important joint debate. We also
thank the Secretary-General for his report entitled Our
Common Agenda.
The report mentions that the coronavirus disease
(COVID-19) pandemic is only the latest reminder of
our vulnerability to the economic shocks that hit the
poorest and most vulnerable the hardest. Our hardwon development gains and efforts to achieve the
Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs) have also
fallen off the track. It is therefore critical that we
explore every possible way of managing our health
and economic challenges while at the same time
ensuring social protection for our peoples. As my
President said at the high-level political forum on
sustainable development convened under the auspices
of the Economic and Social Council in July, Indonesia’s
commitment to the SDGs has not faltered, despite the
pandemic. In that spirit, we have continued to work to
overcome the impact of COVID-19 while ensuring the
implementation of the SDGs. The health sector is being
strengthened through financial and technical support,
with additional incentives for medical workers. We have
introduced economic stimulus packages, including tax
relaxation, debt restructuring and support for small and
medium-sized enterprises. In our voluntary review at
this year’s high-level forum, we also highlighted our
systemic economic reforms aimed at ensuring that the
implementation of the SDGs remains on track.
Leaving no one behind is at the heart of the 2030
Agenda for Sustainable Development. It should not be
a mere tag line invoked in every discussion but should
be effectively translated into concrete action. The
2030 Agenda, the Addis Ababa Action Agenda and
12/17

11/10/2021

the Paris Agreement on Climate Change must remain
our compass for sustainable, inclusive and resilient
recovery. As a member of the Economic and Social
Council until 2023, Indonesia stands ready to continue
to advance economic and social development issues. In
addition, in 2022 Indonesia will take up the presidency
of the Group of 20 under the theme of “Recover together,
recover stronger”. Our priorities for our presidency will
be promoting productivity, increasing resilience and
stability, ensuring sustainable and inclusive growth,
an enabling environment and partnership, and forging
stronger collective global leadership. We look forward
to working with the United Nations in that framework.
With regard to international cooperation in
supporting global supply chains in order to address the
challenges that seafarers are dealing with as a result
of the COVID-19 pandemic, Indonesia takes note of
the section in the United Nations Conference on Trade
and Development’s Review of Maritime Transport
dedicated to information about the crew-change
situation during the pandemic, as was requested in
resolution 75/17. The chapter considers various issues
related to the health, safety, security and welfare of
seafarers, areas where industry, Governments and
international organizations can cooperate to protect
seafarers’ legal and human rights, implement relevant
labour standards, including those agreed on in the
2006 Maritime Labour Convention, and, especially,
alleviate their plight resulting from the pandemic. We
believe that the information provided in the relevant
chapter of the Review of Maritime Transport 2021
will be valuable to our collective efforts to address
the impact of the global COVID-19 crisis on seafarers.
For its part, Indonesia reaffirms its commitment to
taking concrete policy measures to address challenges
confronting seafarers on account of COVID-19 by
opening a total of 11 ports to facilitate crew changes
and repatriation, implementing national procedures
and World Health Organization protocols, including
COVID-19 quarantine, and supporting the continuing
international efforts in this area, including in the
framework of the International Maritime Organization
and the International Labour Organization.
Finally, we would like to assure the President of
our readiness to engage in the collective endeavour to
deliver on the promises of the Charter of the United
Nations and achieve meaningful progress.
21-28190

11/10/2021

Ms. Jiang Hua (China) (spoke in Chinese): I
would like to thank the President for organizing
today’s meeting.
Last year, in the Declaration on the Commemoration
of the Seventy-fifth Anniversary of the United
Nations, world leaders made a solemn commitment to
strengthening multilateralism and the role of the United
Nations. We commend Secretary-General Guterres for
presenting his report on Our Common Agenda, which
contains actions for implementing the Declaration and
unveils a comprehensive plan for responding to future
challenges. China is ready to study the report thoroughly
with all parties and to discuss its recommendations in
depth on that basis. Regarding the follow-up to the
report, we would like to make some preliminary points.
First, we must take a balanced approach to
promoting security, development and human rights.
With the world still in the throes of the coronavirus
disease (COVID-19) pandemic, the road to global
economic recovery will be long and arduous. The
international community is facing daunting challenges
in achieving the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development. Global challenges such as climate
change require that we improve global governance and
practise true multilateralism. The world has only one
system and that is the international system, with the
United Nations at its core. We have only one order and
that is the international order, based on international
law. We have only one set of rules and those are the
basic norms of international relations, anchored in the
purposes and principles of the Charter of the United
Nations. We hope that our Organization will focus on
tackling salient issues and translating our commitment
to multilateralism into concrete action on the ground.
COVID-19 has affected the gains made in
global poverty reduction, widening an ever-growing
development divide. The United Nations should
therefore prioritize the development agenda over
other issues and inject new momentum into countries’
efforts to achieve the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development. Attention should be given to priority
areas, including poverty reduction, food security,
combating the pandemic, COVID-19 vaccines,
financing for development, climate change and green
development, industrialization and the digital economy
and connectivity. It is important to deepen pragmatic
cooperation in those areas while focusing on developing
countries’ actual needs and facilitating the sharing of
development gains.

A/76/PV.18

Secondly, Member States must be in the driver’s
seat. As an intergovernmental organization of
sovereign States, the United Nations should ensure
that its priorities meet the needs of Member States and
reflect their ownership of them. The implementation of
the recommendations in the Secretary-General’s report
requires first and foremost the determination and efforts
of Member State Governments. At the same time, other
stakeholders, such as civil society and young people,
should be heard with a view to mobilizing individuals
from all walks of life in an integrated manner.
Thirdly, we need to maintain solidarity and
cooperation. Faced with global challenges, including
climate change and the COVID-19 pandemic, the
United Nations should promote the practice of mutual
respect and win-win cooperation among countries. Our
Common Agenda puts forward a fair number of forwardlooking considerations and plans for the future work of
the United Nations. Its follow-up and implementation
must be focused. It is important to take into account the
concerns of all parties based on their actual needs and to
take follow-up action based on thorough consultation, a
gradual approach and consensus-building.
Ms. Squeff (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish): We
would first like to thank the Secretary-General for
presenting his report Our Common Agenda, prepared
based on the agreement by Heads of State and
Government in the Declaration on the Commemoration
of the Seventy-fifth Anniversary of the United Nations
adopted on 21 September 2020. The commemoration
of the seventy-fifth anniversary has provided us with
a great opportunity not only to renew the international
community’s commitment to multilateralism and
reaffirm the purposes and principles of the Charter of
the United Nations, but also to assess the current and
emerging challenges that we must face in a world in
crisis — debt, climate change, the coronavirus disease
and other pandemics, hunger, poverty — the list
goes on. But listing all the issues carries the risk of
forgetting at least one, and Our Common Agenda has
fallen into that trap. Nevertheless, we are confident that
its proposals represent a relevant contribution to future
debates on the international order that we will need in a
post-pandemic era, and reaffirm our support for a more
robust and dynamic multilateralism.
Argentina once again reiterates its firm support
for any debate that strengthens the role of the United
Nations and coordination among States in facing
new challenges in order to ensure a more inclusive

21-2819013/17

A/76/PV.18

and equitable international stage that can respond to
the needs of our peoples while leaving none behind.
We also hope that this proposal can contribute to the
regional and international strategies we need in order
to resume a path towards sustainable development
and the implementation of the 2030 Agenda for
Sustainable Development.
With that in mind, we will study the SecretaryGeneral’s report carefully so that we can work on
developing the topics it identifies during this session
of the General Assembly. Each deserves comprehensive
analysis because, as we must not forget, the SecretaryGeneral’s report is not an isolated document but should
be read in conjunction with the system’s relevant
instruments that address the various substantive
issues. Our Common Agenda proposes a road map for
the work of the United Nations in the next few years.
The Member States must now begin to discuss the
actions proposed and the issues that are missing, and
then reach the agreements necessary for their potential
implementation. That is a process that can only be led
by Member States in the framework of the General
Assembly and especially by taking into account a
development agenda that responds to current and
future challenges.
My delegation’s comments so far are preliminary.
We hope to expound our views on the substantive issues
raised in the document at the next meeting scheduled
for 25 October. In conclusion, I would like to express
my delegation’s willingness to work constructively in
this process.
Mr. Mohammad Aamir Khan (Pakistan): I
would like to thank the President for allowing me to
take the floor on this important agenda item relating
to the strengthening of the United Nations system, and
for encouraging us to use the opportunity of this joint
debate to further advance the consideration of elements
in the Secretary-General’s report Our Common Agenda.
We welcome the report as a thoughtful process
and an invitation to elaborate on the 12 commitments
made in the Declaration on the Commemoration of the
Seventy-fifth Anniversary of the United Nations. The
report puts forward several new concepts and proposals
that deserve Member States’ close consideration. Our
criticisms are designed not to denigrate the SecretaryGeneral’s important proposals but to ensure effective
action that is responsive to the national interests and
14/17

11/10/2021

aspirations of all States Members of the United Nations,
and I will therefore make a few comments.
It is important to underline that our two main
purposes under the Charter of the United Nations are
the maintenance of international peace and security and
the promotion of universal socioeconomic development
through international cooperation. The observance of
human rights was added subsequently as a third United
Nations objective after the adoption of the Universal
Declaration of Human Rights. The challenges facing
the international community in each of those areas are
due less to structural deficiencies than to the inability
to mobilize the political will at the national and
international levels to implement actions and decisions
aligned with the purposes and principles of the Charter
and the international and national commitments of
Member States.
Our efforts to build for the future should not ignore
the past, especially past commitments, or our present
challenges to peace, security and development. We
cannot save succeeding generations if we cannot save
the largest segments of today’s generations. Advancing
the agenda for the future should start with ensuring
that past and current agreements and commitments
are upheld, especially those relating to ongoing
crises, conflicts, disputes and challenges to economic
and social development at the national, regional and
international levels. We should work to ensure that is
fully reflected in our common agenda. The proposed
actions must also address the underlying causes of
inequality, exclusion and marginalization.
The United Nations was established to promote
international peace and security in a world composed
of sovereign States. A cardinal principal of the Charter,
enshrined in paragraph 7 of Article 2, is that of
non-interference in the internal affairs of States. While
a number of universal values, principles and objectives
have been developed over the past 75 years, and a host of
non-State actors, including international organizations,
multinational corporations, charitable foundations and
civil-society organizations have emerged to play a part
in international relations, sovereign States remain the
foundation of the existing world order.
While a networked, multi-stakeholder multilateralism
can be a useful adjustment to the current world order
as established under the Charter, it cannot replace it.
Moreover, a multi-stakeholder multilateralism will have
to be inclusive, equal and equitable. Multi-stakeholder
21-28190

11/10/2021

participation should continue to be pursued as it is now,
as and when required in informal or ad hoc arrangements.
In particular, the rules pertaining to the participation of
civil society should continue to ensure the credibility
and likely objectivity of the organizations that are
invited to participate in United Nations deliberations.
To be inclusive, such arrangements should be in the
form of a summit, convened by the Secretary-General,
of all the members of the General Assembly.
Another of the Secretary-General’s proposals, that
of convening an emergency platform, is also interesting.
Its composition would obviously be determined by the
nature of each crisis or emergency. The creation of a
standing platform with a predetermined membership
might conflict with the mandates of the Security Council,
the Economic and Social Council, the Programme and
Budget Committee and other standing bodies.
The proposal to transform the Trusteeship Council
into a multi-stakeholder forum to address emerging
challenges and become a deliberative forum on
global commons is problematic on several levels.
First, the Trusteeship Council is a Charter body with
a decolonization mandate that has not been fully
achieved. Changing the mandate would be a difficult
process involving amending the Charter. Secondly,
new provisions would have to be devised to transform
it into a multi-stakeholder forum, and that would
involve the caveats just indicated regarding the concept
of a networked, multi-stakeholder multilateralism.
Thirdly, the global commons proposed for this forum’s
consideration, such as outer space and the oceans, are
already being addressed in several other bodies and
forums. Those worthy issues are best addressed in
specialized bodies with the relevant expertise.
These are a few of our delegation’s preliminary
comments on the Secretary-General’s important report
entitled Our Common Agenda. As discussions advance
further, our delegation will be an active participant,
especially in the meeting on 25 October.
Mr. Mogyorósi (Hungary): Hungary aligns itself
with the statement delivered by the representative of the
European Union and would like to add some remarks in
its national capacity.
We affirm our strong commitment to multilateralism.
However, we are of the view that certain national
interests are better served by unilateral actions. We
should focus our efforts on the credibility of multilateral
forums where the added value of cooperation should

A/76/PV.18

dominate the agenda. We believe there is no need for
centralized global governance but that rather we need
strong national Governments that cooperate with each
other on issues of international concern. Furthermore,
we want to remind the Assembly that all States have
the right to define their migration policies, guard their
borders and provide protection against the criminal
networks that exploit the often vulnerable situation
of people on the move. In particular, States should
avoid creating pull factors for illegal migration that
create further opportunities for human traffickers
and smugglers.
We also stress that promoting immigration does not
resolve the socioeconomic, political and environmental
challenges in migrants’ countries of origin. Instead, we
should put our efforts into addressing the root causes
of migration, including through conflict prevention,
sustainable development and the upholding of human
rights. For those reasons Hungary did not vote in favour
of the Global Compact for Safe, Orderly and Regular
Migration at the General Assembly and has taken no
part in its implementation, either. For the same reasons,
we reject the inclusion of the Compact and other such
documents in Our Common Agenda because that
clearly does not respect the position of States that do
not adhere to them.
Mrs. González López (El Salvador) (spoke in
Spanish): El Salvador would like to reiterate its full
support for the convening of this plenary meeting and
appreciates the effort to enable a joint debate of the
report of the Secretary-General Our Common Agenda.
My delegation considers it essential to have a debate on
the way forward on the key commitments contained in
the report.
The world has certainly changed since the United
Nations was founded, and multilateralism has evolved
as well. Since last year, we have been confronting the
coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic and are
continuing to deal with its profound political, economic
and social consequences. COVID-19 has been a very
severe test for our countries and for the entire multilateral
system. In that context, it is important to remember
that we, the Member States that make up this General
Assembly, have a crucial responsibility, given that we
embody the commitment to taking an action-oriented
approach to the major decisions emanating from
the main deliberative body of the United Nations.
Accordingly, we recognize that multilateralism is not

21-2819015/17

A/76/PV.18

an option but a necessity in our task of building a more
egalitarian, resilient and sustainable world.
In the framework of the Ad Hoc Working Group on
the Revitalization of the Work of the General Assembly
at its seventy-fifth session, El Salvador recognized the
importance of reflecting that commitment in the core
points of the relevant resolution (resolution 75/325),
which is why the preamble to the resolution recalls the
Declaration on the Commemoration of the Seventy-fifth
Anniversary of the United Nations, which outlines the
working priorities of the General Assembly, including
the commitment to multilateralism and the importance
of continuing the work of revitalizing the Assembly.
One of the most pragmatic steps in resolution 75/325
was its emphasis on the urgent need to preserve the
primacy, importance and established practice of the
general debate, as well as to limit the number of highlevel events held outside the general debate to those of
key importance that require the immediate attention of
Heads of State and Government. My delegation will be
very interested to see how implementing the resolution
can serve as a basis for further improving the Assembly’s
high-level week, taking into account in that regard the
Secretary-General’s recommendation in paragraph
128 of his report regarding strengthening it by taking
advantage of it to make decisions and commitments at
the level of Heads of State and Government.
However, El Salvador believes that a multilateral
system that is equal to our current challenges will not be
possible without a more transparent, representative and
democratic Security Council. That is even more evident
in the current circumstances, as the consequences of
the COVID-19 pandemic for international peace and
security make it necessary to promote inclusiveness in
the Council’s decision-making process.
El Salvador appreciates the willingness of the
Secretary-General to continue working with Member
States and other bodies to put into practice the ideas
reflected in the report, reiterates its readiness to continue
the discussions on this important matter and urges that
we work for meaningful results that will enable us
to modernize the United Nations while maintaining
its legitimacy, universal vocation and impact on the
genuine realization of global public goods in favour of
peace, well-being and security for all our peoples.
Mr. Jiménez (Nicaragua) (spoke in Spanish): We
thank the Secretary-General for the presentation of his
report entitled Our Common Agenda. We agree on the
16/17

11/10/2021

need to strengthen multilateralism and international
cooperation, which are indispensable preconditions for
achieving the Sustainable Development Goals contained
in the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development, the
most urgent challenge in that area being the eradication
of poverty.
Our delegation is committed to a collective
agenda that strengthens international cooperation
and solidarity. However, as we have before us a very
broad and complex document, with concepts that
have not yet been widely discussed by the Member
States, in our view it would be appropriate to engage
in intergovernmental discussions to thoroughly and
carefully address the proposals put forward in Our
Common Agenda. Our delegation will continue to study
the report and will make a more in-depth statement at
the meeting scheduled for 25 October.
The Acting President: We have heard the last
speaker in the debate on these items. As members are
aware, as stated in the letter from the President of the
General Assembly dated 8 October 2021, there will
be an informal plenary meeting of the Assembly on
25 October, at 3 p.m., to give Member States a further
opportunity to comment on the Secretary-General’s
report entitled Our Common Agenda (A/75/982).
The Assembly has thus concluded this stage of its
consideration of agenda items 15, 119, 124 and 125.
Agenda item 142
Scale of assessments for the apportionment of the
expenses of the United Nations
Report of the Fifth Committee (A/76/383)
The Acting President: The positions of delegations
regarding the recommendation of the Fifth Committee
have been made clear in the Committee and are reflected
in the relevant official records. Therefore, if there is
no proposal under rule 66 of the rules of procedure,
may I take it that the General Assembly decides not to
discuss the report of the Fifth Committee that is before
the Assembly today?
It was so decided.
The Acting President: I would like to remind
members that under paragraph 7 of decision 34/401, the
General Assembly agreed that
“When the same draft resolution is considered
in a Main Committee and in plenary meeting, a
21-28190

11/10/2021

delegation should, as far as possible, explain its
vote only once, that is, either in the Committee or
in plenary meeting, unless that delegation’s vote
in plenary meeting is different from its vote in
the Committee.”
In addition, I would like to remind delegations that,
also in accordance with General Assembly decision
34/401, explanations of vote are limited to 10 minutes
and should be made by delegations from their seats.
Before we begin to take action on the recommendation
contained in the report of the Fifth Committee, I would
like to advise representatives that we are going to
proceed to take a decision in the same manner as was
done in the Fifth Committee, unless notified otherwise
in advance.

A/76/PV.18

The Assembly has before it a draft resolution
recommended by the Fifth Committee in paragraph 6 of
its report. The Assembly will now take a decision on the
draft resolution, entitled “Scale of assessments for the
apportionment of the expenses of the United Nations:
requests under Article 19 of the Charter”, recommended
by the Fifth Committee in paragraph 6 of its report. The
Fifth Committee adopted the draft resolution without
a vote. May I take it that the Assembly wishes to do
the same?
The draft resolution was adopted (resolution 76/2).
The Acting President: The Assembly has thus
concluded this stage of its consideration of agenda
item 142.
The meeting rose at 11.45 a.m.

21-2819017/17
