S/PV.7981

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-second year

7981st meeting

Wednesday, 21 June 2017, 3 p.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Llorentty Solíz . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Bolivia (Plurinational State of))

Members:

China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Egypt. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ethiopia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Italy. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Japan. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kazakhstan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Senegal . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Sweden . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ukraine. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Uruguay. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Zhang Dianbin
Mr. Moustafa
Mr. Alemu
Mr. Delattre
Mr. Cardi
Mr. Bessho
Mr. Tumysh
Mr. Iliichev
Mr. Barro
Ms. Schoulgin-Nyoni
Mr. Vitrenko
Mr. Hickey
Ms. Sison
Mrs. Carrión

Agenda
The situation concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

17-17797 (E)
*1717797*

S/PV.7981

The situation concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo

The meeting was called to order at 3.05 p.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation concerning the Democratic Republic
of the Congo
The President (spoke in Spanish): In accordance
with rule 37 of the Council’s provisional rules of
procedure, I invite the representative of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo to participate in this meeting.
The Council will now begin its consideration of the
item on its agenda.
I wish to draw the attention of Council members to
document S/2017/529, which contains the text of a draft
resolution, submitted by France.
I shall now give the floor to those members of the
Council who wish to make statements before the voting.
Mr. Delattre (France) (spoke in French): On
12 March, Michael Sharp and Zaida Catalán, two
members of the Group of Experts on the Democratic
Republic of the Congo went missing. Their bodies
were found a few days later. It was clear that they had
been murdered. The Security Council condemned
their deaths in the strongest of terms and called for
an in-depth investigation to find the perpetrators of
the crime and bring them to justice. Today I reiterate
that condemnation in the strongest of terms, as well
as that call. To that end, France also advocates the
establishment of a special board of inquiry.
Michael Sharp and Zaida Catalán carried out work
that was extremely important to the Security Council
and were very professional in their duties. The experts
on United Nations sanctions committees are extremely
important to the Council and are the key to the sanctions
regimes. I would like thank them again for their service
to the Security Council. Justice must be served; we owe
it to them and to their families.
They died while conducting an investigation on the
tragic situation in the Kasais. We have received very
worrisome reports on attacks on civilians and on many
gross human rights violations, including the mutilation
and murder of children. In recent months, the Council
has condemned the violence in the region and expressed
its deep concern about such human rights violations.
It has underscored the importance and the urgency of
2/7

21/06/2017

carrying out diligent and transparent investigations on
violations of international humanitarian law and human
rights law so as to ensure that those responsible are
brought to justice. That is required now more than ever.
The tragic events have seriously disrupted the work
of the Group of Experts. That is why France proposed
the adoption of a draft resolution to allow the Group of
Experts to resume their work as soon as possible and in
calmer conditions. It is in essence a technical renewal
but, given the circumstances, France has proposed the
following changes. We hope that all the members of the
Council will agree with this approach.
Through the draft resolution contained in document
S/2017/529, the Council would reiterate its condemnation
of the murders of Michael Sharp and Zaida Catalán and
recall the need for a thorough and swift investigation to
determine those responsible and bring them to justice.
It would call on the Democratic Republic of the Congo
to cooperate with the investigations that might be
conducted by the United Nations, Sweden or the United
States in an effort to shed light on the events.
The draft resolution would also introduce a new
criterion for imposing sanctions, which would target
any individual who attacks a member of the Group of
Experts or who is involved in such an act. The Council
would also reiterate its condemnation of the violence
in Kasais and its call for transparent investigations to
be urgently undertaken to identify the perpetrators of
human rights violations in that region.
Finally, given the constraints faced by the experts,
this draft resolution would provide the Group of Experts
with an additional two months in which to complete its
final report. It also envisages that the Council would
review the sanctions regime and make any necessary
amendments once the report has been completed.
The President (spoke in Spanish): The Council
is ready to proceed to the vote on the draft resolution
before it. I shall put the draft resolution to the vote now.
A vote was taken by show of hands.
In favour:
Bolivia (Plurinational State of), China, Egypt,
Ethiopia, France, Italy, Japan, Kazakhstan, Russian
Federation, Senegal, Sweden, Ukraine, United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland,
United States of America and Uruguay
17-17797

21/06/2017

The situation concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo

The President (spoke in Spanish): The draft
resolution received 15 votes in favour. The draft
resolution has been adopted unanimously as resolution
2360 (2017).
I shall now give the floor to those members of
the Council who wish to make statements following
the voting.
Ms. Sison (United States of America): Resolution
2360 (2017), which we have just adopted, reaffirms the
Council’s commitment to continue the work started by
Michael Sharp and Zaida Catalán, two members of the
Group of Experts on the Democratic Republic of the
Congo who tragically lost their lives in March while on
mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo. By
renewing the Group of Experts’ mandate, the resolution
sends a clear message that the Council will continue
to advance Michael and Zaida’s work to advance peace
and address human rights violations and abuses in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo. The resolution
also underscores the Council’s commitment to take
action against those who seek to harm United Nations
personnel, including the Group of Experts.
To the families of Michael and Zaida, the members
of the Groups of Experts, the personnel of the United
Nations Organization Stabilization Mission in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO) and
Special Representative Sidikou, let me say that our
expressions of support and praise are just not enough.
We know that they deserve our commitment to finding
out the truth and holding those who target United
Nations personnel accountable. Today we took a small,
but important, step to do that.
Just as important, the resolution is for the Congolese,
who have witnessed far too much violence, corruption
and far too many human rights abuses. The gruesome
reports coming out of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, specifically from the Kasais, should prompt us
into action not only in the Security Council, but also
in the Human Rights Council. Just yesterday, we read
reports that over 3,000 people had been killed in the
Kasais region in the past eight months.
The Democratic Republic of the Congo military
has not just engaged in violence against civilians, it has
actually filmed summary executions. We have heard
numerous reports of villages being burned and looted,
rape used as a weapon of war, and children being
targeted and executed in their homes. Approximately
20,000 people have fled the Kasais since early April,

S/PV.7981

and yet the Democratic Republic of the Congo has
rejected offers for international support to investigate
the violence. Zaida and Michael lost their lives seeking
the truth in the Kasais. We cannot let that search end,
particularly as the reports coming out of the region
grow increasingly disturbing and the refugee flows
continue unabated.
There will be no peace or security in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo without elections
and a democratic transition of power. All parties,
both the opposition and the Government, must remain
committed to the 31 December agreement and take
action to expedite the implementation of the agreement,
including much needed confidence-building measures.
The Council and the United States Government
stand ready to hold accountable those that foment
violence, undermine peace and increase instability in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo.
Ms. Schoulgin Nyoni (Sweden): Sweden welcomes
the renewal of the sanctions regime and the extended
mandate for the Group of Experts for the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and wishes to thank the
delegation of France for its work on resolution 2360
(2017). It is imperative that the Group of Experts can
continue its important work, including by completing
its final report, and that the Council subsequently
follow up on its recommendations.
It is a grave concern that the humanitarian and
security situation continues to deteriorate in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, with harsh
implications for its population. Horrific violations of
international humanitarian law and human rights law,
including sexual violence and other rampant abuses,
as well as increased recruitment and the use of child
soldiers, reinforces the vicious cycle of violence. It is
important that the international community continues
to monitor and address the situation. The sanctions
regime plays an important part in that endeavour.
As members of the Group of Experts, Zaida
Catalán and Michael Sharp were vital to this effort. We
again strongly condemn their murder. It is intolerable
that those tasked by the Council with investigating
grave abuses and violations of human rights law and
international humanitarian law, for the sake of peace
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo, are brutally
killed. The safety of United Nations personnel must
be ensured. In the light of the killings, Sweden put
forward and actively supported the inclusion of attacks

17-177973/7

S/PV.7981

The situation concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo

against members of the Group of Experts as an explicit
designation criterion.
In the case of the murders of Catalán and Sharp,
our continued priority is to determine the facts and
ensure that the perpetrators are brought to justice. The
Democratic Republic of the Congo must swiftly and
fully investigate the killing of the two members of the
Group of Experts and bring all perpetrators to justice.
Full cooperation by the Democratic Republic of the
Congo with United Nations inquiries, as well as our
own and the United States criminal investigations is
essential, as highlighted by today’s resolution.
No stone should be left unturned in our efforts
to deliver justice for those who lost their lives in the
service of the United Nations. Sweden, in cooperation
with the Secretary-General and partners concerned,
will continue to look into concrete proposals on how
the United Nations system, including the Council, can
further support the ongoing national investigations, in
order to establish the truth and bring the perpetrators to
justice. One such option would be a special investigation
mandated by the Secretary-General.
We must also draw lessons from possible failures
in the system so that what happened to the experts
cannot happen again. Sweden supported the prompt
establishment by the United Nations of a so-called
Board of Inquiry. We look forward to the report to be
presented by the Board of Inquiry next month. The
Council should follow up on its recommendations,
including when the resolution is discussed again in
the fall.
Mr. Hickey (United Kingdom): The United
Kingdom welcomes the adoption of resolution 2360
(2017), which extends the sanctions regime in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo. That regime is a
hugely important tool for the Council, one that we must
use to hold to account those who commit human rights
abuses and violations in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo. Sadly, that now includes those who commit such
abuses against United Nations personnel, following the
horrific murders of Michael Sharp and Zaida Catalán.
We reiterate our condolences to the families of Michael
and Zaida and to the Governments of the United States,
Sweden and Chile. It is imperative that there be a full
and independent investigation into their deaths.
More broadly, the United Kingdom is extremely
concerned about the situation in the Kasais. High
Commissioner Prince Zeid Al-Hussein’s statement
4/7

21/06/2017

yesterday put into stark relief the horror of the situation,
which has led over 1.3 million people to flee. That scale
of violence and level of brutality — destruction of
villages, mutilation and murder, including of children
and pregnant women — cannot be allowed to continue.
We call on the Democratic Republic of the Congo to
protect its people, to act in accordance with human
rights principles and to bring perpetrators of human
rights violations and abuses to justice.
The United Kingdom also expresses its full support
for Prince Zeid Al-Hussein’s call for an independent
international investigation into the situation in the
Kasais region of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo. We fully support the current efforts in Geneva
to mandate such an independent investigation through
the Human Rights Council. We call on the Government
of the Democratic Republic of the Congo to cooperate
fully with any international investigation and to ensure
that any domestic investigation is conducted credibly
and transparently and that the perpetrators are brought
to justice.
It is clear that the impact of the situation is being felt
beyond the Kasais and, indeed, beyond the Democratic
Republic of the Congo. More than 30,000 refugees have
been registered in Angola. It is essential that we in the
Security Council keep a very close eye on the situation
and are prepared to act.
Mr. Moustafa (Egypt) (spoke in Arabic): Egypt
welcomes today’s unanimous adoption of resolution
2360 (2017), based on our conviction that the sanctions
regime contributes to consolidating peace and security
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo and to support
the efforts to reduce the threats posed by armed groups
and other entities that are threatening civilians,
perpetrating grave crimes, prolonging violence and
causing instability.
In that regard, I would like to mention a specific
situation surrounding the adoption of that resolution,
in the light of the killing of the two members of the
Group of Experts on the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, Zaida Catalán and Michael Sharp. We condemn
that act in the strongest terms, as does the resolution.
The Council stands with the families of the victims
and the countries concerned. The Government in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo must carry out
a swift and complete investigation to uncover the
truth and hold those perpetrators accountable. We
call on them to cooperate with the United Nations
17-17797

21/06/2017

The situation concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo

and the two countries concerned — the United States
and Sweden — in a way that is in line with relevant
legislation in the Democratic Republic of the Congo.
In the light of the consultations that took place within
the Security Council Committee established pursuant
to resolution 1533 (2004), concerning the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, which reflected our consensus
in supporting the Group of Experts through the extreme
circumstances they are facing, the resolution provides
an additional two months to the Group of Experts so
that it can carry out its work pursuant to the relevant
resolution, resolution 2293 (2016), and submit its final
report to the Security Council.
Based on that, the current resolution provides some
addition elements that cover a number of matters and the
most urgent developments, with some technical updates
to the remaining paragraphs of the resolution so that
the final report that the Group of Experts will submit
will be the basis for new substantive consultations
between the members of the Council to fully review the
sanctions measures. On that basis, we can adopt a new
resolution before the end of October 2017.
Egypt reaffirms the importance of the sanctions
regime — an important tool for enhancing security in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo, which in turn is
considered to be the cornerstone for peace and security
in the Great Lakes region. Based on our chairmanship
of the Security Council Committee established pursuant
to resolution 1533 (2004), we seek to enhance the role
of the Committee, especially in the light of the security
challenges in the Democratic Republic of the Congo
and given their grave humanitarian repercussions.
Mr. Cardi (Italy) (spoke in French): At the outset
I should like, on behalf of my Government, to once
again convey our condolences to the families of the two
members of the Group of Experts on the Democratic
Republic of the Congo killed in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo — Michael Sharp and Zaida
Catalán. We also extend our sympathy and solidarity to
Chile, Sweden and the United States.
We commend the unanimous adoption of resolution
2360 (2017). It sends a strong message about the unity
of the Security Council on this important topic. I should
like to thank the French delegation for its efforts in
drafting the text, which conveys the Council’s energetic
and explicit condemnation over the murder of the
two Experts.

S/PV.7981

At the same time, the resolution enables us to
condemn the violence in Kasais. Italy is extremely
concerned about the deteriorating humanitarian
situation in those provinces, about human rights
violations and the shrinking of the democratic space
in the country. We are therefore convinced of the need
to continue to implement the New Year agreement of
31 December 2016, which is critical to supporting the
legitimacy of the transitional institutions.
Given the country’s situation, which remains
very difficult, Italy endeavours to work alongside the
members of the Council and assisting the Democratic
Republic of the Congo to achieve stabilization.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of the Democratic Republic
of the Congo.
Mr. Gata Mavita wa Lufuta (Democratic Republic
of the Congo) (spoke in French): At the outset, I
should like to congratulate you, Mr. President, on your
accession to the presidency of the Security Council
for thie month of June and to express my delegation’s
satisfaction at the great skill and professionalism
with which you have steered the work of the Council
this month. I would also like to thank you for having
given me this opportunity to take the floor before the
Council during this meeting, dedicated to the adoption
of resolution 2360 (2017), which renews the sanctions
regime for the Democratic Republic of the Congo.
I should also like to express once again to the
Council the gratitude of the Congolese Government and
people for the efforts of the United Nations with a view
to safeguarding the sovereignty and territorial integrity
of my country, and to provide for and guarantee its
peace and stability.
My delegation takes note of the Council’s adoption
of the resolution that renews the mandate of the Group of
Experts on the Democratic Republic of the Congo until
1 August 2018.cMy delegation takes this opportunity
to thank the Group of Experts, which continues to
dedicate itself to the cause of the country, and extends
its encouragement and sympathy in honouring the
memory of two of their colleagues who tragically lost
their lives in our country. As the High Commissioner
for Human Rights said yesterday at the thirty-fifth
session of the Human Rights Council in Geneva, the
Government of my country is determined to ensuring
that light be shed on these heinous murders and to
ensuring that the perpetrators be held to account.

17-177975/7

S/PV.7981

The situation concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo

With respect to resolution 2360 (2017) just
adopted, I would like to revisit some aspects that, in my
delegation’s opinion, deserve some comment.
Generally speaking, my delegation believes that,
insofar as the Group of Experts is due to present its
report in two months, the resolution could have been
limited to extending the Group’s mandate to two months
in order to allow it to finalize its report. In our view,
the report could have served in principle as a basis for
the drafting of the resolution. In so doing we could
have avoided the adoption of a plethora of resolutions
that, at first blush, are unwarranted in the present case.
Council members will agree that adopting a resolution
in March, a second one in June and a third in August
or September is not an approach that would facilitate
their implementation.
Furthermore, we believe that political issues,
such those related to the 31 December 2016 political
agreement and to the elections, which are already duly
reflected in the resolution adopted in March (resolution
2348 (2017)), need not have been referred to in a
resolution of the Sanctions Committee. My delegation
has already lamented this situation, which was the
subject of its note verbale of 20 June 2016, which was
conveyed to various member States of the Council
at the time. However, important security issues that
require an urgent response, such as the South Sudanese
combatants, have been cast aside.
Turning to the sanctions regime, my delegation
believes that resolution 2360 (2017) spells out no
measure that could stabilize the situation with regard
to the plundering of natural resources being exported
from the Democratic Republic of the Congo through
bordering countries. The same holds true for weapons
and munitions trafficking. Council members will agree
with us that armed groups do not sell the products of
their looting to so-called little people, that is, people
without resources. We believe that, in order to put an
end to this situation, sanctions must be imposed against
multinational companies. They are well known and
supply these criminals with weapons. Sanctions should
also target transit and host countries of transit for these
blood minerals.
In view of the fact that resolution 2360 (2017) refers
to the situation in the Kasais region, my delegation
deems it wise to inform the Council that the Government
has undertaken joint investigations to shed light on the
events that took place in the there. Contrary to what
6/7

21/06/2017

I have heard here, the Government of my country
has never refused to cooperate with investigations
relating to events in the Kasais. It is working jointly
with the United Nations through the United Nations
Organization Stabilization Mission in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO) and the United
Nations Joint Human Rights Office. In that regard, one
should note the adoption last month of a road map and
the establishment of a task force in which MONUSCO
and the United Nations Joint Human Rights Office
are members. The Government also hopes to receive
technical and logistical assistance from the two
United Nations agencies for the joint investigations.
Furthermore, it expects from them frank collaboration
devoid of any political interference.
With specific reference to mass graves, reports of
their existence were made here at Headquarters, mainly
by MONUSCO. We deplore the contrast between the
speed with which MONUSCO spreads rumours and the
slow pace of informing the international community
when those rumours turn out to be groundless. My
delegation would flag as proof the recent cases of
reported mass graves that were dismissed by our Human
Rights Minister in Geneva. It is confounding to note
that MONUSCO up until now has failed to announce
the results of the joint MONUSCO and military justice
representatives’ visits on the ground.
Indeed, in a number of these alleged mass graves,
what these joint missions found was something other
than what was expected, namely, a 12-calibre hunting
weapon in one, a motorcycle in another, two decapitated
bodies in a third and a body in a fourth. And today it
is the Congolese military judiciary that has begun to
insist that MONUSCO show the other mass graves for
them to pursue their joint work.
With respect to the judicial proceedings on the
death of the two experts, as we mentioned before, an
investigation was initiated by the Congolese military
judiciary, with MONUSCO and the United Nations
Joint Human Rights Office both lending support. The
United States Federal Bureau of Investigation has also
become involved at the request of the Government of
the United States of America. The Government of my
country is open and willing to follow suit if the Swedish
Government issues a request to that end.
Since 5 June 2017, the trial of these murders
has been under way in Kananga, in Central Kasai.
MONUSCO and the United Nations Joint Human
17-17797

21/06/2017

The situation concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo

Rights Office have been attending every day, as have
all other non-governmental organizations that wish
to do so. To date, nine suspects, four of whom are in
the grim video showing the savage murder of the two
experts, have been arrested and are currently being
tried. The military judiciary in my country is counting
on the assistance of MONUSCO, which states that it
has information about areas where fugitives are hiding
in order to help it arrest and try these criminals.

S/PV.7981

I would be remiss if I were to conclude without
once again reassuring the Council of my country’s
determination to carry out these investigations to the
very end, in a transparent way, so as to punish, as we
mentioned, the guilty parties.
The meeting rose at 3.35 p.m.

17-177977/7
