S/PV.7587

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventieth year

7587

th meeting
Thursday, 17 December 2015, 3 p.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Lew. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(United States of America)

Members:

Angola. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Chad . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Chile . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Jordan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Lithuania. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Malaysia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
New Zealand . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Nigeria . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Spain. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Manuel
Mr. Cherif
Mr. Valdés Pulido
Mr. Zhao Yong
Mr. Sapin
Mr. Malhas
Mr. Krivas
Mr. Ahmad Husni Hanadzlah
Mr. Van Bohemen
Mrs. Ogwu
Mr. Churkin
Mr. De Guindos Jurado
Mr. Osborne
Mr. Ramírez Carreño

Agenda
Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

15-43473 (E)
*1543473*

S/PV.7587

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

The meeting was called to order at 3.05 p.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Threats to international peace and security caused
by terrorist acts
The President: I would like to warmly welcome
the Secretary-General, the Ministers and the other
representatives here in the Security Council Chamber.
Their presence today underscores the importance of the
subject that we have gathered to discuss.
In accordance with rule 37 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the
representatives of Albania, Armenia, Australia,
Austria, Belarus, Belgium, Bosnia and Herzegovina,
Bulgaria, Canada, Costa Rica, Croatia, Cyprus, the
Czech Republic, Denmark, Egypt, Estonia, Finland,
Germany, Greece, Hungary, Iceland, Iraq, Ireland,
Israel, Italy, Japan, Kazakhstan, Latvia, Lebanon,
Liechtenstein, Luxembourg, Malta, Montenegro,
Morocco, the Netherlands, Nicaragua, Norway, the
Philippines, Poland, Portugal, Qatar, Romania, Saudi
Arabia, Senegal, Serbia, Slovakia, Slovenia, Sweden,
Switzerland, the Syrian Arab Republic, Tajikistan, the
former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Togo, Tunisia
and Turkey to participate in this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite Mr. Je-Yoon
Shin, President of the Financial Action Task Force, to
participate in this meeting.
The Security Council will now begin its consideration
of the item on its agenda.
I now give the floor to His Excellency SecretaryGeneral Ban Ki-moon.
The Secretary-General: Let me begin by thanking
the Government of the United States for its leadership
in convening this historic first-ever Security Council
meeting of Finance Ministers. I salute your decision,
Mr. President, to focus on countering the financing
of terrorism. As Daesh and other terrorist groups
disseminate their hateful propaganda and ratchet up
murderous attacks, we must join forces to prevent them
from acquiring and deploying resources to do further
harm.

2/24

17/12/2015

We know the challenges before us. The terrorists
take advantage of weaknesses in financial and
regulatory regimes to raise funds. They circumvent
formal channels to avoid detection and exploit new
technologies and tools to transfer resources. They
have have forged destructive and very profitable links
with drug and criminal syndicates, among others,
and they abuse charitable causes to trick individuals
to contribute. They are agile and have been far too
successful in attaining resources for their heinous acts.
Through the years, we have made progress in
identifying and limiting various methods of terrorist
financing, in many cases developing measures to prevent
the flow of funds to terrorists. Numerous Security
Council resolutions clearly express the international
community’s determination to tackle terrorist
financing. More and more Member States continue to
sign and ratify the International Convention for the
Suppression of the Financing of Terrorism. More and
more countries have adopted legislation to criminalize
terrorist financing and build and strengthen regulatory
systems to counter funding flows to terrorists. The
focus and guidance of the Financial Action Task Force
has expanded to include the spectrum of methods to
fund terrorism.
Still, more needs to be done. Terrorists continue to
adapt their tactics and diversify their funding sources.
Today, Daesh runs a multi-million dollar economy
in territories under its control. Daesh terrorists raise
money through the oil trade, extortion, undetected
cash couriers, kidnapping for ransom, the trafficking
of humans and arms. and racketeering. They loot and
sell precious cultural property, shamelessly profiting
from the destruction of humankind’s common heritage.
Social media outreach is exploited by Daesh not just for
radicalization and recruiting, but also for fundraising.
Other terrorist organizations around the world — from
Boko Haram to Al-Shabaab to the Taliban — are
following suit. They increasingly employ elusive tricks
to raise and transfer funds, covering their tracks and
leaving little evidence for Governments and the private
sector to identify tainted resources or to follow the
funding trail.
Just as terrorist groups are innovating and
diversifying, the international community must stay
ahead of the curve to combat money-laundering and the
financing of terrorism. Doing so will not be easy. Many
States have yet to establish the necessary legal regimes,
institutions and expertise to identify and freeze terrorist

15-43473

17/12/2015

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

financing and assets. The implementation of key
Security Council resolutions on this subject remains
weak in many parts of the world. The private sector
and civil society are often left outside the circle of
consensus-building and trust, thus becoming a potential
weak link. In some cases, the misinterpretation and
misapplication of international standards have resulted
in violations of due process, undermining confidence
and damaging the. partnerships with key communities
needed to effectively address the problem.
The draft resolution to be adopted by the Security
Council today will help intensify our efforts, identify
new vulnerabilities and advance stronger and more
efficient regulatory regimes, with due regard for human
rights. I would suggest at least five further areas of
focus.
First, we should increase international cooperation
and share information and expertise, especially in
stopping the illegal transfer of and trade in cultural
artefacts. Where States lack the knowledge and
resources to strengthen their systems, the international
community should offer effective capacity-building.
Secondly, we will expand United Nations
programming on countering the financing of terrorism,
which currently includes the United Nations CounterTerrorism Implementation Task Force Working Group
on this subject. That body coordinates the activities
of several entities in this area, such as the CounterTerrorism Committee Executive Directorate, the United
Nations Office on Drugs and Crime and the Monitoring
Team of the Committee pursuant to resolutions 1267
(1999) and 1989 (2011) concerning Al-Qaida and
associated individuals and entities. The United Nations
Counter-Terrorism Centre will also now focus on
programming in countering the financing of terrorism.
Thirdly, we should work more closely with the
private and charitable sectors to identify suspected
transactions and invest in credible and manageable
regulatory systems to block terrorist funds.
Fourthly, I intend to lead, as requested by the
Council, strategic-level discussions within the United
Nations on the gravity of the threat including on the
sources of financing of these groups, and report back to
the Council within 45 days on our conclusions.
Fifthly and critically, as we fight terrorists, let
us also take special measures to ensure that we do
not harm migrants or refugees and their communities

S/PV.7587

of origin. Last year, developing countries received
over $400 billion in remittances from migrants living
abroad. That is more than three times the total of global
official development assistance.
Remittances sent home by migrant workers are
a lifeline. The average Somali family, for example,
receives 60 per cent of its income from abroad. The
2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development (General
Assembly resolution 70/1) includes commitments to
making the transfer of remittances faster, cheaper and
safer, while fully recognizing measures to combat
the financing of terrorism. Let us work to ensure that
measures to stop illicit financial flows do not undermine
the achievement of the sustainable development goals.
I once again welcome today’s draft resolution
and this unprecedented demonstration of global
commitment. I urge the Council to complement its
effort today with concrete action to ensure that today’s
historic meeting shuts down funding channels for
terrorist groups, prevents attacks and builds a safer,
more secure world for all.
The President: I thank the Secretary-General
for his statement and his strong support for the draft
resolution.
I now give the floor to Mr. Shin.
Mr. Shin: I thank you, Sir, for this unprecedented
opportunity to address the Security Council and to
highlight the importance of countries taking urgent
action to implement the Financial Action Task Force
(FATF) standards to counter terrorist financing and
help defeat the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant
(ISIL).
Terrorism needs money. ISIL operates as a State and
provides all the services a State is expected to provide.
Therefore, ISIL needs more money than other terrorist
groups. Money is its biggest vulnerability. Preventing
and disrupting financial flows must be at the centre of
any successful strategy to defeat ISIL. Disrupting the
finances of ISIL damages its ability to recruit fighters.
ISIL needs access to the financial system to move
money and pay for supplies. ISIL misuses charities and
money-remitters and needs to physically move large
quantities of cash. Financial intelligence can reveal the
structure of terrorist groups, the activities of individual
terrorists, and their logistics and facilitation networks.
How does the FATF help and what has it achieved?
It has put in place a global framework of standards to

15-434733/24

S/PV.7587

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

17/12/2015

combat the financing of terrorism, based on Security
Council resolutions. Almost all jurisdictions have
committed to implementing the FATF standards and
are being assessed by their peers. We publicly name
those that fail to take action. That serves to warn
other jurisdictions and banks of the risks, and deters
foreign investment. So far, the FATF has put more than
80 jurisdictions through that process and has publicly
identified 58 of them. Of those, 43 have since made the
necessary reforms.

those challenges. That will help us work together to
overcome obstacles to information sharing. We know,
for example, that different data-protection laws mean
that banks, one of our largest sources of intelligence,
are often prevented from sharing information across
borders even within their own organizations, let alone
with other banks or the authorities. We will also identify
and share red flags, indicators of terrorist financing, so
as to help the private sector detect and report suspicious
activity.

Our aim is to protect the integrity of the financial
system and to make sure that there are no safe havens
for terrorist financing. During the past six months, the
FATF has reviewed the implementation of counterterrorist financing measures in 196 jurisdictions.
Almost all have criminalized terrorist financing and
can apply targeted financial sanctions. In the past
two months alone, half of those jurisdictions where
we found serious problems have introduced urgent
laws to address them. But that is not enough. Only
33 jurisdictions have secured convictions for terrorist
financing, and most implement United Nations asset
freezes too slowly, with delays of between two days
and one month. It is now urgent that every jurisdiction
focus on effectively implementing the FATF standards,
not just on passing laws and regulations.

The FATF has always worked closely with the
United Nations. In October we updated our standards
to reflect resolution 2178 (2014), on foreign terrorist
fighters. With a strong mandate from the Security
Council today, we will take further action to strengthen
those measures throughout the FATF global network,
and we will continue to promote faster, more effective
implementation of targeted financial sanctions. The
visible support of the United Nations helps us put
pressure on members to implement FATF standards
effectively.

The value of those measures is clear. On Saturday,
the FATF convened a meeting of operational experts
from financial intelligence units, law enforcement and
security and intelligence agencies. They explained how
financial intelligence from the private sector has helped
to track down the terrorists behind recent attacks,
thereby preventing further attacks. We also heard
about cases where disrupting terrorist financing has
undermined terrorist groups’ ability to prepare attacks.
On Sunday, members of the FATF, the United
Nations, the International Monetary Fund, the World
Bank and others came together to learn lessons from
the recent attacks, focusing on members’ operational
capability to counter terrorist financing. Our most
important conclusion is that there is a need for better
and more timely information-sharing among agencies
within and among jurisdictions and with the private
sector.
In the next six weeks we will gather information
from FATF members on the terrorist financing
risks that they are facing, the challenges of sharing
financial intelligence and how they are responding to

4/24

Finally, the FATF is a task force with a time-limited
mandate. That focuses our work and can make us
responsive and flexible. But it also means that we
depend on the goodwill and support of members to
implement and assess the FATF standards and to share
their knowledge of the changing threats. As finance
ministers, we need the Council’s strong support in
order to carry out our work. I will therefore end by
thanking the members of the Security Council, and all
of our members, for their help with our essential work.
The President: I thank Mr. Je-yoon Shin for his
briefing and for the important work that the Financial
Action Task Force does to bring the world together in
order to fight this problem. We hope today’s meeting and
draft resolution will help to enhance the effectiveness
of our effort.
Members of the Council have before them
document S/2015/972, which contains the text of
a draft resolution submitted by Albania, Angola,
Armenia, Australia, Austria, Belarus, Belgium, Bosnia
and Herzegovina, Bulgaria, Canada, Chile, Costa
Rica, Croatia, Cyprus, the Czech Republic, Denmark,
Egypt, Estonia, Finland, France, Germany, Greece,
Hungary, Iceland, Iraq, Ireland, Israel, Italy, Japan,
Jordan, Kazakhstan, Latvia, Lebanon, Liechtenstein,
Lithuania, Luxembourg, Malaysia, Malta, Montenegro,
Morocco, the Netherlands, New Zealand, Nicaragua,

15-43473

17/12/2015

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

S/PV.7587

Nigeria, Norway, the Philippines, Poland, Portugal,
Qatar, Romania, the Russian Federation, Saudi Arabia,
Senegal, Serbia, Slovakia, Slovenia, Spain, Sweden,
Switzerland, the Syrian Arab Republic, Tajikistan,
the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Togo,
Tunisia, Turkey, the United Kingdom of Great Britain
and Northern Ireland, the United States of America and
the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela.

I would like to reaffirm the continued commitment
of the United States of America to cutting ISIL
off from economic resources and the international
financial system, and to working with the international
community to use the measures in today’s resolution
2253 (2015) and the tools we have honed over the past
14 years to make the world safer and better protected
from ISIL and other deadly terrorist groups.

The Council is ready to proceed to the vote on the
draft resolution before it. I shall put the draft resolution
to the vote now.

After the 11 September attacks, the United States
and our international partners vowed to counter
terrorism with every tool at our disposal. Early on, we
recognized the need to target the financial resources
of terrorism networks and to deprive them of the funds
they need to recruit, train, travel, equip, attack and
murder. Since that time, we have greatly strengthened
the transparency and resilience of the international
financial system and developed tools to track and
disrupt channels of terrorism-funding. The impact is
real. Regulators and financial institutions alike are far
more sophisticated and attuned to the threat of terrorfinancing, and have made it harder for terror groups
like Al-Qaida and Hizbullah to place and move funds.
Our financial system is more transparent, resilient and
stronger as a result.

A vote was taken by show of hands.
In favour:
Angola, Chad, Chile, China, France, Jordan,
Lithuania, Malaysia, New Zealand, Nigeria,
Russian Federation, Spain, United Kingdom of
Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United States
of America and Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of)
The President: The draft resolution received
15 votes in favour. The draft resolution has been
adopted unanimously as resolution 2253 (2015).
I shall now make a statement in my capacity as
Secretary of the Treasury of the United States.
We come together at a consequential time and in
a historic setting. Never before have finance ministers
convened for an official Security Council meeting.
Today’s unprecedented meeting underscores the
importance of combating the financing of terrorism,
the dedication of the international community to
destroying the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant
(ISIL), and the critical role of finance ministries and
the broader international financial community in this
fight.
I would like to thank His Excellency SecretaryGeneral Ban Ki-moon for his leadership and the
commitment of the United Nations to this important
effort. I also thank President Je-Yoon Shin of the
Financial Action Task Force (FATF) for travelling all
this way and for all that the FATF is doing to counter
terrorism threats. And I would like to thank Ambassador
Power for her work in organizing today’s meeting and
finalizing the resolution we have just adopted, which
will help us protect the international financial system
from abuse and exploitation by terrorists. For coming
here to signal our collective resolve, I would like to
thank all of those in the Chamber, so many of whom
travelled long distances to be at this meeting.

We have uncovered and cut off channel after
channel of support to Al-Qaida, leaving its branches
hungry for funding and less capable of plotting and
carrying out attacks. We have also improved our ability
to deploy those tools in effective and sophisticated
ways against other illicit financial threats, most notably
in our successful multilateral effort to bring Iran to
the negotiating table in connection with its nuclear
programme.
But we have also seen the terror threats evolve in
dangerous ways. Different tactics, like lone wolf attacks
and shootings, are examples we have seen on American
soil. New groups have emerged with innovative
messaging, recruiting, military and financing strategies.
ISIL is the most dangerous manifestation of that new
threat. Since it emerged, ISIL has terrorized the people
of Iraq and Syria, Paris and elsewhere with its attacks,
and killed and wounded people from many nations and
religions. Our Governments, in coordination with the
United Nations and other multilateral organizations,
have been countering ISIL for some time. But we all
know that we need to do more together to degrade and
destroy that brutal force of terror.

15-434735/24

S/PV.7587

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

Since 2014 the United States has been working to
destroy ISIL by drawing upon every aspect of American
power, as President Obama made clear again last week.
A critical part of the entire United States Government
strategy is the use of counter-terrorism-financing tools
and authorities to stop ISIL’s operations by isolating
it financially and economically. As many here know,
ISIL is a challenging financial target. Unlike other
terror groups, ISIL derives a relatively small share of
its funding from donors abroad. Instead, ISIL generates
wealth from economic activities and resources within
the territory under its control. And ISIL’s financing
has evolved from seizing territory and looting bank
vaults to leveraging more renewable revenue streams.
So far, ISIL has reaped an estimated $500 million from
black-market oil and millions more from people whom
it brutalizes and extorts.
At the same time, ISIL has financial vulnerabilities,
and the United States approach has evolved as well
so as to attack those vulnerabilities. ISIL’s newer
financing methods are now targets. Because of its need
to control territory, ISIL requires large and renewable
streams of income to pay fighters, procure weapons
and provide basic services to local populations. In
order to sustain its oil infrastructure and its military
efforts, ISIL needs access to the international financial
system. Those dependencies present opportunities for
attack. To cut off ISIL’s resources and funding streams,
most important the revenue from its oil sales, the
United States military has been working with coalition
partners to attack ISIL’s entire oil supply chain, its oil
fields, refineries and its tanker trucks. Over the past
month, nearly 400 of ISIL’s oil tanker trucks have been
destroyed.
While those attacks are having a real and growing
impact, the United States and the international
community must also work with countries bordering
Iraq and Syria to enhance border security and help
stop illicit cross-border flows. To sever ISIL from the
international financial system, the United States is
working with its partners to actively target ISIL’s key
financial facilitators, sanctioning more than 30 of its
senior leaders and financiers. United States officials
have worked with the Government of Iraq to deny ISIL
access to the Iraqi financial system and, in collaboration
with law enforcement and foreign partners, United
States officials have worked with financial institutions
to strengthen their ability to detect activity associated
with ISIL supporters.

6/24

17/12/2015

While we are making progress to financially isolate
ISIL, if we are to succeed we must all intensify our
efforts, on our own and together at an international level.
Today, we adopted a new Security Council resolution
that builds on previous measures and strengthens
our existing tools. It expands the focus of resolution
1267 (1999), concerning the Al-Qaida sanctions, to
specifically emphasize ISIL in the designation criteria,
making association with ISIL grounds for targeted
sanctions. It calls on Member States to ensure they
have the legal tools to criminalize the financing of
individual terrorists and terrorist organizations for
any purpose — recruiting, training, travel and other
activities — even in the absence of a link to a specific
terrorist act. It calls upon Member States to increase
engagement with the private sector to prevent the
terrorists’ use of the financial system, and it encourages
Governments to better share information internally and
among nations so as to avoid missing critical information
about terrorist activities. Resolution 2253 (2015) is
a critical step, but the real test will be determined
by the actions that we each take after adoption. We
need meaningful implementation, coordination and
enforcement from each country represented here and
from many others. As we have all learned in our work
to counter Al-Qaida, ISIL and other groups to date, the
successful use of those counter-terror-financing tools
requires robust domestic implementation, extensive
collaboration with private partners, intense multilateral
coordination and information-sharing.
The importance of that coordination was exemplified
this year when we at the United States Treasury worked
with our French and European counterparts in real time
to provide over 1,300 leads immediately following the
horrific Paris attacks in January and November. That
type of coordination is ongoing and essential, and we
must combine it with a relentless desire to adapt and
change our tools as the terror groups adapt to our
measures. The nations of the world standing together
and acting together represent a more powerful force
than our individual actions alone. We must also work
through other multilateral organizations. Last week,
the Financial Action Task Force held a meeting on
investigating and prosecuting terrorist financiers and
implemented targeted financial sanctions. The CounterISIL Finance Group, which is co-led by the United
States, Italy and Saudi Arabia, is focused, among others
things, on expanding information-sharing in combating
the financing of ISIL affiliates.

15-43473

17/12/2015

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

Even as we continue that important work, we
must also remain steadfast in our commitment to
both protect the stability of the international financial
system and expand financial inclusion, so that the
benefits of global growth are broadly shared. Those
two objectives — protecting the financial system from
illicit activity while increasing access to financial
services — are complementary, not conflicting, as we
know that financial exclusion undermines the integrity
of the entire financial sector and that inclusion creates
stakeholders around the world committed to positive
change.
In conclusion, our joint work on counter-terrorism
financing over the past 14 years has taught us that we
can meet the long-term evolving terror challenge, but
we must keep adapting, and we must stay focused to
do so. The enhanced sanctions regime under the newly
adopted resolution and the robust implementation of the
resolution and other counter-terror-financing measures
will help us meet the terrorism threat, whether from
ISIL or others like Al-Qaida, Al-Shabaab, Boko Haram,
Hizbullah, the Al-Nusra Front or new individuals and
groups.
Once again, I thank the many participants who
have come here for travelling to take part in this
historic meeting and for their support of this important
resolution and this broader long-term effort.
I now resume my functions as President of the
Council.
I give the floor to the Minister for Finance of
Jordan.
Mr. Malhas (Jordan) (spoke in Arabic): First and
foremost, allow me to thank the United States Secretary
of the Treasury, Mr. Jacob Lew, for presiding over this
very important meeting. My country appreciates the
efforts of the United States of America, which have led
to the convening of this meeting, the very first in the
history of the Security Council.
We too are gratified by the adoption by consensus
of resolution 2253 (2015), at a time when many terrorist
attacks have been carried out throughout the world,
killing innocent people and exacerbating humanitarian
crises — attacks that, as we all know, disregard all
precepts of morality and humanity. I would like to
thank the lead delegations of the resolution, namely, the
delegations of the Russian Federation and the United
States of America, for their efforts. I would also like
to thank the Secretary-General, Mr. Ban Ki-moon, for

S/PV.7587

his statement, and I would like to thank Mr. Je-Yoon
Shin for his briefing. We fully support the efforts of
the Financial Action Task Force, as well as its close
cooperation with all States within the framework of the
fight against terrorism.
The resolution we have just adopted is a watershed,
given its specificity and its major thrust. It updates
the sanctions regime, which will now be known as
the sanctions regime against Al-Qaida and the Islamic
State in Iraq and the Levant. It expands the criteria for
listing on the sanctions list to ensure that they include
activities that demonstrate a link between individuals
and entities tied to Daesh, so that those criteria are not
limited solely to links with Al-Qaida. That is a point
that we stressed during the negotiations, because it
is in keeping with today’s reality and shows that the
international community is determined to face the
international threat posed by Daesh.
Jordan has always stressed the importance of
the fight to combat the financing of terrorism and
cut off its sources. That is one of the pillars and
prerequisites when it comes to any efforts aimed at
combating terrorism. It behooves me to say here that
the fight against the financing of terrorism, including
the financing of Daesh, cannot rest on the shoulders
of a single country or a single independent institution.
The multifaceted sources of that financing mean that
we need to strengthen cooperation among national
institutions and among institutions at the regional and
international levels. Terrorist organizations thrive
on the illicit trafficking in oil, natural resources and
antiquities and the seizing of hostages for ransom, not
to mention the taxes they impose on the population and
the exploitation, to put it baldly, of innocent citizens.
The lack of international cooperation and cooperation
at the regional level has contributed to the success of
those terrorist organizations. With respect to the fight
against the financing of terrorism, my country would
like to stress several important points.
We need to bolster the International Convention
for the Suppression of the Financing of Terrorism.
All countries must adhere to that Convention, which
focuses specifically on the financing of terrorism
and strengthens judicial cooperation among States.
Countries must also live up to their commitments
and must ensure that their citizens and residents do
not support terrorist organizations financially. All
sanctions committees must include on their sanctions
lists any individuals guilty of such actions, and we must

15-434737/24

S/PV.7587

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

also ensure that individuals included on either national
or United Nations sanctions lists have no access to the
financial system, in accordance with all the relevant
resolutions. Donor countries, as well as their partners
and the relevant United Nations agencies, must provide
assistance to States so as to strengthen their capacities
and capabilities in the fight against terrorism, including
strengthening their public and private banking sectors.
Individuals guilty of the crimes at issue here must
be brought to justice or extradited to States with
jurisdiction. I would like to share with the Council
some of the measures we have undertaken in Jordan in
that regard.
Jordanian parliamentarians have taken note of the
expansion of terrorist groups in the region. We have
strengthened our legislation so as to take that new
reality into account. We have criminalized any acts
involving the financing of terrorism or the lending of
support to terrorist organizations. Any individual who
provides financing to those preparing or committing an
attack will be brought to justice, pursuant to the updated
law on the suppression of the financing of terrorism of
1994, as well as the 2010 law on money-laundering.
Our national authorities have also undertaken practical
measures at all crossing and border points so as to
prevent the entry of oil shipments from areas controlled
by Daesh or the entry of any stolen goods or antiquities.
Those two forms of trafficking are the main sources
of financing for terrorist organizations in both Syria
and Iraq. We have also raised the level of awareness
and vigilance in the financial and currency sectors.
We have taken measures to ensure that both the public
and private banking sectors prevent Daesh, as well as
any other terrorist organization, from accessing the
Jordanian or international financial system. The new
law on currency exchange is being studied so as to
ensure that it is in keeping with the provisions of our
Constitution. Following the adoption of resolution 2199
(2015) by the Council, we have undertaken a number of
measures and steps aimed at combating trafficking in
antiquities. Those measures form part of the efforts we
have undertaken to combat the financing of terrorism,
since we know that trafficking in antiquities is the
second most important source of funding for terrorist
organizations.
The atrocities committed by terrorist organizations,
including Daesh, clearly demonstrate that the terrorists
want to prevent us from living in peaceful coexistence.
The fight against terrorism is therefore truly a global
one. Combating Daesh and similar organizations
8/24

17/12/2015

requires a global approach based on three axes — the
military, security and ideological.
I would like to reiterate the importance of
weakening Daesh, especially at the financial level. That
will require international efforts, as well as serious
collective efforts at all levels.
The President: I thank Minister Malhas for his
statement. We all understand that Jordan bears a special
burden in dealing with so many refugees escaping from
the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant.
I now give the floor to the Minister of Finance and
Public Accounts of France.
Mr. Sapin (France) (spoke in French): I would like
to thank the United States presidency for having taken
the initiative of convening this meeting, which gives
Ministers of Finance the honour of taking part in a
meeting of the Security Council.
One month ago, France was struck by terrorist
attacks of an unprecedented scale on French soil. I
would like to take this opportunity to thank the entire
world that reached out to us with words and gestures
of solidarity that touched us deeply. But France
was not the only country to be attacked. No country
has escaped, no continent has been spared, and with
each passing month the list of barbaric attacks grows
inexorably longer: Lebanon, Turkey, Tunisia, Egypt and
now, most recently, the United States. Since June 2014,
thousands of men and women around the world have
lost their lives in acts of terrorism perpetrated by Daesh
or groups that have sworn allegiance to Daesh. We are
therefore all — and we all know this — affected. In the
face of such blind savagery, we each have the duty to
act.
At such moments, we must each set aside our
national differences and join forces to advance our
common will. That common will must be expressed
here, in the Security Council of the United Nations,
because it is here that the story of all major crises has
been written, and the crisis we face today is of such
scope. This message was one that I shared last week in
Brussels with my European colleagues, at the heart of
this other collective and common endeavour that is the
European Union. The terrorist threat is a threat not only
to the whole world but also, more specifically, to the
European project, given its consequences. Europeans
must therefore be prepared to address it, and they have
decided to do so.

15-43473

17/12/2015

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

Tomorrow our colleagues from the ministries for
foreign affairs will meet here to seek a solution to the
Syrian crisis. They are more used to meeting in this
Chamber than we are, but the same motivation inspires
us and the same desire guides us: to ensure our common
security and our common responsibility. Our colleagues
contribute by finding solutions to armed conflicts, and
we contribute by drying up the sources of financing for
terrorism and thereby overcoming the terrorists whose
acts they fuel.
The singularity and power of this terrorist group
stems from the fact that it has collected vast spoils
of war from various sources. Smuggling, extortion,
trafficking — Daesh will do anything to finance itself.
We who are gathered here today — most of us are
ministers of finance — have the task of understanding
these financial flows and cutting them off. Everything
possible must be done to financially choke off terrorism.
Resolution 2253 (2015), which we have just
adopted, offers concrete responses. It recognizes Daesh
as the entity that must be combated. It identifies the
specific financing methods used by this terrorist group:
the trade in oil; trafficking in antiquities and artwork;
kidnapping for ransom; extortion; and trafficking in
human beings. The resolution provides us with the
legal means to stop them, through freezing the assets
of individuals or entities linked to such financing
throughout the world.
Now that the resolution has been adopted, we must
implement it as rapidly as possible. It will have no
impact unless it leads to new listings by the Security
Council. There is a list of individuals and entities subject
to sanctions because of their links with Al-Qaida. Now
we are targeting both Al-Qaida and Daesh, so the list
must grow. France attaches particular importance to the
effective and speedy implementation of the resolution.
Over and above Daesh, the other lesson to be drawn
from the recent attacks is that terrorists continuously
find new ways to finance themselves, including
through small amounts. Our responsibility is to ensure
that none of these goes unnoticed. In this respect, I see
three challenges facing ministers of finance.
First, we need to bolster the effectiveness of our
financial intelligence-gathering. We must acquire the
capabilities necessary to track suspect financial flows.
We must better integrate our financial intelligence
units with our intelligence and investigation services.

S/PV.7587

There is also a need to considerably improve the
exchange of information between the financial
information intelligence units of our various countries.
It is crucial that information be better shared in a more
comprehensive and more rapid manner. Sometimes all
that is needed is a few hours’ warning to prevent an
attack.
There is a second challenge: that of anonymity.
Those who wish to transfer funds discreetly can resort
to archaic traditional methods such as cash, gold and
precious metals. These forms of payment need to be
better controlled, of course, but today those who want to
transfer funds discreetly can also do so using innovative,
very modern methods. Electronic and virtual currencies
pose new risks, and I speak from recent and very painful
experience. The attacks on 13 November in Paris were,
to a large extent, financed through prepaid cards, which
enabled anonymous transfers and payments to take
place between Belgium and France. We must therefore
tackle these shortcomings. It is certainly not a matter of
prohibiting such innovative forms of payment, but we
have to do away with their anonymous aspect.
Finally, because the financing of terrorism is
multifaceted and shape-shifting, all of society must
mobilize. Private actors must be just as vigilant as our
services. In France, we have since January called for
more vigilance to be shown by financial establishments,
to raise their awareness of the risk of financing terrorist
groups linked to Daesh. We have compiled a specific
manual for organizations, and I have written to artworld professionals to point out to them the risks of
Daesh being financed by trafficking in archaeological
artefacts or artwork. I am gratified that the concept of
cause for vigilance has been included in the resolution.
We need to generalize this.
This programme of work is a very dense one, and
a great deal of effort lies before us. I wish to take the
opportunity afforded us by this meeting to thank the
Financial Action Task Force (FATF), which is at the
very heart of the mechanism to combat the financing
of terrorism. It has a clear vision of the shortcomings
of its members in terms of the criminalization of the
financing of terrorism and of asset freezes. At the Group
of 20 Summit held in Antalya, following the attacks of
13 November, Heads of state and Government entrusted
a very clear mandate to us: the time for procrastination
is over, and we must exert pressure on these countries
to ensure that their mechanisms are made effective.

15-434739/24

S/PV.7587

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

I should like to thank the President of the FATF for
having held in Paris this weekend a special meeting on
the financing of terrorism.
I hope that next February, during the next Group
of 20 finance meeting, under the Chinese presidency,
we will be able to take new, effective and strong
measures. An effective FATF is a guarantee of the
effective implementation of United Nations decisions.
Similarly, it is very important that the work of the FATF
nourish the process of reflection taking place in this
very building. Too often, our institutions function in
compartmentalized silos: diplomats speak to diplomats
and financiers speak to financiers. Today is opportunity
to do away with such compartmentalization.
Finally, I would like to pay tribute to Jack Lew
for taking the initiative of organizing this very first
meeting of Security Council ministers of finance. I
hope that this will serve as a fruitful precedent, because
joint action is the key to effectiveness.
The President: Again, I extend my condolences on
the terrible losses from the recent terrorist in Paris.
I now give the floor to the Minister of Finance of
Chile.
Mr. Valdés Pulido (Chile) (spoke in Spanish): We
thank the Secretary-General and the President of the
Financial Action Task Force (FATF) for their statements,
and the United States and the Russian Federation for
having put together resolution 2253 (2015).
Chile welcomes the convening of this meeting by
the President of the Security Council, and we take this
opportunity to reaffirm our unwavering determination
to cooperate with collective efforts to combat terrorism.
We would like to once again reiterate our condemnation
of all terrorist acts, methods and practices and of the
operations that finance them, in all their forms and
manifestations, regardless of their motivation, wherever
they occur, and by whomever they are committed.
The self-styled Islamic State terrorist group remains
a destabilizing factor in the Iraqi and Syrian conflicts.
Its spread to and presence in other countries and regions
is equally alarming. We must therefore work together to
implement a multilateral strategy aimed at putting an
end to its activities.
Regarding the specific topic that brings us here this
afternoon, we believe that additional efforts must be
made to choke off financing of these groups and thus
ensure the full and effective implementation of the
10/24

17/12/2015

relevant Security Council resolutions. It is thus vital to
ensure the implementation of the standards contained
in the recommendations of the Financial Action Task
Force.
Putting an end to the financing of the Islamic
State will be no easy task, since a significant part
of its income derives from activities carried out on
the territory under its control and which therefore
cannot be detected by the financial system. We must
therefore focus our efforts on its interactions with the
outside world, such as the sale of oil, the payment of
ransom or the smuggling of objects of cultural and
historical value, inter alia. That is why it is essential
that resolution 2253 (2015), adopted today, allow for the
ongoing judicious study of the evolution of new trends
in terrorist financing.
Moreover, we believe it to be important that the
sanctions imposed on Al-Qaida and associated groups
be implemented effectively. There must be timely
exchange of information among countries on the
financial transactions that terrorist groups conduct,
either themselves or, more important, through third
parties. We also need to be aware of the new challenges
that arise every day, such as the fight against the
funding of foreign terrorist fighters. At the same time,
we reiterate that protecting human rights is an essential
aspect of the fight against terrorism. All efforts and
measures carried out within States must constantly
be adjusted to take into account obligations under
international law, human rights law and the rule of law.
Finally, Chile notes, as it indicated during its
presidency of the Security Council in January, that it
is crucial that the link between inclusive international
development, peace and security be recognized. We
believe that, as the numerous destabilizing processes
are showing, the lack of inclusive development in many,
but not all, cases can foment conflicts, It is therefore
essential that the lack of opportunities be addressed
with greater force, without our being distracted from
taking all immediate measures to stop the financing of
terrorist groups at a global level.
The President: I now give the floor to the
Chancellor of the Exchequer of the United Kingdom of
Great Britain and Northern Ireland.
Mr. Osborne (United Kingdom): I would like
to begin, as others have done, by congratulating the
President for suggesting today’s meeting, in which
the Finance Ministers of the members of the Security

15-43473

17/12/2015

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

Council have come together for the first time in the
history of the United Nations. I would also like to
congratulate the Secretary-General and the President
of the Financial Action Task Force (FATF) for the
leadership that they have shown on the issue before us.
I, too, would like to start by offering my condolences
and the condolences of the British people for those
who lost their lives in Paris as a result of the dreadful
attacks there, but also those who lost their lives in
Ankara, Beirut and California, as well as the Russian
holiday-makers travelling home from Sharm el-Sheikh
who lost their lives. It is clear that these acts of violence
were designed to intimidate and divide us, but they
have failed to do that. Indeed, it is very striking to look
at the Security Council table here in the Chamber and
note that this has often been where the divisions of the
world have been most evident, yet today the unity of the
world is on display. Far from dividing us, the terrorists
in Daesh — the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant
(ISIL) — are actually uniting us. We are determined to
take the fight to them, deprive them of their financing
and to defeat them.
All of us around this table have been grappling with
the threat that terrorism poses. In the last year alone in
the United Kingdom, our security forces have prevented
seven different plots to attack citizens in our country.
At a time where people question whether we can defeat
these terrorists, we are already defeating these terrorists
and we are making progress. In the last year, the
coalition against Daesh/ISIL has liberated over 40 per
cent of the territory under their control in Iraq. We are
stemming the flow of foreign fighters to their ranks.
We are exploiting the vulnerabilities in their financial
network, and we are successfully targeting their oil
supply. As British Prime Minister David Cameron said
here at the United Nations in September, we are leading
the efforts to tackle Daesh/ISIL’s propaganda so that
fewer people around the world are influenced by their
message of hate.
We know that those who seek to commit acts of
terrorism will not stop, so neither should our resolve
to defeat them. When our values of freedom and
democracy are threatened, when efforts are made to
undermine the international peace and security that the
Security Council protects, we must all unite to condemn
those actions and prevent further tragedy.
Since the Council first adopted resolution 1267
(1999), the threat from terrorism has evolved. In
Daesh, we face a new type of threat, oppressing those

S/PV.7587

in the territory that they physically control, inspiring
foreign terrorist fighters to join their cause in places
like Syria and Iraq, and now potentially in Libya as
well, and radicalizing individuals to inspire them
to commit atrocities at home. It is a new breed of
terrorism and a new challenge for us as Governments
and the international community, and it calls for a new
response. Today we are taking significant further steps
to strengthen that response. I very much welcome the
adoption of the very comprehensive resolution today
(resolution 2253 (2015)), and I thank the SecretaryGeneral and his team at the United Nations for their
work on this matter. I would like briefly set out the
areas that the United Kingdom considers to be key to
strengthening the global efforts to combat terrorist
financing and the financing of Daesh and to make full
use of resolution 2253 (2015).
First, we must ensure that we are using the existing
tools that we already have to combat the threat of terrorist
financing to their full effect. In September this year, the
United Kingdom put forward a list of names of British
nationals who had travelled to Syria and recommended
them for listing under United Nations sanctions. Today
I would urge other Member States to do the same, to
propose the designation of those individuals who pose a
real threat so that their assets can be frozen around the
world and we can cut off the resources they need before
they can commit their planned acts of terrorism.
We must ensure that we are using our counterterrorism financing regimes to full effect domestically
as well. I agree with what the Secretary-General was
saying earlier. We need to make sure that all Member
States have a regime in place that criminalizes the
financing of terrorists for any purpose and that they
implement the United Nations sanctions regimes fully
and promptly. I thought this was also an extremely
important point raised by the President of the FATF.
The gap between the sanction being announced and the
sanction being implemented is crucial in a world where
money can be moved from one place to another in a
matter of seconds.
In the United Kingdom, we have taken a long
look at our regime, and I can confirm today that we
will legislate domestically to ensure that we are able to
implement United Nations sanctions without any delay.
Like all members of the European Union (EU), we are
currently reliant on an EU process that takes too long.
We want to work with our partners in the European
Union to streamline that process and make our response

15-4347311/24

S/PV.7587

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

more rapid in order to make sure that we at a European
level are able to implement United Nations designations
immediately.
Secondly, I want to make sure that we are
responding to the evolving nature of terrorist threats
with additional new measures. We heard today about
the value of the Syrian oil fields to Daesh, namely, that
oil alone is providing the terrorist group with millions
of dollars every day: it is estimated that Daesh receives
$1.5 million in proceeds every day from its exploitation
of oil. We know that the military action that the United
Kingdom is proud to be taking with its allies through
the British air force is having some success in limiting
this resource — this oil money.
But we Finance Ministers can also take action.
We should make clear, as we do with resolution 2253
(2015), that the United Nations sanctions regime can
and will be used to target not just the terrorists but the
traders, the middlemen, the people who facilitate the
illegal trade in oil that provides Daesh with one of its
principal sources of revenue. We should similarly focus
on the illegal trade in cultural artefacts, about which the
Finance Minister of Jordan spoke very powerfully. We
are literally seeing the history of some these countries
being stolen outright from their peoples. Frankly, there
is much more we can do to shine a light on the opaque
trade in cultural artefacts.
But, naturally, as we limit one branch of Daesh’s
financial network, we know that they will attempt
to strengthen another. We must therefore be ready
to respond to their evolving ways of satisfying their
financial needs, that is, kidnapping for ransom or the
involvement of organized crime. Accordingly, I am
delighted that resolution 2253 (2015) makes this point
clear as well.
I also want to look at new ways of gathering and
sharing information among law enforcement agencies,
internationally as well as domestically, between law
enforcement agencies and the private sector, including
our banking systems. This was a point that was raised by
a number of speakers, and I think it is a very important
one. We are taking steps in the United Kingdom, the
home of one of the world’s largest — indeed the world’s
largest — financial centres, to make sure that we have
a partnership with the financial sector by which we are
working together to tackle illicit financial flows.
The third and final point I want to make is this:
I want to make sure that the Council continues to

12/24

17/12/2015

work together to consider how we implement the
recommendations on how we do more to tackle terrorist
financing. Because if the threat is constantly evolving,
so must our response to match it.
I welcome the special meeting of the Financial
Action Task Force last weekend, specifically focused
on our collective response to terrorist financing. In
particular I was pleased to see a commitment from the
group to update its report on Daesh financing while
working with the counter-ISIL finance group and
others.
I think it would be sensible for finance ministers
to perhaps meet again in the Security Council in the
months ahead, at some point, to review the evolving
situation and to consider proposals for further measures.
Let us be clear: adopting a resolution is one thing,
implementing the resolution is of course another. We
have all committed to report to the United Nations on
the progress we make on that. I think that is something
that we should therefore put into action.
That is where I see the priorities for action — ensuring
we are making the most of the existing tools that we
have; implementing new measures to respond to the
particular threat that Daesh poses to us and continuing
to work together to develop our response further and
reporting back here at the United Nations until we fully
destroy this evil.
The President: I agree wholeheartedly that the
unity we have here today has to be reflected in the unity
we undertake in implementing and executing against it.
I now give the floor to the Minister for Economic
Affairs and Competitiveness of Spain.
Mr. De Guindos Jurado (Spain) (spoke in Spanish):
Allow me to begin, Mr. President, by welcoming your
initiative, which gives us an opportunity for Ministers
for Finance to come together at the Security Council in
a historic meeting. I also wish to express my gratitude
for the contributions and leadership of the SecretaryGeneral and of the President of the Financial Action
Task Force.
I would like especially to congratulate the Russian
Federation and the United States of America for
introducing resolution 2253 (2015), which improves the
tools at the disposal of the international community for
combating the financing of international terrorism in
three important ways.

15-43473

17/12/2015

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

The resolution incorporates Daesh as part of the
United Nations sanctions regime; it strengthens and
enhances the obligations of Member States in the light
of the recent recommendations of the Financial Action
Task Force; and it sets up systematic reporting, which
will facilitate the updating of intelligence information
of the United Nations and its States Members on the
reality we are facing.
The urgency of the threat represented by Daesh
today justifies the updating of the sanctions regime and
making sanctions as effective as possible. That is why
we very much welcome the new measures set out by the
resolution with regard to the functioning of the Security
Council Committee established pursuant to resolutions
1267 (1999) and 1989 (2011).
Spain is fully committed to the core principles of
the United Nations, especially the initiatives developed
to combat terrorism generally, and the financing
of terrorism in particular. Often we are tempted to
see terrorism as an issue that is only of interest to
those countries that suffer from terrorist attacks first
hand. However, we tend to forget that we live in an
interconnected world with a globalized economy.
Therefore, the risk that the financial system of one
country could be used to channel funding to terrorism
exists in every country in the world.
Those who finance terrorism take advantage of
the lack of control over the risk that may exist in some
countries in order to abuse the financial system. That
is why I believe that one of the first tasks on which
we need to redouble our efforts is in raising global
awareness about the risks. All countries are faced with
the risk of being used to divert funds for the purpose
of terrorism. And therefore all countries must act with
determination to set up effective oversight mechanisms.
The global nature of the threat necessarily requires
a coordinated response aimed at eliminating any
vacuum or gap or disconnect that could be exploited by
terrorists to their own ends. We must therefore improve
communication networks and information exchange,
both bilaterally and multilaterally and eradicate any
existing impediment, as called for in the resolution we
have adopted today.
To ensure effective coordination, however, a
necessary first step requires us to establish national
structures capable of handling the information and
intelligence that is indispensable and relevant if we are
to prevent and fight this scourge. As part of the combat

S/PV.7587

against the financing of terrorism, access to information
is an essential element. It is important that we intensify
efforts and improve transparency regarding the real
holders of funds, who hide themselves behind other
persons and legal provisions.
We have a lengthy task before us, but we must address
it with a broad perspective that not only focuses on the
financing of terrorism but also encompasses financial
aspects of violent extremism and radicalization, which
is the life blood of such organizations.
Daesh also needs to finance its processes for
attracting new adherents. It is crucial that we are able to
identify and cut off financial flows at that early stage.
Moreover, terrorist groups have exploited new
payment methods in financing their criminal activities.
Against that backdrop, we must be able to put in place
mechanisms to control and avert the use of such tools
for financing of terrorism.
Finally, I would like to highlight the point that the
new instrument adopted today by the Security Council
includes elements that will serve to strengthen one
of the core principles in the fight against terrorism,
namely, respect for human rights. We very much
welcome the fact that the new resolution includes
a specific mention of the importance of the role of
the Office of the Ombudsperson and calls upon the
Secretary-General to take all the necessary measures to
continue to ensure the independence and effectiveness
of that Office. We hope that, on the basis of that new
paragraph in the resolution, we will make progress
towards the full institutionalization of the Office of
the Ombudsperson, which plays an essential role in the
work of the Committee.
The President: I now give the floor to the Minister
of Finance of Angola.
Mr. Manuel (Angola): We fully support the
initiative of the United States presidency and the
co-sponsors to promote this meeting of the Ministers
of Finance in the Security Council, as we believe it
will contribute to the development of new and effective
measures to achieve our common objectives in the fight
against terrorism and money-laundering.
The fight against terrorism is not a new concept.
For some time now, many countries have been
battling terrorism, which has taken the lives of many
innocent men, women and children across the globe,
while breaching fundamental human rights that are

15-4347313/24

S/PV.7587

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

17/12/2015

consecrated by the spirit and letter of the Charter of the
United Nations.

weapon against terrorism remains the eradication of its
sources of financing.

As a Member of the United Nations and various
other international and regional organizations, Angola
is still highly concerned about terrorism. Like the United
Nations, we will fight against it, for it is not a matter
that solely concerns a single country or organization,
but in fact affects all of the citizens of the world.

Getting rid of the sources of financing for terrorism
is by far the more effective weapon. But in order to
do so, a massive collective effort is required by all
countries and organizations. Efficient mechanisms
must be created to allow countries to control the origin
and destination of funds that circulate internally and
which, instead of being channelled towards investing
in development, are in danger of being directed towards
disseminating ideologies, extremism and political
objectives that go against human rights under the
democratic rule of law. That primarily affects those
developing countries that have been recently recovering
from the effects of the Cold War.

In recent decades, extraordinary advances in
information and technology have facilitated financial
flows and communication among billions of people,
among which are those who breach human rights through
the misuse of social media and other communication
tools.
Angola’s action against terrorism became effective
in 1999, when parliamentary resolution 25/99 was
adopted on preventing and fighting terrorism,
which adopted the 1999 Organization of African
Unity Convention on the Prevention and Combating
of Terrorism. In addition, a number of other legal
measures were put in place. I wish to point out that the
Angola National Assembly regulation 38/10, adopted
in 2010, approves the International Convention for
the Suppression of the Financing of Terrorism. An
anti-terrorism and money-laundering bill was adopted
in Angola under law 12/10, and was later reinforced by
law 34/11. Law 1/12 allows Angola to immediately apply
resolutions of United Nations sanctions committees in
order to prevent terrorism from benefitting from any
form of financing. Under those regulations, we created
a financial intelligence unit and a national designation
committee, which are in charge of the centralizing
and processing of all information concerning moneylaundering and the financing of terrorism.
Apart from implementing the various laws against
terrorism, money-laundering and illicit financial flows,
as a country, Angola has made tremendous efforts to
empower its institutions to detect and combat terrorism
and its financiers. As a response to the worldwide
appeals against this evil, which affects all of us, the
proliferation of terrorist organizations, such as Islamic
State in Iraq and the Sham and Boko Haram, is a
major concern, as they end the lives of thousands and
thousands of citizens across the world. We recognize
that such terrorist organizations originate not only from
erroneous religious ideologies, but they are strongly
correlated with the sources of financing. That is what
makes such organizations powerful and still more
threatening. On that basis, we believe that the best
14/24

However, we must extend the fight beyond
institutions, countries and organizations. All citizens
must feel socially responsible and be individually
involved in fighting this phenomenon. In that context, it
is worth strengthening the efforts of developed countries
to approve the restructuring of national financial
systems, as that proposed in the Group of 20 meetings,
modelled after the Volcker Rule and the Dodd-Frank
Act, approved in the United States Congress, designed
to protect financial and non-financial institutions
against the risks of exaggerated self-regulation, which
led to the earlier financial crises of 2008 and 2009.
Moreover, it is necessary to provide the mechanisms
by which all citizens have access to, and knowledge of,
the information on the United Nations sanctions lists.
Furthermore, citizens must be aware of the actual
sanctions to be applied, such as the seizure of capital,
goods and assets of those listed. Such mechanisms have
already begun to be implemented in Angola, based
on information provided by the Financial Intelligence
Unit. We think it is also important that all countries
develop and speed up legal cooperation mechanisms
and knowledge-sharing regarding such matters as
the origin and destination of funds, as well as the
implementation of restorative measures required by
other foreign States.
The President: I now give the floor to the Second
Minister of Finance of Malaysia.
Mr. Ahmad Husni Hanadzlah (Malaysia): I join
other Council members in thanking you, Mr. President,
for convening this meeting, which Malaysia fully
supports. I wish to acknowledge the presence of my
counterparts around the table, which is a sign of our

15-43473

17/12/2015

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

collective resolve to combat the scourge of terrorism,
particularly its financing aspects. I also wish to express
appreciation to His Excellency Mr. Ban Ki-moon and to
Mr. Je-Yoon Shin for their respective briefings on the
issue at hand.
I wish to echo and underscore the sentiments by
earlier speakers about the need for additional measures
to further isolate the terrorist entity Daesh/Islamic State
in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL) from the international
financial system, with a view to effectively constraining
and ultimately cutting off its sources of funding.
Malaysia strongly condemns the recent multiple
terrorist attacks, including the most recent ones in
Paris, Beirut, Mali and the Sinai.
Malaysia strongly rejects the warped ideology of
Daesh. We fully reject any attempt on its part to link
such ideology with Islam, which is a religion of peace,
compassion, moderation, justice and tolerance towards
all cultures and religions.
Too many innocent people have paid the price of
terrorism, and the international community needs
to step up to do more. The heinous attacks serve to
reaffirm the need for all countries to stand united and
firm against terrorism. We believe the United Nations
and other multilateral frameworks provide the best
platform for coordinated and sustained action. It is
on that basis that Malaysia fully supports the present
initiative by both the Russian Federation and the United
States, and we welcome the unanimous adoption of
resolution 2253 (2015) today, which we co-sponsored.
Malaysia welcomes the comprehensive coverage
of the new resolution to further focus the longstanding 1267 (1999) Al-Qaida sanctions regime on
evolving terrorist threats. The new resolution covers
all aspects of the obligations of Member States with
regard to establishing the necessary legal framework
for the criminalizing of terrorism financing and to
operationalize terrorism financing sanctions through
the listing and delisting process.
On the domestic front, Malaysia has adopted a
comprehensive framework that criminalizes terrorism
financing and money-laundering. Punishment for
terrorism financing under section 130N of the Malaysian
penal code carries severe penalties, among others, of up
to 30 years of imprisonment. The terrorism financing
offence is also provided under the Anti-moneylaundering, Anti-terrorism Financing and Proceeds of
Unlawful Activities Act of 2001.

S/PV.7587

In June, Malaysia underwent the mutual evaluation
exercise of the Financial Action Task Force (FATF).
Among other things, the exercise highlighted Malaysia’s
commitment to FATF standards, including our strong
legal and regulatory framework for combating terrorism
financing. Malaysia’s legal framework for targeted
financial sanctions against terrorism provides strong
tools to identify terrorist networks and take steps to
freeze terrorist assets. The regime against terrorism
is administered robustly and is well implemented, to a
large extent based on resolution 1267 (1999).
Malaysia is well placed to adopt and implement the
proposals set out in the new resolution. Our strategic
plan under the anti-money-laundering and combating
financing of terrorism act includes measures such as
engaging with the private sector on terrorism financing
issues and implementing the necessary measures.
Malaysia’s financial regulators and compliance
officers constantly exchange views and share
information on issues relating to the implementation
of anti-money-laundering and countering the financing
of terrorism with our regional and international
counterparts. We constantly work to identify key Daesh
threats, including the trends and modus operandi of
terrorism financing, enhance investigation techniques
and conduct specialized training in relation to
typologies, investigations and new areas.
The threat of international terrorism has increased
with the terrorists’ capabilities to manipulate the
various technological innovations of our time. Hence, it
is imperative that Member States resolve to undertake
further multilateral and high-priority measures to
combat terrorist financing. Our experts will have to
continuously work together to address the defining
and urgent challenges arising from that threat. The
international community needs to be vigilant of
terrorist financing activities. Concerted efforts are
urgently needed not only to adopt and implement the
new resolution, but also to renew our commitment to
carry out the measures conscientiously to counter the
challenge.
In conclusion, Malaysia joins other Council
members in urging all Member States to continue to
take appropriate measures to counter radicalization and
violent terrorism in all its forms and manifestations
that lead to terrorism, financing, recruitment or the
mobilization of individuals into terrorist groups.

15-4347315/24

S/PV.7587

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

The President: I now give the floor to the
Vice-Minister for Foreign Affairs of Lithuania.
Mr. Krivas (Lithuania): My delegation would like
to commend the presidency for steering the negotiations
that led to the adoption of resolution 2253 (2015) and
for organizing this timely debate. We hope that this
innovative format, with the participation of senior
officials in charge of the subject matter, will become
a tradition for the Security Council, which strives
for practical impact. I would also like to thank the
Secretary-General and the President of the Financial
Action Task Force for their insightful briefings.
The resolution adopted today clearly identifies
countering the financing of terrorism as one of the
priorities in the fight against terrorism. The financing
of terrorism and its connections with organized crime
represent a widespread and very complex phenomenon.
We should protect the integrity and stability of the
international financial system, cut off the resources
available to terrorists, deny possibilities for those
engaged in terrorism financing to profit from such
activities and, ultimately, hold them to account.
Money-laundering represents a significant part
of the funds raised to finance terrorism. We therefore
acknowledge the important role of banks and other
reporting industries in the identification and tracking
of terrorist financing activities. In that regard, we
welcome the steps taken by the Council — including
its resolutions 2191 (2015), 2199 (2015) and 2253
(2015), the last of which includes a major review of
the Al-Qaida sanctions regime. We also welcome the
work and recommendations by the Financial Action
Task Force, which enable Members States to effectively
counter the financing of terrorism, including by Daesh,
Al-Qaida and associated individuals and entities.
As a member of the European Union (EU),
Lithuania supports and actively participates in the
EU’s engagement with regional and global partners
on the issue of countering terrorism financing, such
as the United States, the Council of Europe, the Gulf
Cooperation Council and the United Nations. The
EU has taken a number of important steps in that
regard, including securing effective implementation
of anti-money-laundering/countering the financing of
terrorism mechanisms, advancing the establishment of
financial intelligence units and much more.
At the same time, we spare no effort in stepping
up internal preparedness by Lithuania. Back in 2013,

16/24

17/12/2015

Lithuania revised its legislation to bring the measures
against the financing and support of terrorism into
full conformity with its international obligations, as
well as with the recommendations of the Committee of
Experts on the Evaluation of Anti-Money-laundering
Measures and the Financing of Terrorism. Lithuania
is now well-positioned for international cooperation in
that regard. Our institutions now focus on the effective
implementation of the revised legislation. To raise
awareness, the Ministry of Foreign Affairs has included
detailed information about it on its Internet site.
As a practical step of implementation, the director
of our national financial intelligence unit has issued
an order that establishes a list of 50 criteria related
to clients’ behaviour, the nature and background of
monetary transactions and geographic aspects. It gives
clear guidance for reporting entities on recognizing
suspicious transactions and on reporting suspected
terrorist financing.
While countering money laundering and the
financing of terrorism is one of the priorities, we
also recognize that terrorism can be defeated only
by a comprehensive response. That means that every
aspect — from conditions conducive to terrorism to
incitement to commit terrorist acts, from terrorists’
military infrastructure to large-scale offensives, from
the flow of foreign terrorist fighters to the supply of arms
and other non-financial support — must be addressed
in its own right. We must maintain commitment to
bringing terrorists and their accomplices to justice, and
send out a strong and clear message that support for or
carrying out terrorist activities will never be tolerated.
The essential element of all these efforts remains the
long-term commitment of States and their cooperation.
We note especially the significant and admirable efforts
that have been made by the countries neighbouring
conflict zones. But we also recognize that individual
States may lack capacities to address those aspects
adequately, and therefore we support a call to the donor
community and the United Nations to help build the
capacities of States in need.
The President: I now give the floor to the
Permanent Representative of New Zealand.
Mr. Van Bohemen (New Zealand): Let me
congratulate you, Secretary Lew, for convening this
meeting today of so many finance ministers, and I
acknowledge the presence of so many of your colleagues
in the Chamber today. Sadly, the New Zealand Minister

15-43473

17/12/2015

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

of Finance was not able to join you, Mr. President, but
he does send his greetings and his support for the work
done today.
The Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL)/
Daesh is one of the gravest threats we have known
to the purposes and principles of the United Nations.
Over the past year, we have watched in horror as ISIL
and Al-Qaida have conducted attacks against innocent
civilians around the world. There has been a ripple
effect of fear and intolerance that has gone further.
The Security Council’s message in today’s
resolution 2253 (2015) is simple: the whole United
Nations membership must work more actively to disrupt
ISIL, Al-Qaida and associated terrorist groups. We are
pleased that the resolution takes a more comprehensive
approach to the issue of countering ISIL. We believe
that it is essential that when the Council considers
this threat it look at the whole threat posed by those
groups and consider it beyond the narrow prism of the
sanctions regime, which has sometimes been the only
focus, particularly of the Committee that I chair.
That is why we regard the new element in the
resolution today calling for a comprehensive, strategic
report by the Secretary-General as particularly
important. It should ensure that the Council does have
that totality of understanding when it takes decisions
affecting ISIL. Fundamentally, we need to deny
ISIL, Al-Qaida and their affiliates the resources to
operate — the oxygen that fuels the fire. The targeting
of terrorist financing has never been more important.
As I have previously reported as Chair of the
pursuant to resolutions 1267 (1999), 1989 (2011), and
2253 (2015), ISIL generates revenue internally and has
diverse funding sources. The non-traditional sources
of terrorist financing — whether fund-raising through
social media, organized trade in oil and antiquities or
self-funded foreign terrorist fighters — can be difficult
to disrupt without the coordination of efforts at all levels.
That includes coordination with the private sector and
solid financial intelligence. We need to attack all the
financial flows, all of the time.
Member States are obligated to prevent and
criminalize terrorist financing. The Financial Action
Task Force (FATF) provides essential expertise and
support in those areas, in what is now a global standard.
It is worrying, therefore — as the President of the FATF
has reminded us — that there are gaps in the legal
effectiveness of some Member States’ regimes. We

S/PV.7587

are talking not about the numbers of laws enacted or
prosecutions undertaken, but about how effective our
overall systems are to prevent, detect and stop terrorist
financing. Our challenge is to operationalize the
sanctions regime and the obligations that we have put
on paper. That requires political will and prioritization,
and a greater practical focus on implementation,
compliance and follow-up.
There is significant but unrealized potential in the
sanctions list. We have the measures, but need the wider
United Nations membership to provide the listings.
While there are existing listings relating to ISIL,
Al-Qaida and their leaders, there is a need to update
the list to reflect the threat, as stated in resolution
2249 (2015). We have to be better at targeting those
who facilitate funding and support, and are within our
grasp. The web of funding streams and support extends
well beyond the territory that ISIL controls, including
to a growing list of affiliates. The list needs to be an
operational instrument, not a policy statement. As a
result of resolution 2253 (2015), the list’s annual review
also now has more teeth, with incentives for States to
cooperate and remain engaged. Delisting as a possible
consequence of Member States not providing up-todate information is now a reality.
As Chair, New Zealand is committed to openness
and engagement with the broader United Nations
membership. That is for its own sake and to enable
greater understanding, support and implementation.
That is an important point because the regime will not
work if Member States do not cooperate with it. As
Chair, I have to say frankly that there are aspects of
the way the regime operates that have concerned me.
The Committee’s rules and practices can, in my view,
compromise the effectiveness of the very regime we
are seeking to implement. While consensus can be a
strength, to require unanimity before any action can be
taken on important matters, such as the investigation
of allegations of non-compliance, is a major weakness.
It politicizes the regime and arguably goes beyond
the Charter of the United Nations provisions on
decision-making. In our view, the Council needs to
have a good look at that aspect of the regime.
As Chair, we want to be practical about sanctions
exemption requests, such as for basic expenses and
travel bans, and encourage Members to utilize them
and work with them. We are pleased, therefore, that
today’s resolution provides explicitly for the granting
of exemptions for asset-freezing provisions. That will

15-4347317/24

S/PV.7587

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

allow the regime to be applied practically and will
strengthen rather than weaken the regime.
The Office of the Ombudsperson is essential to
the effectiveness and support of the regime. It is a
real success story. It is vital to demonstrate that the
due-process requirements are being fulfilled. New
Zealand, as Chair, has, like others, put significant
effort into managing the successful transition to our
new Ombudsperson, Ms. Catherine Marchi-Uhel.
However, as the first Ombudsperson reported, there
are still shortfalls in the Office’s arrangements. We
hope that the Secretariat will act on the expression of
will in resolution 2253 (2015) to ensure the necessary
arrangements to carry out the Ombudsperson’s mandate
in an effective and independent manner. We, as a
Council, need also to ensure that the Monitoring Team
and the Security Council Affairs Division are properly
resourced to carry out the tasks that have been assigned
to them.
We should never allow the threat posed by ISIL and
Al-Qaida to become normalized by the repetition of
“UN-speak” or the tyranny of distance from so many
of our own countries. The atrocities and deprivations
committed by ISIL, Al-Qaida and affiliated groups
are very real and hurt us all. The sanctions regime
is a living instrument that we must regularly adapt.
Resolution 2253 (2015) is just that — an adaptation and
a strengthening of the regime to counter the growing
threat ISIL.
The President: I call on the Permanent Representative
of Nigeria.
Mrs. Ogwu (Nigeria): I want to thank the
delegation of the United States for convening this
seminal meeting to address a very critical dimension
of terrorism. Being the first Security Council meeting
held at the level of Finance Ministers, it underscores the
readiness of the Council to adopt a holistic approach
to examining terrorist financing. We acknowledge
the presence of participating Finance Ministers and
welcome them to the Security Council. I want to thank
the Secretary-General for sharing his perspectives on
this subject. Mr. Shin, President of the Financial Action
Task Force (FATF), has provided significant insights
into countering the financing of terrorism, and we are
indebted to him.
The threat of terrorism is expanding and
intensifying. This scourge is affecting a greater number
of States throughout the entire world. Terrorist groups

18/24

17/12/2015

have developed an insatiable appetite for territory. They
are increasingly laying claim to territory and, indeed,
setting up administrative structures to support them.
They continue to gain access to significant funding
streams, which they use to support their destabilizing
activities.
Nowhere is that more profound than in the case
of the Islamic State in Iraq and the Sham (ISIS). The
ISIS phenomenon demonstrates a new type of terrorist
organization. The group sustains its operations through
funding, illicitly generated within the territory that
it occupies. That is primarily from looting banks,
exploiting oil fields, kidnapping for ransom and robbing
economic assets. Those funding streams are crucial to
the activities of ISIS. Cutting them off is therefore of
critical importance and should be a top priority for the
international community. That also applies to Al-Qaida,
the Al-Nusrah Front, Al-Shabaab, Boko Haram and
other terrorist groups.
Criminalizing the financing of individual terrorists
and terrorist organizations, implementing the relevant
United Nations sanctions regime and multilateral
action are some of the most most potent weapons in
the arsenal of the international community in the
war against the financing of terrorism. International
cooperation must be strengthened to achieve the goal of
stifling the funding of ISIS and other terrorist groups.
A comprehensive approach within the scope of the rule
of law and due process, respecting all principles of the
Charter of the United Nations and international human
rights and humanitarian law, is essential. It requires
urgent action at the international, regional and national
levels.
At the international level, the Security Council
has provided effective leadership in countering the
financing of terrorism through instruments such
as Al-Qaida sanctions regime and resolution 2199
(2015). The Al-Qaida sanctions regime requires United
Nations Member States, among other things, to freeze
the assets of ISIS, Al-Qaida and other listed entities
and individuals. Resolution 2199 (2015) specifically
targets the oil trade, the trade in cultural property,
kidnapping for ransom and other sources of funding
exploited by terrorist groups. All of this demonstrates
the commitment of the Council to advancing the
countering terrorist financing agenda.
At the regional level, specifically in West Africa,
the Intergovernmental Action Group against Money

15-43473

17/12/2015

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

Laundering (GIABA) — an institution of the Economic
Community of West African States (ECOWAS) — is
playing a key role in the efforts of ECOWAS member
States to comply with international standards
in combating money-laundering and countering
terrorist financing. In addition to its engagement
with Governments, GIABA also works with financial
institutions that operate in ECOWAS States in order to
strengthen their capacity to combat money-laundering
and the financing of terrorists. In response to the
threat of terrorism, ECOWAS has taken a variety of
measures, including the enactment of laws to combat
terrorist financing and the establishment of the
relevant institutional frameworks. They have enhanced
cooperation among their national agencies and with
international partners. They have also strengthened
their investigative and prosecutorial capacities.
At the national level, Nigeria has enacted legislation
to combat terrorist financing. In 2014, the Anti-Money
Laundering and Combating the Financing of Terrorism
in Banks and Other Financial Institutions Regulations
were adopted. The objective of the law is to provide
compliance guidelines for finance institutions to counter
money-laundering and the financing of terrorism that
are consistent with international best practices under
the regulatory purview of the Central Bank of Nigeria.
The regulation empowers the Central Bank to diligently
enforce measures to counter money-laundering and the
financing of terrorism, as well as to ensure compliance
by all financial institutions in the country. In addition
to setting up those units in all financial institutions and
banks, the regulation requires financial institutions
to report all suspicious transactions to the Nigerian
Financial Intelligence Unit. The regulation is consistent
with the recommendations of the Financial Action Task
Force concerning resolutions 2170 (2014) and 2178
(2014).
It is not sufficient to establish laws and regulations
to disrupt terrorist financing. We must ensure that they
work effectively. Governments must also approach
those laws in a whole-of-Government approach that
implements the United Nations sanctions regimes,
identifies terrorist financing risk and develops effective
ways to detect, disrupt, deter and prosecute terrorist
financing. We must devise mechanisms to identify,
monitor and take action against unregulated money
transfer services and strengthen the transparency
of financial flows. The ability to detect, analyse and
share information about financial flows is essential to
financial investigations.

S/PV.7587

National financial intelligence units and other
competent national authorities must be empowered
to effectively discharge these mandates. This may
require capacity-building intervention on the part of
the Counter-Terrorism Committee and other relevant
entities. Those entities may also help to identify gaps
in Member States’ competencies that diminish their
capacity to detect and disrupt terrorist financing, and
make appropriate recommendations on how to bridge
those gaps.
It is essential that the international community
develop a harmonized and decisive response to cut off
the sources of financing that sustain ISIS and other
terrorist groups. This is a critical first step in degrading
and defeating them. To achieve this, information
sharing, cooperation and coherence must be enhanced
at all levels. In that regard, we believe that resolution
2253 (2015), just adopted this afternoon, is a vital step
forward and a practice point of departure toward our
common purpose.
The President: I thank the representative of
Nigeria for her statement and note the horrible violence
and death of thousands in Nigeria perpetrated by Boko
Haram. It is yet another reminder of how important the
work we are doing here today is.
Mr. Ramírez Carreño (Venezuela) (spoke in
Spanish): I would like to thank Mr. Jacob Lew, United
States Secretary of the Treasury, and his delegation
for having convened this debate on an issue of such
importance — the threat to international peace and
security posed by terrorism and its financing. We also
thank in particular the Finance Ministers and other
national officials for their presence here this afternoon,
as well as the Secretary-General and the President of
the Financial Action Task Force, Mr. Je-Yoon Shin, for
their attendance here today.
My country highlights the unity and joint efforts of
all the members of the Security Council that enabled the
unanimous adoption today of resolution 2253 (2015),
whose provisions are central to addressing this issue of
global reach while also serving to adapt the instruments
and mechanisms of the Council to the situation facing
humankind today, in particular the ruthless actions of
terrorist groups such as the Islamic State in Iraq and the
Sham (ISIS). We note that the Security Council is able
to effectively fulfil its mandate when the necessary
political will is there. We hope that this spirit will
prevail, enabling us to address and resolve important

15-4347319/24

S/PV.7587

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

issues that have awaited the Council’s attention for
years.
Venezuela reiterates its categorical rejection of
acts of terrorism in all its forms and manifestations,
irrespective of motive, wherever and by whomever it
is committed, bearing in mind that such acts constitute
flagrant violations of international law and violate the
right to life. Accordingly, my country wishes to express
its deep concern over the accelerated pace at which
the phenomenon has spread, and the unprecedented
military and logistical capacity at the disposal of
terrorists acting in the Middle East, Africa and Europe.
The extraordinary military capacity of terrorist
groups has been directly linked to the destabilization
of countries such as Iraq, Libya and Syria through
military intervention, foreign interference and war. It
must be stated clearly that the rapid rise of terrorism
is the result, inter alia, of the financial and military
support provided to armed and violent non-State
actors who were previously exploited as instruments of
destabilization before becoming terrorist groups that
merged with ISIS, expanding rapidly.
My country is appalled by the suffering and high
cost in human life paid by the peoples of Iraq, Libya and
Syria, among others, as a result of the barbaric acts and
violence of terrorist groups. It is time for the Security
Council to act to prevent the financing and support of
terrorism, while complying with international law. My
country therefore firmly supported resolution 2199
(2015) and resolution 2253 (2015), which we adopted
earlier today. We hope that all States will work towards
their strict implementation, without exception or double
standards.
The most recent terrorist attacks, in particular those
committed by ISIS, demonstrate that vulnerability in
the face of this terrible scourge and the phenomenon
of foreign terrorist fighters is now worldwide. That is
why the role of the Council will be crucial in the fight
to address this extraordinary threat to the future of
humankind. In the same vein, we stress that effectively
combatting terrorism, including the financing thereof,
will require robust joint efforts on the part of the
international community. States must boldly assume
their responsibility for fighting this scourge by ensuring
full compliance with the provisions of international
instruments and the resolutions of the Security Council
and the General Assembly prohibiting the transfer of
arms to, the financing and training of, and the provision
of safe haven to terrorist groups.

20/24

17/12/2015

Effectively tackling this phenomenon does not
allow for dichotomies, because there is no such thing as
good terrorists and bad terrorists. Terrorism is a single
phenomenon that must be prevented, confronted and
eliminated unequivocally. That is why the international
response to this scourge requires an assessment of the
conditions that favour its spread throughout the world,
without justifying the commission of terrorist acts in
any circumstances, with a view to developing effective
and innovative strategies to counter terrorist and
extremist narratives so as to prevent the radicalization,
recruitment and mobilization of both human and
economic resources in its favour.
Much progress has been made since 11 September
2001 in combating financing for terrorist groups,
but clearly it is not enough. As terrorist societies and
groups have evolved, these criminal organizations have
also improved their methods of building and managing
their resources. The best example of that is the way
that ISIS has supported itself thanks to revenue illicitly
generated in the occupied territories, primarily by
exploiting and selling oil, looting banks, smuggling
cultural heritage and antiquities and kidnapping
for ransom, among others. In that regard, financial
intelligence activities, along with the timely exchange of
operational information, are crucial if we are to disrupt
and dismantle the financial infrastructure of such
terrorist organizations, keeping in mind that ending
their financing will help to limit and even contain their
criminal activities. It is important to understand how
they manage their resources if we are to combat them
effectively.
Finally, we believe the international community
must continue to work to create, implement and
strengthen strategies that can neutralize terrorist
groups’ ability to act. In that regard, we believe that the
eventual adoption of an international convention against
terrorism would complement the range of international
legal instruments we already have, by enabling us
to arrive at a definition that would strengthen the
consensus on this subject.
The President: I now give the floor to the
Permanent Representative of Chad.
Mr. Cherif (Chad) (spoke in French): I too would
like to thank the United States presidency for organizing
this special Council meeting of finance ministers
devoted to the fight against terrorist financing. I
would also like to thank the Secretary-General and

15-43473

17/12/2015

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

Mr. Je-Yoon Shin, President of the Financial Action
Task Force (FATF), for their briefings.
Effectively countering every form of financing of
terrorism, including the raising, transfer and use of
funds and other financial assets by terrorists, requires
States to continually adapt their responses to the
terrorists’ increasingly sophisticated methods in an era
of technological advances and globalization. In that
regard, we welcome the results that have been achieved
through the sanctions regime imposed on Al-Qaida
through resolutions 1267 (1999) and 1989 (2011). As
the principal tools available to the Security Council,
they have enabled us not only to implement sanctions
measures such as the assets freeze, travel ban and arms
embargo, but also to prevent the transfer of weapons
to the individuals and entities on the sanctions list. We
commend the activities of the Committee established
pursuant to 1267 (1999) and 1989 (2011) concerning
Al-Qaida and associated individuals and entities and
would like to express our appreciation to the Analytical
Support and Sanctions Monitoring Team for its
valuable assistance to the Committee in implementing
the Security Council’s measures.
Resolution 2253 (2015), which we have just adopted,
strengthens the existing sanctions regime against
Al-Qaida and takes into consideration the new aspect
of the terrorist threat stemming from the activities of
the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL). Chad
welcomes this significant new phase in the fight against
terrorist financing, which specifically targets the illicit
trade in oil and petroleum products, modular refineries
and related materiel, as well as associated individuals
and entities who facilitate the travel of foreign terrorist
fighters.

S/PV.7587

jointly in cooperation with the Executive Directorate
of the Counter-Terrorism Committee in following up on
the implementation of resolutions 2199 (2015) and 2178
(2014), as well as the report of the Secretary-General on
United Nations action aimed at helping Member States
combat this threat.
Strengthening the global fight against terrorist
financing has to be done by enacting and implementing
measures on the national, regional and international
fronts. In that regard, to the extent that its means permit,
Chad has made major efforts to prevent and combat
money-laundering and terrorist financing. To do so,
we have established a national financial investigation
agency and begun to implement the relevant community
regulations established on 4 April 2003 by the Central
African Economic and Monetary Community.
After adopting our first ever anti-terrorism law a few
months ago, we are determined to add to our legislative
arsenal in order to be able to more effectively combat
terrorist financing in all its forms, in accordance with
the relevant FATF recommendations concerning the
fight against money-laundering, terrorist financing and
the proliferation of weapons of mass destruction. The
FATF recommendations form the basis of a coordinated
response to threats to the integrity of the financial
system and will help to harmonize its regulation at the
global level. In that regard, efforts are under way to
enact legislation prohibiting terrorist financing in all
its forms. Chad participated actively in formulating a
subregional strategy for combating terrorism and arms
trafficking in Central Africa and we expect to ratify
the 19 international instruments on terrorism in their
entirety.

The process of adding individuals to the sanctions
list must be done with transparency and respect
for human rights. In that regard, we emphasize the
importance of ensuring the independence of the
Office of the Ombudsperson and of strengthening its
capacity by providing it with the tools and resources
it needs to function. We would also like to stress the
importance of strengthening the independence of the
Monitoring Team. Furthermore, the appointment of the
Ombudsperson and the Monitoring Team experts should
be done in respect for transparency and competence, as
well as for the principle of regional representation.

The addition of ISIL to the sanctions list and the
change of the name of the sanctions regime, henceforth
to be known as the ISIL (Daesh) and Al-Qaida sanctions
list, signals the international community’s determination
to respond commensurately to the extremely serious
threat that terrorism represents. However, we should
recall that the deliberately provocative names that
terrorist organizations give themselves cannot and
should not be associated with any religion, nationality
or civilization. The fight against terrorism must not
become a vehicle for inciting religious hatred and
fear, because terrorism is a global threat that does not
confine itself to any religion or community.

Beyond this, we are impatiently awaiting the
various reports requested under resolution 2253 (2015),
particularly that of the Monitoring Team working

In conclusion, we note that there is an entire
range of tools and norms for effectively combating
terrorist financing, including the relevant Security

15-4347321/24

S/PV.7587

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

Council resolutions, especially resolutions 1367 (1999),
2199 (2015) and 2253 (2015), adopted today. What is
therefore lacking is their effective implementation. We
urge every State to get to work immediately to tackle
the problem of terrorist financing.
The President: I thank the Permanent Representative
of Chad for his statement and I note that the people of
Chad have suffered terrible violence at the hands of
Boko Haram. As we look around the table, there are too
many reminders of how important this work truly is.
I now give the floor to the representative of China.
Mr. Zhao Yong (China) (spoke in Chinese): China
welcomes the initiative of the United States presidency
to convene today’s meeting and thanks SecretaryGeneral Ban Ki-moon and President Je-Yoon Shin of the
Financial Action Task Force (FATF) for their briefings.
At present, international terrorist activities are
rampant. The international community is experiencing
a severe resurgence of terrorism, which has become its
most severe and urgent security challenge. International
terrorist forces are using all sorts of channels to raise
funds for their terrorist activities, thereby endangering
the stability of the global financial system. In recent
years, the international community has worked
diligently to combat the financing of terrorism, but
many challenges remain in that regard.
First, the sources of terrorist funding are many.
International terrorist forces, in addition to such
traditional methods as receiving donations and
committing armed robbery, are using new channels
to raise funds, including the illegal exploitation of
and trafficking in oil and other mineral resources, the
smuggling of cultural relics and ransom payments.
Secondly, the financing of terrorism is becoming
ever more discreet, due to the growing number of ways
to transfer funds in today’s world, in particular the
rapid growth of electronic payment platforms. It has
become more difficult to precisely identify the sources
of funding of terrorist organizations.
Thirdly, international cooperation in that regard
needs to be strengthened. At present, coordination in
this field remains inadequate and double standards
persist. Some countries are still facing real difficulties
in implementing the Council’s resolutions and FATF
rules.
Fourthly, efficiency in combating the financing of
terrorism needs to be further improved. The current
22/24

17/12/2015

lists of terrorists lack information that is crucial
to identifying them, thereby hampering effective
monitoring by the financial organizations.
With respect to combating the financing of
terrorism, China wishes to emphasize the following
five points. First, the fundamental principles of
counter-terrorism action must be strictly followed.
Terrorism is the common enemy of humankind and any
act of terrorism — whenever, wherever or by whomever
conducted and for any motivation — constitutes a
serious crime. There must be no double standards in
counter-terrorism. International counter-terrorism
activities must adhere to the purposes and principles of
the Charter of the United Nations and other recognized
fundamental norms of international relations, and bring
into full play the leading role of the United Nations.
That is the primary principle in our efforts to combat
the financing of terrorism.
Secondly, the resolutions of the Council and relevant
rules of FATF must be implemented effectively. China
welcomes the adoption today of resolution 2253 (2015).
All countries should comply with the provisions of
the resolution so as to further improve their domestic
legislation,
establish
appropriate
mechanisms
and ensure the effectiveness of the measures they
undertake. All countries should also comply with the
rules of the FATF to strengthen cooperation in financial
monitoring and crack down on illegal activities, such
as underground banking, so as to cut terrorist funding
channels.
Thirdly, international cooperation in combating
the financing of terrorism should be further enhanced
in the light of new trends and changes in methods
of terrorist financing, the international community
should adopt targeted measures and approaches at the
international level. It is important to fully exploit the
advantages of the United Nations and other international
organizations, including through the establishment of
databases and information-exchange platforms for that
purpose. At the national level, it is imperative to enhance
interdepartmental coordination and information
analysis. At the industrial level, Internet companies
and network carriers should exercise self-discipline and
consider the adoption of a global industry-wide code of
conduct at an early date.
Fourthly, continuous efforts should be made to
increase efficiency in the financing of terrorism,
China hopes that the countries concerned will provide
detailed information when submitting listing requests
15-43473

17/12/2015

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

for individuals and entities. The Ombudsman and the
Council’s sanctions Monitoring Teams should assist the
sanctions committees in further improving the current
sanctions lists.
Fifthly, assistance should be provided for capacitybuilding of developing countries, which are limited in
their means and resources to confront terrorist threats.
The international community should focus on the
real difficulties faced by the developing countries in
combating financing for terrorism, and provide them
with effective assistance, including financial resources
and training of personnel.
China is firmly opposed to all forms of terrorism
and is an important actor in international counterterrorism efforts. We will strengthen our counterterrorism cooperation with the international
community, including by combating the financing of
terrorism through joint efforts in the maintenance of
international peace and security.
The President: I now give the floor to the
Permanent Representative of the Russian Federation.
Mr. Churkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We welcome the convening of today’s Security
Council timely and important meeting on suppressing
the financing of terrorism.
The consequences of the outbreak of terrorism
in the Middle East and North Africa are spreading
far beyond the region. The recent terrorist attacks
demonstrated that the world is facing a threat of global
nature and scale. At the same time, it is quite clear that
its breeding ground lies in the Iraqi and Syrian territory
that has been seized by the so-called Islamic State in
Iraq and the Levant (ISIL). There is a need to rebuff
ISIL decisively and in a coordinated manner, and to
that end to elaborate a clear mechanism for action by
the international community. We can eradicate that
absolute evil only by acting together, without double
standards, and by fully suppressing the channels used
to finance terrorism.
In February, at Russia’s initiative, the Security
Council adopted resolution 2199 (2015), reaffirming
and creating new commitments for States in preventing
the financing of terrorism through the illicit trafficking
of oil, other natural resources, antiquities and other
sources. Unfortunately the obligations under the
resolution are not being shouldered by all or everywhere.
In that regard, it is clear that the special responsibility
for suppressing the channels for the financing of ISIL

S/PV.7587

unavoidably rests with the States bordering on Iraq
and Syria. We are forced to note that the sale of fossil
fuel from ISIL-controlled territory continues. It is
organized with the complicity of tenebrous economic
structures, whereby oil is acquired by smugglers for
cash in areas where it is extracted and refined. They
freely cross borders, entering in direct contact with the
heads of ISIL and conclude business deals with them.
It is estimated that the illicit export of fuel by ISIL
is reaching $1.5 million per day. The majority of oil
products move through Turkey. In the majority of cases,
oil is transported in trucks by road through the border
crossing points of Karkamış, Akçakale, Cilvegözü and
Öncüpınar. The trucks number in the thousands, and
the shipments are carried out on behalf of ISIL by a
number of Turkish companies, including Serii in the
city of Konya and Sam Otomotiv in the city of Antakya.
The oil purchased in Turkey for ISIL is transported to
the Tüpraş Refinery in the city of Batman. However the
main flow goes through Turkish ports located on the
Mediterranean Sea, mainly Ceyhan.
As a result of air strikes by the Russian Federation’s
aerospace forces, the volume of illicit oil exports has
been substantially reduced. On the other hand, it has
increased the importance for terrorists of alternative
sources of financing through other natural resources
and agricultural and industrial production. The total
value of that basket is already approaching $700 million
per year. For example, ISIL’s income from the sale
of phosphates is close to $250 million; from the sale
of barley and rye, $200 million; and from cement,
$100 million. There is also trafficking in hostages and
cultural artefacts, and foreign donations continue to
flow in.
The proceeds are used by ISIL to purchase weapons
and ammunition. The supreme military council of ISIL
monthly allocates over $30 million for that purpose.
Purchases of weapons and ammunition for terrorists
take place through shell companies in a number of
Eastern European States. Only since September, under
the pretext of strengthening the Syrian opposition,
rocket missiles for Grad multiple rocket launcher
systems and grenades for hand-held portable anti-tank
grenade launchers, small arms and ammunition, as well
as spare parts for Gvozdika self-propelled howitzers
have all entered ISIL-controlled Syrian territory. What
is noteworthy is that most of the weapons consignments
are of Soviet design, manufactured in Eastern Europe
on expired Soviet licenses.

15-4347323/24

S/PV.7587

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

To eradicate ISIL’s illicit economy, a quantitative
strengthening of the measures undertaken by States
and the international community as a whole is
needed. An important step was taken today. Upon the
initiative of Russia and the United States, the Council
unanimously adopted resolution 2253 (2015), aimed at
combating ISIL and other terrorist organizations and
their financing. The key task of the resolution, in our
eyes, lies in strengthening the regime for tracking and
suppressing the channels used to illicitly finance ISIL
and associated groups. The United Nations monitoring
and sanctions mechanisms can now clearly focus on
eradicating any manifestation of terrorist financing.
Work will not be limited to the United Nations
alone. The potential of the Financial Action Task Force
(FATF) to elaborate counter-financing and moneylaundering measures will be activated. Forty-five days
following the adoption of the resolution, the SecretaryGeneral will issue a report containing concrete and
frank assessments, including with respect to the sources
of the illicit financing of ISIL.
It is important that the resolution pinpoints ISIL as
the most dangerous independent terrorist threat. That is
why the sanctions list and special committee were both
renamed. The listing criteria have been made clearer,
which will allow for any natural or legal person who
has been complicit with that criminal organization to
be subject to sanctions. The resolution calls for full
coordination among States in their efforts to investigate
crimes related to the financing of ISIL, Al-Qaida and
associated organizations, including the extradition and
prosecution of those guilty of such actions. Special
stress is placed in that regard on cooperation with
States on whose territory or against whose citizens
such terrorist attacks have been carried out.
In the Russian Federation, we are working
consistently and systematically at the national level to
counter and suppress the financing of terrorism. On
18 November, by presidential decree, an inter-agency
committee to suppress the financing of terrorism was
created. An inter-agency plan has been elaborated,
in the framework of which financial intelligence and

24/24

17/12/2015

law enforcement agencies have conducted close to
5,000 investigations, resulting in the initiation of 270
criminal cases. Over 1,600 natural and legal persons
are suspected of having provided material support to
ISIL. With the support of the legislative branch, work
to improve legislation to counter terrorism is ongoing.
Our country will continue to take decisive measures
to counter ISIL. We will defeat that evil only by
presenting a common front. As the President Vladimir
Putin of the Russian Federation has repeatedly said,
combating the threat of terrorism will require the
consolidation of the entire international community’s
efforts, with respect for the norms of international law
and with a central role to be played by the Security
Council.
The President: I thank the Permanent Representative
of the Russian Federation for his statement and offer
condolences for the lives lost in the terrorist attack on a
civilian flight carrying so many holiday travelers.
There are no more names inscribed on the list of
speakers. Before adjourning the meeting, I would like
to make a few closing remarks.
This has been an unprecedented meeting, as well
as a constructive and productive one. We have adopted
resolution 2253 (2015), which will help us protect
the international financial system from abuse and
exploitation by terrorists, and we have reviewed our
work to counter the financing of the Islamic State in
Iraq and the Levant (ISIL). We have also reaffirmed our
commitment to using the measures contained in today’s
resolution and the tools that we have honed over the
past 14 years to make the world safer from ISIL and
other deadly terrorist groups. We must remain united
as we move forward to execute our task with the same
determination with which we have spoken today in the
adoption of the resolution. That is the only way we will
be effective in combating the threat of terrorism.
I thank the Secretary-General and I thank
Ambassador Power for organizing the meeting.
The meeting rose at 5.25 p.m.

15-43473
