S/PV.7168

United Nations

asdf

Security Council

Provisional

Sixty-ninth year

7168th meeting

Friday, 2 May 2014, 3 p.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Oh Joon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

(Republic of Korea)

Members:

Argentina . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Australia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Chad . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Chile . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Jordan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Lithuania. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Luxembourg . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Nigeria . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Rwanda . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . . 
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mrs. Perceval
Mr. Quinlan
Mr. Cherif
Mr. Barros
Mr. Shen Bo
Mr. Araud
Mr. Hmoud
Ms. Murmokaitė
Ms. Lucas
Mr. Laro
Mr. Pankin
Mr. Gasana
Sir Mark Lyall Grant
Ms. Power

Agenda
Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

14-31996 (E)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-506.

*1431996*

S/PV.7168

Sudan and South Sudan

The meeting was called to order at 3.05 p.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and
South Sudan
The President: In accordance with rule 37 of the
Council’s provisional rules of procedure, I invite the
representative of South Sudan to participate in this
meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite Ms. Navanethem
Pillay, United Nations High Commissioner for Human
Rights, and Mr. Adama Dieng, Special Adviser to the
Secretary-General on the Prevention of Genocide, to
participate in this meeting.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I now give the floor to Ms. Pillay.
Ms. Pillay: I thank you, Mr. President, for this
opportunity to address the Council on the crisis in South
Sudan. My visit to the country this week, together with
the Special Adviser to the Secretary-General on the
Prevention of Genocide, Mr. Adama Dieng, revealed
a sharp and drastic deterioration in the human rights
situation. The deadly spiral of revenge killings that has
developed over the past four and a half months appears
to be reaching a level of intensity that is generating a
real fear of disaster among the people of South Sudan
and that is compounded by the likelihood of widespread
famine that the conflict has generated.
Two weeks ago, in the aftermath of the capture of
Bentiu by the Sudan People’s Liberation Movement/
Army in Opposition, hundreds of people, many of
them civilians — including those sheltering in places
of worship and hospitals — were hunted down on
the basis of their ethnicity and killed. Following the
massacre at Bentiu, a retaliatory assault occurred in
Bor against displaced people who had sought refuge in
the United Nations Mission in South Sudan (UNMISS)
compound, leading to the deaths of at least 50 women,
men and children. Many more were injured, including
two peacekeepers.
Earlier this week, Mr. Dieng and I travelled to
Bor and met several of the survivors, who described

2/23

02/05/2014

the assault to us and expressed fears of being targeted
on the grounds of their ethnicity or of their being
perceived as supporters of one or other of the warring
sides. Thankfully, the strong intervention of Indian
peacekeepers prevented hundreds more from being
killed or injured.
UNMISS has performed commendably in opening
its doors to some 80,000 people and has been sheltering
and protecting them as best it can. However, several
community leaders told us that they were terrified of
further attacks and wish to be moved from the United
Nations compound to places of safety. UNICEF reports
that more than 9,000 children have been recruited into
armed forces by both sides. Thirty-two schools have
been taken over by military forces, and there have been
more than 20 attacks on clinics and health centres.
Children have also been killed during indiscriminate
attacks on civilians by both sides.
Since December, we have seen versions of such
targeted ethnic violence in Malakal and dozens of
other, smaller towns across the country, as well as
in Juba itself. The accelerating cycles of revenge are
now such that the slaughters in Bentiu and Bor could
ignite further violence. Some of those key state capitals
have changed hands numerous times since the conflict
started, either following fighting or after the other party
retreated, leaving civilians more vulnerable to attacks.
Elements on all sides of the conflict have called
publicly for their supporters to hunt down other ethnic
groups. Harking back grimly to the events that led up
to the Rwandan genocide, following their capture of
Bentiu this month rebels commandeered a local radio
station and urged supporters to take revenge, including
by raping women from other communities. Even more
recently, according to media reports, the Governor of
the Lakes region told a gathering of youths last weekend,
“What we are doing today is eye for eye. You pinch
me, I pinch you too — no forgiveness. If someone
pinches you time and again and you do not do
the same, you are creating a point of weakness in
yourself.”
Such statements by senior public officials fuel violence.
President Kiir told us that he hated revenge. I urged him
to make his statement known publicly in order to stem
the continued violence. Riek Machar acknowledged the
need for a political solution, stating that he “hates the
situation that he is in” and would be open to peace talks.

14-31996

02/05/2014

Sudan and South Sudan

A matter of pressing urgency is the looming
humanitarian disaster. The rainy season has begun,
meaning that the planting season is already half
over, which raises the spectre of widespread famine.
Mr. Dieng and I have urged leaders on both sides to
observe a 30-day ceasefire to allow people to return to
their fields to plant as much as possible. Shockingly,
their reactions indicated that this was not an overriding
concern.
Last month I said, with respect to impunity and
accountability before the Council, that the pervasive
culture of impunity in South Sudan had fuelled the
current violence and that it was critical that the capacities
of the domestic judicial system to effectively address
accountability be established without delay. Only clear
and decisive moves towards accountability can hope to
stop the cycles of revenge killings and re-establish a
sense of common destiny across the country.
During our mission, Mr. Dieng and I conveyed
that concern to President Salva Kiir and five senior
Cabinet Ministers in his Government. We also
travelled to Nassir, where we discussed the killings in
Bentiu with opposition leader Riek Machar, the former
vice-President of South Sudan, since the attacks were
carried out by forces associated with the Sudan People’s
Liberation Movement/Army in Opposition, which he
leads. The Government said that it is investigating the
mass killings of civilians in Juba in mid-December,
and Mr. Machar similarly assured us that he would
investigate the slaughter in Bentiu, adding that he
would do his utmost to stop his forces from attacking
civilians.
I welcome those commitments to investigate, but
as I said this week to my various interlocutors, such
investigations must be independent, transparent and
consistent with international standards, and they must
move swiftly to take action against alleged perpetrators
in order to reassure a terrified civilian population that
the escalation of ethnic violence will not continue to
intensify.
Unfortunately, I am not convinced that this will be
the case. I fear that South Sudan’s leaders are locked in a
purely personal power struggle, with little or no regard
for the appalling suffering that it inflicts on their people.
Mr. Dieng and I warned them that they will inevitably
be the subject of international investigations regarding
the extent of their knowledge of war crimes and crimes
against humanity committed by subordinates under

S/PV.7168

their authority and their failure to take reasonable steps
to prevent such crimes.
With regard to the peace negotiations, international
pressure has had some effect on the deadlock between
President Kiir and Mr. Machar. Last week, in what was
perceived as a gesture of reconciliation, the Government
released four prisoners whom it had accused of plotting
a coup. On Monday, peace talks between the warring
sides reopened in Addis Ababa under the auspices of
the regional East Africa bloc, the Intergovernmental
Authority on Development (IGAD). And today, I
understand that United States Secretary of State John
Kerry has announced that the two leaders have agreed
to meet.
I was able to meet in Addis Ababa with the head
of the IGAD mediation team, the African Union
Commissioner for Political Affairs and the Ethiopian
State Minister of Foreign Affairs. IGAD is pushing
for the quick deployment of the proposed protection
and deterrent force, which will provide protection
for the monitoring and verification teams responsible
for monitoring the implementation of the cessation
of hostilities signed in January. The IGAD head sees
that as, in his words, “a game changer” in reducing the
ongoing violence. Despite egregious violations of the
cessation of hostilities by both parties, the monitoring
and verification teams have not investigated any
reported violations.
As I was reminded by the Ambassador during
our meeting, more people have been killed after the
cessation of hostilities was signed than before. I call
on the Security Council to support the IGAD initiative.
The deployment of the protection force will help save
lives in the short run. The force should be deployed
only if it has a clear mandate that supports the political
resolution of the conflict.
I also met with four members of the African Union
commission of inquiry. They have just returned from
their first visit to South Sudan, where they met with
internally displaced persons and victims in furtherance
of their mandate to inquire into accountability, justice
and reconciliation. The Commission will require
substantial support if it is effectively to fulfil its
mandate, including a fully staffed secretariat with the
required expertise. My office stands ready to support
the commission whenever requested.
IGAD and regional leaders share the same outrage
as the rest of the world. They see the conflict as a

14-319963/23

S/PV.7168

Sudan and South Sudan

showdown between two leaders for political power and
the control of oil revenues.
With regard to international action and
recommendations, in December the Council agreed
that the number of UNMISS peacekeepers should
be increased from 7,700 to 13,200. However, the
contributing countries have still not supplied some
two-thirds of the extra troops. They are desperately
needed. I trust that the members of the Council will do
their utmost to ensure that UNMISS can count on a full
complement of peacekeepers, as well as an adequate
budget. The world’s youngest country has a long history
of suffering. Its people look to the Council to exert its
authority to ensure a speedy political solution to this
dreadful conflict.
The President: I thank Ms. Pillay for her briefing.
I now give the floor to Mr. Dieng.
Mr. Dieng: First, I would like to thank the President
of the Security Council, Ambassador Oh Joon, and other
Council members for inviting me to brief this meeting.
The Secretary-General, Mr. Ban Ki-moon, asked
the High Commissioner for Human Rights, Navi Pillay,
and I to travel to South Sudan this week to follow up on
the recent brutal attacks against civilians that took place
in the northern town of Bentiu, including in places of
worship and hospitals, and within a United Nations base
where internally displaced persons were sheltering, in
Bor. We are very grateful to Special Representative of
the Secretary-General Hilde Johnson and the staff of
the United Nations Mission in South Sudan (UNMISS)
for the support they provided to our very brief but
intense mission. I will restrict my remarks to elements
that are relevant to my mandate.
The violence that broke out on 15 December
2013, following a power struggle within the ruling
Sudan People’s Liberation Movement between former
Vice-President Riek Machar and President Salva Kiir,
has quickly degenerated into ethnic violence. The recent
brutal attacks in Bentiu, in Unity state, and Bor, in
Jonglei state, seem to have changed the trajectory of the
conflict, and if such attacks are not immediately halted
they could plunge the country into serious violence that
could spiral out of control. In the current situation, we
see elements that we could categorize as risk factors for
genocide and other atrocity crimes.
In Bentiu, more than 200 civilians of Dinka
ethnicity were massacred and more than 400 others

4/23

02/05/2014

wounded, reportedly by opposition forces allied to
former Vice-President Riek Machar. According to
United Nations reports, the attackers separated ethnic
Dinka from ethnic Nuer civilians and then executed the
Dinka and others perceived to support the Government.
In Bor, armed elements reportedly affiliated
with the Government forced entry into the UNMISS
camp, in which displaced persons had been sheltering.
They killed more than 50 civilians, mostly of Nuer
ethnicity, and wounded around 100 others. That attack
was allegedly carried out in revenge for the capture of
Bentiu town by opposition forces. In our meeting with
the internally displaced persons in Bor, they expressed
fear that the attacks could recur at any time and pleaded
with the United Nations to relocate them to somewhere
safer, preferably Akobo. They said that they knew some
of the perpetrators and that they did not feel safe in
Bor, where they risked being targeted simply because
they were Nuer. The UNMISS commander in Bor
corroborated the statements of the internally displaced
persons and informed us that the recent attack was well
organized and that the attackers included individuals
in uniforms of the army of South Sudan, the Sudan
People’s Liberation Army (SPLA).
Another cause for serious concern has been the
reported use of radio in some areas to spread messages
constituting incitement to violence against all those
perceived to support the Government. It was reported
that, in Bentiu, fighters allied with Mr. Riek Machar
incited the civilian population to attack the Dinka, even
encouraging their supporters to commit acts of sexual
violence against women. That is totally unacceptable.
In our consultations with senior Government
officials in Juba and with Mr. Machar, we noted with
concern that both sides either denied attacks against
civilians or justified them on the grounds that they
were carried out in self-defence against a vengeful
group. If we are to ensure the protection of the civilian
population in the country, the State must acknowledge
that it has the primary responsibility to protect all
South Sudanese, irrespective of nationality, ethnicity
or political affiliation, and prioritize that responsibility.
Blaming one group or another is simply irresponsible
and dangerous.
UNMISS is doing its best in very difficult
circumstances and should be commended. All leaders
in South Sudan must assume greater responsibility to
ensure that those under their authority do not commit

14-31996

02/05/2014

Sudan and South Sudan

serious violations of international human rights and
humanitarian law. They should send strong messages to
call for the unity and respect of all South Sudanese and
take immediate measures to end the violence. I am glad
that, in our meetings this week, both President Salva
Kiir and Mr. Riek Machar affirmed their will to do so.
I hope that they will now take concrete steps to act on
their commitments.
Reports of the homogenization of security forces
by both camps are worrying as we consider the risk of
atrocity crimes. The perception that those supporting
Riek Machar are predominantly ethnic Nuer and
those supporting President Kiir are predominantly
Dinka has heightened the risk that individuals could
be systematically targeted on the basis of ethnicity.
That polarization is further compounded by reports of
exclusion and discrimination on the basis of ethnicity.
For example, in Bor the internally displaced persons
reported to us that they had been denied access to
medical care by Government officials because they
were Nuer.
The culture of impunity in South Sudan has
contributed immensely to the current crisis. As we
search for peace in that young nation, we must also
ensure that those responsible for crimes committed
there are held to account. There can be no peace
without justice. The current culture of impunity will
only undermine our efforts. We have learned this the
hard way from events in other places, including the
genocide of the Tutsis that took place 20 years ago in
Rwanda. To the survivors of the genocide, we owe a
pledge to take all possible measures within our power
to protect populations from another Rwanda. There is
no excuse for inaction.
In this regard, I welcome the mediation efforts
of the Intergovernmental Authority on Development
(IGAD) and the role of the African Union’s commission
of inquiry on South Sudan, which aim to end the
violence and to bring justice to the victims. Both
President Kiir and Riek Machar informed us that they
were investigating any serious violations committed by
their respective forces and that those found responsible
would be held accountable. We should hold them to that
commitment.
In our meeting with the members of the African
Union commission of inquiry on South Sudan,
I reiterated the expectations of the international
community that the work of the commission would be

S/PV.7168

independent, thorough and credible, and stressed that
they should ensure that the commission not only seeks to
pursue measures for reconciliation and national healing
but also places emphasis on accountability measures.
The members of the African Union commission of
inquiry requested technical assistance from the United
Nations, in particular the Office of the United Nations
High Commissioner for Human Rights. We should do
all we can to support their work. I was encouraged to
note, from my discussions with IGAD, that the IGAD
mediation envoys believe that accountability should be
part and parcel of any agreement reached to end the
fighting.
To conclude, we must continue to follow the situation
in South Sudan closely, take whatever measures are
most appropriate to protect the population from further
suffering and prevent the situation from spiraling out
of control. The risk that it could do so is clearly high,
based on the risk factors that I have highlighted today.
UNMISS has saved lives by opening its gates to protect
the population in Bentiu, Bor, Malakal and other places.
The Mission is under stress, however, and troopcontributing countries should expedite the deployment
of additional troops as part of the UNMISS force surge
to enhance its capacity to protect the population.
If the parties do not clearly demonstrate their will
and intention to end the violence and attacks against
civilians, including incitement to commit violence, I
believe the Council should consider taking additional
measures against the parties to prevent the situation
from deteriorating further. We should all support efforts
aimed at holding accountable those responsible for
serious violations. The findings and recommendations
of the report of the United Nations High Commissioner
for Human Rights, which is about to be released, and
other human rights reports must be acted on, including,
first and foremost, by the national authorities.
Finally, the issue of weaknesses in governance must
be addressed by development partners. In addition to the
seeming disregard for the condition of the population,
authorities have turned a blind eye to corruption. That
corruption has also created a clear motivation for others
to take up arms so that they can also access national
resources for personal gain. Today’s violence in South
Sudan is not motivated by the desire to change the
country, but rather by self-interested goals related to
accessing oil wealth and development resources. The
international community must not be complicit in this
agenda. The prevention of further violence therefore

14-319965/23

S/PV.7168

Sudan and South Sudan

requires a coordinated international response that
includes a new posture by development partners. Any
resolution should take this into account.
We must uphold our collective responsibility to
protect the populations of South Sudan from genocide,
war crimes, ethnic cleansing and crimes against
humanity and their incitement. Ethnicity must not be
used as an excuse to incite violence or to demonize,
exclude or attack any community or section of the
population in South Sudan.
The President: I thank Mr. Dieng for his briefing.
I now give the floor to the members of the Council.
Ms. Power (United States of America): I would
like to thank High Commissioner Pillay and Special
Adviser Dieng for their disturbing briefings today.
My Government joins with them and others in
condemning the outrageous and deliberate targeting of
civilians in South Sudan. Instead of ceasing hostilities,
as was pledged three months ago, the parties have
chosen to intensify fighting and to do so in ways that
have shredded humanitarian norms. In April, forces
loyal to former Vice-President Machar attacked
civilians in Bentiu, pursuing them into a hospital, a
church and a mosque, killing at least 200 and likely
many, many more, and leaving the dead lying in the
streets. In Bor, against a backdrop of hostile rhetoric
against the United Nations from senior South Sudanese
Government officials, several hundred armed youths
entered the camp of the United Nations Mission in
South Sudan (UNMISS) by force and fired on displaced
civilians in an ethnically motivated assault that was as
cowardly as it was ruthless. The death toll in the clash
exceeded 110, including 48 civilians who were fleeing
for their lives.
Violence against civilians has also taken place in
Juba, Malakal and Wau, accompanied by sexual abuse
and recruitment of child soldiers. We have also heard
of the ominous emergence of radio broadcasts that
foment ethnic hate and incite further violence. And,
as we all know, more fighting means more displaced
civilians in need of safe haven and sustenance, more
lives disrupted, more schools closed and an even
larger burden for the increasingly hard-pressed United
Nations relief agencies and donors.
We recall the jubilation less than three years ago
when South Sudan achieved its independence. Amid
honking horns and vivid expressions of national

6/23

02/05/2014

pride, cheering citizens raised their new flag and
newly appointed diplomats took their seats in the
General Assembly. Friends of South Sudan, who were
familiar with the many sacrifices that preceded that
day, celebrated. Exiles returned home to help the new
nation get on its feet. The international community lent
ample support, including a United Nations mission that
pledged to work hand in hand with the Government
and the Sudanese people to help build this new States.
Civil society pitched in, and the vast majority of South
Sudan’s citizens focused on the hard work of bolstering
their economy and building stronger communities.
But a country requires effective leadership, and
in South Sudan, after a promising start, the leaders
in office and in the opposition have chosen to place
personal rivalries and suspicions above the best interests
of their country. Those fuelling this conflict — many of
them the very same individuals who were instrumental
in bringing about South Sudan’s independence — have
chosen coercion over cooperation and violence over the
democratic process. The result is catastrophe.
It is unconscionable that South Sudan’s leaders
have failed to take the steps necessary to restore peace
and end the needless suffering of their people. The
continuation of this failure could very well push the
country further into a cycle of retaliatory ethnic killing,
a deepening civil war and an even more devastating
humanitarian disaster that will further worsen with
the full onset of the seasonal rains and the looming
prospect of famine. To prevent this, we call on all sides
to do right by the people of South Sudan, who place
their trust in them, and by the international community,
which stood by them for decades and promised to roll
up their sleeves and help build their new country.
We call on South Sudan’s leaders to cease military
action, as they promised to do when they signed the
cessation-of-hostilities agreement. They must allow
UNMISS to carry out its mandate, without harassment,
threats or fear of assault, to protect the people of South
Sudan. They must respect the rights and dignity of
every citizen regardless of his or her ethnicity, enable
the unfettered delivery of humanitarian supplies, stop
the warlike rhetoric and incitement to violence, and
publicly condemn any and all attacks on civilians. They
must return in good faith to the peace process moderated
by the Intergovernmental Authority on Development;
cooperate with United Nations and African Union
human rights investigators and monitors, and resolve
their differences by peaceful means. And they cannot

14-31996

02/05/2014

Sudan and South Sudan

just promise to do all this, as they have before. They
must mean it, and do it, and do it now.
Primary responsibility for ending the violence in
the Sudan rests with the country’s leaders, but there
are helpful steps that the Council and the international
community can take. On 3 April, the President of the
United States issued an executive order providing for
targeted sanctions against those individuals determined
to have contributed to atrocities or taken actions
harmful to peace and stability in South Sudan. The
Council should urgently consider whether to put in
place parallel targeted Security Council sanctions so as
to try to deter the outrageous attacks on civilians of the
kind we saw in Bor and Bentiu last month. We will also,
of course, never give up on diplomacy.
Earlier today, Secretary of State John Kerry
was in Juba, where he reiterated to President Kiir
both the support of the international community to
the people of South Sudan and our refusal to stand
by if the country’s leaders continue to go down the
path of violence and destruction rather than that of
negotiation and cooperation. President Kiir has said
that he will implement the cessation-of-hostilities
agreement immediately and meet directly with former
Vice-President Machar. We have heard many promises
from South Sudanese leaders, with no follow-up. We
hope, for the sake of the people of South Sudan who are
suffering through this terrifying crisis, that this time is
different. And we urge President Kiir and Riek Machar
to swiftly agree on a date for face-to-face talks.
The meeting is an emergency meeting, and
should be treated as such by both sides. Every day the
ethnic polarization and violence is growing worse. I
emphasize that the United States strongly supports the
critical work of the United Nations Mission in South
Sudan, as well as the relief agencies doing their best in
difficult conditions to meet the needs of men, women
and children in dire straits. I remind the Government of
South Sudan that it has an obligation to the international
community to prevent attacks on the United Nations
and those agencies. That means, to repeat it again,
that the Government itself must cease intimidation,
harassment and slander of the United Nations Mission
and its personnel.
In the coming days, my Government will join
in circulating a draft resolution that will revise the
UNMISS mandate so that it focuses more fully on
civilian protection, human rights monitoring and

S/PV.7168

investigation, and the delivery of food and other
emergency supplies. Given the key role UNMISS plays,
the Council should take up that draft resolution with the
urgency that this crisis demands.
Those who choose the path of further violence and
hatred have been given fair notice. No one has licence
to attack United Nations peacekeepers, international
monitors or civilian non-combatants of any nationality
or ethnicity. No one has the right to target others
because of their ethnicity, to incite violence or breach
the protective walls of a United Nations base. Those
who ignore this warning should have no doubt that the
international community will do all within its power
to hold those individuals accountable. The culture of
impunity must end.
My colleagues, it is imperative that we remain
determined and united in pressing the Government and
leading opposition figures in South Sudan to reverse
their dangerous course and genuinely, actually, pursue
peace. Last month, the world stopped for a moment to
remember the genocide that took place in Rwanda 20
years ago. President Kiir attended that ceremony to pay
his respects. Now President Kiir, former Vice-President
Machar and other rebel leaders have a duty to themselves
and their fellow citizens to pull their country back from
the abyss. It is not too late, but the window is closing.
Mr. Quinlan (Australia): Thank you, Mr. President,
for convening this important briefing in the open
Chamber. I would also like to thank High Commissioner
Pillay and Special Adviser Dieng for their forthright
and very disturbing briefings. Their visit was an
essential one, and the Council itself must ensure that
their immediate report back to us is instrumental.
All of us have been appalled by the horrifying
events in Bentiu and Bor, where just weeks ago
hundreds of men, women and children were targeted
in ethnic killings while seeking refuge in a hospital,
a mosque, a church and a United Nations base — all
places that should be inviolate, as they are protected
under international law. The use of radio broadcasts
to incite ethnic killings and sexual violence against
women and girls is chilling and frighteningly resonant
of mass atrocities elsewhere. The image of slain child
soldiers, their lifeless bodies still clutching AK-47s as
they lay dead in the streets, is harrowing.
Australia’s Foreign Minister Bishop, along with so
many other world leaders, has strongly condemned this
violence, whose scale and intensity represent a grim new

14-319967/23

S/PV.7168

Sudan and South Sudan

chapter of a brutal conflict that has already claimed the
lives of many thousands of civilians and displaced more
than a million. Until this cycle is broken, more atrocities
will occur, inevitably, and many more lives will be lost,
inevitably. Our message to all parties to this conflict is
simple. There can be no military solution.
President Salva Kiir and Mr. Riek Machar must
uphold their responsibility to protect civilians,
regardless of ethnicity or political affiliation. They
must immediately commit themselves and their forces
to a ceasefire and engage sincerely in the peace process
led by the Intergovernmental Authority on Development
(IGAD). We commend IGAD and Ethiopia for their
leadership and for the invaluable role they continue to
play as partners for peace and stability in the region.
We welcome the imminent release of the report of the
United Nations Mission in South Sudan (UNMISS) on
human rights violations. No party to the conflict should
be under the illusion that there will be anything less
than full accountability for the crimes against humanity
and war crimes we expect it to detail. In accordance
with the principle of command responsibility, leaders
will be held to account for their subordinates’ actions.
Impunity cannot persist, nor can blanket amnesties be
entertained. The legacy of a lack of accountability is
among the drivers perpetuating the conflict.
We welcome the African Union commission of
inquiry and express our continued support to President
Obasanjo and his team. It will remain open for the
Council to consider referring the situation in South
Sudan to the International Criminal Court once we
have had the opportunity to consider the Commission’s
recommendations.
As a Council, our obligation now is to help pull the
country back from the brink, confronted as we are by
grave and persistent human rights violations, extreme
protection challenges and a worsening humanitarian
crisis. The situation clearly invokes the principle of
responsibility to protect. We commend the swift action
of UNMISS to establish protection sites in the early
stages of the conflict, saving countless lives. That is
why the United Nations exists. The commitment of
the United Nations and Special Representative of the
Secretary-General Johnson to the protection of civilians
is a statement of their concern and determination to
help the South Sudanese people. The Government of
South Sudan must now state unequivocally its support
for UNMISS and extend seriousfull cooperation to it.

8/23

02/05/2014

We must move urgently to recast the UNMISS
mandate to give the Mission clearer, more focused
priorities, with the protection of civilians at its core.
The new mandate should reaffirm the neutrality
and impartiality of UNMISS, and freeze most
State-building tasks until the fighting stops and a
pathway to genuine peace is established. We must work
with the peacekeeping partnership — the Council,
the Secretariat and troop- and police-contributing
countries — to deploy the requisite peacekeepers much
faster, and we must equip them with the mandate, tools
and mobility they need to protect civilians adequately.
The crucial next step is to expand the security
footprint beyond the camps of internally displaced
persons to protect more civilians at grave risk. And
we support the proposed deployment of an IGAD
protection force to allow IGAD’s monitors to perform
their task. With the spectre of famine looming, we
must spare no effort to facilitate humanitarian access
so that life-saving assistance can reach those people
in most need. Any action to deny, delay or otherwise
obstruct such access is unacceptable. My own country
has provided over $10 million in emergency aid to date
since the crisis began. We encourage Member States
to give generously to the South Sudan humanitarian
appeals.
As the fighting in oil-rich Upper Nile and Unity
states demonstrates, competition over natural resources
and their revenues is another important driver of that
conflict. The proliferation and ready availability of
small arms, light weapons and ammunition is further
fuelling the fighting.
The Council has instruments, in addition to
peacekeeping, that it can apply to mitigate the intensity
of the conflict and bring a measure of protection to
the people of South Sudan. We believe it is time for
the Council to consider applying an arms embargo.
Australia also supports the application of financial
and travel sanctions against instigators of violence and
perpetrators of human rights abuses in South Sudan.
Those who stand in the way of peace must pay a price
for their actions. Targeted sanctions are a lever to curb
the protagonists’ behaviour and bring them back to
dialogue.
In conclusion, while South Sudan’s leaders are
engaged in a bitter and bloody power struggle in the
pursuit of their own narrow self-interest, the suffering
of the South Sudanese people grows more and more

14-31996

02/05/2014

Sudan and South Sudan

acute. That is an unforgivable betrayal to the world’s
youngest nation. We must heed the crystal clear call to
action we have heard today and accelerate the Council’s
response.
Mr. Laro (Nigeria): I too thank United Nations High
Commissioner for Human Rights Pillay and UnderSecretary-General Special Adviser to the SecretaryGeneral on the Prevention of Genocide Dieng for their
briefings.
Nigeria followed with keen interest the visit of
High commissioner Pillay and Special Adviser Dieng
to South Sudan. We welcome the engagement of the
United Nations with the Government of South Sudan,
as well as the opposition. What began as intraparty
political dispute last December, which could have
been and, indeed, should have been resolved through
dialogue, has degenerated to the point where the very
future of South Sudan is now severly threatened.
Four months into the conflict, we are now seeing
events that have all the hallmarks of mass atrocity
crimes. Nigeria strongly condemns those crimes. High
Commissioner Pillay has rightly described the situation
in South Sudan as a
“deadly mix of recrimination, hate speech and
revenge killings that has developed relentlessly
over the past four and a half months and is now
reaching a boiling point”.
The situation is looking dangerously similar to that
which preceeded the genocide against the Tutsi in
Rwanda, which took place 20 years ago. The world has
collectively said “Never again” to genocide. It is time
for us to stand firmly by that solemn pledge.
As the body charged with maintaining international
peace and security, we see the need for strong deterrent
action by the Council to put a stop to the slaughter of
innocent civilians on the basis of ethnicity, religion
or whatever consideration. We call for the arrest and
prosecution of the perpetrators and instigators of the
mass killings in Bentiu and Bor in order to discourage
impunity.
On another note, we welcome the resumption
of peace talks this week by the Government and
opposition and commend the mediation role of the
Intergovernmental Authority on Development in
that regard. We reiterate Nigeria’s position that there
cannot be a military solution to the conflict. We urge
both parties to the conflict to embrace dialogue as the

S/PV.7168

only path to sustainable peace, security and stability in
South Sudan.
With thousands killed and millions displaced,
ending the conflict in South Sudan is a matter of extreme
urgency. The millions of displaced South Sudanese
cannot wait while the politicians dither — enough of the
bloodshed, enough of the hardship. The time for peace
is now and the Council, as well as the international
community, must continue to take all necessary steps
to support South Sudan in that regard.
Mr. Shen Bo (China) (spoke in Chinese): I too
would like to thank United Nations High Commissioner
for Human Rights Pillay and Special Adviser to the
Secretary-General on the Prevention of Genocide
Dieng for their briefings.
The bloody conflict triggered by the political strife
in South Sudan has lasted for almost five months and
caused tremendous civilian casualties and a sharp
increase in internally displaced persons. The security
and humanitarian situation is grave. China is deeply
concerned about the situation. We urge both parties to
the conflict in South Sudan to reach a ceasefire and
end violence immediately to effectively implement
the cessation-of-hostilities agreement and settle their
differences through dialogue.
China supports the political mediation efforts led
by the Intergovernmental Authority on Development
(IGAD) and urges both parties to the conflict in South
Sudan to cooperate with the IGAD mediation efforts and
settle their differences in the framework of negotiations.
We welcome the recent resumption of talks between the
two parties under the auspices of IGAD and call upon
the international community to coordinante with the
IGAD-led mediation efforts, support the expeditious
deployment of IGAD’s ceasefire monitoring team,
and leverage its constructive influence through their
respective channels to advance the political talks.
China strongly condemns the violent attack that
targeted civilians, the compound of the United Nations
Mission in South Sudan and peacekeepers in South
Sudan. China urges the parties to the conflict to protect
the security and safety of civilians, including foreigners
and peacekeepers, and to investigate the incident. We
welcome the despatch of the African Union commission
of inquiry to conduct on-site investigations.
China is following the humanitarian situation in
South Sudan with close attention and is cooperating fully

14-319969/23

S/PV.7168

Sudan and South Sudan

with the United Nations Mission in South Sudan and the
Government of South Sudan to start the construction of
a temporary camp for internally displaced persons in
Juba as soon as possible. We call on the international
community to step up its assistance to South Sudan and
to honour its commitment to helping the people of thye
Sudan to weather the crisis.
Since the outbreak of the crisis, China has worked
hard and contributed constructively through various
means to promote peace efforts and talks. The special
representative of the Chinese Government on African
affairs has repeatedly carried out mediation efforts
between the parties to the conflict and the countries of
the region. China has decided to offer financial support
to the IGAD mechanisms. We shall continue to provide
humanitarian assistance to South Sudan within our
capabilities.
Mr. Cherif (Chad) (spoke in French): At the
outset, I should like to thank the United Nations High
Commissioner for Human Rights, Ms. Navanethem
Pillay, and the Special Adviser to the Secretary-General
on the Prevention of Genocide, Mr. Adama Dieng, for
their briefings. I also thank the Secretary-General for
his initiative to despatch a high-level mission to South
Sudan to further clarify for the Council the most recent
attacks on civilians in the country.
Chad once again expresses its concern at the
widespread violence perpetrated in Bentiu and Bor,
which has led to hundreds of deaths and wounded
many more people, including women and children. We
strongly condemn the systematic targeting of civilians
on the basis of their ethnic origins and the use of radio
broadcasts to incite hatred and sexual violence, not to
mention the persecution in places that should be safe,
including mosques, churches and hospitals.
The two parties are seeking a military solution on
the ground instead of a negotiated solution, the prospects
for which seem ever weaker, despite mediation efforts,
especially those deployed under the auspices of the
Intergovernmental Authority on Development, to revive
negotiations. In this regard, we urgently call on the
international community to bring pressure to bear on
the parties to immediate cease violence against civilians
and sites protected by the United Nations Mission in
South Sudan (UNMISS), and to commit to an inclusive
peace process. We reiterate our unmitigated support for
the peacekeeping forces of UNMISS, who are working

10/23

02/05/2014

in very difficult situations to protect civilians in South
Sudan.
We welcome the decision made by neighbouring
countries and countries of the region to send troops to
aid in the protection of civilians, which is a priority of
the UNMISS mandate. We welcome the freeing of four
political prisoners and hope that it will have a positive
effect on the peace talks. We condemn all attacks on
civilians and United Nations facilities, and call on all
of the parties concerned to immediately cease acts of
intimidation and harassment against UNMISS in order
to allow it to fully implement its mandate. We welcome
the assessment carried out by the Office of the High
Commissioner for Human Rights regarding recent
events and we eagerly await its report. We hope that
the first mission of the African Union commission of
inquiry currently under way can shed further light on
these attacks so that the perpetrators of the atrocious
acts may face justice.
We call once again on all parties concerned to
choose the path of dialogue and national reconciliation
in the interests of the people of South Sudan.
Mr. Pankin (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We are grateful to Ms. Pillay and Mr. Dieng
for their briefings on the findings of their visit to crisistorn South Sudan. We share their profound concern at
the mass violations of human rights and the norms of
international humanitarian law by both parties to the
conflict, including the monstrous killing of civilians
on ethnic grounds. This is particularly troubling in
the light of the diverse character of the young society
of South Sudan. Among the most glaring examples of
the clashes between these two camps were the crimes
perpetrated in Bentiu and Bor, which could amount to
war crimes.
We hope that the visit by Ms. Pillay and Mr. Dieng
will push the parties towards practical implementation
of their stated intentions to prevent such crimes in the
future and to bring to justice all of those responsible. We
trust that next week’s report from the United Nations
Mission to South Sudan (UNMISS) on the human rights
situation there will be substantive and make a genuine
contribution to tackling challenges with regards to
establishing the truth and combating the deep-rooted
culture of impunity that reigns in the country.
We welcome the activities of the African Union
commission of inquiry on South Sudan, which
should effectively complement United Nations

14-31996

02/05/2014

Sudan and South Sudan

efforts in this area, including with the development
of recommendations for addressing the root causes
of the conflict and fostering a process of national
reconciliation. We are particularly concerned at reports
of an impending humanitarian catastrophe in South
Sudan. The number of people displaced by violence now
exceeds 1.2 million. Approximately 5 million people
require humanitarian assistance, and the number is
growing rapidly. The genuine threat of mass starvation
in the country looms large.
We agree that the path towards addressing the
grave humanitarian and human rights situation lies
in a political settlement of the armed conflict. The
leaders of both warring parties must finally set aside
their own ambitions and begin seeking a solution to
the crisis through peaceful means by implementing
the agreement of 23 January. We strongly welcome the
vigorous efforts of international partners, especially the
Intergovernmental Authority on Development, seeking
a negotiated solution and ceasefire. The international
community, represented inter alia by the Council, must
duly support those efforts in a timely fashion.
With regard to the recent and growing calls for the
adoption of targeted Security Council sanctions against
so-called saboteurs of the peace process in South Sudan,
this is an issue that should be addressed extremely
warily and cautiously. This subject needs to be fully
fleshed out, taking into account both internal and
regional factors. Our extensive collective experience
shows that sanctions are far from a panacea and never
have been an effective instrument for achieving political
settlements to conflicts. What they can do, however,
is undermine the spirit of cooperation. Moreover, it is
important to canvass the opinions of leading regional
actors on such an initiative.
The latest tragic events have again called into
question the effectiveness of the leadership of the
United Nations Mission to South Sudan. Despite a
budget of almost $1 billion, a large contingent and
robust mandate, it has proven unable to fully guarantee
the protection of civilians, even on the grounds of its
own compounds, which, incidentally, are not designed
to host tens of thousands of civilians for long periods.
The scheduled mandate review and increase in the
maximum force strength should be geared specifically
towards improving the performance of its activities and
implementing the tasks mandated to it by the Security
Council.

S/PV.7168

In conclusion, we must note that the current events
in South Sudan are just the latest sad result of the
fanciful scheming of Juba’s main partners, who have
sought to hide the truth and cover up for their stooges.
Sir Mark Lyall Grant (United Kingdom): I thank
you, Mr. President, for convening this meeting on the
dire situation facing the people of South Sudan. I would
like to thank High Commissioner Pillay and UnderSecretary-General Dieng for their timely visit to South
Sudan and for their briefings to us today.
A million people have been displaced, and millions
more are in need of humanitarian relief because of
the unfolding conflict in South Sudan. Today, we
have heard about chilling human rights violations and
abuses, and the horrors go on. The South Sudanese
people are bearing the highest costs and now face the
risk of famine. Targeted attacks on civilians, including
the recent attacks in Bentiu on those in hospitals and
places of worship and targeting those under United
Nations protection in Bor, demonstrate the extreme
vulnerability of civilians in conflict.
The very clear ethnic dimension to the conflict in
South Sudan is particularly alarming. Just over two
weeks ago, the international community commemorated
the twentieth anniversary of the Rwandan genocide.
That meeting was a sober reminder of what can happen
when, faced with clear evidence of atrocities, we
collectively fail to act. The ethnic motivations behind
targeted attacks on civilians in South Sudan should
serve as a wake-up call to us all. The use of radio,
for example, in Bentiu to incite ethnically motivated
violence and sexual violence harkens back to the
tragic events in Rwanda two decades ago. We must get
better at using tools to counter that practice, including
the United Nations own use of public information
broadcasts in the country.
On human rights, it is clear that serious abuses and
violations have taken place and continue to take place
as the conflict drags on. The use of sexual violence
as a weapon of war and the recruitment of children as
combatants by both sides in the conflict are particularly
concerning. UNICEF estimates that more than 9,000
children have now been recruited by both sides.
I thank High Commissioner Pillay and UnderSecretary-General Dieng for delivering the urgent
concerns of the international community to the leaders
of both sides in the conflict. We expect President Kiir and
former Vice-President Riek Machar to act immediately

14-3199611/23

S/PV.7168

Sudan and South Sudan

on those concerns. All political leaders must take full
personal responsibility for continued fighting and the
plight of the people. They must take immediate action
to curb violations and abuses of human rights, engage
seriously in peace talks, and enable full humanitarian
access. We have said that before, but those steps have
not been taken, and the needs become ever more urgent.
Looking forward, we need to focus on three areas
of activity.
First, we must end impunity. Accountability
and justice are essential to national healing and
reconciliation. Allegations of violations and abuse
must be thoroughly and impartially investigated. Those
responsible must be held to account. We support the
African Union commission of inquiry and look forward
to the outcome of its investigations. But with different
domestic, African Union and United Nations work under
way in the area, it would be helpful for the Office of the
United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights
(OHCHR) to set out the different available tracks for
accountability in South Sudan. In addition, we request
OHCHR to consider a thorough investigation and to
report on the atrocities recently committed in Bentiu
and Bor. We also look to the Human Rights Council to
take appropriate action in response to the human rights
situation in South Sudan.
Secondly, we must increase political support to
the mediation effort. The international community,
including the Security Council, must consider all
available levers and tools in the effort to deter a
devastating slide towards repeated mass atrocities
and protracted conflict. The focus, responsibility
and priorities we give the United Nations Mission in
South Sudan are only part of the answer. The ultimate
responsibility lies with those leading the war effort. We
must continue to send strong and clear messages that
the international community cannot accept the current
situation. We support the tireless mediation efforts of
the Intergovernmental Authority on Development in
the search for lasting peace in South Sudan. Women
and civil society must play a role in that. But those
mediation efforts may need to be complemented by
targeted sanctions against those who obstruct peace
and by reducing the arms available to those involved in
the conflict.
Thirdly, the safety of millions of innocent civilians
in South Sudan must remain paramount. With the
continued fighting and the impending rains, the

12/23

02/05/2014

already acute humanitarian situation could become a
humanitarian disaster. Famine lies around the corner.
Millions could be condemned to untold suffering that
would take decades to rectify. The needs are urgent
and clear. The onus is on the international community
to help meet those needs. We must increase the
humanitarian response as quickly as possible. The
British Government will do its part and has released an
additional amount of approximately $65 million for the
humanitarian response.
The situation in South Sudan is urgent. The South
Sudanese people have suffered far too long. The
international community has the tools to alleviate that
suffering. We must act and we must do so quickly.
Mr. Gasana (Rwanda): Mr. President, I thank you
for convening this briefing on the human rights situation
in South Sudan. I thank Ms. Navi Pillay, United Nations
High Commissioner for Human Rights, and Mr. Adama
Dieng, Special Adviser to the Secretary-General on the
Prevention of Genocide, for their respective briefings
following their recent visit to South Sudan. I would
also like to recognize the Ambassador of South Sudan,
Ambassador Deng.
We appreciate the Secretary-General’s dispatch of
several United Nations teams to South Sudan to monitor
the situation on the ground and for his unequivocal
messages to both the South Sudan leadership and
the Sudan People’s Liberation Movement/Army in
Opposition.
On 14 July 2011, the General Assembly adopted
resolution 65/308, introduced by Rwanda on behalf of
the African Group, admitting the Republic of South
Sudan as the 193rd State Member of the United Nations.
As we admitted that young nation, it was with hope,
anticipation and pride that the international community
stood ready to accompany South Sudan as it built its
State institutions and forged a united South Sudan for
all its citizens. However, three years later, considering
the widespread killing of civilians and the human rights
situation described by our briefers today and emphasized
by Ambassador Samantha Power, we cannot remain
bystanders. We cannot remain bystanders.
You cannot fight for independence for years and
then turn around and kill our own people. It is a shame.
Almost five months have passed since the beginning
of the conflict in South Sudan. Hundreds of innocent
civilians have been killed due to their ethnicity and
political affiliation; 1.5 million civilians have been

14-31996

02/05/2014

Sudan and South Sudan

displaced. All of that has been happening while the
world is watching. During our most recent consultations
on South Sudan, held on 23 April, we were shown
very painful images of hundreds of dead bodies piled
on the ground. For Rwandans like me, those images
take us back to 20 years ago. After the 1994 genocide
against the Tutsi, the international community said,
“Never again”. Now we say, “lessons learned”. That
has — unfortunately, we believe — become just a
cosmetic word. It is, again, a real shame.
What do we do now about the continued killings
of innocent civilians in South Sudan? What do we do
about the recent mass atrocities committed against
civilians in Bentiu and in Bor? Or, for that case, what
do we do now when we hear a radio station which, 20
years after the infamous RTLM broadcasts in Rwanda,
has called upon one group of the community to rape
women of another group in retribution? Do we again
condemn and adopt statements expressing outrage?
Recently Ambassador Joy Ogwu of Nigeria,
during her last meeting as President of the Council
(see S/PV.7166), expressed regret that sometimes we
become bystanders and display a lack of unity in the
Council, due to national interests. I hope that on this
issue, the Council will do whatever it takes to stop the
killing of innocent people in South Sudan. That being
said, we commend the men and women of the United
Nations Mission in South Sudan (UNMISS) who, under
intense pressure, opened their compound to the civilian
population in distress, saving thousands of innocent
lives. I recall that while in Kigali during the twentieth
commemoration of the genocide against the Tutsi, the
Secretary-General made an important statement, very
clearly. He said,
“I have sent my own signal to United Nations
representatives around the world. My message to
them is simply this: When you see people at risk of
atrocity crimes, do not wait for instructions from
afar; speak up, even if it may offend. Act. Our first
duty must always be to protect people — to protect
human beings in need and distress.” (SG/SM/15755)
But we definitely need to do more. There are millions
of people outside of UNMISS compounds who still
need our protection. As UNMISS compounds cannot
also receive Sudanese under threat, we should find a
way to stop what is going on there, without wasting
further time.

S/PV.7168

Rwanda’s Minister for Foreign Affairs, Ms. Louise
Mushikiwabo, stated on Saturday in Nairobi, “Let us
stop this idea that people have to die when we want
power. Let us distance citizens from power differences”.
We believe that it is the primary responsibility of the
Government of South Sudan to protect civilians from
mass atrocities. That responsibility shifts to the Sudan
People’s Liberation Movement/Army in Opposition
(SPLM/A) in the areas under its control.
Why do innocent children, women and men always
pay the price when politicians are fighting for power?
Why? Let us be clear. Leaders shall be held responsible
for all atrocities committed by people under their
control. Indeed, they bear command responsibility. I
prod the leaders of South Sudan to envision the future
of their country after this crisis. The choices and
opportunities that they have today to solve the crisis
may not exist in the future.
As we welcome the resumption of negotiations
among the parties, in Addis Ababa this week, I would
like to point out three key elements that Rwanda
believes will improve the current situation in South
Sudan, if they are given priority.
First, the parties must immediately cease hostilities
and stop the continuing killing of innocent civilians.
That will save thousands of displaced people from the
humanitarian crisis, especially during the upcoming
rainy season, which will further aggravate the situation.
The parties have signed the ceasefire, but regrettably
they have not abided by their commitments. This time,
the international community should use all necessary
means to convince the parties to cease their hostilities
if, of course, they cannot do so themselves. They should
ensure full respect for the cessation-of hostilitiesagreement. I urge both parties to fully cooperate with
the monitoring and verification mechanism led by the
Intergovernmental Authority on Development (IGAD).
It is also urgent that the United Nations and IGAD agree,
as soon as possible, on how the mechanism, which
includes the deployment of a protection and deterrent
force, can be supported in order to fulfil its mandate.
We wish the parties to have the same understanding of
the mechanism.
Secondly, it is an obligation of the international
community, including the Council, to make sure that
all perpetrators of atrocity crimes in South Sudan are
brought to justice. In that regard, we encourage both the
Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for

14-3199613/23

S/PV.7168

Sudan and South Sudan

Human Rights and the African Union commission of
inquiry on South Sudan to expedite their investigations
so that the perpetrators are held accountable. In the
meantime, the fact that both President Salva Kiir and
former Vice-President Reik Machar have committed
themselves to investigating the human rights abuses
committed by their respective combatants, especially
the ethnic killings in Juba in December and the recent
atrocities in Bentiu and Bor, is very encouraging and
must be translated into tangible action.
Thirdly, with regard to the ongoing IGAD
mediation in Addis Ababa, the parties should put their
own interests behind the national interest and engage
in a constructive dialogue with a view to finding a
sustainable political solution. In that context, Rwanda
welcomes the decision taken by President Kiir to
release the four remaining detainees arrested following
the outbreak of the crisis in December, and to drop the
charges against them. While that will create a better
environment for negotiations, the willingness recently
expressed by President Kiir to hold direct talks with
Mr. Machar is also commendable. Furthermore,
we believe that the ongoing initiative of the SPLM
intraparty dialogue, launched in Addis Ababa recently,
could be another milestone towards identifying fault
lines in South Sudan’s political process and thus
lead to the necessary political reforms. We take this
opportunity to commend IGAD for its commitment to
finding a solution to the crisis and look forward to the
upcoming IGAD summit on the crisis in South Sudan.
As we continue to urge UNMISS to ensure the
increased protection of civilians, the Secretariat needs
to expedite the full deployment of additional troops
through inter-mission cooperation, as authorized by
resolution 2132 (2013). That is important in order to
increase the Mission’s protection capacity. In that
regard, we urge all stakeholders, especially donors, to
support the Mission on the ground and provide the airlift capability necessary for the swift deployment of the
required troops and police personnel. Furthermore, it
is also important that the Government of South Sudan
improve its relations with UNMISS and consider the
Mission as a partner in the restoration of peace.
To conclude, I call on all of us to exercise our
respective responsibilities to solve the crisis in South
Sudan. The warring SPLM/A parties must stop the war
and the killing of civilians and engage in a genuine
dialogue. IGAD and the countries of the region should
strive to help the parties find a solution to the conflict,

14/23

02/05/2014

and the United Nations must protect civilians effectively,
ensure the end of hostilities and killings and ensure that
the perpetrators in Bentiu, Bor and elsewhere in South
Sudan are held accountable for their crimes.
I also look forward to the United States proposal of
a draft resolution and to working together on that.
Mr. Araud (France) (spoke in French): I thank
Ms. Navi Pillay, United Nations High Commissioner
for Human Rights, and Mr. Adama Dieng, Special
Adviser to the Secretary-General on the Prevention of
Genocide, for their briefings.
The alarm raised by the United Nations High
Commissioner for Human Rights cannot leave the
Council indifferent. The situation in South Sudan
is extremely serious. The country has become an
area of lawlessness. Violations of human rights
and international humanitarian law are increasing,
including deliberate attacks against civilians,
large-scale sexual violence and the recruitment of child
soldiers. A cycle of reprisals has begun, fuelled by
public calls to violence and hatred. Radio broadcasts
intensify that vicious circle by calling for women from
opposing communities to be raped. We are dealing with
a dangerous drift into communitarian conflict, which is
being exploited by both parties.
The humanitarian situation is equally disturbing.
The number of displaced persons and refugees is
increasing by the day. Nearly 5 million people are in
need of humanitarian assistance. In particular, the
situation in the United Nations Mission in South Sudan
(UNMISS) camps, which are still home to almost
80,000 civilians, has deteriorated markedly. The rainy
season will further exacerbate the situation, and there
is a threat of famine.
Both parties are responsible for the tragic situation
and the seriousness of the violations committed against
the civil populations. The massacres of Bentiu and
Bor have once again demonstrated that no one has a
monopoly on violence or atrocities. We support the
Intergovernmental Authority on Development (IGAD)
mediation efforts, but we must recognize that, today, the
political process is at a standstill. While a ceasefire was
signed on 23 January, the parties still refuse to engage
in peace talks and act only on the basis of the territorial
gains they can make, especially in oil-producing areas.
The Government of South Sudan, just like the
opposition forces, must stop any incitement to hatred

14-31996

02/05/2014

Sudan and South Sudan

and the attacks against
​​
United Nations staff. The
resumption of talks in Addis Ababa on 28 April is an
encouraging sign. We call, as IGAD has, for Mr. Salva
Kiir and Mr. Riek Machar to meet face-to-face to
end the vicious cycle of massacres and decide on a
one-month truce, which will be essential for the South
Sudanese to sow their fields.
While the authorities have the primary
responsibility to protect their citizens, the international
community should take the measures necessary to
ensure the protection of populations under threat. The
Council cannot remain indifferent to the situation in
the country. That is why France supports a rapid review
of the mandate of the United Nations Mission in South
Sudan (UNMISS). All its capacities must be dedicated
to enhancing protection for civilians, respect for human
rights and free access to humanitarian aid.
Noting the lack of political will to reach a peace
agreement, we also believe that the Security Council
should consider the establishment of a sanctions regime
against individuals who oppose the political process. To
answer the legitimate questions asked by ​​the Russian
Federation, the regime could initially not name names
but simply be used as a means to exert pressure on both
parties.
The reign of impunity in South Sudan cannot
continue. Independent and impartial investigations
must be conducted immediately. The perpetrators must
be tried and convicted, regardless of their political
affiliation. The African Union’s commission of inquiry
must collect evidence on the crimes committed. The
attacks, in particular those against United Nations bases,
constitute war crimes. Given the exceptional gravity
and scale of the crimes, and within the framework of
a dialogue with IGAD and the African Union, we must
also consider a referral to the International Criminal
Court.
Mr. Hmoud (Jordan) (spoke in Arabic): I would
like to thank the United Nations High Commissioner
for Human Rights, Ms. Navanethem Pillay, and the
Special Adviser to the Secretary-General on the
Prevention of Genocide, Mr. Adama Dieng, for the
valuable information they have provided to us in their
briefings. We would also like to express our thanks
and appreciation to the entire staff of the United
Nations Mission in South Sudan (UNMISS) and other
international entities for their work in extremely
difficult circumstances in South Sudan.

S/PV.7168

We would like to express our grave concern over
the deterioration of the situation in South Sudan, the
ongoing killings and the serious humanitarian violations
by both parties to the conflict. We would also like to
stress the importance of putting an immediate end to
mutual incitement that contributes to the spread of
hatred and the promotion of ethnic and tribal divisions
within South Sudanese society. We would also like to
stress the following points.
First, it is clear that, several months after the outbreak
of the crisis in South Sudan, and despite the Council’s
full involvement, the tireless international efforts
to contain the crisis and put an end to humanitarian
suffering and the efforts deployed by African parties
to translate the agreement on the cessation of hostilities
into a basis on which we can build, we are still far
from the lasting stability, political dialogue or national
reconciliation that we all seek.
A solution to the crisis in South Sudan is
directly linked to the fulfilment by both parties of
their commitments and pledges undertaken under
the agreement on the cessation of hostilities. That
presupposes the willingness, ability and commitment
of leaders in the field to implement such an agreement
on the ground.
However, it has become clear that, despite the
commitments made by the leaders of the two parties to
the international community in bilateral encounters, the
situation on the ground has further deteriorated. That in
turn gives rise to doubts about the credibility of those
parties in dealing with the international community
and its efforts.
We have previously stressed the importance of
identifying the areas most vulnerable to violations
and of the deployment of efforts to protect civilians.
We would like to once again stress the importance of
preventive measures to avoid the recurrence of the
events that recently took place in Bentiu and Bor. We
must also stress the importance of taking into account
the distribution of the population groupings most
vulnerable to violations when deploying further forces.
In conclusion, we reiterate the need for the
Government of South Sudan and the opposition
to shoulder their responsibilities in bringing the
perpetrators of violations and crimes to justice. The
international community and the Security Council must
bring pressure to bear on both parties in that regard and
consider measures that could be taken with a view to

14-3199615/23

S/PV.7168

Sudan and South Sudan

bringing criminals to justice, including the possibility
of a referral to the International Criminal Court. We
would like to stress what Ms. Pillay and Mr. Dieng have
stated, that is, that there will be no peace without justice.
Therefore, efforts should be undertaken to change the
culture of impunity in South Sudan, and the Security
Council should focus its efforts in line with that.
Ms. Murmokaité (Lithuania): Thank you,
Mr. President, for organizing this briefing. I would
also like to thank the High Commissioner for Human
Rights, Ms. Navanethem Pillay, and the Special Envoy
for the Prevention of Genocide, Mr. Adama Dieng, for
their extensive briefings.
Only last month we commemorated the twentieth
anniversary of the Rwandan genocide (see S/PV.7155).
As we adopted resolution 2150 (2014), we recommitted
to preventing and fighting genocide and other serious
crimes against humanity. We also reaffirmed the
principle of the responsibility to protect populations
from genocide, war crimes, ethnic cleansing and
crimes against humanity. And yet, three years after
South Sudan’s independence, the reports from that
country read like catalogues of barbarity, with
all actors — Government forces, opposition and
militias — committing shocking atrocities. Incitement,
targeted killings, rape and torture are the typical
ingredients that lead to a situation of genocide. Even
places that are supposed to be considered safe shelters,
such as places of worship, hospitals and United Nations
bases, have been brutally attacked. The despicable
attacks in Bor on the United Nations compound and the
slaughter of civilians in mosques and churches in Bentiu
deserve the strongest condemnation of the Council and
the entire international community.
What is also troubling is a fact that the High
Commissioner mentioned — that sowing season will
likely be missed, and as many as 7 million people
will soon face a terrible famine. And to think that the
two rival leaders and their supporters would prefer
to continue their bloody rivalry rather than grant one
month of calm for the people to plant their crops, in order
to save them from the horror of death by starvation. It is
definitely very hard to confront such facts.
We note President Salva Kiir’s statement earlier
today that he is ready to meet face to face with Riek
Machar. We have not heard a denial of that from
Machar, and we assume that he is also ready to meet.
It is absolutely crucial that the two leaders renounce

16/23

02/05/2014

and denounce all violence and call on their forces
and supporters to lay down their arms, stop targeting
civilians and pursue a path of genuine dialogue
and reconciliation. Both the Government and the
armed opposition must cooperate in investigating the
horrendous crimes that have been committed. The
perpetrators must be arrested and prosecuted with full
respect for internationally recognized standards of due
process. Accountability is a must. If there is no end to
impunity, violence and atrocities will continue.
The Council must see to it that current and future
investigations examine the extent to which political
and military leaders knew or should have known about
what was going on, and failed to take all necessary and
reasonable measures to prevent the war crimes and
crimes against humanity committed by themselves
or by subordinates under their effective control and
authority. We welcome the efforts of the commission
of inquiry of the African Union and urge it to continue
documenting all atrocities committed on both sides.
We look forward to the report of the United Nations
Mission in South Sudan (UNMISS) on violations and
abuses on the ground. As some speakers have already
said, the Human Rights Council’s active involvement is
also essential.
It is time for the warring leaders to place the
interests of their country and people above their
own. We have a tiny glimmer of hope today with the
announcement by President Kiir, and we urge the
leaders to take advantage of this window of opportunity.
The political leaders must act on their words and must
stop the violence. The Security Council, for its part,
must ensure that if that does not happen, we will use
all the tools at our disposal to send a clear, strong
message that war crimes, crimes of sexual violence
and atrocities will no longer be tolerated. I understand
the differences of opinion on the use of sanctions, but
my delegation believes that, if nothing else works, the
threat of targeted sanctions is a useful tool that must be
made real and imminent if we want the warring parties
to change their behaviour. Referral to the International
Criminal Court should also be on the table.
Deterrence on the ground must be strengthened. We
are looking into revising the UNMISS mandate to that
effect. The deployment of a regional task force to protect
ceasefire monitors and deter Government and rebel
forces from staging assaults is to proceed at full speed.
We would like to express our appreciation to UNMISS

14-31996

02/05/2014

Sudan and South Sudan

and to Special Representative Johnson for doing their
utmost under extremely difficult circumstances.
We regret the continuing challenges in relations
between the Government of South Sudan and UNMISS.
The Government must stop the harassment of the
United Nations Mission and its staff and make it clear
to the public that it appreciates UNMISS’s lifesaving
role and are fully committed to cooperating and
providing safety and security to its personnel, as well
as to ceasing all status-of-forces agreement violations.
It is totally unacceptable that a United Nations mission,
carrying out vital work in extreme conditions at a risk
to the lives of the peacekeepers and supported by the
international community, should be attacked or abused
in any way. With the growing number of crises in the
world, peacekeepers and the funds for them are in
ever greater demand. Countless victims of violence
elsewhere would be happy to have those peacekeepers
protecting them, and I think the Government of South
Sudan should keep that in mind. They are doing a vital
job.
In conclusion, we call our leaders “leaders” not
simply because that is the only word we have, but
because we expect them to show true leadership. If
in future President Salva Kiir and Riek Machar want
to be considered leaders by their own country, this
is a moment for them to show that, to step up to that
leadership and make sure that the danger of destroying
the independence so hardly won just a few years ago
does not become a gruesome reality.
Mr. Barros (Chile) (spoke in Spanish): We would
like to thank the High Commissioner for Human Rights,
Ms. Navanethem Pillay, and Mr. Adama Dieng, the
Special Envoy for the Prevention of Genocide, for their
briefings. We especially appreciate their undertaking a
joint visit to South Sudan.
Chile has stated that accountability in the area
of human rights must be a priority in the renewal of
the mandate of the United Nations Mission in South
Sudan (UNMISS). We are witnessing what could
be the start of a humanitarian catastrophe, and there
are strong indications that compel us to believe that
genocide and crimes against humanity are taking shape
in South Sudan. While there is no question that every
State is responsible for protecting its people from
large-scale and widespread abuses of human rights,
the international community, in accordance with the
concept of the responsibility to protect, as set out in

S/PV.7168

the outcome document of the 2005 World Summit, is
obliged to support States when they will not meet or are
clearly incapable of meeting that obligation.
The Council must act rapidly. Prevention is
possible and we should make use of all the earlywarning mechanisms that can help us avoid the loss of
more lives while also promoting dialogue between the
parties. We cannot remain indifferent to the information
Ms. Pillay and UNICEF gave us on 30 April on the
deaths of children as a result of indiscriminate attacks
on civilians, many of them internally displaced; on the
recruitment of more than 9,000 children by the armed
forces on both sides, which is a war crime under the
Rome Statute; on the seizure of 32 schools and attacks
on about 20 clinics and health centres by armed forces;
and on sexual violence against girls and women.
We believe that those facts, and previous ones, that
the Council has received on human rights violations
and other atrocities in South Sudan, including the
reports from UNMISS since the conflict broke out in
December, are enough to get us started on an in-depth
discussion on imposing specific sanctions on the
individuals responsible. We hope that the African Union
commission of inquiry can submit its report soon. We
trust that there is sufficient coordination with UNMISS
in order to ensure that background information and
evidence are not lost, which would make accountability
difficult.
We appreciate the courage and the determination
of Ms. Johnson and the UNMISS staff to protect the
internally displaced persons and to forge ahead with
the investigation on human rights violations, despite
the prevailing violence and the constant attacks and
threats. As the United Nations High Commissioner
for Human Rights did, we extend our appreciation to
the peacekeeping staff from India whose actions have
allowed for the protection of many civilians during the
crisis.
The Council and the other bodies of the United
Nations system must step up efforts to prevent a
catastrophe in South Sudan, which would lead to the
deterioration of the youngest State Member of the
Organization. We believe that it is time for the Council
to refer the background information it has on the
situation in South Sudan to the International Criminal
Court in order to show that we can take concrete actions
to strengthen those already taken by the United Nations
to protect the civilian population.

14-3199617/23

S/PV.7168

Sudan and South Sudan

Mrs. Perceval (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish):
Thank you, Mr. President, for convening this meeting.
I also thank Ms. Navi Pillay, United Nations High
Commissioner for Human Rights, and Mr. Adama
Dieng, Under-Secretary-General Special Adviser to the
Secretary-General on the Prevention of Genocide, for
their briefings on their mission, which was necessary
and met the essential need to convey the fact that
impunity cannot and will not be tolerated.
I think that it is important that we are meeting
publicly, not just because of what we can say and
do today, which can help to end the hostilities and
the attacks against the civilian population, but it is
also important because, Argentina believes, for the
purpose of accountability and transparency, this is how
the meeting should be held, pursuant to the general
principles established in rule 48 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure.
I would like to reiterate our support for the work
and efforts that our Blue Helmets are undertaking in
the United Nations Mission in South Sudan (UNMISS).
Beyond any shadow of a doubt, that work has allowed
us to prevent many deaths. I also want to underscore
the responsibility and efforts deployed by the United
Nations, together with regional and subregional bodies,
aimed at stopping the crisis and mitigating so much
suffering.
Argentina shares the condemnation in the
strongest terms of the serious violations of human
rights and international humanitarian law that have
been perpetrated by both parties to the conflict in
South Sudan over recent months. We appreciate that
during their visit, Ms. Pillay and Mr. Dieng warned
the country’s leaders that the inquiries under way, or
future inquiries, will inevitably examine those parties’
responsibility for the war crimes and crimes against
humanity being perpetrated in the country. We also
believe that it is essential that they have reminded them
about their responsibility to protect civilians and the
need to put an end to hostilities as soon as possible to
prevent the situation from worsening further.
Argentina supports the work of the African
Union commission of inquiry, which is necessary if
those responsible for the atrocities are to be brought
to justice. We also believe that in all of the inquiries
under way — be they by the African Union, UNMISS
or the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner
for Human Rights — it is extremely important to

18/23

02/05/2014

establish who is responsible at the highest levels, as it
is not enough to merely punish those who undertook
the heinous actions; rather, it is necessary to establish
responsibility all the way up the chain of command.
There is a need to put an end to impunity so that
massive violations of human rights stop. However, it is
also equally necessary to reach a political agreement.
On that point, encouraging news from South Sudan
is scant. We note the release of the remaining 4 of the
11 detainees accused of undertaking a coup d’état, the
progress with regard to the African Union’s commission
of inquiry and that there is still hope that the parties can
truly negotiate a cessation of hostilities as they have
said they are willing to do. But they need to do that,
because the victims are not invisible. They should do
that because death speaks. The murder of civilians, of
boys and girls, women and the elderly, because of their
ethnicity, the colour of their skin; the rape of women to
destroy their dignity and in vengeance; the recruitment
of thousands of children to lead them to death instead
of bringing them to a life that is free of fear; the
destruction of hospitals in order to unleash epidemics;
the occupation of schools to nourish ignorance; the
destruction of entire towns by those whose hands
are stained with petroleum; the calls to hate aimed
at stripping communities of the opportunity to learn
respect for differences and love for peace — those
crimes are not invisible because death speaks in Bor
and Bentiu and in all corners. And we are listening.
For that reason, we too must show enormous
responsibility, not just by lamenting and condemning
atrocious acts and famines. Argentina believes that the
Security Council should continue, as the case may be,
to support, to take or to assess the following efforts as
soon as possible.
First, Argentina has no doubt that the most important
thing at this time is to provide all the necessary
protection for the tens of thousands of individuals who
have sought refuge in the hands of UNMISS and have
not found protection. It is urgent that a decision be
made with regard to the Secretary-General’s request to
increase the troop numbers of UNMISS and, in should
that be approved, ensure that it is effectively done.
Secondly, we must establish what support the
United Nations can provide so that the regional force
that has been decided upon by the Heads of State and
Government of the Intergovernmental Authority on
Development can be deployed.

14-31996

02/05/2014

Sudan and South Sudan

Thirdly, we hope that the commitment to ensure
that the victims will receive justice and reparation
nationally in South Sudan is not an empty promise.
We trust that it is not a empty promise. However, we
also wish to recall that when a country cannot or will
not ensure that justice is carried out, the International
Criminal Court is there. That is a mechanism that
Argentina supports and defends.
Fourthly, we again condemn the actions of the
Government of South Sudan and the forces loyal to them
with regard to UNMISS and humanitarian assistance.
Argentina believes that the activities of UNMISS must
be solely focused on matters linked to the protection
of civilians, human rights and humanitarian assistance.
We do not believe that there is any room for the
allocation of resources to other types of tasks.
In conclusion, I want to reiterate our concern
about the regional repercussions that the conflict
could have, in particular with regard to the presence of
foreign troops in the country. I would also like to echo
the question of Ms. Pillay in the press conference of
30 April: “How much worse does it have to get before
those who can bring this conflict to an end, especially
President Kiir and Mr. Machar, decide to do so?”
Ms. Lucas (Luxembourg) (spoke in French): I
want to thank Ms. Navi Pillay, United Nations High
Commissioner for Human Rights, and Mr. Adama
Dieng, Under-Secretary-General Special Adviser to the
Secretary-General on the Prevention of Genocide, for
their poignant words, which illustrate both the gravity
of the situation in South Sudan and the United Nations
willingness to implement the Secretary-General’s
“Rights up front” initiative, which prioritizes the
struggle against human rights violations with a view to
preventing mass atrocities.
Luxembourg condemns in the strongest terms the
attacks in Bentiu and Bor that have claimed hundreds
of civilian casualties, among them many women and
children. These attacks are the most recent examples
of the serious violations and atrocities committed
against civilians, often based on ethnicity, that have
been attributed to both sides since the conflict began on
15 December 2013. Abuses against civilians have likely
led to thousands of deaths. They have displaced more
than 1 million people.
The South Sudanese leaders who are in dispute
must finally take responsibility and stop the carnage. It
is unacceptable that Government and opposition forces

S/PV.7168

continue to violate the cessation of hostilities agreement
of 23 January, and that the parties stubbornly refuse to
engage in political negotiations. We continue to fully
support the mediation efforts by the Intergovernmental
Authority on Development (IGAD). We want to take
this opportunity to call urgently on the parties to begin
to address the substantive issues in good faith, without
further delay. As the humanitarian situation continues
to deteriorate, each day missed at the negotiating table
increases the risk of famine for the South Sudanese
people.
We strongly condemn the serious violations of
human rights and international humanitarian law that
continue to be committed with impunity in South
Sudan. The picture painted this afternoon by Ms. Pillay
and Mr. Dieng is frightening. President Salva Kiir
and former Vice-President Riek Machar bear a heavy
responsibility. They must absolutely publicly reject all
attacks against civilians and commit to holding those
who ordered or carried out the attacks to account for
their actions. The fight against impunity is a priority for
us. Those responsible for serious violations, including
the officials who ordered, instigated, encouraged or
tolerated such violations and abuses, must understand
that the international community is watching, that their
crimes will not go unnoticed and that they will have to
answer for them.
In that regard, we welcome the publication next
Monday of the final report on human rights violations of
the United Nations Mission in South Sudan (UNMISS).
We also welcome the launch of the commission of
inquiry of the African Union, led by former Nigerian
President Olusegun Obasanjo, which has just carried
out its first mission to South Sudan.
That United Nations report and the investigative
work of the African Union are important, but we must
go further. There is no doubt that war crimes and crimes
against humanity have been committed. In that context,
to fight against impunity and prevent future atrocities,
we believe that the Council must seriously consider a
referral to the International Criminal Court.
More generally, the Security Council must
consider all the means at its disposal, including the
establishment of a sanctions regime, to bring the parties
to see reason, cease hostilities and avoid an escalation
of the situation with incalculable consequences. The
adoption of targeted sanctions against those who have
perpetrated violations of human rights and international

14-3199619/23

S/PV.7168

Sudan and South Sudan

humanitarian law, violated the agreement on cessation
of hostilities and impeded the progress of peace talks
should be considered.
We welcome the important work carried out by
UNMISS to protect civilians, especially the civilian
refugees in its bases, under extremely difficult
conditions. We condemn the restrictions UNMISS
continues to face, the harassment of its staff and the
persistent violations of the status-of-forces agreement.
The Security Council should review the mandate of
the Mission to focus on three priorities: the protection
of civilians, facilitating the delivery of humanitarian
assistance and monitoring human rights. It is also
crucial to strengthen the Mission by integrating, on
terms to be agreed, the forces proposed by IGAD.
Luxembourg condemns in the strongest terms the
recruitment and use of children, killing and maiming of
children, sexual violence, attacks against schools and
hospitals and the use of schools by all parties to the
conflict. We recall to the parties that they agreed under
the cessation of hostilities agreement not to recruit or use
children. The latest figures from UNICEF, according
to which more than 9,000 children were recruited and
used by parties to the conflict, are simply outrageous.
We recall that, on 13 March 2012, the Government of
South Sudan signed an action plan to stop and prevent
the recruitment and use of children. Any violation of
that action plan is a violation of obligations undertaken
by the Government.
Faced with the scale of the violations committed and
pursuant to Security Council resolutions on children
and armed conflict, UNMISS should strengthen the
monitoring and reporting of information on violations
and abuses committed against children. And the
Mission should be equipped with adequate resources
to do so. We also encourage the commission set up by
the African Union to investigate these violations and
abuses.
In conclusion, I would like to assure Ms. Pillay and
Mr. Dieng that we have heard their call. The Council will
act firmly to eliminate the looming threat of yet more
serious violence that risks spiralling out of control. It is
our collective responsibility to act to prevent, 20 years
on, another genocide on the African continent.
The President: I shall now make a statement in my
capacity as the representative of the Republic of Korea.

20/23

02/05/2014

I thank High Commissioner Navi Pillay and Special
Adviser Adama Dieng for their briefings. We believe that
the Council fully echoes their urgent call for attention
and action. The ethnically targeted killings in South
Sudan are unacceptable and must stop. Only a fortnight
ago, the Security Council convened an open debate on
the twentieth anniversary of the Rwandan genocide,
and reaffirmed that never again should such events
occur (see S/PV.7155). The use of radio broadcasts to
incite ethnic violence is reminiscent of a prelude to that
catastrophe, adding a new and dangerous dimension
to the crisis. We call on both President Salva Kiir and
Mr. Riek Machar to publicly state their firm opposition
to any attacks against civilians as well as their
commitment to seeking accountability. All political
and tribal leaders in South Sudan must publicly declare
their objection to violence and take responsible actions
accordingly. We look forward to the final report of the
United Nations Mission in South Sudan (UNMISS) on
human rights violations.
With the onset of the rainy season, we are deeply
concerned about the dire situation of over 1 million
displaced people. The UNMISS protection of civilian
sites are already overcrowded, and they were never
designed to cope with the enormous task of protecting
such a huge number of civilians. A comprehensive
strategy for the protection of civilians should be
formulated to make best use of the capabilities of
UNMISS. We also encourage the Intergovernmental
Authority on Development (IGAD) to enhance its
mediation efforts.
Intensifying battles in the oil-producing fields
threaten to trigger a regional escalation of the conflict.
The United Nations and IGAD need to swiftly finalize
the modalities for implementing the monitoring and
verification mechanism under the cessation of hostilities
agreement. Only a political solution can return the
situation to normalcy. The Council must be ready to
take additional measures to discourage spoilers and
expedite stability.
I now resume my functions as President of the
Council.
I give the floor to the representative of South Sudan.
Mr. Deng (South Sudan): I thank you, Mr. President,
and members of the Security Council for giving me the
opportunity to address the Council on the critically
important issues concerning our country. As this is
the first time I address the Security Council under

14-31996

02/05/2014

Sudan and South Sudan

S/PV.7168

the presidency of the Republic of Korea, allow me to
congratulate you, Mr. President, and to assure you
of our support and cooperation. I would also like to
commend your predecessor for successfully steering
the Council during the month of April.

without discrimination on ethnic or any other ground
and be accountable in that regard. However, that cannot
justify placing a democratically elected Government on
the same moral, political and legal grounds as a rebel
group using violence to overthrow the Government.

My delegation and I have listened with keen interest
to the deeply moving statements presented and the
concerns raised this afternoon by United Nations High
Commissioner for Human Rights Navi Pillay, and by
the United Nations Special Adviser on the Prevention
of Genocide, my successor and younger brother, Adama
Dieng, and the members of the Security Council. I
would like to thank both the High Commissioner and
the Special Adviser for having visited our country and
for giving the current crisis such high priority. I want to
assure them, and indeed all the members of the Council,
that we sincerely appreciate and genuinely share their
deep concerns and commitment to see an end to the
violence.

The President of South Sudan, Mr. Salva Kiir, told
me today that he had said to the High Commissioner
for Human Rights and the Special Adviser on the
Prevention of Genocide that if they had time to spend in
the country, he would grant them full and unhindered
access to establish the scope of the violence in order to
gain a deeper understanding of the situation and of who
is doing what. The President also spoke to me about
the constructive discussions he had with United States
Secretary of State John Kerry, to whom he expressed his
willingness to meet with the rebel leader Riek Machar
in the interests of bringing a speedy end to the war.

As I have previously stated to the Council, while
it is painful to listen to accounts of the tragic situation
in our country, our response is not to be defensive or
in denial. We recognize that the motivation behind the
accounts is to help South Sudan address the crisis in
cooperation with the international community. That
is why we have consistently expressed our sincere
appreciation to the Security Council specifically,
and the international community generally, for their
steadfast engagement and support.
No one who believes in the ideals of human rights
and in the prevention of genocide and related atrocities
can quarrel with the pleas and warnings made by
the High Commissioner for Human Rights and the
Secretary-General’s Special Adviser on the Prevention
of Genocide and by members of the Council. As I have
repeatedly stated, our people struggled for decades
against discrimination and gross violations of human
rights. Ours was a struggle for equality and human
dignity, which constitute the foundations for human
rights. Those principles should guide us in building our
nation.
While the tendency towards moral equivalency may
be understandable as a tactic, and even a strategy, for
engaging the parties on the basis of mutual recognition
and respect, it risks equating rights and wrongs in a
way that clouds the situation on the ground. It is of
course indisputable that the Government must bear
the primary responsibility for protecting its citizens

We recognize that people do not take up arms to kill
and risk being killed without some cause or grievance
that should be addressed. That is why our Government,
in particular President Kiir, has repeatedly reaffirmed
his commitment to dialogue with the rebels to bring a
swift end to the violence and promote peace, unity and
national reconciliation.
On specific issues raised by the High Commissioner
and the Special Adviser in their briefings, the allegation
that both sides are recruiting child soldiers is an example
of the moral equivalency that clouds the facts and of the
need to place responsibility where it belongs. It is well
known that since 2003 the Sudan People’s Liberation
Army (SPLA) has ended recruiting or deploying child
soldiers. That has indeed been acknowledged by the
relevant United Nations bodies, which have applauded
South Sudan for that action. Although the demands of
the war have recently necessitated army recruitment,
especially with the defection of large numbers of soldiers
to the rebels, it has not at all entailed recruiting child
soldiers. As a prominent member of the Government
told me recently, our problem is the reverse, namely,
that we have an ageing army. In contrast to the
Government, the rebel army is known for its recruiting
and deploying child soldiers, its “White Army” being a
notorious example.
On the issue of human rights violations in general,
President Kiir has condemned it unequivocally and, in
response to the recent developments, has created a highlevel committee chaired by the former Chief Justice
to investigate gross violations of human rights and to

14-3199621/23

S/PV.7168

Sudan and South Sudan

hold accountable those found responsible. During the
eruption of violence in Juba on 15 and 16 December,
the President went as far as to say that anyone targeting
members of the Nuer community in his name was
against him. The Government has also welcomed and
pledged support for the African Union commission
of inquiry on South Sudan under the chairmanship
of former President of Nigeria Olusegun Obasanjo,
charged with investigating human rights violations
resulting from the current crisis. That contrasts sharply
with the situation of human rights on the part of the
rebels, where massive abuses and ethnically targeted
massacres have become a conspicuous part of their war
strategy, with scarcely a condemnatory word from its
leadership.
It is unfortunate that the very regrettable incident
of the youth attack on the United Nations compound in
Bor is being equated with atrocities committed by the
rebel army in Bentiu and Malakal. The Bor incident,
which was strongly condemned by the Government,
was provoked with the youth of the town of Bor heard
internally displaced persons in the United Nations
compound celebrating the capture of Bentiu by the rebels
who had only recently destroyed Bor and massacred its
inhabitants. The incident was initially intended as a
peaceful rally to submit a protest letter to the United
Nations Mission in the Republic of South Sudan
(UNMISS), requesting that the internally displaced
persons be removed from Bor where they were now
perceived by the youth as a source of provocation.
A peaceful protest got out of hand when the
peacekeepers fired shots into the air to stop the youth
from entering the camp, which was construed by the
youth as an attack on them, provoking them to force
their way into the camp. I would like to note that local
Government authorities had informed UNMISS of the
intentions of the youth to demonstrate and that the
SPLA, in collaboration with UNMISS, work together
to calm the situation. That is a clear indication that
the Government sees UNMISS as a critical partner in
South Sudan.
In Bentiu, the rebels massacred hundreds of
civilians, including people who had sought shelter
or refuge in churches and mosques and patients who
were receiving care in hospitals, as was noted in
today’s briefings. That has been strongly deplored and
condemned by our Government.

22/23

02/05/2014

Before I conclude my remarks, I would like
to highlight two points that I consider crucial to a
constructive response to the crisis in our country.
First, we very much appreciate the concerted
efforts of the international community in support of the
Intergovernmental Authority on Development/African
Union peace process. We would urge continued, and
indeed stepped up, engagement at the highest level to
accelerate an early end to this devastating and senseless
violence.
Secondly, we all recognize that, after the long
war in the Sudan, South Sudan has been weakened
and has very limited capacity for ensuring internal
peace, security and stability. Its capacity to
deliver social services and generate and sustain
badly needed socio-economic development is also
severely constrained. That was indeed the reason
for the ambitious, multifaceted support that created
UNMISS. The current crisis is weakening, and indeed
diminishing, the limited capacity of the State even
more. It is understandable that the United Nations
must reconsider it priorities in the light of the crisis,
in particular to support the peace process, protect
civilians, deliver humanitarian assistance and promote
respect for human rights.
But South Sudan also needs support for capacitybuilding now, even more than it did before. Withdrawing
that support, whether for lack or resources or as a
punitve measure, can only compound the crisis. The
United Nations needs to consider maintaining strong
capacity-building, even if it is not within UNMISS.
Furthermore, greater confidence-building mechanisms
need to be put in place for the collaboration work
between the Government of South Sudan and UNMISS.
My Government continues to remain committed to
working with all humanitarian actors in assisting us
alleviate the dire conditions our our people. What South
Sudan needs is understanding, compassion and support
in building a nation that can ensure peace, security,
stability and development for all its people.
Let me end with some final comments on the
nature of our quest for peace. Although our country
is now acutely divided, we believe that our culture is
one in which conflicts can be ultimately resolved by
balancing accountability with mutual accommodation,
forgiveness and reconciliation. It was the pursuit of
those values that made President Kiir grant amnesty to
militias, mostly Nuer, and absorb them into the army, to

14-31996

02/05/2014

Sudan and South Sudan

the extent that they eventually constituted the majority
of the armed forces. Although most of them have now
joined the rebellion, President Kiir continues to call on
those values as the pillars of our peace process and has
expressed his willingness to take any steps that would
accelerate the way forward towards an end to the war.
In that connection, I would like to report that
President Kiir graciously granted me permission to
meet with the four detainees in Juba and the seven who
had been released and placed under the protection of the
Government of Kenya. All of them opposed the use of
violence to overthrow the Government, but supported
dialogue to address the concerns of the rebels and other
opposition groups to end the war and restore peace and
national reconciliation. As the President stated, one of

S/PV.7168

the reasons that the charges against the four accused
were eventually dropped was to foster efforts towards
peace and national reconciliation.
I would like to conclude by once more reiterating
our trust and deep appreciation for the understanding
and unwavering support of the United Nations for our
country as one united nation that aspires to be at peace
with itself and to promote development and prosperity
for all its people.
The President: There are no more names inscribed
on the list of speakers. The Security Council has thus
concluded the present stage of its consideration of the
item on its agenda.
The meeting rose at 5.15 p.m.

14-3199623/23
