A /67/PV.57

United Nations

asdf

General Assembly

Offi cial Records

Sixty-seventh session

57th plenary meeting
Monday, 17 December 2012, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Jeremić . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (Serbia)

The meeting was called to order at 10.15 a.m.
Agenda item 3 (continued)
Credentials of representatives to the sixty-seventh
session of the General Assembly
(b) Report of the Credentials Committee (A/67/611)
The President: I give the floor to the Chairperson
of the Credentials Committee to introduce the report
of the Committee and the draft resolution contained
therein.
Mr. Charles (Trinidad and Tobago), Chairperson
of the Credentials Committee: On behalf of the
Credentials Committee, I wish to introduce the
Committee’s report on the credentials of representatives
to the sixty-seventh session of the General Assembly
(A/67/611). The Committee wishes to recommend to the
General Assembly the adoption of the draft resolution
in paragraph 16 of the report. I wish to thank the
Secretariat, in particular the Office of Legal Affairs,
and members of the Committee for their support.
The President: The General Assembly will now
take a decision on the draft resolution recommended by
the Credentials Committee in paragraph 16 of its report.
The Credentials Committee adopted it without a vote.
May I take it that the Assembly wishes to do the same?
The draft resolution was adopted (resolution
67/103).
The President: The representative of the Islamic
Republic of Iran has asked to speak in explanation of

position on the resolution just adopted. I remind him
that explanations of vote are limited to 10 minutes and
should be made by delegations from their seats.
Mr. Alibabaee (Islamic Republic of Iran): My
delegation joined the consensus adoption of resolution
67/103, entitled “Credentials of representatives to the
sixty-seventh session of the General Assembly”. In that
context, I reiterate my Government’s position that our
support for the resolution shall in no way be construed
as recognition of the Israeli regime. I wish my statement
in that regard to be recorded and registered in the
official record of the meeting.
The President: The General Assembly has thus
concluded this stage of its consideration of sub-item (b)
of agenda item 3.
Agenda item 118
Strengthening of the United Nations system
(a) Strengthening of the United Nations system
Report of the Secretary-General (A/67/312)
The President: I am glad to refer to the report of
the Secretary-General entitled “Civilian capacity in the
aftermath of conflict” (A/67/312). The initiative aims
at a cross-cutting effort to improve the United Nations
support to capacity-building in countries emerging
from conflicts. As such, the initiative, pursuant to
resolution 66/255, is scheduled to be considered by the
General Assembly and its subsidiary bodies, including
in particular the Fifth Committee and the Special
Committee on Peacekeeping.

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. Corrections should be submitted to the original
languages only. They should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature
of a member of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room
U-506. Corrections will be issued after the end of the session in a consolidated corrigendum.

12-65159 (E)

*1265159*

A/67/PV.57

Today, I would like to open the discussion process
that will allow Member States to draw up coordinated
approaches to that important initiative.

effective civilian expertise. Further efforts also should
be deployed to locate specialized civilian capacities in
the global South.

Mrs. Zarrouk Boumiza (Tunisia): I have
the honour to deliver a statement on behalf of the
Non-Aligned Movement.

The Movement encourages the SecretaryGeneral to make his civilian capacity review process
representative by drawing upon talent from the global
South, including at Headquarters. We emphasize in that
context the framework of South-South and triangular
cooperation, based on predictable and adequate funding
and resources. The potential role of the Peacebuilding
Fund in filling gaps in the funding of civilian capacities
also should be explored much further.

The Movement welcomed the adoption of
resolution 66/255 on civilian capacity in the aftermath
of conflict in support of national capacities for postconflict peacebuilding, giving particular attention to
mobilizing the capacities of developing countries, in
particular among women, that are vital to successful
United Nations peacebuilding activities. The Movement
supports the Secretary-General’s civilian capacity
initiative and takes note of his report (A/67/312). We
reiterate, in the same regard, the importance of national
civilian capacity development and institution-building
in post-conflict situations, as well as enhanced regional,
South-South and triangular cooperation.
The report contains valuable insights and highlights
the importance that the Secretary-General attaches
to civilian capacity. The Movement looks forward to
being constructively engaged in carrying the review
process forward. In the same context, the Movement
reiterates its stress on the following points.
On building partnerships, the Movement reiterates
the potential benefits that the process can realize in
its development and implementation from inclusive
partnership among relevant stakeholders, including
regional and subregional organizations. Progress still
needs to be made also in avoiding duplication of work
at Headquarters as well as in the field.
With respect to a demand-driven approach, the
Movement commends the demand-driven approach
of the report. The Movement stresses, however, that
the assessment of demand should be done jointly with
national stakeholders, aligned with national priorities,
and strike a good balance between development needs
and the contingencies of peace and security.
As to capacity from the South, we underline the
necessity for the United Nations to make full use of SouthSouth cooperation arrangements in the development
of civilian capacities in post-conflict countries. We
stress as well the need for the United Nations to draw
from the expertise of leaders and practitioners from
countries of the global South who have grappled with
civilian capacity challenges, with the aim of deploying

2

With regard to resource mobilization, the Movement
firmly believes that post-conflict peacebuilding is a
long-term and resource-intensive process. Thematic,
personnel and support mechanisms at Headquarters
must match the abilities to undertake those tasks in the
field.
As for the peacekeeping-peacebuilding nexus,
the success of peacebuilding activities hinges upon
the effective completion of peacekeeping operations
and the efficacy of the overall peace process of which
peacekeeping and peacebuilding are parts. We therefore
stress that both peacekeeping and peacebuilding
activities should be supported by adequate financial and
human resources in order to ensure sustainable peace.
We stress also that peacebuilding activities should not
have a negative impact on the resources allocated to
the peacekeeping operations. Moreover, consultations
with the Security Council on mandate adjustments, in
line with the evolving needs of civilian capacities in the
field, should be conceived ahead of deployment in order
to allow for the proper allocation of budget resources.
With respect to national capacity-building, building
the national capacities of post-conflict countries should
remain at the centre of all our efforts. We are cognizant
of the fact that national capacities in many postconflict situations are often fragmented. Therefore, our
initiatives should focus on integrating the fragmented
capacities that exist in post-conflict countries so that
they can strive towards sustainable peace and avoid
possible relapse into conflict.
Regarding the inclusiveness of the peacebuilding
process, we reiterate that national ownership is at
the core of all the principles guiding the review of
civilian capacities. The peacebuilding process should
be inclusive so that all citizens, including vulnerable
groups such as women and children, are in a position to

12-65159

A/67/PV.57

engage meaningfully in the process. It should empower
people at the grass-roots level to utilize their social
bond as a strong collateral for development work and
as an effective deterrent against relapse into conflict.
Moreover, the Movement is convinced of the crucial role
of the Peacebuilding Commission in supporting agenda
countries in identifying national existing capacities and
capacity gaps. It could also evaluate the progress and
challenges facing the implementation of the initiative.
Finally, the Movement underlines in the same
regard the need to take forward the ongoing process of
civilian capacities review in intergovernmental settings,
and to involve the Special Committee on Peacekeeping
Operations and the Fifth Committee, given the many
administrative and budgetary implications. We
reiterate our commitment to constructively engage in
substantive and specific proposals on the matter.
Mr. Mahmoud (Egypt) (spoke in Arabic):
Egypt aligns itself with the statement delivered by
the representative of Tunisia in its capacity as the
coordinator of the Non-Aligned Movement (NAM)
caucus on peacebuilding. Egypt also thanks the
Secretariat for its efforts in developing civilian
capacities in post-conflict countries and in launching
the CAPMATCH mechanism under resolution 66/251.
Civilian capacities in the countries of the South
are considered to be among the most important sources
of civilian expertise in post-conflict countries, given
the similarities of the relevant conditions, capabilities
and challenges. In that context, Egypt reaffirms the
importance of launching bilateral partnerships between
countries of the South and trilateral cooperation
mechanisms in order to develop work plans that
respond to countries’ real need for civilian expertise in
the aftermath of conflict. Moreover, civilian capacities
from the South are cost-effective in comparison with
the familiar programmes of North-South cooperation.
Egypt stresses the importance of devising new,
sustainable financial formulas for providing civilian
capacities to countries in the aftermath of conflict,
and of building on experiences drawn and lessons
learned from financing regional and international
peacebuilding processes, especially now that it has
become clear that the financial restraints represent an
obstacle to achieving effective material progress in
peacebuilding programmes.
Egypt has diligently followed the progress of the
initiative, given its confidence in the initiative’s relvance

12-65159

and potential to bring a high return to countries in the
aftermath of conflict. That was reflected in Egypt’s
active participation in the negotiations on resolution
66/255, which shows that the civilian expertise of
countries in democratic transition can be an important
source of civilian expertise for countries in the
aftermath of conflict.
Egypt has endowed active funds for technical
cooperation with Africa and the Commonwealth of
Independent States. Through those funds, Egypt
provides its civilian expertise to friendly countries,
either bilaterally or through trilateral cooperation
mechanisms. That has enabled Egypt to play a similar
role in providing civilian expertise to countries in
the aftermath of conflict. Accordingly, interested
Egyptian entities were among the first subscribers to
the CAPMATCH site launched in September.
On the basis of its firm belief in the importance of
intensifying cooperation with regional organizations in
the field and of providing civilian expertise to countries
in the aftermath of conflict, Egypt has launched an
initiative within the African Union to establish an
African Union centre for post-conflict reconstruction
and development in order to encourage ownership by
African countries of qualified national expertise as they
aspire to achieve long-term sustainable development.
Egypt welcomes the results of the visit to Cairo of
the Special Adviser and Assistant Secretary-General
for Civilian Capacities in October, during which she
met with a wide range of high-level officials in the
relevant Egyptian ministries to discuss what could be
provided in the first phase of CAPMATCH.
To conclude, Egypt reaffirms its participation in
all the implementation phases of the United Nations
initiative to enhance civilian capacities in post-conflict
countries, given its firm belief that the peoples of those
countries deserve a chance to live a better life, to own
their national programmes to achieve that goal, and
to achieve sustainable development in all its various
aspects in order not to relapse into conflict.
The President: I now give the floor to the observer
of the European Union.
Mr. Vrailas (European Union): I have the honour
to speak on behalf of the European Union (EU) and
its member States. The acceding country Croatia; the
candidate countries the former Yugoslav Republic of
Macedonia, Montenegro, Iceland and Serbia; and the

3

A/67/PV.57

countries of the Stabilization and Association Process
and potential candidates Albania and Bosnia and
Herzegovina align themselves with this statement.
The European Union and its member States
welcome the report of the Secretary-General on civilian
capacity in the aftermath of the conflict (A/67/312). The
report clearly shows both the progress achieved in that
important undertaking as well as the challenges for
the next phase of the work. It goes without saying that
there is continuous need for a practical, results-oriented
focus in a process that is aimed at delivering stronger,
efficient support to national processes and priorities.
We value the consultative approach taken to
develop and promote the initiative, as successfully
demonstrated through various regional conferences.
The European Union and its member States strongly
support the basic principles of the initiative. National
ownership is underlined as the only way to build a
lasting peace. Partnerships are a vital element and their
use should be maximized. As the report underlines,
the endeavour is a collective enterprise undertaken
by various actors, both internationally and within the
United Nations system.
The international community must do better at
providing rapid, effective civilian capacity to conflictaffected countries. One of the main efforts is to
broaden and deepen the pool of civilian expertise. We
are in the process of defining how we can contribute to
that endeavour, both within the EU and in cooperation
with the United Nations. We are seeking to enhance the
identification, recruitment and training of specialist
civilian experts, as well as opportunities for synergies
where appropriate. We are also looking at priority gaps in
the provision of support to national institution-building
in countries in conflict, crisis-affected countries and
those in transition. We emphasize the awareness and
understanding of specific contexts and conditions
as criteria for the expertise, thus strongly supporting
South-South cooperation.
Creating networks to that effect is important. We
note with satisfaction that the new online platform
CAPMATCH has now been launched, providing a
mechanism to connect those seeking experience and
capacity with potential providers. We encourage
active use of the system and its continuous refinement,
based on early experiences and lessons learned. New
innovative models need to be found to enable triangular
cooperation.

4

We welcome the focus put on enhancing
accountability and support the establishment of the
joint global focal point for the rule-of-law sector. The
synergies to be gained through such an approach are
important, and similar arrangements could be beneficial
in other sectors as well.
The European Union is fully committed to
strengthening its partnership with the United Nations.
The European Union is working closely with the
United Nations on how to provide support to the
civilian capacity review. The United Nations has
drawn attention to a number of areas where European
Union experience in civilian capability development
for crisis management could be of direct support to
United Nations field operations. As the report states,
the initiative will apply across the various responses
of the United Nations system. We therefore encourage
the United Nations system to continue to work together
to find the optimal ways to be more nimble, responsive
and innovative in post-conflict situations.
Mr. Sinhaseni (Thailand): At the outset, my
delegation aligns itself with the positions of the
Non-Aligned Movement, as set forth earlier by the
representative of Tunisia.
We thank the Secretary-General for his report
on civilian capacity in the aftermath of conflict
(A/67/312). The report reiterates the important
principles and understandings that underpin the work
of the international community in rebuilding societies
in the aftermath of conflict. It also provides thoughtful
and thought-provoking reflections on how to further
strengthen the means to rebuild those societies
through enhancing civilian capacity in meaningful
and innovative ways. Our appreciation extends also
to Ms. Sarah Cliffe, Special Adviser and Assistant
Secretary-General for Civilian Capacities, for her
earnest efforts in that regard.
Over the years, the international community has
come to learn that there is an undeniable premise
that must guide our work in the context of supporting
transitions from conflict to durable peace and
sustainable development. That premise is that the
road to recovery must be rooted in institutions and
capacities that are organic and sustainable. As stated in
the Secretary-General’s report,
“civilian capacities and institution-building
pathways cannot be imposed from outside but work
best when programmes are designed to support

12-65159

A/67/PV.57

a strong process of national decision-making”
(A/67/312, summary).
Equally important are the role of South-South and
triangular cooperation and the work of the Peacebuilding
Commission in developing national capacity and
mobilizing resources for institution-building. Thailand
agrees with the understanding — reflected in the
Secretary-General’s civilian capacity initiative and
reiterated through the consultations of Member
States in various forums on the issues — that sharing
comparable experiences among countries that have
faced similar challenges at different stages of their
transitions is extremely useful because it broadens and
deepens the pool of civilian capacity in a manner that
is very promising and has great potential. While SouthSouth and triangular cooperation should not take the
place of traditional North-South cooperation, the role
of the global South in that context should be further
explored and supported.
Thailand has, in various forums, stressed the
importance of any and all efforts aimed at strengthening
and improving the United Nations system and its ability
to respond to various issues in a transparent, effective
and accountable manner. We believe that efforts that
continually review and reassess how to do things
better within the Organization and in cooperation with
relevant stakeholders and partners are the only way to
meet evolving demands and challenging landscapes.
We highly appreciate the fact that the SecretaryGeneral’s civilian capacity initiative has at its core a
genuine desire to improve and strengthen the ability of
the United Nations to provide support to conflict and
post-conflict countries. Therefore, we will lend our full
support to it and to the overarching goals of effective
implementation, transparency and accountability.
Thailand’s decision to join the first group of
participants in the CAPMATCH online platform was
based firmly on the principles I have just outlined. We
have always attached the highest importance to SouthSouth cooperation in the bilateral context. We are
therefore delighted to have registered on the recently
launched online platform the available capacities and
experiences of Thai Government agencies in the area
of economic revitalization, in particular in the context
of post-conflict, post-crisis and political transitions.
Since representatives of our civil society have been
very active in those areas, we hope to draw on their
experiences in the future as the CAPMATCH platform
continues to evolve.

12-65159

As these and other initiatives develop further,
Thailand will continue to engage in the broader
conversation on enhancing civilian capacity in the
aftermath of conflict. In that context, my delegation
hopes that the many other interesting ideas presented in
the Secretary-General’s report will be further developed
and elaborated in consultation with Member States.
Although they raise many administrative and practical
questions, their potential for positive and lasting impact
is evident. If we are to strive for what more Member
States, the international community and the United
Nations system can do to further support countries
emerging from conflict on the road to recovery and
sustainable peace and development, it is our hope that
we can then continue this important discussion on
civilian capacities in increasingly concrete ways.
Mr. Laursen (Denmark): Denmark welcomes the
report of the Secretary-General on civilian capacity
in the aftermath of conflict (A/67/312) and wishes to
thank him for his commitment to strengthening the
United Nations support of national capacity-building in
post-conflict and post-crisis transitions.
Denmark aligns itself with the statement of the
European Union.
Allow me to reaffirm Denmark’s commitment to
assisting countries emerging from conflict in order
to consolidate transition from war and instability to
sustainable peace and development. We share the
view of the Secretary-General that developing civilian
capacities is crucial for the journey from conflict
to sustainable development. In doing so, we must
reinforce national ownership and leadership, avoid
one-size-fits-all solutions, and do better at delivering
effective and efficient civilian expertise when it is
needed. Furthermore, we must remain committed for
as long as it takes to set a country on the path towards
peace and prosperity.
Denmark supports the focus of the United Nations
on civilian capacity. We appreciate the openness and
consultative approach that the civilian capacities team
has taken, and we encourage it to continue its outreach
in order to build further support and momentum. It is
therefore my great pleasure to announce that Denmark,
pending final approval in Copenhagen, will shortly be
donating additional funds in the amount of 1 million
Danish kroner to the civilian capacity initiative for
2013. At the current exchange rate, that amounts to
some $170,000.

5

A/67/PV.57

As the report outlines, the civilian capacity
initiative has made some important progress in a broad
range of areas. Allow me to highlight three areas that
are of significant interest to Denmark and where we
would like to see the civilian capacity work evolve.
First, we welcome the development and launch of the
online platform CAPMATCH. In our view, CAPMATCH
helps to promote national ownership, partnership and
expertise. CAPMATCH strengthens global partnership
by promoting South-South cooperation without
replacing North-South technical and financial support
and triangular exchanges. We must broaden and deepen
the visibility of and awareness about CAPMATCH
so that we can match even better the demand for and
supply of specialized civilian capacities for countries
emerging from conflict. We must also keep exploring
innovative models for voluntary funding in the quest for
more systematic support to South-South and triangular
cooperation.
Secondly, as a staunch supporter of an international
system based on international law, we welcome the
establishment of the joint global focal point for the rule
of law. Indeed, there is a need for enhanced political
will and stronger efforts to build national ownership
when it comes to the rule of law and transitional justice
in conflict and post-conflict States. We encourage the
civilian capacity team to continue to support the efforts
in developing such global focal points.
Thirdly and finally, it is essential that the United
Nations bring greater focus to support for national
ownership of institution-building processes and
results on the ground. As underscored in the New
Deal for International Engagement in Fragile States
and recognized by the Group of Seven Plus countries,
inclusive country-owned and country-led transitions
are vital to helping countries emerge from fragility and
conflict.
To conclude, Denmark remains fully committed
to actively participating in making the United Nations
do better at facilitating rapid and well-suited civilian
capacities by enabling greater access to expertise and
experience and by enhancing nimbleness within and
beyond the United Nations. Denmark will continue to
give full support to the work of the Secretary-General
in that respect.
Mr. Cassidy (Indonesia): We thank you,
Mr. President, for convening this important debate on

6

the report of the Secretary-General on civilian capacity
in the aftermath of conflict (A/67/312).
The building of effective national institutions
and capacities in post-conflict countries has to be a
comprehensive and collaborative undertaking, and
Indonesia welcomes this discussion in the General
Assembly and its subsidiary bodies, including in
particular the Fifth Committee, the Special Committee
on Peacekeeping Operations and the Peacebuilding
Commission (PBC).
We align ourselves with the statement made by
the representative of Tunisia, the coordinator of the
Non-Aligned Movement caucus on peacebuilding.
The Secretary-General’s report before us is a
welcome follow-up to resolution 66/255. We hope that
many of the Secretary-General’s observations and
measures will serve to strengthen the role of the United
Nations system in supporting the capacities of conflictaffected countries. My delegation would like to present
some of its views on the various issues in the report.
First, we fully agree that without nationally
owned transformations of institutions that provide
political representation, security, justice and economic
opportunities, there can be no sustained recovery from
conflict. In that regard, constant effort is required to
make domestic institutions and governance strong and
accountable to their citizens. At the same time, it is
essential that countries be given the necessary policy
space and an enabling environment. The fostering
of national dialogue with all national stakeholders,
including civil society and women, should be
encouraged.
Indonesia’s hard work of nation-building and
democratic transition has consistently involved efforts
to resolve conflicts in a peaceful manner and to
promote reconciliation. We bear witness to the critical
importance of building our national capacity and core
Government functions. Since 1999, our country has
been rebuilding its system in a gradual manner. We
have made sure that every election has been carried out
correctly and that every vote has been counted. We have
persistently pushed for policy reforms. Our country has
managed to overcome every trial and tribulation that
has stood in its path and to sort out each of its conflicts
one by one, peacefully. Indeed, today Indonesia is
blessed with a strong democracy, vibrant civil society
and reasonably sound economic growth.

12-65159

A/67/PV.57

In that context, any international blueprint for
support for national capacity development in postconflict countries must be fully aligned with nationally
identified priorities. Thus, we look forward to
receiving the outcome of the review of the integrated
mission-planning process guidelines, which is currently
under way, to reflect the changing national priorities
related to capacity development.
Secondly, while the newly launched online tool of
CAPMATCH and other ways to better match needed
civilian capacities are important, and Indonesia
supports work in that regard, the United Nations
civilian capacity agenda must also apply greater focus
on the aspect of adequate and sustained financing that
helps to broaden, deepen and draw civilian capacities
from the global South.
In that regard, Indonesia has provided information
on the availability of its civilian capacities to
CAPMATCH in the fields of core Government
functionality, economic revitalization and basic
security, offering the expertise of the Indonesian
National Police. Our support for the initial phase of
the online platform, among others, arises from our
confidence in the importance of enhanced transparency
and equal opportunity for countries of the global South
and those having gone through transitional democracy
to contribute to the national capacity development of
post-conflict countries, in accordance with the national
ownership principle. We also recognize that the various
United Nations departments working in the area of
post-conflict peacebuilding and conflict resolutions,
including mediation and human rights, are currently
making use of their rosters of civilian experts. It
would be useful to have condensed information about
those different rosters and their composition in the
CAPMATCH web portal as well.
We are optimistic that the platform, when
transparently managed and properly overseen by Member
States, has the potential for achieving success. Such
oversight, among others, pertains to the need to avoid
duplication and overlap with any existing mechanisms,
as well as to ensure that a more robust vetting procedure
with regard to the participation of non-governmental
agencies or any other non-government entities.
Thirdly, we also would have liked the report to
elaborate on ways for the United Nations system to
support and to draw capacities from the global South
through enhanced regional, South-South and triangular

12-65159

cooperation. There also should be an active and
transparent dialogue among Member States and the
relevant United Nations and non-United Nations actors
on how to better facilitate the needed financing for
civilian capacities and institutions, as well as for other
peacebuilding purposes. In that context, Indonesia has
been underscoring the role played by the Peacebuilding
Fund to also support the developing countries in their
efforts to assist post-conflict countries in their national
capacity development. We hope that future reports of
the Secretary-General on civilian capacities will also
identify some concrete ways for the United Nations to
assist developing countries and regional organizations
in better identifying and preparing their capacities for
civilian capacity development.
Fourthly, Indonesia strongly supports the advisory
role of the PBC and its country configurations in the
national capacity development of countries emerging
from conflict, in particular those on the Commission’s
agenda. We look forward to having a regular and
in-depth discussion on how the PBC can best identify
the needed capacities of those countries, in strict
compliance with the national ownership principle.
Fifthly, we would appreciate more information
on the work by the inter-agency working group led
by the United Nations Development Programme to
develop principles and guidelines for better using and
developing national capacity and how it would link
to drawing on the capacity that will potentially be
increasingly available through CAPMATCH. We also
call on the working group to begin interaction with the
PBC and the wider United Nations membership in the
context of the civilian capacity review.
Finally, we emphasize that the review must at
all times be conducted in full consultation with the
States Members of the United Nations, soliciting views
and ideas from all the relevant United Nations and
non-United Nations actors. The perspectives of regional
organizations are also very pertinent.
In that regard, in March in Bali, Indonesia and
Norway, supported by the United Nations civilian
capacity team, held the first regional consultation on
strengthening the partnership of civilian capacities
in the aftermath of conflict. The consultation raised
awareness of civilian capacity issues among the regional
stakeholders and served to strengthen partnerships
between the United Nations, countries in the region

7

A/67/PV.57

and other actors on deploying effective and demand-led
civilian capacities.
Member States may be aware that more regional
consultations have been held in Africa and in Arab
regions, co-convened with the respective regional
organizations. Such dialogue and the sharing of diverse
experiences are extremely important to ensure that the
United Nations system of enabling civilian capacities
is engendered in response to countries’ needs on the
ground and with the widest international support. On
its part, Indonesia is determined to continue to support
steps that tangibly assist countries in their journey
towards recovery and sustainable peace.
Ms. Cousens (United States of America): The
United States welcomes the most recent report of the
Secretary-General on civilian capacity in the aftermath
of conflict (A/67/312) and appreciates the opportunity
to discuss those issues in the General Assembly today.
As we know all too well, societies emerging from
conflict or managing post-conflict political transitions
face innumerable challenges on the road to sustainable
peace. From planning the formation of Government
ministries to the provision of local utilities, from the
structuring of legal systems to revitalizing the economy
or nurturing a robust civil society, successful and
sustainable transitions require mobilizing wide-ranging
civilian capacities, skills and expertise.
The Secretary-General’s initiative on civilian
capacity in the aftermath of conflict recognizes those
challenges and seeks to improve the ability of the
international community, in particular the United
Nations system, to provide critical expertise and
support in assisting national actors in tackling those
challenges. The United States applauds the SecretaryGeneral for the initiative, and we also would like to
thank his civilian capacity team.
We welcome the efforts already undertaken by
the United Nations system over the past 18 months to
draw more systematically on existing mechanisms for
providing civilian capacity in a way that is timely and
responsive to the evolving needs of national authorities.
In Libya, for example, the flexible approach of the
United Nations to planning allowed the new national
authorities to set their own priorities and enabled the
United Nations to tailor its transitional support to the
genuine needs of the Libyan people.

8

The good-faith efforts of any Government struggling
to rebuild after conflict should not in any way be
impeded by the Organization’s inability to muster the
necessary civilian expertise, which is what makes the
initiative so crucial. We must ensure that the United
Nations response is timely, tailored to context and
nimble. As my delegation has noted previously, supply
rather than demand has too often driven international
assistance in post-conflict settings. Accordingly, the
United States welcomes the extensive consultations
undertaken by the United Nations to nurture a global
pool of civilian expertise, with particular focus on
experts from the global South, as well as the launch of
the online platform CAPMATCH to facilitate greater
access to that global expertise.
Mr. Prosor (Israel), Vice-President, took the Chair.
As the report of the Secretary-General explains,
improving the United Nations system’s ability to deliver
effective support in the field also requires the right
institutional arrangements at Headquarters. The United
States therefore welcomes the enhanced cooperation
between the United Nations Development Programme
and the Department of Peacekeeping Operations
on rule-of-law support in the field. While that new
arrangement is at an early stage, we are encouraged by
the steps taken to date and the dedication of the United
Nations to improving coordination in this critical area.
We look forward to further progress, including greater
coordination in other critical gap areas.
I thank the President again for convening today’s
timely debate. The Secretary-General’s initiative on
civilian capacity in the aftermath of conflict represents
a serious effort to learn from many years of practical
experience with post-conflict transitions. The United
States looks forward to further progress in closing
critical civilian capacity gaps and continuing to
strengthen our collective ability to support countries
and communities making the transition from war to
durable peace.
Mr. Yamazaki (Japan): It gives me great pleasure to
address the General Assembly today on the report of the
Secretary-General on civilian capacity in the aftermath
of conflict (A/67/312). Japan supports the civilian
capacity initiative, which aims to widen the pool of
civilian expertise and facilitate the rapid and efficient
deployment of expertise to post-conflict countries. We
appreciate the hard work put into the initiative by the

12-65159

A/67/PV.57

civilian capacities team, as well as the two chairs of the
consultative group, Canada and Indonesia.
Japan welcomes the launch of CAPMATCH, which
took place at the margins of the high-level meetings
of the General Assembly in September. By providing
a self-service online platform for better matching
demand for and supply of specialized civilian capacities
for countries emerging from conflict, CAPMATCH
builds partnerships to support post-conflict recovery,
democratic transitions and conflict prevention, either
bilaterally or through the United Nations presence on
the ground. Japan supports such civilian exchange and
has started to consider participation in CAPMATCH.
In that regard, we will continue to actively engage in
the discussions, including those on creating a guideline
for the recruitment and deployment of Governmentprovided personnel in order to ensure rapid deployment
and a transparent process.
Japan believes that the key to the success of the
civilian capacity initiative lies in national ownership.
In addition, South-South cooperation and triangular
partnerships, which allow countries to share similar
peacebuilding experiences, should be further
encouraged. We would also like to request the civilian
capacities team to widely disseminate the lessons
learned, including achievements and challenges, from
the trial phase of CAPMATCH.
The report also sets out some of the challenges
for the next phase of the initiative, including refining
CAPMATCH based on initial feedback, learning
from the new global focal point arrangements, and
re-examining administrative arrangements and
operating procedures of the United Nations. It is our
hope that the work of the Secretariat will be conducted
effectively and efficiently, in line with the original
objective of the civilian capacity initiative. We
welcome and appreciate the efforts of the Secretariat to
be transparent with Member States over the past year,
and encourage it to continue to provide us with needed
clarification on the initiative.
The civilian capacity initiative, along with the New
Deal for International Engagement in Fragile States and
the United Nations peacebuilding architecture, plays
an integral part in the global peacebuilding discussions
currently being undertaken by the international
community. We must ensure that those different
initiatives are pursued not separately but in a mutually
complementary way, leading to effective and efficient

12-65159

implementation. In order to attain the goal of building
a conflict-resilient society in a post-conflict State
where citizens are able to enjoy the peace dividend,
we Member States must pursue the civilian capacity
initiative with the larger peacebuilding framework in
mind.
In conclusion, I wish to reaffirm Japan’s strong and
continuing interest in strengthening the international
response to the needs of civilian expertise in conflictaffected countries. Peacebuilding is one of the central
pillars of our foreign policy. The importance of
deploying highly skilled experts in the early phases
of peacebuilding is undisputed, and Japan supports
initiatives that allow for the rapid deployment of
that civilian expertise. We look forward to seeing
substantive progress that will generate concrete peace
dividends on the ground in the coming years.
Mrs. García Guiza (Mexico) (spoke in Spanish):
Mexico recognizes the progress achieved in developing
the civilian capacity initiative, as reflected in the report
of the Secretary-General entitled “Civilian capacity
in the aftermath of conflict” (A/67/312). We also pay
tribute to Ms. Susana Malcorra, Chef de Cabinet of
the Secretary-General, and her team for their efforts to
implement the initiative.
It is undeniable that, in order to achieve peace
and sustainable development in countries emerging
from conflict, we must strengthen their national and
institutional capacities. The civilian capacity initiative
is aimed primarily at supporting those efforts,
recognizing that the development of national capacity
is a political and technical process that must be rooted
in national ownership and, if need be, accompanied by
good practices or lessons learned from the international
community.
We have successful and valuable experience in the
political transitional process in areas such as electoral
assistance, transitional justice, political inclusion
and poverty eradication and economic revitalization
programmes. Mexico has shared its experience in
electoral processes with a number of friendly countries
and assisted programmes or deployments of the United
Nations system on the ground. Such exercises are proof
of Mexico’s support and commitment to promoting
the national capacities of countries emerging from
conflict and enhancing South-South cooperation with
innovative models of financing.

9

A/67/PV.57

We believe it important to pursue efforts to identify
triangular cooperation models that ensure the longterm sustainability of projects and that exploit the funds
and resources of the United Nations and international
financial institutions to finance South-South exchanges.
The use of the resources of the Peacebuilding Fund
for specific projects in that area, in coordination with
international financial institutions, is a step in the right
direction.
Our tools for promoting international peace and
security, and in particular for preventing relapse into
conflict — peacekeeping operations, special political
missions and the Peacebuilding Commission, inter
alia — are facing increasingly diverse challenges. That
is why Mexico believes in the importance and value of
the initiative to ensure that United Nations missions
on the ground have sufficient, timely and specialized
civilian capacities that truly contribute to sustainable
peace and development.
Mr. Rishchynski (Canada): It is evident that
the international community can and must do better
in supporting States recovering from conflict or
managing political transitions. It is also evident that
those States often face significant shortages in the
technical expertise necessary to deliver tangible peace
dividends and to protect the fundamental freedoms of
their populations. In that regard, the United Nations
has a crucial role to play in supporting the quick and
efficient deployment of specialized civilian experts in
order to assist in enhancing the prosperity, security and
dignity of the world’s populations.
Canada is very pleased to co-chair the consultative
group on civilian capacities with Indonesia, which has
provided a valuable opportunity to focus on improving
international support for peacebuilding. The latest
report of the Secretary-General on civilian capacity
in the aftermath of conflict (A/67/312) outlines several
concrete steps that have been taken over the past year.
In a time of global fiscal restraint, efforts must be
focused on achieving measurable results on the ground
in post-conflict and transition settings and on avoiding
duplicative processes.
(spoke in French)
Other signs of progress are worth mentioning.
While the international community has long and
openly recognized that national ownership is central to
peacebuilding, it has been less successful in turning that
commitment into practice. When the new authorities

10

of Libya identified their needs, the United Nations,
through its flexible approach to planning the United
Nations Support Mission in Libya, was able to tailor its
efforts to better reflect national priorities and respond
more effectively to realities on the ground.
Canada also supports the strong emphasis
throughout the report of the Secretary-General on
national capacity-building. Early work in Liberia to
better support national institution-building in the
justice and security sectors is just one among many
examples of how the process can help contribute to
filling enduring gaps in post-conflict support.
The report rightly stresses the need to nurture and
support latent national capacities and promote their
development across the global South. Doing so holds
promise for strengthening the supply of expertise
tailored to the specific demands of a given situation
in a more sustainable and cost-effective manner. In
that context, Canada welcomes the efforts of several
African States to support security system reform in
Côte d’Ivoire. While CAPMATCH remains in its initial
phase, it should provide increased opportunities for that
kind of exchange in the future.
(spoke in English)
Finally, let me close by stressing the practical
nature of this topic. As always, the ultimate test for
success is the impact achieved on the ground. Gaps
in civilian capacity have real consequences for States
struggling to return from violent conflict or facing the
prospect of instability. Efforts so far have established a
solid foundation for meaningful progress.
Taken as a whole, the civilian capacity review
properly encompasses a series of pragmatic steps
that will improve the policy options available both to
the United Nations and to the broader international
community. It has also been conducted in an open,
transparent and consultative manner from the outset.
The important issue now is for Member States to have
ample opportunity to fully debate the latest report in
the appropriate venues. Following those discussions,
and without prejudging any conclusions, the entire
membership should then collectively consider any
necessary next steps.
Canada looks forward to the period ahead, with
civilian capacity tools and expertise delivering greater
results in advancing the prosperity, well-being, security
and dignity of all of the world’s populations.

12-65159

A/67/PV.57

Mr. Manjeev Singh Puri (India): I thank you, Sir,
for giving me this opportunity to address the General
Assembly. At this stage, I intend to speak only on the
matter concerning the civilian capacity initiative.
At the outset, we would like to express thanks and
appreciation to the Secretary-General for his report on
civilian capacity in the aftermath of conflict (A/67/312),
and to the President of the General Assembly and to
the steering committee on civilian capacity for the
painstaking work that they have undertaken. I also
offer my appreciation to the Special Adviser and her
team; we were very happy to have welcomed them to
India in the course of their interactions with Member
States.
Today’s debate is also an opportunity to reaffi rm our
commitments to the significant initiatives undertaken
under the auspices of the United Nations. I would
therefore seek the Assembly’s indulgence as I share
some of our thoughts on the civilian capacity initiative,
and note that it is shaping up into an implementable
programme.
The civilian components of peacekeeping missions
define the quality of the peace we achieve. The
sustainability of peace depends on comprehensive
peace processes wherein all actors contribute towards
the attainment of one goal. Governance, basic services
and public administration issues are some of the
formidable challenges to transition from conflict to
lasting peace. Support to national civilian capacities
in post-conflict situations, with national ownership at
the core, is therefore a noteworthy imperative that must
engage our attention at the United Nations.
As a country, India has developed capacities in
all spheres of governance, in all spheres relating to
development and in all spheres that are relevant to
post-conflict situations. We have made many of those
capacities available, through the United Nations and
other multilateral processes as well as bilaterally, to
countries across the globe desirous of them. We will
continue to offer those services to assist countries
undergoing the transition from conflict to peace,
and we shall engage constructively with the civilian
capacity initiative in a robust manner and support the
enhancement of United Nations civilian capacities
efforts in the aftermath of conflict.
We firmly believe that the overarching
peacekeeping framework is an effective and time-tested
instrument of peace and security. Civilian capacity,

12-65159

being a crucial component of this framework, should
impart strength to peacekeeping missions and certainly
not detract or dilute from the budgetary and financial
support of peacekeeping missions. My delegation
firmly believes that the intergovernmental character
of the civilian capacity process strengthens its very
foundations. Our own engagement with the civilian
capacity initiative reaffirms that belief. Given the
integral nature of the linkage between peacekeeping
and peacebuilding, we also believe that vibrant debates
in the Special Committee on Peacekeeping Operations,
the Peacebuilding Commission and the Fifth Committee
will make the outcomes rich and inclusive.
It is about time that the civilian capacity process
marked a transition from the conceptual to the
programmatic. Its scope, road map, deliverables,
timelines and performance indicators will determine
when it embarks on the implementation phase. We
believe that overlaps and duplications in terms of parallel
work streams and ongoing reform processes need to be
avoided in the process. Additional bureaucratic layers
at Headquarters will also not guarantee the success of
the programme and need to be eschewed.
The identification of entities responsible for the
implementation of the civilian capacity initiative
will address crucial requirements with respect to the
accountability and oversight procedures necessary
for its future implementation. Vetting norms for
various actors and organizations for inclusion in
its implementation framework will also have to be
transparent and rigorous to preclude threats to the
reputation of the Organization.
In conclusion, let me reiterate that my delegation
welcomes the Secretary-General’s recognition of the
importance of civilian capacities and recognition of
capacities in the global South as part of the initiative,
and would like to underscore the availability of such
capacities in the Governments of the global South.
Mrs. Dunlop (Brazil): Brazil welcomes the
opportunity to discuss with other Member States the
Secretary-General’s report on the review of civilian
capacity in the aftermath of conflict (A/67/312). We
fully agree that the review process should promote the
greater participation of civilians from the developing
world, including in mission leadership. We also believe
that the review should ensure that international experts
are able to train and nurture local capacities in order to
ensure that all actions are nationally owned.

11

A/67/PV.57

We see the CAPMATCH platform as a useful tool
that may constitute a valuable inventory of the existing
offers of civilian expertise, especially for developing
countries. If the instrument is to be successful, it is
of utmost importance that the necessary assistance
be offered to countries that still struggle to identify
and develop a roster of their available capacities. That
would guarantee an inclusive process and avoid the
possibility that only countries with previous experience
in deploying experts take part in the process.
We hope that Member States and the Secretariat
will be able to translate into practice the main
principles behind the civilian capacity process, in
particular the importance of its being demand-driven,
taking into consideration the different needs of postconflict countries, including in the social and economic
fields. Our efforts should be focused on strengthening
local institutions in the light of the priorities identified
by local actors. The relevant bodies of the General
Assembly, especially the Fifth Committee and the
Special Committee on Peacekeeping Operations, will
consider different aspects of the document in the near
future.
Brazil welcomes the report of the Advisory
Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions
on the review of civilian capacities (A/67/583). We
believe that it makes a constructive contribution to
taking the process forward in an effective manner.
We hope that the Fifth Committee will discuss the
recommendations made in that document in due course.
We also encourage the continuation of consultations
and the exchange of views in different bodies, such as
the Peacebuilding Commission. It is our expectation
that those discussions will allow the General Assembly
to give the Secretariat the guidance and support it needs
to take this initiative forward.
Mr. Haniff (Malaysia): I wish to take the opportunity
to express my sincere and heartfelt condolences to the
families of the victims of the Newtown, Connecticut,
community, as well as to the people of the United States
of America, for their senseless and tragic loss. Our
hearts and prayers go out to them at this most difficult
time.
At this plenary meeting, I wish to present my
delegation’s views on issues under agenda items 118,
“Strengthening of the United Nations system”, and 15,
“Culture of peace”. I wish to align my statement with
that made by the representative of Tunisia on behalf

12

of the Non-Aligned Movement (NAM) under agenda
item 118 and that to be delivered by the representative
of Cambodia on behalf of the Association of Southeast
Asian Nations (ASEAN) under agenda item 15.
It is sad to see that many countries emerging from
post-conflict situations have relapsed into conflict.
There is no doubt that those countries face many
challenges. My delegation shares the view that civilian
capacity is an important element in spearheading the
successful transition of countries transitioning from
conflict to peace.
Malaysia believes that there is a need to
expand civilian capacity and expertise in support
of nation-building programmes. We underscore the
importance of the various fields of civilian expertise
in instilling reform and institution-building for
Governments emerging from conflict. We are also
of the view that it is important to draw the necessary
expertise from countries that have experienced conflict.
Civilian experts sourced from those countries would be
invaluable assets, because their experience is crucial in
the development of nation-building programmes and
institution-building.
In that regard, Malaysia is encouraged by the
introduction of the CAPMATCH online platform
system, operated by the United Nations civilian
capacities team. It is heartening to note that 63 countries
and non-governmental organizations have shown keen
interest in the programme. We sincerely believe that the
CAPMATCH online system can be effective in further
enhancing connectivity between Governments in the
pursuit of a comprehensive political and economic
development agenda that would help countries emerging
from conflict.
As a member of the Guinea configuration of the
Peacebuilding Commission, Malaysia has trained
more than 300 Guinean students at various Malaysian
universities. In addition, Malaysia has sponsored
over 25,000 participants attending capacity-building
courses conducted through the Malaysian Technical
Cooperation Programme since 1980. We look forward
to contributing further to the work and development of
civilian capacities in assisting countries in transition to
ensure sustained global peace and security.
Turning to the issue of the culture of peace, no
religion asks its followers to do evil. Indeed, all religions
enjoin human beings to do good and refrain from evil,
to know and understand each other, and to live in peace

12-65159

A/67/PV.57

with one another. Therefore, rarely will we find that
conflicts are between religions. On the contrary, we
have noticed that in recent times, conflicts erupt over
issues of territory or resources and are initiated by the
attempts of people who happen to be of one faith to
dominate those of another.
There is a tendency to describe such conflicts as
conflicts between religions and cultures. However, we
often find people dressing their causes and political
agenda in religious garb to make them appear more
appealing, respected and legitimate. When that
happens, it is the obligation of those of the same faith
to discredit them. When extremists who kill innocent
civilians are engaged in misusing their faith in that
manner, it is our duty to challenge and expose them
for what they truly are. They should be condemned for
shrouding their noble faith in shame.
Faiths are not what is in conflict; it is the people
and nations with conflicting interests that collide.
Understanding that truth, Malaysia’s Prime Minister
called for a global movement of moderates at the sixtyfifth session of the General Assembly. The call for
moderation stems from the belief that it is a guiding
principle that would enable a society to successfully
prosper in unity. It is based on our own experience in
Malaysia.
Embracing moderation is an important value
ingrained in every Malaysian. It is built into every
Malaysian, irrespective of his or her ethnic, religious or
cultural background, and has contributed to the relative
peace and harmony experienced by Malaysia up to this
very day. For Malaysia, moderation comes with a high
degree of tolerance, trust and mutual understanding.
It values dialogue as an important tool for resolving
disputes. With relative political peace comes economic
stability, which in turn has allowed Malaysia to
concentrate on socioeconomic development in the
country.
However, if we were to take a look back at where
Malaysia was at the time of achieving its independence
in 1957, we could not blame others if they thought
that Malaysia would be a fertile breeding ground for
extremists. At that time, Malaysia was a country plagued
by a host of problems. Malaysians were generally
uneducated, poor, and most strikingly, strongly divided
along religious and ethnic lines. Thus, our forefathers
knew that we had to take drastic steps to ensure that
Malaysia remained stable and could move forward.

12-65159

The very first step taken then was to create a
more united society by forming an alliance of political
parties that represented all the major ethnic groups
in the country. It was important to ensure that all
the ethnic and religious groups were included in the
political process and had a stake in how the country
was run. That was one of the most significant decisions
that contributed to making Malaysia what it is today.
It was one of the most moderate actions taken by our
forefathers.
The practice of moderation in Malaysia is not
confined to religion alone, but is an all-encompassing
value that could be applied to other areas, such as
politics, the economy, culture and social dynamics.
Moderation is an important approach for bridging
differences, facilitating dialogue, resolving disputes,
sustaining stability and development, and creating
harmonious relations, since it calls for mutual respect,
tolerance, understanding, dialogue, compromise and
justice.
In October this year, the Philippine Government
and the Moro Islamic Liberation Front signed a historic
peace framework agreement to bring an end to the
40-year conflict in the southern Philippines. Malaysia
believes that this peace agreement was achieved thanks
to the moderation practiced by all sides. Had the parties
concerned resorted to taking hard-line positions, such
an agreement would still be far from sight.
Malaysia has also approached the conflict in the
Rakhine region, Myanmar, by adopting the moderation
approach. We believe that the conflict is not between
religions, but a humanitarian issue in which people
of different faiths are suffering. As such, Malaysian
non-governmental organizations have extended
humanitarian aid in the form of food and medical
supplies to Muslims and Buddhists alike in Rakhine
state. That measure will assist all concerned and
alienate none.
The idea of the Global Movement of Moderates
continues to receive the support of the international
community. It has been referenced in the outcome
documents of various international meetings and
conferences held by organizations such as NAM,
the Organization of Islamic Cooperation, the
Commonwealth of Nations and the Asia-Europe
Meeting. In April, ASEAN leaders unanimously
endorsed and adopted the Global Movement of
Moderates initiative at the twentieth ASEAN Summit

13

A/67/PV.57

in Phnom Penh, in which the Movement would become
one of ASEAN’s positive contributions to achieving
global peace. On that note, we welcome the ASEAN
proposal to include a paragraph on moderation in this
year’s draft resolution on interreligious and intercultural
dialogue (A/67/L.44). We believe that the language
contained in the draft resolution lays the foundation for
further elaboration of the idea.
In conclusion, Malaysia believes that the Global
Movement of Moderates complements activities and
efforts towards a culture of peace. As such, Malaysia
wishes to invite all to support the Movement and looks
forward to cooperating in promoting moderation to
counter extremism in all its forms. We do not doubt that
the road ahead will be long and arduous. There will be
detractors along the way. But in the end, the moderates
will prevail, and that will usher in a period of sustained
global peace and prosperity for all.
Mr. Schaper (Netherlands): I would like to begin
by aligning the Netherlands with the statement made by
the observer of the European Union.
We have come a long way in the field of civilian
capacities since the 2009 report of the SecretaryGeneral on peacebuilding in the immediate aftermath
of conflict (A/63/881). It has become increasingly clear
that we need, in particular, a comprehensive approach to
strengthening local institution- and capacity-building
on the basis of national ownership and priority-setting,
especially in post-conflict situations. The Netherlands
considers the civilian capacity initiative an important
element of that broad approach. The challenge is to
ensure a more effective and coherent United Nations
approach to developing and deploying civilian expertise.
Also, the role of women in those processes is crucial.
The latest civilian capacity report of the SecretaryGeneral (A/67/312) identifies important progress, but
also a continuing gap regarding a coherent and nimble
support structure of the United Nations. We would like
to commend the Secretary-General and the civilian
capacities team for the steps that have been taken and
for their ongoing efforts in that respect. One important
element highlighted by the report is the need for heads
of missions to be able to facilitate changes in the mix of
civilian capacities, as and when circumstances require.
We invite the Secretary-General and the civilian
capacities team to continue to work with high ambition
towards a more flexible and more sophisticated United
Nations system for the use of civilian expertise. That

14

will improve the response capacity of the United Nations
in fragile situations and more effectively address the
challenges we face in the aftermath of conflict. In that
respect, we look forward to a system-wide framework
for delivering capacity development support and would
welcome proposals to the membership in that respect.
The Netherlands would also like to emphasize
the importance of mobilizing the capacity of the
global South and South-South cooperation within this
framework. It is clear that countries in post-conflict
situations can benefit from the experience of other
countries that have faced the same problems. Trilateral
cooperation can support that. The Netherlands has,
for example, cooperated with Ghana and the United
Nations Mission in Liberia in the training of Liberian
customs officials.
The Netherlands will continue to support efforts
that lead to better coordination between different
United Nations institutions and between bilateral and
multilateral initiatives focused on strengthening and
enhancing the role of civilian experts in the aftermath of
conflict. We therefore welcome the recent arrangement
between the Department of Peacekeeping Operations
and the United Nations Development Programme to
serve as the global focal point for police, justice and
corrections. We are also improving our own systems for
the deployment of civilian experts, and we will link up
with the recently launched CAPMATCH website. I call
upon other Member States to do the same.
A last but important issue is the necessity of a
consistent approach by the United Nations membership,
all of us assembled here in this Hall, with regard
to the important role of civilian capacities on the
road away from conflict and towards development.
The High-level Meeting on the Rule of Law at the
National and International Levels and the high-level
event on peacebuilding organized by the Chair of the
Peacebuilding Commission recognized the critical
importance of peacebuilding in achieving long-term
sustainable peace through security and development.
However, the discussions on the relationship between
peacebuilding and development in the context of the
quadrennial comprehensive policy review have been
laborious and difficult. Moreover, embracing and
supporting the leadership of fragile and post-conflict
countries meets resistance. Unfortunately, the civilian
capacities process has also met with some steep
resistance.

12-65159

A/67/PV.57

If we are collectively declaring ourselves seriously
committed to peacebuilding in debates such as the one
today, we also need to ensure that we are committed
to making progress in related discussions within all
bodies of the United Nations in order to ensure that the
whole system can contribute to that important cause.
Mr. Shin Dong Ik (Republic of Korea): I would like
to begin by expressing my appreciation to the President
for convening today’s meeting on civilian capacity
in the aftermath of conflict under agenda item 118.
My appreciation also goes to the Secretary-General,
Mr. Ban Ki-moon, and his civilian capacity team, for the
initiative they have taken and the leadership they have
shown in promoting tangible progress. I believe today’s
discussions will serve to gather important perspectives
for furthering our collective efforts towards enhanced
civilian capacities in post-conflict countries.
We know all too well that the end of conflict does
not automatically mean flourishing peace. Indeed, the
fragility in post-conflict countries can be overcome only
when the people themselves can become the masters
of their fate. Without adequate civilian capacities,
sustainable peace and long-term development will
remain a far-fetched dream. It is in that vein that the
Republic of Korea joined many other Member States as
a sponsor of resolution 66/255, adopted by consensus
in March.
The Republic of Korea notes with appreciation that
the report of the Secretary-General on civilian capacity
in the aftermath of conflict (A/67/312) contains
specific assessments on priority areas such as national
ownership, the system-wide framework, partnerships
and expertise. We believe that the report is a step in
the right direction and that it is in line with the four
shared principles of the Busan Partnership, agreed
upon and endorsed by approximately 160 countries
on the occasion of the Fourth High-level Forum on
Aid Effectiveness held last year in Busan, Republic
of Korea. Those four principles are, first, ownership
of development priorities by developing countries;
secondly, a focus on results; thirdly, transparency and
accountability to each other; and, fourthly, inclusive
development partnerships.
As civilian capacity is about developing people’s
capability to construct and secure their own future
with their own hands, country-owned and countryled approaches in the planning and implementation
of civilian capacity-building must be put at the centre

12-65159

of our efforts. Inclusiveness and the participation of
all relevant stakeholders in the process, including
women and children, is also critical. We can also
expect enhanced accountability where the democratic
approach is guaranteed both in form and in substance.
However, at the current juncture, the peacekeeping,
peacebuilding and development components of the
United Nations are not being harmonized in a sufficiently
effective manner. Rather than taking a fragmented
approach, those efforts should be synchronized to
maximize effectiveness. Civilian capacity must be
promoted at, or even before, the peacekeeping stage so
as to avoid missed opportunities and wasted time and
resources. Specifically, the demand for resources and
expertise should be precisely assessed. Furthermore,
the division of labour and partnership-building among
all stakeholders must be planned in advance to avoid
duplication and redundancy. In that regard, we look
forward to the swift and successful implementation
of the initiative so that the United Nations can, as the
Secretary-General has often stressed, deliver as one.
The Republic of Korea also welcomes the launch of
the online platform CAPMATCH and hopes that it will
serve as a useful tool to match the demand for and supply
of available expertise and resources. As for the Republic
of Korea, 13 Governmental and non-governmental
institutions, ranging from universities, hospitals and
relief agencies, have registered to offer assistance in
their own capacities. We encourage the United Nations
to come up with a specific strategy to make the best
use of CAPMATCH and substantively contribute to the
initiative.
The Republic of Korea believes that it is crucial
for the United Nations to establish a “lean and mean”
system to support the long-term political and economic
stability of post-conflict countries in this era’s
challenging international environment. Having risen
from the ashes of war to what it has become today, the
Republic of Korea stands ready to play its part in that
regard.
Mr. Vilović (Croatia): At the outset, I would like to
thank the Secretary-General for his report on civilian
capacity in the aftermath of the conflict (A/67/312),
which we are discussing today.
Croatia aligns itself with the statement previously
delivered by the observer of the European Union.
However, I would briefly like to make a few additional
comments in my national capacity.

15

A/67/PV.57

Croatia fully supports current efforts to broaden
and deepen the pool of experts ready to help rebuild and
transform national institutions in countries emerging
from conflict. That institutional transformation, guided
by national authorities and embracing all key elements
of a nation’s fabric, is among the most important
prerequisites for permanent recovery and sustainable
peace in all conflict-affected countries.
Croatia appreciates the establishment of a broad
and comprehensive process aimed at achieving the best
possible results in that crucial area. In that context,
we particularly welcome the recent launch of the
online platform CAPMATCH, which should result in
a new partnership among all the relevant stakeholders,
including non-governmental organizations.
It is particularly heartening to learn of robust
support for the platform from the global South. Croatia
strongly believes that a correct understanding of context
and circumstances of a conflict, derived, inter alia,
from similar experiences of other countries, should
significantly increase the likelihood of success in this
important undertaking.
Croatia supported the CAPMATCH project from
the very beginning and will continue to do so by offering
its vast experience in post-conflict reconstruction and
State-building. Three of our Ministries — the Ministries
of Justice, Finance and War Veterans — provided their
inputs to the platform, and we intend to continue on
that path in the future. We are currently developing a
national register of civilian capacities that will, once
established, significantly improve the diversity of our
engagement, as well as how quick and nimble it is. In
that context, Croatia attaches particular importance to
the activities of the Peacebuilding Commission and the
Peacebuilding Fund, in particular as regards the delivery
of predictable and sustainable funding for civilian
expertise engagement. At the same time, we strongly
support institutional cooperation on identifying and
overcoming future challenges.

General for his report on civilian capacity in the
aftermath of conflict (A/67/312). The delegation of
Pakistan aligns itself with the statement made by the
representative of Tunisia on behalf of the Non-Aligned
Movement.
The report of the Secretary-General under
consideration today is the result of a long process that
included the appointment of a senior advisory group
and the drafting of a report with recommendations and
follow-up. The present report notes that the civilian
capacity initiative is being developed on the basis
of input from Member States and the Peacebuilding
Commission, as well as in regional meetings and
during various informal meetings. Such a dialogue
is critical to developing the discourse on the civilian
capacity initiative. We hope that intergovernmental
consultations, including in the Fifth Committee and the
Special Committee on Peacekeeping Operations, will
underpin further progress on the subject. I will make
the following four points to highlight our perspective
on the subject.
First, Pakistan fully supports the idea of reinforcing
national ownership in deploying civilian capacities.
The Secretary-General has rightly underlined the need
to support capacity-building by following nationally
determined priorities and fostering inclusive national
dialogue involving both the Government and civil
society.
Secondly, it is important to understand the relevance
of expertise in the context of a particular post-conflict
situation. Developing clear guidelines to govern the use
of such expertise in the field will maximize benefits.
Preferably, capacities should be identified from within
the region concerned, including for senior positions.
We must build a firewall to protect the system from
overstaffing.

Finally, as we have pointed out many times during
our previous debates on peacebuilding and related
issues, Croatia attaches crucial importance to the
issues of effective coordination and mutual cooperation
between all the relevant stakeholders in peacebuilding
efforts, especially in this time of austerity and scarce
resources.

Thirdly, the deployment of civilian capacities in
peacekeeping missions should be carefully conceived
in order to avoid duplication of roles and resources.
Civilian capacities cannot replace key peacekeeping
functions or be conceived at the expense of resources
allocated for peacekeeping. Moreover, United Nations
peacekeepers are performing numerous tasks related
to peacebuilding and various integrated missions.
Therefore, civilian capacities should supplement
existing structures and not create parallel ones.

Mr. Tarar (Pakistan): I thank the President for
convening today’s debate. We also thank the Secretary-

Finally, civilian capacities should fall within the
given regulatory and financial frameworks existing in

16

12-65159

A/67/PV.57

the United Nations. As the civilian capacity initiative
develops further, we understand that the Secretariat will
present concrete proposals on end-state vision, project
benchmarks and organizational linkages, as well as
scope, monitoring, oversight, planning and budgeting.
That will help Member States make informed decisions.
In that context, the observations and recommendations
made by the relevant report of the Advisory Committee
on Administrative and Budgetary Questions (A/67/583)
merit serious attention.
It is our sincere hope that the civilian capacity
initiative will progress through a membership-owned
process. Today’s deliberations, including the four points
flagged by our delegation, can provide useful signposts
for such an approach.
Ms. Chartres (Australia): We thank the President
for convening today’s discussion on an important aspect
of United Nations reform and effectiveness, and we
thank the Secretary-General for his report (A/67/312).
The United Nations has an essential role to play
in developing civilian capacity in the aftermath of
conflict. Australia welcomes the progress achieved
over the past year to further strengthen cooperation
between United Nations agencies at the Headquarters
and country levels in order to deliver effective support
to countries transitioning from conflict to peaceful,
prosperous and democratic nations. In that context, we
welcome the establishment of the global focal point
for the rule-of-law sector and commend the agencies
involved. We further welcome the contribution of the
civilian capacity initiative to United Nations planning
and capacity needs in Libya.
We share the view that priority must be given to
capacity-building in the areas of security, justice,
inclusive political processes, core Government
functionality and economic revitalization in those
countries emerging from conflict. Identifying the
appropriate sources of expertise in those areas and
deploying such expertise in a timely and flexible
manner is a vital part of the work of the United Nations.
Australia fully supports measures that increase
the use of expertise from the South. South-South
cooperation facilitates the sharing of experience,
lessons and good practice by countries that have faced
and overcome similar challenges, but we also fully
understand that such cooperation complements and
does not substitute for North-South cooperation. That is
why we call upon the United Nations to find faster and

12-65159

more efficient ways to draw upon expertise, wherever
it may reside.
We look forward to further improvements in
United Nations procedures and practices to harness
support from within the system in a more nimble and
responsive manner, including through cross-agency
rosters of experts, as well as arrangements with Member
States that stand ready with expertise to help the United
Nations in its essential support for peacebuilding and
institution-building.
Australia is pleased to be providing specialized
justice personnel to the United Nations Mission in
South Sudan. Such support is helping to address an
urgent need.
Australia spends more than half of its regional and
bilateral aid budget in fragile and conflict-affected
countries. Seven of the top 10 recipients of Australian
aid are fragile or conflict-affected countries. With a long
history of engagement with those partner countries, we
have a clear understanding of what we need to support
and how we need to go about providing that support for
maximum effectiveness.
We recognize the need for an inclusive approach
that reflects the priorities of partner Governments,
as well as for a comprehensive analysis of the local
context to guide our support to Governments as they
face the challenge of restoring stability and confidence
and building fully functional institutions. We recognize
the need to align our assistance with a country’s own
planning cycle and priorities and to work through
national systems wherever possible. That is essential to
building Government ownership and capacity. We also
recognize the need to sustain engagement over the long
term; there is no quick fix. We ask the United Nations
to apply the same principles, and we call for further
measures that strengthen coordination and coherence
across the United Nations system and between the
United Nations, the World Bank and other financial
institutions.
In the words of the Group of Seven Plus countries,
transitioning out of fragility is long, political work that
requires country leadership and ownership. Australia
commends the steps taken within the United Nations
system to strengthen that leadership and ownership,
including through innovative, appropriate and flexible
initiatives aimed at building civilian capacity and
capabilities. As an active supporter of the civilian
capacity initiative, Australia will continue to support

17

A/67/PV.57

that important part of the reform agenda. We know
that it has the potential to deliver tangible benefits to
the lives of those living in countries emerging from
conflict.
Mr. Iliichev (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): The Russian Federation believes that
assistance in strengthening national civilian capacities
is an important aspect of United Nations assistance to
post-conflict States. Consistent with resolution 66/255
of 16 March 2012, the report of the Secretary-General on
measures to build civilian capacity in the aftermath of
conflict (A/67/312) and further initiatives in that sphere
should be considered in the subsidiary bodies of the
General Assembly, in particular the Special Committee
on Peacekeeping Operations, the Fifth Committee and
the Peacebuilding Commission.
We think that today’s discussion should ensure due
Member State oversight over the relevant proposals of
the Secretariat affecting the various spheres of United
Nations activities. Without prejudging the discussions
in the subsidiary bodies, we note our belief that, on
a preliminary level, far from all the initiatives of the
Secretary-General in the sphere of developing civilian
capacities are properly thought through. The priority in
that sphere should be providing due oversight over the
activities of personnel deployed to post-conflict States
in the framework of existing United Nations mandates.
Equally important is ensuring strict compliance with the
highest United Nations standards on the qualifications
of personnel and with the rules administering their
deployment and functions.
We are perplexed by the launch of the CAPMATCH
website platform, a project that has yet to be approved
by the Member States and which is only in planning
stages. We believe it would be in the interest of all
Member States to restore logical consistency to the
development of the project. In that respect, we think it
would be wise to suspend the functioning of the website
and to focus on developing the project’s parameters.
Mrs. Comesaña Perdomo (Cuba) (spoke in
Spanish): My delegation thanks the Secretary-General
for his report on civilian capacity in the aftermath of
conflict (A/67/312), which covers essential aspects
related to political concepts, modalities for cooperation,
and initiatives undertaken within and outside the United
Nations system — all of which must be considered in
depth by the competent intergovernmental mechanisms,
including the Special Committee on Peacekeeping

18

Operations, the Peacebuilding Commission, and the
Fourth and Fifth Committees.
We note with concern the use of concepts, such
as that of fragile States, that have not been defined
by the General Assembly. That lack of definition is
further proof of the Secretariat’s tendency to use such
concepts and terms despite repeated objections by
Member States. Although we will speak in detail on the
issue within the framework of various relevant United
Nations bodies, we wish to express some of our basic
views during this discussion.
The proposals on the strengthening of civilian
capacity in the aftermath of conflict must be considered
and approved by Member States. The full participation
of Governments must be the fundamental premise for
the functioning of the CAPMATCH platform, which
must be fully inclusive in nature. We firmly believe
that the General Assembly should have approved its
launching. It is therefore up to us to approve or modify
the guidelines governing CAPMATCH.
The proposals on South-South cooperation and
cooperation must follow guidelines approved by the
General Assembly and not be a drain on the resources
earmarked for international development cooperation
with
developing
countries.
Non-governmental
organizations participating in the CAPMATCH
platform must enjoy consultative status with the
Economic and Social Council. The delegation of
authority for the initiative must in turn have the prior
approval of the General Assembly and be accompanied
by a robust accountability mechanism.
Finally, allow me to reiterate the readiness of my
delegation to participate actively in discussions on the
issue in the various forums where it is considered.
Mr. Guerber (Switzerland) (spoke in French):
Switzerland commends the Secretary-General for his
efforts and for the progress achieved in mobilizing
civilian capacity in the aftermath of conflict. We
continue to believe that such efforts are among the most
important measures currently undertaken in that sphere
within the United Nations system. Like the SecretaryGeneral, we believe that recent events confirm the
wisdom of that approach. Moreover, we commend the
Secretary-General for the transparency and openness
that he has demonstrated in steering the process.
Switzerland has always supported and continues to
support efforts to strengthen civilian capacities in the
aftermath of conflict.

12-65159

A/67/PV.57

Allow me now to highlight four points to which
Switzerland attaches particular importance.

success of peacebuilding measures, and on the ways of
ensuring their effectiveness.

First, the adoption of a coordinated and systemic
approach remains key. By working to strengthen
civilian capacities, we must continue to push the
envelope beyond the United Nations framework and to
consider things from a broader perspective. The chapter
on partnerships shows that clearly. It is vital that we
have an accurate idea of the other actors involved and
of their actions, and that we identify gaps and the best
way of filling them.

Thirdly, in our opinion what matters are the
results achieved. Concrete application of measures
and feedback should provide valuable indicators on the
way to move forward. Among recent examples are the
situations in Timor-Leste, where efforts to build civilian
capacities are contributing to the peaceful transfer
of responsibilities and authority to a United Nations
country team, and in Libya, where an innovative
planning system has been put in place.

The United Nations is not obliged to meet all
challenges alone. It can share responsibilities with other
stakeholders, given that a process based on national
ownership should be a priority. The existence of solid
partnerships is therefore a necessity in the complex
context of contemporary peacebuilding.

The CAPMATCH online platform is another tool
offering the possibility of achieving positive results. As
a useful channel for mentoring and reform, CAPMATCH
can give better visibility to capacity-building actions
undertaken by countries of the South and thereby
encourage cooperation among them, while promoting
the appropriate adjustment of practices in countries of
the North and within the donor community. In order to
exploit that potential and achieve the expected results,
the CAPMATCH platform must enjoy consensus and
be sustainably supported, particularly when it comes
to financial resources. Finally, a clear division of
labour and responsibility is vital. In that context, we
support the establishment of a global focal point in the
area of the rule of law to focus on the police, justice
and corrections systems. We look forward to future
developments in those various areas.

Cooperation with the World Bank is particularly
exemplary in that regard. The United Nations and the
World Bank no longer undertake successive tasks in
the same sphere on their own. On the contrary, their
mandates are interdependent and must take into account
the contributions of each, based on its comparative
advantages and benefits. Promising initiatives have
been launched, such as the exchange of staff and the
United Nations-World Bank Partnership Trust Fund
funded by Switzerland. The Fund is a tool to support
joint projects, such as the review of public spending in
Liberia, which helps in reforming the security sector
in the country. We are convinced that such initiatives
can only contribute to improving those fundamental
relations.
Secondly, we stress the importance of the full
integration of a gender approach into all activities
undertaken. The Secretary-General states that there
is no one-size-fits-all method within the system to
identify the necessary competencies in the aftermath of
conflict. That understanding is already a step in the right
direction. We welcome the opportunity to learn more
about the systematic approach envisaged for deploying
expertise in this sphere. We also believe it very wise to
include gender experts not in ad hoc special units, but
rather in the main sectors responsible for peacebuilding
and in the offices of high-level representatives on
the ground. Assuming the function of coaches, such
specialists could initiate more advanced, strategic
discussions on the importance of gender equality to the

12-65159

Fourthly, the question of civilian capacities must
be part of a long-term approach. The report of the
Secretary-General on the matter (A/67/312) stresses
that point, inter alia, in the passages on strengthening
institutions. Based on an inclusive process and country
ownership, that requires a lasting commitment from
all stakeholders. We will have to show patience,
perseverance and courage in order to prioritize the
long-term viability of the project over short-term gains.
Switzerland firmly supports efforts to mobilize
civilian capacities in the aftermath of conflict, and we
hope to further develop the initiative.
Mr. Langeland (Norway): We have learned a lot
about peacebuilding over the past decades; not least,
we have learned from our failures. Two of those lessons
are, first, that we need to be better in using civilian
capacity in the aftermath of conflict and, secondly,
that we need to focus on national capacity-building.
The civilian capacity initiative is one of the important
United Nations responses to those lessons.

19

A/67/PV.57

We would like to highlight the examples from the
field contained in the report of the Secretary-General
(A/67/312). Those examples illustrate how the initiative
can bring results. We look forward to seeing further
examples in the coming months. We need to be practical
and results-oriented, while aiming at providing efficient
support to national processes and priorities.
We are pleased that the Secretary-General stresses
that regional consultations have confirmed “a particular
interest among conflict- or crisis-affected countries
in sharing and learning from others’ comparable
experiences” (A/67/312, para. 18). That is what the
United Nations is all about — learning from each other
and advancing together.
The report of the Secretary-General points to the
need to develop a system-wide approach to identifying
the gender expertise needed in the aftermath of conflict.
We would be happy to receive an update on the progress
of that work.
Norway works with countries in the global South
to develop local civilian capacities. One example is
the Training for Peace programme, through which
Norway works with African partners to support the
building of sustainable African capacities for peace
operations in the United Nations, the African Union and
African regional economic communities and regional
mechanisms. The Training for Peace programme
supports training, policy advice and research. Through
the programme, we support the only African civilian
roster in existence, the African Civilian Response
Capacity for Peace Support Operations.
Another example of Norway’s work with the
global South is the triangular North-South-South
partnership through the Intergovernmental Authority
on Development in South Sudan. The funds made
available by the Norwegian Government are managed
by the United Nations Development Programme, and
the main implementing partner is the South Sudanese
National Ministry of Labour, Public Service and
Human Resource Development.
We know from our experience that triangular
cooperation and South-South cooperation have a lot to
offer. We are pleased to see that that philosophy is at
the core of the civilian capacity initiative. Allow me to
highlight the innovative character of that initiative.

that CAPMATCH is not a site for United Nations
recruitment, but we encourage the active use of that
mechanism.
Like other delegations, Norway welcomes the
establishment of the joint global focal point for the rule
of law sector.
The President returned to the Chair.
We are happy to see that the Advisory Committee
on Administrative and Budgetary Questions (ACABQ)
has studied the report of the Secretary-General in great
detail. The ACABQ is right in pointing out that more
work needs to be done. However, we must not forget
what the process is about. When the General Assembly
adopted resolution 66/255, it did so because we all
agreed that the United Nations should improve its use
of civilian capacity in the aftermath of conflict. We
have confidence that the Secretary-General can lead
the way in ensuring the outcome we all have an interest
in securing — a United Nations better able to build and
consolidate peace in countries emerging from conflicts.
The President: We have heard the last speaker in
the debate on agenda item 118 and its sub-item (a).
I would like to round out today’s deliberations by
saying that the issue that we discussed is multifaceted,
with wide scope and forums for its consideration.
In that regard, I would like to share the following
understanding conveyed to me by the Member States.
Upon appropriate consideration of the report by
the Peacebuilding Commission, the Fifth Committee
and the Special Committee on Peacekeeping
Operations, presumably by March or April 2013, it is
to be scheduled for consideration by the plenary of the
General Assembly. While the opinions expressed at
today’s discussion of the topic are much appreciated,
this opening debate cannot be interpreted at this stage
as giving approval to or advancing the report contained
in document A/67/312.
The General Assembly has thus concluded this
stage of its consideration of agenda item 118 and its
sub-item (a).

We are pleased to see that the new online
platform CAPMATCH has been launched. We note

20

12-65159

A/67/PV.57

Agenda item 15
Culture of peace
Report of the Secretary-General (A/67/283)
Note by the Secretary-General (A/67/284)
Draft resolutions (A/67/L.44, A/67/L.45 and
A/67/L.46).
The President: I would like to draw the attention
of members to a letter dated 16 August 2012 from
the Secretary-General addressed to the President of
the General Assembly, transmitting the fifth annual
report of the High Representative for the Alliance of
Civilizations (A/67/336).
I now give the floor to the representative of the
Philippines to introduce draft resolution A/67/L.44.
Mr. De Vega (Philippines): At the outset, allow
me, speaking on behalf of my Government, to extend
our most sincere and heartfelt sympathies to the
Government and the people of the United States of
America for the tragic incident that occurred last Friday
in Newtown, Connecticut. The Philippines shares in the
grief of those who lost precious loved ones, family and
friends. That unspeakable incident claimed the lives of
26 people — 20 very young children and six educators.
Mr. Prosor (Israel), Vice-President, took the Chair.
As that community seeks answers, we join the
international community in expressing our prayers and
hopes for strength, reassurance and comfort for all those
who have been forever changed by that incident. It is
partly in memory of those children and their educators
that we renew our commitment to help strengthen the
foundations of a more peaceful, loving and caring
world based on a culture of peace. Indeed, as expressed
in the messages of remembrance and hope during the
interfaith ceremony held in honour of the victims, we
must not let this and other violent incidents overrun our
world. That is our responsibility to our children. That is
our responsibility for our world.
It is with that pledge that today the Philippines
jointly introduces with Pakistan draft resolution
A/67/L.44, which builds upon our collective efforts to
further strengthen a culture of peace throughout the
world.
It was in 2004 that the Philippines first presented
to the General Assembly a draft resolution on the
promotion of interreligious dialogue. We did so in the

12-65159

firm belief — shared by many partners in the United
Nations — that one of the ways of achieving global peace
would be through drawing the human family closer in
greater understanding and respect for its diversity. It
was not seen to be an easy task, but we knew it could be
done. We knew we could tear down the artificial walls
built to separate humankind. We knew that could be
done through interreligious and intercultural dialogue.
Ever since the landmark resolution 59/23 was
unanimously adopted, we have steadily fortified the
foundations of that initiative and resolutely worked
to broaden the participation and ownership of key
stakeholders. Eight years afterwards, we have seen a
deeper appreciation for interreligious and intercultural
dialogue in the context of the United Nations holistic
and comprehensive efforts to achieve peace. Eight years
afterwards, we have seen a growing and deepening
recognition of the value of efforts in many parts of the
world to foster dialogue among religions, cultures and
civilizations. We are pleased to note that, since 2004,
the resolutions on this subject matter have been adopted
by consensus in the General Assembly.
This year’s draft resolution was finalized following
three informal consultations sessions. Throughout the
process, we strived to be open and to consider the many
comments and input from a wide range of participants.
With dialogue as our overriding theme for the draft
resolution, it was fitting that dialogue would likewise
be the hallmark of our process. In that regard, I wish
to thank all of the delegations that participated actively
in the discussions. The constructive approach and the
flexibility demonstrated by all delegations contributed
greatly to the positive atmosphere that characterized
the consultations. We note that all the delegations
involved made every effort to articulate their concerns
and, more important, to listen to each other. That is the
dialogue we are striving to achieve and is the basis for
the document before us today.
Draft resolution A/67/L.44 builds on the
developments from last session’s resolution (resolution
66/226), which drew the links between interfaith
dialogue, peace, development, the achievement of the
Millennium Development Goals and the important
role played by UNESCO. It contains, among
others, the following key elements: first, technical
updates on resolution 66/226, particularly the latest
developments from UNESCO, including the adoption,
during, its thirty-sixth session, of resolution 40, on
the proclamation of an international decade for the

21

A/67/PV.57

rapprochement of cultures for the period 2013-2022;
second, a linguistic change to the seventh preambular
paragraph from the word “peoples” to “people”; third,
a paragraph taking note of the positive outcomes of the
International Year for the Rapprochement of Cultures in
2010, which contributed to establishing an environment
conducive to harmonious coexistence and congenial
interaction within and among diverse societies; fourth,
a paragraph proclaiming the period 2013-2022 the
international decade for the rapprochement of cultures,
calling upon Member States to take that opportunity
to enhance their activities relating to interreligious
and intercultural dialogue, promoting tolerance and
mutual understanding and, in that context, inviting
UNESCO to be the lead agency in the United Nations
system; fifth, a paragraph welcoming the outcome of
the Seventh Interfaith Dialogue of the Asia-Europe
Meeting, on harnessing the benefits and addressing
the challenges of migration through interfaith and
intercultural dialogue, held in Manila in 2011; sixth, a
paragraph encouraging the relevant stakeholders to take
the opportunity to disseminate their best practices and
experiences on interreligious and intercultural dialogue
by contributing to the interfaith dialogue e-portal
established by the Non-Aligned Movement pursuant
to commitments made during the Special Non-Aligned
Movement Ministerial Meeting on Interfaith Dialogue
and Cooperation for Peace and Development, held in
Manila in 2010; and seventh, a paragraph recognizing
the importance of interreligious dialogue and its
valuable contribution to promoting social cohesion,
peace and development and calling upon Member
States to consider, as appropriate and where applicable,
interreligious and intercultural dialogue as an important
tool in efforts aimed at achieving peace and social
stability and the full realization of the Millennium
Development Goals.
Just as in the resolution we sponsored last year,
the draft resolution before us today is a product of
both dedicated labour and love for our fellow man. The
Philippines wishes again to thank all the delegations
that actively participated. With ears, eyes, hearts and
minds wide open, we held genuine dialogue marked
by both candour and cooperation. The informal
consultations in fact showed how far we have come in
the understanding of this dialogue. We are grateful to
Pakistan, the principal sponsor, and the core group of
sponsors for their hard work in coordinating our efforts
and for their flexibility, which ensured that the outcome
document would be balanced.

22

We are thankful, too, for the other original
sponsors and for the new sponsors. Their support is
very important to us. We note that, once again this
year, all members of the Association of Southeast Asian
Nations are sponsors of this draft resolution. We urge
all those States that have yet to sign up as sponsors to
do so at the Secretariat table. We are likewise grateful
for the technical assistance provided by UNESCO and
by the Office for Economic and Social Council Support
and Coordination of the Department of Economic and
Social Affairs. We are also thankful to the General
Assembly Affairs Branch of the Department of
General Assembly and Conference Management for the
technical assistance it extended.
Interreligious and intercultural dialogue continues
to be a vital component of our comprehensive efforts
to achieve lasting peace in our world — a peace that
is a precondition for development and certainly an
end unto itself, a peace that ensures that the most
vulnerable in our society, in particular our children,
will grow up not cowering in the darkness of fear and
violence but embraced by the light of care and concern.
In introducing this draft resolution for action today,
my country, the Philippines, has full faith that we
will build on what we have achieved and move ahead
further, together, towards an objective we all share,
through dialogue that keeps us all drawn together as
one human family.
Mr. Tarar (Pakistan): In our capacity as one of
the two main sponsors of the draft resolution under
discussion (A/67/L.44), it is my privilege to make this
statement following the introduction by my colleague,
the Deputy Permanent Representative of the Philippines,
of the text contained in document A/67/L.44, entitled
“Promotion of interreligious and intercultural dialogue,
understanding and cooperation for peace”. My colleague
correctly described the continued significance of this
important initiative, which our two countries have led
for some time. We are grateful to all Member States,
in particular to the sponsors, who have continued to
support this initiative since its inception. Over time,
the initiative has acquired added support in terms of
sponsorship from an increasing number of Member
States from different regions — which is reflective of
its importance and the need to pursue it meaningfully
at various levels.
The draft resolution was discussed thoroughly for
two weeks at the experts level in informal consultations.
Our discussions were held in a collegial atmosphere that

12-65159

A/67/PV.57

enabled us to enrich the contents of the draft resolution
in a meaningful and consensual manner. The sponsors
would like to convey their gratitude for the constructive
contributions from all our partners in streamlining and
strengthening this important draft resolution. We are
equally grateful to delegations for their flexibility and
cooperation in achieving a balanced text that reflects
the views of all partners. Accordingly, we hope that, as
in the past, the text will again be adopted by consensus.
Incidents of intolerance, discrimination, hatred,
xenophobia and violence based on erroneous perceptions
of different cultures and religions are on the increase.
Divisive ideologies, mutual suspicion and mistrust are
being fuelled by extremists and opportunists in all
societies. As responsible representatives of our societies,
we need to tackle the problem straight-on, with courage
and clarity. The way forward is not estrangement but
more engagement. Only through dialogue can we
overcome the unfounded but deeply entrenched mutual
fears, based on a lack of understanding of different
religions and cultures, and on our inability to see things
from each other’s perspectives.
The draft resolution seeks to promote dialogue
among different religions and cultures, to promote
tolerance, mutual respect and increased understanding
of each other’s views and beliefs. Interreligious and
intercultural dialogue must be pursued in an organized
manner at all levels, including, but not limited to,
among religious leaders, institutions, local and national
Governments, regional and international organizations,
civil society and media outlets. Pakistan believes
that religious and cultural diversity are positive
driving forces that can meaningfully contribute to the
socioeconomic development of multicultural societies.
We therefore need to strengthen religious and cultural
harmony within and among societies.
We are very pleased with the results of the
International Year for the Rapprochement of Cultures
in 2010. We hope that the resolution’s proclamation of
the period 2013-2022 as the International Decade for
the Rapprochement of Cultures will further promote
ongoing interreligious and intercultural dialogue,
to achieve our common objective of increased
understanding and peace among societies. Pakistan
appreciates all the relevant initiatives being taken by
various Governments and organizations at various
levels. Civil society has also played an important role in
promoting the cause. We acknowledge civil institutions’

12-65159

contributions and encourage them to continue with their
valuable efforts for the common good of humankind.
In Pakistan, we have established interfaith harmony
committees throughout the country. The committees
include representatives from all religions, to enhance
understanding, address misperceptions and promote
harmony through dialogue. Pakistan also actively
participates in the Asia-Europe Meeting Interfaith
Dialogue, which meaningfully contributes to promoting
social cohesion, peace and development.
We urge all Member States to support the draft
resolution before us, to promote dialogue at various
levels, to foster greater understanding and cooperation
among religions and cultures. That, in turn, will
contribute to achieving a global culture of peace, which
is something that we all aspire to.
The Acting President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Hungary to introduce draft resolution
A/67/L.45.
Mr. Körösi (Hungary): I have the honour to
introduce, under agenda item 15, draft resolution
A/67/L.45, entitled “International Day of Charity”.
Presented under the agenda item “Culture of peace”,
the draft resolution reaffirms the role of charity
in promoting peace and the universal principles of
human dignity and solidarity. That relationship is
well recognized around the world. Mother Teresa of
Calcutta, the anniversary of whose death 15 years ago
is to be designated the International Day of Charity,
received the Nobel Peace Prize in 1979. Our societies
are fortunate to learn from outstanding and emblematic
representatives of charitable thinking and their way of
life. More recently, in 2012, Mr. Abdul Sattar Edhi of
Pakistan was nominated for the Nobel Peace Prize for
his lifetime achievements, which run parallel to those
of Mother Teresa.
While we recognize that the work of outstanding
individuals and their legacies of bridging cultures,
religions, civilizations and nations serve as a beacon for
all of us, the prime purpose of the this draft resolution
is to remind ourselves that, all over the world, charity
is mainly carried out by countless individuals and
charitable and volunteer organizations of all kinds. No
part of that work could happen without the devotion of
millions, whose names will never be known to us.
The authors of the draft resolution did not aim at
giving a clear-cut definition for charity, since it may

23

A/67/PV.57

take different forms and shapes in different cultures.
Nonetheless, charity can be universally understood as
stakeholders uniting in the principle of solidarity and
the act of benevolent giving. Interestingly, contrary to
some perceptions, the vast majority of all charitable
activities are carried out within the boundaries of the
respective countries, and charitable deeds originate
from all sections of our societies. They are not limited
to donations by the very rich to the very poor.

Mr. Momen (Bangladesh): On behalf of its
sponsors, I have the honour to introduce draft resolution
A/67/L.46, entitled “Follow-up to the Declaration and
Programme of Action on a Culture of Peace”. Every
year since 2001, we have been presenting a draft
resolution on the subject of a culture of peace. That
draft resolution has been receiving the overwhelming
support of Member States, and it has been adopted
every year by consensus.

Therefore, it is common in different cultures and
religions that charity is a way of thinking. It is our
common desire to help. Charity can alleviate the worst
effects of humanitarian crises and supplement public
services in health care, education, housing and child
protection. It helps to advance culture, science, sports
and the protection of cultural and natural heritages.

As we have completed a decade for promoting a
culture of peace, there may be a question of whether
we still need a resolution on the subject. The answer is
yes. We need such a resolution even more than we did
years back. The recent tragedies, violence, conflicts,
misunderstandings and killings witnessed by the world
serve as testimony to the fact that in spite of immense
efforts to create a mindset of love, of respect for others,
and of tolerance with the hope of attaining peace, peace
has remained elusive. We have impressive frameworks
on paper, but translating them into action is still a
challenging task. Distrust, inequality, discrimination,
deprivation, misunderstanding and intolerance around
the globe are generating new dimensions of conflicts.
We need a culture that upholds human dignity and
that has built in a mindset of tolerance that promotes
understanding among nations. Promoting a culture of
peace has become more urgent than ever before.

It also promotes the rights of the marginalized
and the underprivileged and spreads the message
of humanity in conflict situations. Charity, like the
notion of volunteerism, provides real social bonding
and contributes to the creation of inclusive and more
resilient societies. Charity remains as relevant today
and in the future as ever.
The draft resolution before the General Assembly
is short and simple but significant. The designation of
the International Day of Charity will create a universal
platform to enhance visibility, organize special
events and create synergies — and thereby further
increase public support. While the initiative provides
a universal framework for charity — and a new focus
on charity — its concrete utilization on the local,
national, regional and international levels will remain
in the hands of the various stakeholders, based on their
special circumstances, needs and priorities.
In conclusion, I would like to thank Member
States for their support and constructive participation
in our open and transparent consultations. I thank
all colleagues for their valuable contributions, which
helped to accommodate the desires of a broad range
of actors. The cross-regional sponsorship of the draft
resolution reflects the universal recognition of charity
and the enduring relevance of selfless giving in today’s
world. In that spirit, the sponsors respectfully call on
all Member States to support the draft resolution.
The Acting President: I now give the floor to
the representative of Bangladesh to introduce draft
resolution A/67/L.46.

24

We are thankful to UNESCO for its leading role in
promoting a culture of peace. Our sincere appreciation
also goes to other stakeholders, individuals and civil
society. Their enthusiastic support of the cause has been
instrumental in continuing global efforts to promote a
culture of peace.
It was against that backdrop that my delegation
presented this annual draft resolution. As in the past,
delegations actively participated in the negotiation
process. We would like to thank them for their valuable
input, their cooperation and their flexibility. This year’s
draft resolution builds on resolutions of previous years.
Apart from some technical updates vis-à-vis last year’s
resolution, the draft resolution contains few additional
elements.
First, it welcomes the High-level Forum on the
Culture of Peace held on 14 September. The first of its
kind, the Forum brought together Member States, civil
society and United Nations entities.
Secondly, the draft resolution also welcomes the
high-level debate organized by UNESCO to mark

12-65159

A/67/PV.57

the observance of the International Day of Peace, on
21 September.

Myanmar, the Philippines, Singapore, Thailand, Viet
Nam and my own country, Cambodia.

Thirdly, while welcoming the decision by the
General Conference of UNESCO to proclaim 30 April
as International Jazz Day, the draft resolution also
calls upon Member States to participate actively in the
celebration of the Day in order to develop and increase
intercultural exchanges and understanding for the
purpose of mutual comprehension and tolerance.

ASEAN greatly appreciates the tireless efforts
of Member States, the United Nations and different
international and regional organizations in promoting
a culture of peace through dialogue and negotiations by
enhancing tolerance, trust and mutual understanding, as
well as by addressing all forms of political and religious
disputes, ultranationalism and radicalism. We welcome
the new Programme of Action on a Culture of Peace,
adopted by the General Conference of UNESCO in
November 2011, aimed at promoting wider engagement
with a culture of peace and non-violence. ASEAN also
welcomes the efforts of the United Nations Alliance
of Civilizations in facilitating the global conversation
on living together in diversity, preventing intercultural
crisis and mobilizing broad public support for cultural
diversity, tolerance and inclusion.

Fourthly, the draft resolution also requests
the President of the General Assembly to consider
convening a high-level forum, as appropriate and within
existing resources, devoted to the implementation of
the Programme of Action on a Culture of Peace on the
occasion of the anniversary of its adoption on or around
13 September.
We all agree that a culture of peace cannot
be achieved by Governments alone. It requires
commitments by, and the concerted efforts of, all
stakeholders, youth, teachers, religious and community
leaders, parents, grass-roots groups, non-governmental
organizations and civil society. The High-level Forum
organized by the President provided us with a unique
opportunity to bring together all those stakeholders
and to reinvigorate our common endeavour. The
enthusiasm exhibited during the Forum inspired us to
accommodate a provision of a future such forum on or
around 13 September. We are thankful that the Member
States have agreed to keep the provision in the text.
Holding such events every year will not necessarily
entail any additional costs from the United Nations
budget. But it will convey a strong message to the world
that the United Nations is truly committed to nurturing
a culture of peace and non-violence.
This draft resolution receives the support of a large
number of Member States every year because the issue is
close to our hearts. It is an aspiration of all humankind.
It is the essence of the Charter of the United Nations.
It is my belief that one day every delegation will come
forward to sponsor the draft resolution. With such an
aspiration today, I hope we will be able to adopt the
draft resolution without a vote.
Mr. Sea (Cambodia): At this plenary meeting
under agenda item 15, entitled “Culture of peace”,
I have the honour to deliver a statement on behalf of
the Association of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN),
which consists of Brunei Darussalam, Indonesia,
the Lao People’s Democratic Republic, Malaysia,

12-65159

As home to more than half a billion people, SouthEast Asia is a mosaic of great religions and cultures. It
is also home to many ethnic groups. Its general diversity
is a reflection of the multiracial, multi-religious and
multicultural societies in most South-East Asian
countries. Because of that, ASEAN Member States
cannot stress enough the importance of creating and
maintaining a culture of peace in the region, as well
as beyond. Despite the multiracial, multi-religious and
multicultural background in the region, we have been
able to coexist in relative peace since the establishment
of ASEAN, in 1967. Our diversity is a source of our
strength.
There is no doubt that the positive interactions
and synergy among the peoples of the South-East Asia
region have contributed to the success of ASEAN and
have made it what it is today. A big reason for that
success is the practice of moderation in the region in
all matters, from economics and politics to cultural
and social dimensions. Embracing moderation is an
important ASEAN value. Our societies have taken
active and positive action in cultivating a culture of
peace at all levels.
It is due to the practice and recognition of the
importance of moderation in the region that during
the eighteenth ASEAN Summit, in Jakarta, the leaders
of ASEAN member States welcomed the initiative to
establish a Global Movement of Moderates. At the
ASEAN Summit in Phnom Penh on 3 April, ASEAN
leaders unanimously adopted that initiative, which

25

A/67/PV.57

essentially calls on the voices of moderation — which
make up a silent majority — to drown out the voices of
extremism in all forms and to reclaim the centre and
moral high ground. We believe that the real divide in
the world today is not between East and West, between
the developed and developing countries or between
Muslims and non-Muslims. Instead, the fault line lies
between moderates and extremists of all religions and
beliefs, and in all areas and aspects. On that note, we
are happy that a fifteenth preambular paragraph on
moderation was inserted into this year’s draft resolution
on the promotion of interreligious and intercultural
dialogue, understanding and cooperation for peace.
The phrase “culture of peace” implies a more
nuanced and complex foundation for a lasting peace,
transcending the mere cessation of armed conflict.
It requires the whole-hearted participation of all
stakeholders at the national and international levels.
A healthy dialogue and understanding at all levels
of society and among nations should be fostered by
an enabling national and international environment
conducive to peace.
Peace and happiness are the aspirations of all of
humankind. Strengthening and expanding the social
sector through various means, such as providing
national education and health care and enhancing
people’s livelihoods, as well as supporting the progress
of every religion, will contribute to the achievement of
a society free from violence, racism and discrimination.
Interreligious and intercultural dialogue can open
the hearts and minds of people, so that their common
aspirations can underpin social and institutional
cooperation in the pursuit of peaceful coexistence and
mutual understanding among different religions and
different ethnic cultures. With that in mind, numerous
initiatives have been launched, such as the Asia-Pacific
Regional Interfaith Dialogue, which started in 2004 and
has taken place annually in Indonesia, the Philippines,
New Zealand, Cambodia and Australia, as well as the
Special Non-Aligned Movement Ministerial Meeting
on Interfaith Dialogue and Cooperation for Peace and
Development, held in Manila in 2010, which adopted
the Manila Declaration and Programme of Action.
ASEAN member States have also actively
participated in the Asia-Europe Meeting Interfaith
Dialogue, which aims to foster mutual understanding
and respect among all faiths and religions in Asia and
Europe. Moreover, the pioneering Tripartite Forum

26

on Interfaith Cooperation for Peace provides a unique
venue for Governments, United Nations agencies and
offices and non-governmental organizations to discuss
ways of supporting United Nations programmes relating
to peaceful coexistence.
All of those initiatives are mutually supportive and
are meant to reinforce and strengthen a culture of peace.
In doing so, the efforts aim to be inclusive and seek the
participation of all relevant sectors, including women,
young people, civil society, the media and academia.
In conclusion, I wish to reiterate that ASEAN
remains committed to promoting peace and fully
supports the efforts of the United Nations. In that
regard, as we believe that, in spite of our differences
in race, creed and belief, we are all but part of the
same human family, with a shared future and a
common desire to live in a world of peace, stability and
prosperity, founded on respect and deep appreciation
for humankind’s diversity.
The Acting President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Cyprus, who will speak on behalf of
the European Union.
Mr. Makriyiannis (Cyprus): I have the honour to
speak on behalf of the European Union (EU) on the
draft resolution contained in document A/67/L.44,
entitled “Promotion of interreligious and intercultural
dialogue, understanding and cooperation for peace”.
The European Union would like to extend
its thanks to the delegations of Pakistan and the
Philippines for the constructive spirit in which they
led the consultation process. The European Union
expresses its appreciation for the efforts of the main
sponsors in taking into account some of the concerns
raised in previous years. We especially appreciate the
addition of the seventh preambular paragraph, which
focuses on the diversity of identities as an important
element in global dialogue efforts, and a contribution
to peace, mutual understanding and friendship among
individuals with multiple backgrounds.
With regard to efforts for more understanding
and collaboration and the promotion of dialogue, we
regret that interreligious dialogue is not mentioned.
The European Union emphasizes that intercultural,
interreligious and intrareligious dialogue are processes
that involve and open and respectful exchange,
especially within societies, among individuals,
representatives of groups and others. The EU attaches

12-65159

A/67/PV.57

great importance to always mentioning religion and
belief in conjunction with each other. Furthermore,
with regard to the fifteenth preambular paragraph, the
EU believes that the prerogative of religious leaders,
religious communities and individuals in matters of
religion and belief should be fully respected.
In the promotion of intercultural dialogue, we
attach great importance to the work done by UNESCO,
the leading agency in the promotion of intercultural
dialogue, as well as other initiatives for enhancing
dialogue and mutual understanding, such as the United
Nations Alliance of Civilizations and the Anna Lindh
Foundation.
The draft resolution proclaims the International
Decade for the Rapprochement of Cultures, with

12-65159

UNESCO invited to be the lead agency. The General
Assembly understands that UNESCO will seek to fund
any activity from within existing resources, and/or
invite Governments and other stakeholders to provide,
on a voluntary basis, financial and other resources to
enable the implementation of an action plan for the
Decade.
The member States of the European Union join the
consensus on this draft resolution, and we acknowledge
that the text continues to improve over the years. We
trust that its sponsors will want to continue to pursue
that undertaking, so as to further broaden support for
the text.
The meeting rose at 1 p.m.

27
