S/2021/695

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
2 August 2021
English
Original: French

Letter dated 30 July 2021 from the Secretary-General addressed to
the President of the Security Council
I have the honour to refer to paragraph 33 of Security Council resolution 2551
(2020), in which the Council requested me to provide it with an update on any further
developments towards the normalization of relations between Djibouti and Eritrea.
This is the fourth update that I have provided to the Council since the adoption of
Security Council resolution 2444 (2018) in November 2018.
As I have previously emphasized, the rapprochement between Eritrea and
Ethiopia in 2018 and subsequent diplomatic exchanges between Djibouti, Eritrea,
Ethiopia and Somalia created a genuine opportunity to transform the political
landscape in the region and generate positive momentum for peace, security and
cooperation, for the benefit of all the peoples of the region. However, a multiplicity
of obstacles, including armed conflict, population displacement, desert locusts,
drought and other climate shocks, together with the persistent threat posed by the
coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic, continue to hinder the quest for enduring
stability and shared prosperity in the region. The United Nations will continue to help
local stakeholders to tackle these challenges, chart a positive future for the region and
make progress towards achieving shared sustainable development. The normalization
of inter-State relations is a crucial part of this endeavour.
While we are not aware of any high-level bilateral dialogue having taken place
between the two countries since I submitted my previous update to the Council in
July 2020 (S/2020/759), I wish to highlight that they have continued to act responsibly
towards one another and, while there has been no notable progress on the outstanding
issues between them, we have not seen any deterioration in the situation either.
Djibouti and Eritrea have continued to maintain security along their shared
border, where the situation has remained stable. There has been no negative rh etoric
from either side, and the two countries have continued to maintain diplomatic
relations. I am pleased to note that the Chargé d’affaires a.i. of the embassy of Eritrea
in Djibouti attended the inauguration ceremony for Ismaël Omar Guelleh, on 15 May
2021, following his re-election as President of Djibouti on 9 April 2021.
The perspectives of the two countries remain divergent at this time. Djibouti
continues to see the border dispute with Eritrea as a source of tension and remains
committed to having it resolved either through bilateral dialogue, mediation or
binding international arbitration. Djibouti is of the view that, since the first two
options have been attempted but have not resulted in significant progress,
international arbitration might be a useful mechanism to permanently settle the
dispute at this stage. It also remains concerned about the fate of the 13 soldiers from

21-10607 (E)

040821

*2110607*

040821

S/2021/695

Djibouti who have been missing since the border clashes of June 2008. Furthermore,
in recent consultations with the United Nations, Djibouti raised concerns about the
continuing existence of the Anda’ali camp on the Eritrean side of the shared border,
which has allegedly been used as a training base by members of an anti -Djiboutian
armed group in the past. Djibouti believes that dismantling the camp would be a
positive confidence-building measure for the two countries.
For its part, Eritrea is of the view that the process of normalizing bilateral
relations, by its very nature, requires time. However, it has expressed confid ence that
the process is moving in a positive direction. Eritrea has stressed that Djibouti plays
a key part in the revitalized regional dynamics that emerged in 2018. It maintains that
past tensions concerning the border have now subsided and that the sta tus of relations
between Djibouti and Eritrea should no longer be a cause for concern, in particular at
a time when the Horn of Africa is facing serious challenges. Eritrea considers that any
differences between it and Djibouti can be resolved bilaterally and asks that the two
countries be accorded the necessary time and space to do so undisturbed. Eritrea has
also strongly denied providing any form of support to anti-Djiboutian militants in the
past and has stated that it wishes only to resume and advance development projects
along the shared border. Eritrea has also indicated that it has no Djiboutian prisoners
of war in its custody at present.
Despite these differences, Djibouti and Eritrea have continued to express their
desire to pursue regional integration and cooperation, and I welcome the participation
of both countries in regional frameworks established to coordinate action on common
challenges, such as the Council of Arab and African Coastal States of the Red Sea and
Gulf of Aden, which aims to enhance the security of regional waterways, and the
Commission for Controlling the Desert Locust in the Central Region, a body of the
Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations.
I hope that cooperation within the framework of these regional me chanisms will
be a positive starting point for deeper engagement and concrete progress on the
unresolved issues between the two countries that will ultimately lead to the complete
normalization of relations. I appreciate the offers extended by friends of b oth
countries to facilitate dialogue to that end, and I encourage Djibouti and Eritrea to
embrace such opportunities. I also wish to reiterate my availability to provide my
good offices, should both parties desire them.
I should be grateful if you would bring the present letter to the attention of the
members of the Security Council.
(Signed) António Guterres

2/2

21-10607
