General Assembly-Thirty-fifth Session

186

9. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its
thirty-sixth session an item entitled "World Assembly
on Aging" and requests the Secretary-General to prepare a progress report on the preparations for the World
Assembly on Aging, including the report of the Advisory Committee for the World Assembly on Aging,
whose establishment was recommended by the Economic and Social Council in its resolution 1980/26," to
be considered under this item.
92nd plenary meeting
I I December I 980

4. Requests the Secretary-General to submit to the
General Assembly at its thirty-sixth session a report prepared on the basis of the information received from
Member States regarding the implementation of the
provisions of the Declaration:
5. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its
thirty-sixth session the item entitled "Human rights and
scientific and technological developments".

35/130.

The General Assembly.
Recalling its resolution 33/53 of 14 December 1978, in
which it urged the undertaking by the Sub-Commission
on Prevention of Discrimination and Protection of
Minorities of a study on the question of the protection
of those detained on grounds of mental ill-health, with a
view to formulating guidelines as a matter of priority,
and requested a progress report on this question at its
thirty-fifth session.
Bearing in mind Commission on Human Rights
resolution 10 A (XXXIII) of 11 March 1977," in which
the Commission requested the Sub-Commission on Prevention of Discrimination and Protection of Minorities
to study the question of the protection of those detained
on grounds of mental ill-health, with a view to formulating guidelines.
Taking note of resolution 6 (XXXII) of 5 September
1979 of the Sub-Commission on Prevention of Discrimination and Protection of Minorities,'' in which the
Sub-Commission requested a report from the SecretaryGeneral on medical measures that might properly be
employed in the treatment of persons detained on
grounds of mental ill-health and procedures for determining whether adequate grounds exist for detaining
such persons and applying such medical measures,
Taking note also of resolution 11 (XXXIII) of 10 September 1980 of the Sub-Commission on Prevention of
Discrimination and Protection of Minorities,'" in which
one of its members, Mrs. Erica-Irene A. Daes, was entrusted with the task of elaborating and submitting to
the Sub-Commission at its thirty-fourth session guidelines relating to procedures for determining whether
adequate grounds existed for detaining persons on the
ground of mental ill-health and principles for the protection of persons suffering from mental disorder, taking
into a_ccount the views of Governments and specialized
agencies,
Bearing in mind its resolution 34 / 168 of 17 December
1979 concerning the draft Code ot Medical Ethics submitted by the World Health Organization to the General
Assembly,
Concerned, in particular. at reports from several parts
of the world of persons being detained in mental institutions on account of their political views and on other
non-medical grounds,
Recalling that 1981 has been proclaimed by the
United Nations as the International Year of Disabled
Persons,
I. Welcomes the action taken by the Sub-Commission
on Prevention pf Discrimination and Protection of
Minorities to implement General Assembly resolution
33 '53:

92nd plenary meeting
I I December I 980
B

Human rights and scientific and technological
developments

A
The General Assembly,
Reaffirming the great importance of the Declaration
on the Use of Scientific and Technological Progress in
the Interests of Peace and for the Benefit of Mankind.
adopted by the General Assembly in its resolution 3384
(XXX) of 10 November I 975,
Considering that scientific and technological progress
is a necessary prerequisite for accelerating social and
economic development in all countries,
Recalling the relevant provisions of the Declaration
on Social Progress and Development, contained in its
resolution 2542 (XXIV) of 11 December I 969,
Seriously concerned that the results of scientific and
technological progress could be used to the detriment of
human rights and fundamental freedoms, the dignity
of the human person, international peace and security
and social progress,
Recognizing that the establishment of the new international economic order calls in particular for an important contribution to be made by science and technology
to economic and social progress, and also to the promotion of human rights and fundamental freedoms,
A ware that the implementation of the Declaration on
the Use of Scientific and Technological Progress in the
Interests of Peace and for the Benefit of Mankind will
contribute to the strengthening of international peace
and security and promote co-operation among States in
the field of human rights and economic and social
development of peoples,
1. Stresses the importance of implementing the provisions and principles contained in the Declaration on
the Use of Scientific and Technological Progress in the
Interests of Peace and for the Benefit of Mankind in order to promote human rights and fundamental freedoms
under conditions of scientific and technological progress:
2. Requests the specialized agencies and other bodies of
the United Nations to take fully into account in their programmes and activities the provisions of the Declaration:
3. Requests the Commission on Human Rights, in
its consideration of the item entitled "Human rights and
scientific and technological developments", to give
special attention to the question of the implementation
of the provisions of the Declaration:
------

'-' In resolution 1980/26 the Economic and Social Council recommended that the Advisory Committee should be composed of nnt
more than twenty-three Member States appointed by the Chairman of
the Third Committee. The Chairman subsequently informed the
Secretary-General, by communications dated 30 June and 13 August
1981 (A/35/806 and Add.I), that he had appointed the following
twenty-two States as members of the Advisory Committee: Benin.
Byelorussian Soviet Socialist Republic, Chile. Costa Rica, Dominican
Republic, France, Hungary, India, Indonesia, Japan. Lehanon. Malta.
Morocco, Nigeria, Philippines, Spain, Suriname, Sweden. Togo. Union
of Soviet Socialist Republics. United States or America and Vcnc1ucl:i

See 0/}icia/ Records of 1he Economic and Social Council. Sixly·"',·ond Session. Supp/emen, No. 6 (E/5927), chap. XXI, sect. A.
"Sec E,'CN .4 / \.<50. chap. XVI. sect A.
· Sec E C'\.4 I.JI 1 and Corr.I. char. XVII. sect. A.

VI.

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

187

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 31 /86 of 13 December 1976,
32/66 of8 December 1977, 33/51 of 14 December 1978
and 34/45 of 23 November 1979,

Having noted the report of the Secretary-General on
the status of the International Covenant on Economic,
Social and Cultural Rights, the International Covenant
on Civil and Political Rights and the Optional Protocol
to the International Covenant on Civil and Political
Rights,""
Noting with appreciation that, following its appeal,
more Member States have acceded to the International
Covenants on Human Rights," 1
Bearing in mind the important responsibilities of the
Economic and Social Council in relation to the International Covenants on Human Rights,
Noting with appreciation that during the first regular
session of the Economic and Social Council in 1980 the
Sessional Working Group on the Implementation of the
International Covenant on Economic, Social and
Cultural Rights began consideration of reports submitted by States parties under article 16, of the Covenant,
Recognizing the important role of the Human Rights
Committee in the implementation of the International
Covenant on Civil and Political Rights and the Optional Protocol thereto,
I. Notes with appreciation the report of the Human
Rights Committee on its eighth, ninth and tenth sessions02 and expresses satisfaction at the serious and constructive manner in which the Committee is continuing
to undertake its functions;
2. Expresses its appreciation to the States parties to
the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights
which have extended their co-operation to the Human
Rights Committee when submitting their reports under
article 40 of the Covenant and urges States parties which
have not yet done so to submit their reports to the Committee as speedily as possible;
3. Urges States parties which have been requested by
the Human Rights Committee to provide additional information to comply with that request;
4. Takes note of the fact that the Human Rights
Committee is considering the question of the follow-up
to its consideration of the reports of the States parties to
the International Covenant on Civil and Political
Rights;
5. Welcomes Economic and Social Council resolution L980/24 of 2 May 1980 regarding the consideration of reports submitted under the International
Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights;
6. Again invites all States which have not yet done so
to become parties to the International Covenant on
Economic, Social and Cultural Rights and the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights as well as
to consider acceding to the Optional Protocol to the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights;
7. Invites the States parties to the International
Covenant on Civil and Political Rights to consider making the declaration provided for in article 41 of the
Covenant;
8. Appreciates that the Human Rights Committee
continues to strive for uniform standards in the implementation of the provisions of the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights and of the Optional
Protocol thereto, and emphasizes the importance of the
strictest compliance by States parties with their obligations under the Covenant;

"See Official Records of the Economic and Social Council, 1978,
Supplement No. 4 (E/ I 978/34), chap. XXVI, sect. A.
"Ibid., 1979, Supplement No. 6 (E/1979/36), chap. XXIV. sect. A.
"Ibid., 1980, Supplement No. 3 (E/1980/13 and Corr. I),
chap. XXVI, sect A.

''" A/35/195.
''' Resolution 2200 A (XXI), annex.
" Official Records of the General Assembly. Thirty-fifth Session,
Supplement No. 40 (A/35/40).

2. Requests the Economic and Social Council and
the Commission on Human Rights to consider the draft
guidelines related to procedures for determining whether adequate grounds exist for detaining persons on the
grounds of mental ill-health and the draft principles for
the protection of persons suffering from mental disorder
requested in resolution 33 /53, with a view to their being
submitted to the General Assembly at its thirty-seventh
session.
92nd plenary meeting
I I December 1980
35/131.

Question of a convention on the rights of the
child

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 33 / 166 of 20 December 1978,
entitled "Question of a convention on the rights of the
child", and 34/4 of 18 October 1979, entitled "International Year of the Child",
Bearing in mind Commission on Human Rights
resolutions 20 (XXXIV) of 8 March 1978, S7 19 (XXXV)
of 14 March 1979 5 ' and 36 (XXXVI) of 12 March
1980, 59 as well as Economic and Social Council resolutions 1978/18 of 5 May 1978 and 1978/40 of I August
1978 and Council decision 1980/138 of 2 May 1980,
Aware of the widespread interest during the International Year of the Child in working out an international convention on the rights of the child and of the
important role the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization and the United Nations
Children's Fund have to play in the subject-matter concerned,
Noting further progress in discussions on and in the
elaboration of such a draft convention by the Commission on Human Rights,
I. Takes note with satisfaction of the work so far
accomplished and the spirit of co-operation in elaborating a convention on the rights of the child:
2. Welcomes Economic and Social Council decision
1980/138 by which the Council authorized an openended working group of the Commission on Human
Rights to meet for a period of one week prior to the
thirty-seventh session of the Commission to complete
the work on the draft convention:
3. Requests the Commission on Human Rights, at
its thirty-seventh session, to continue to give high
priority to the question of completing the draft convention on the rights of the child;
4. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its
thirty-sixth session the item entitled "Question of a
convention on the rights of the child".
92nd plenary meeting
I I December 1980
35/132.

International Covenants on Human Rights
