S/PV.9015

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-seventh year

9015th meeting

Tuesday, 12 April 2022, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Lord Ahmad/Dame Barbara Woodward . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(United Kingdom of Great Britain
and Northern Ireland)

Members:

Albania . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Brazil. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Gabon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ghana . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
India . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ireland. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kenya. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Mexico. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Norway . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Arab Emirates . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Hoxha
Mr. Costa Filho
Mr. Zhang Jun
Mrs. Broadhurst Estival
Ms. Bongo
Mr. Boateng
Mr. Tirumurti
Mr. Flynn
Mr. Kimani
Mr. De la Fuente Ramírez
Ms. Juul
Mr. Nebenzia
Mrs. Alhefeiti
Mr. Lu

Agenda
Identical letters dated 19 January 2016 from the Permanent Representative of
Colombia to the United Nations addressed to the Secretary-General and the President
of the Security Council (S/2016/53)
Report of the Secretary-General on the United Nations Verification Mission in
Colombia (S/2022/267)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

22-31544 (E)
*2231544*

Colombia

S/PV.9015

The meeting was called to order at 10.05 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Identical letters dated 19 January 2016 from the
Permanent Representative of Colombia to the
United Nations addressed to the Secretary-General
and the President of the Security Council
(S/2016/53)
Report of the Secretary-General on the
United Nations Verification Mission in
Colombia (S/2022/267)
The President: In accordance with rule 37 of
the Council’s provisional rules of procedure, I invite
the representative of Colombia to participate in this
meeting.
On behalf of the Council, I welcome His Excellency
Mr. Iván Duque Márquez, President of the Republic of
Colombia, and request the Protocol Officer to escort
him to his seat at the Council table.
Mr. Iván Duque Márquez, President of the Republic
of Colombia, was escorted to a seat at the Council
table.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite Mr. Carlos
Ruiz Massieu, Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral and Head of the United Nations Verification
Mission in Colombia to participate in today’s meeting.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I wish to draw the attention of Council members to
document S/2022/267, which contains the report of the
Secretary-General on the United Nations Verification
Mission in Colombia.
I now give the floor to Mr. Ruiz Massieu.
Mr. Ruiz Massieu (spoke in Spanish): Thank
you, Mr. President, for the opportunity to present the
most recent report of the Secretary-General on the
Verification Mission to Colombia (S/2022/267).
It is an honour for me to be at the Security Council
today in the presence of the President of the Republic
of Colombia, Mr. Iván Duque Márquez. I would like
to take this opportunity to reiterate my appreciation
and thanks for his support for the United Nations in
2/23

12/04/2022

general, and for the Verification Mission in particular.
His confidence in the Mission’s role has allowed us
to assist the Government, the former combatants of
the Fuerzas Armadas Revolucionarias de ColombiaEjército del Pueblo (FARC-EP) and civil society in
their efforts towards peacebuilding in Colombia.
As the Secretary-General has said, with the Final
Peace Agreement and its implementation, Colombia
reminds the world that even an armed conflict of more
than five decades, with a painful toll of millions of
victims, can be resolved through dialogue, laying the
foundations for reconciliation and non-repetition.
Today, the United Nations is an exceptional witness
to a peacebuilding process that is advancing, albeit to
different degrees, along the path laid out by the Final
Peace Agreement. The advances are certainly the
product, above all, of the perseverance of the Colombian
State and the former FARC-EP, and the determined
support of civil society, victims and communities in all
regions. For Colombia and the world, it is essential to
recognize what has been achieved through this process,
especially in order to protect it and project it into the
future.
Naturally, recognizing what has already been
achieved does not mean minimizing the challenges and
risks that still threaten peacebuilding in the country. On
the contrary, overcoming the obstacles — starting with
the growing violence in some regions — and persisting
in the complete implementation of the Agreement must
be the objectives that guide our work in the remaining
years for the full materialization of what has been
agreed.
(spoke in English)
The current electoral cycle helps illustrate some of
the dividends of peace. For the second time since the
signing of the Agreement, elections were mostly free of
violence. There is no question that the successful laying
down of thousands of arms of the former FARC-EP,
which was verified by the United Nations, significantly
reduced nation-wide levels of conflict-related violence.
Recent elections also saw an increase in the number
of women candidates and women elected to Congress,
even in the face of major challenges including genderbased political violence.
As the Council is also aware, the recent
congressional elections offered Colombians, for the
first time, the opportunity to elect representatives of
16 new electoral districts established under the peace
22-31544

12/04/2022

Colombia

agreement in conflict-affected regions. Despite a range
of difficulties that constrained campaigning, Colombia’s
democracy will no doubt be enriched by the stronger
voice of victims in Congress. The United Nations stands
ready to support their effective participation, and I trust
that the new Congress that will take office in July will
work to advance on the pending legislative agenda of
the peace agreement.
Peacebuilding is an ever-evolving process with
breakthroughs and setbacks, and the reintegration
of former combatants is no exception. Despite the
challenges, including in the area of security, former
members of the extinct FARC-EP and members of the
Comunes party were able to campaign and to vote in
congressional elections for the second time since the
signing of the agreement. Obstacles to their votes were
jointly addressed by the authorities, former combatants’
representatives and the Verification Mission.
Throughout the countryside and in many cities,
those who laid down their arms are building productive
new lives through a myriad of projects that also benefit
communities and foster reconciliation. The vast
majority of the more than 13,000 accredited former
combatants remain engaged with the peace process, and
almost two thirds of all former members of the FARCEP are now taking part in collective and individual
income-generating initiatives.
Those examples are certainly noteworthy, as is
the commitment of authorities and partners, whose
work has made this possible over the years. Progress is
being made regarding key elements for the long-term
success of reintegration, including, most recently, on
the provision of land and housing.
Nevertheless, the sustainability of the process
remains contingent on additional efforts, including
those aimed at halting the violence that still jeopardizes
former combatants’ plans to build a new life. While I
recognize that various measures are in place, more can
and must still be done to improve their security.
Two weeks ago, alongside representatives of the
Catholic Church and the United Nations country team,
I visited Arauca, a region facing a critical situation
where more than 100 people have been killed and
thousands forcibly displaced this year alone. We
met with authorities, civil-society organizations and
members of the communities, and what we heard was
a desperate plea for help. We conveyed our support
to those affected as well as the urgency of authorities

S/PV.9015

taking action to improve the situation. We also called
on armed groups once again to immediately cease the
violence and respect international humanitarian law.
Arauca is illustrative of the situation of violence in
various neglected regions facing illegal armed groups,
illicit economies and a limited presence of the State.
The department of Putumayo has been similarly
affected by violence in recent weeks. I stress the
importance of a thorough investigation by the relevant
authorities into the reported deaths of 11 persons,
including indigenous and community leaders, in the
context of a military operation against members of an
illegal armed group in Puerto Leguízamo.
Violence is also exacting a particularly high toll
on indigenous and Afro-Colombian communities in
the form of killings, displacement and the increasing
recruitment of minors.
The continuation of such suffering in the very
communities that were most victimized during decades
of conflict calls urgently for the full implementation
of the peace agreement. It is important to recall in
that regard that the agreement was conceived as an
interconnected set of mechanisms whose comprehensive
implementation would not only end the conflict with the
FARC-EP but address deep-rooted factors that continue
today to underpin the dynamics of violence in many
areas of the country.
For instance, if implemented in a coordinated
manner, the security guarantees provisions set out in
the agreement have the potential to boost key areas such
as reintegration, political participation and transitional
justice. Similarly, progress in bringing long-needed
rural reform and in combating illegal drugs, in particular
through voluntary crop-substitution programmes,
will reinforce reintegration and security. Given the
differentiated effects of the conflict, gender and ethnic
provisions are meant to be mainstreamed throughout.
The effective use of the institutions devised by
the Government and the former FARC-EP to set those
changes in motion is essential. Likewise, strengthened
joint work within the ad hoc mechanisms developed
throughout the years could also help the parties fulfil
their obligations and meet the expectations raised
by the agreement. A clear example is the ongoing
pilot to enhance former combatants’ capacities to
locate minefields, which is possible only thanks to
the collaboration of the Government and former
FARC-EP members and the support of the United

22-315443/23

S/PV.9015

Colombia

Nations. The contributions of that work to clearing
contaminated areas will directly alleviate the suffering
in communities, preventing mines from claiming new
victims and fostering development.
(spoke in Spanish)
After years of continuing work, in June the Truth
Commission will release its final report, which is based
on the testimony of thousands of victims, all the actors
in the conflict and sectors from the length and breadth of
Colombian society. The legacy of the Commission will
represent more than a single narrative of the past and
will consist of translating that plurality of experiences
into recommendations and specific initiatives that will
contribute to overcoming the dynamics that led to and
prolonged the conflict.
At this point, I wish to recall the SecretaryGeneral’s recommendation that wise use be made of the
Commission’s report. I trust that it will be precisely in
that spirit that both victims and perpetrators, as well as
Colombian society and its institutions, will receive this
legacy and make it their own. The United Nations will
stand ready to support the Commission in its crucial
work of raising awareness of the report following its
publication.
I wish also to stress the historic nature of the first
public hearings on acknowledgement of responsibility
to be undertaken by the Special Jurisdiction for
Peace in the coming weeks. In those hearings, former
commanders of the FARC-EP, members of the public
security forces and third parties will have a forum
to demonstrate their commitment to truth and the
rights of victims, which is the reason for being of that
comprehensive system for truth, justice, reparation
and non-repetition. That is a decisive step towards
defining the sanctions that the jurisdiction will decide
on. Its potential for ensuring reparation will be key
to satisfying the expectations of victims. I welcome
the recent announcement by President Duque of the
establishment of a road map for the care and support of
members of the public security forces who voluntarily
appear before the Special Jurisdiction for Peace.
Peace in Colombia is invaluable. We must continue
building it and protecting it in order to ensure its
success, not only for the good of Colombia but also
because of the example that it sets for the world. The
Secretary-General, during his visit to Colombia last
November, said:
4/23

12/04/2022

“In a world of geopolitical divisions, interminable
wars and multiplying conflicts, Colombia sends a
clear message: it is time to invest in peace”.
We welcome all the efforts that the Government,
led by President Duque, will continue as making in
the months to come. At the same time, I am aware that
leadership will soon pass to a new Administration, the
third since the agreement was signed, which will take on
the responsibility of the executive in its implementation.
In order to continue to make progress in that
direction, it is vital that the parties, civil society and
political stakeholders acknowledge the progress made,
commit to making progress on outstanding tasks and
decisively respond to challenges. In that context, the
Security Council’s continuing support will be crucial,
as always.
The President: I thank Mr. Ruiz Massieu for
his briefing.
I now call on the President of Colombia.
President Duque Márquez (spoke in Spanish):
Mr. President, please convey my greetings to your
Ambassador and Permanent Representative, Dame
Barbara Woodward. I am very pleased to be able to
also greet Mr. Ruiz Massieu and all the representatives
here today, as well as the entire organizational team at
the United Nations and the members of the Colombian
delegation. As President of Colombia, it is an honour
for me to be here at the Security Council today and to
do so at our request to share with Council members the
results of my country’s peacebuilding agenda.
Our country has endured the shame of violence for
many decades, with much senseless fratricidal violence
inflicted by illegal armed groups that have sought to tear
apart our nation and undermine institutional stability.
That said, Colombia is a country that embraces the
substantive principles of peace, as enshrined in article
22 of our Constitution, in which our political charter,
as our society’s beacon and guidepost, stipulates that
peace is a duty and a right that we are obliged to comply
with. That core virtue of article 22 is also endorsed by
article 2 of our Constitution, which fully and clearly
states that the principal duty of the State is to protect the
lives of its citizens and honour the rights and freedoms
of all its citizens at all times, wherever they may be.
Based on that premise, we must acknowledge that
over the past 40 years, Colombia has launched various
peace processes with illegal armed groups, some
22-31544

12/04/2022

Colombia

more successful and with better results than others.
Nonetheless, our institutions have constantly sought to
promote the principles of demobilization, disarmament
and reintegration together with another key element,
which is the ability to adapt to circumstances,
progress and developments in international law and
the willingness to build peace, with even greater
certainty since the world witnessed the advent of the
Rome Statute, enabling us to ensure that crimes against
humanity do not go unpunished.
The process undertaken in 2016 is one of those
developments, and it unquestionably presents our
country with both challenges and opportunities. It
is also important to consider within the context of
the international community the fact that after the
agreement was signed, we continued to deal with latent
threats from illegal armed groups such as the Ejército
de Liberación Nacional and terrorist groups linked to
drug trafficking, including organizations such as Los
Pelusos and Caparros, dissidents from the Fuerzas
Armadas Revolucionarias de Colombia and, of course,
the terrifying drug-trafficking group known as the
Clan del Golfo.
In the light of these multidimensional threats to
security, we need to build peace throughout the territory
of Colombia. From the very first day our Government
took office we set in motion a vision for a public policy
that we call Peace with Legality. It is our guiding
principle for building peace without impunity while
seeking to adapt to ensure clear, effective, verifiable
implementation that is open to scrutiny by all members
of our society, in accordance with the Constitutional
Court of Colombia. And so from the first day that we
announced the Peace with Legality policy, we asked the
United Nations to ensure that its Verification Mission
would support us throughout the process for the entire
four years of our term of office. I would like take this
opportunity to thank Secretary-General Guterres for
his commitment and leadership aimed at ensuring
that this support, which should be independent and
impartial, can provide the assistance that Colombia
needs within the concert of nations and the context of
multilateralism. I also want to thank Mr. Ruiz Massieu
and his team for their consistent participation in the
work of developing public policies that can enable our
reach to extend throughout our territory.
Based on that perspective, our focus on Peace with
Legality is comprehensive and we aim to ensure progress
in all areas, while maintaining a critical view in order to

S/PV.9015

improve in those areas where improvement is needed.
It is because of that comprehensive focus that I would
like to mention the many achievements in our country,
which have been supported by the Security Council, as
is noted in all reports that have been published since
then, as well as bilaterally by a number of the countries
represented here in the Security Council.
Let me begin with the issue of reintegration.
If the reintegration of individuals with a violent
past did not turn out well, it would affect the full
development of a genuine peace process throughout
the country. That is why we stress that there are
now approximately 12,800 people who had taken the
wrongful path of arms who today are in a trustworthy,
credible process of reintegration into Colombian
society. There are a number of features that make the
process unique, beginning with the fact that seven
qualitative guarantees are established for each person,
including psychosocial, economic and legal support
and assistance entering the labour market. It is very
important to emphasize that today many of those former
combatants or those in the process of reintegration are
involved in productive projects. More than 8,600 are
directly involved in individual or collective productive
projects — producing, selling, marketing and building
a better life for their families. However, as Mr. Ruiz
Massieu noted, we have gone even further to address
issues related to land, housing and property. I have
had the opportunity to visit seven former territorial
spaces for training and reincorporation that had been
handed over during the first transition phase to create
settlements for former combatants. We have shifted to
the provision of property that individualizes the rights
of each family, affords them genuine economic freedom
and allows them to re-enter Colombian society.
Here it is crucial to emphasize that the first
set of considerations presented to me by Mr. Jean
Arnault, Mr. Ruiz Massieu’s predecessor, were the
shortcomings of the process. We are tackling those
shortcomings through our policies aimed at enabling
people to reintegrate into Colombian society. Today,
more than 85 per cent of them are now participating
in our country’s social security, pension and healthcare systems, which is unprecedented in other peace
processes around the world.
Let us talk about the victims. That is the second
element of our comprehensive vision. Our Government
promoted the extension of Law 1448, on land restitution
for victims, to enable us to use State resources to help

22-315445/23

S/PV.9015

Colombia

the situation of the millions of Colombians who were
affected by the decades of violence. In that regard,
it is also important to point out that our Government
was able to move from conducting three proceedings
for collective reparation to more than 50, providing an
unprecedented budget and economic reparations for
almost 400,000 victims in only four years, which is also
an unprecedented milestone.
In line with the principle of giving the victims
a voice and a vote and political representation and
influence in public decision-making, we supported
regulations enabling 16 victims, elected by popular
vote in the most violence-ridden regions of the country,
to be able to sit in Congress with a voice and vote,
beginning on 13 March. That historic decision also
reflects another cross-cutting aspect, which is that
those electoral districts are in deepest Colombia, the
part of the country that is demanding more and more
development efforts.
That leads me to the third point that I want to
share today. The development plans with a territorial
focus are the cornerstone of peace for Colombia.
Twenty months after the start of their implementation
and before I assumed my presidency, there were only
two development programmes with a territorial focus.
Today we have 16, after conducting 14 community
round-table processes, which I am proud to say have
enabled Colombia to see more than $4 billion invested
in 170 municipalities, encompassing more than 11,000
villages and 6 million Colombians, 2 million of whom
have been victims of violence. Those development plans
involve investments in water, electricity and education
and an almost unprecedented investment in secondary
roads, and are one of the best examples of Colombia’s
commitment to the territories, with investments that
with or without the agreement are historic. I am pleased
that we have been able to undertake public works based
on taxes and more recently launch a national brand,
led by the State, so that all producers, whether former
combatants, victims or residents of those areas, can
reach every market in our country, and so that when
products with that brand are purchased, they contribute
to the well-being of people who are betting everything
on a productive life.
Fourthly, the comprehensive rural development of
our country is key to that comprehensive vision. Today
our Government can say that we have distributed almost
52,000 titles to rural property in Colombia in under four
years, meaning that our Government has distributed the
6/23

12/04/2022

largest number of titles to land in the history of our
country. We have been able to incorporate more than
1.6 million hectares into Colombia’s land bank. By
August of this year our investments in secondary roads
will be the highest in public works and job creation in
rural areas in the country.
It is that comprehensive approach that in the
middle of the pandemic enabled us to record the largest
agricultural exports in Colombia’s history, with the
element that made the difference being farming by
contract. Farmers can sell without a middleman, and
with micro-insurance and financing schemes can
have a predictable income over time. Approximately
300,000 rural producers will be incorporated into
the programme by the end of August. Another very
important aspect of our comprehensive vision has
been substitutions of illicit crops. Fifty per cent of the
eradication in the areas under the model has occurred
during our Administration, in the understanding that
we have to consider all the tools at our disposal in order
to address the threat of drug trafficking.
Yet another element related to that comprehensive
approach is humanitarian de-mining. Today we are able
to share that 50 per cent — half — of all of the de-mining
in Colombia has taken place during the almost four
years of my presidency. And within our comprehensive
approach, we have differentiated according to
gender and by ensuring that Afro-Colombian
communities — Raizales and Palenqueras — and
members of indigenous communities today have a
specific budget assigned to them. For the first time in
Colombia, we have a new law that makes it possible for
those communities to directly contract with the State,
on a larger scale, in order to have an impact on our
development programmes.
I also want to bring up the very important aspects
related to the principles of truth, reconciliation and
non-repetition. We have provided full economic
support to the relevant institutions and in our design of
public policies. We are supporting the first restorative
processes in our country for those who have been
deprived of freedom and for providing reparations for
victims. But this is also the time to say that when our
Government was looking to the future and considering
how to correct the errors of the past, we were able to
amend the Constitution so that neither drug trafficking
nor kidnapping would be designated as connected to
political crime and thereby covered under amnesty
22-31544

12/04/2022

Colombia

in the future. That is a significant correction that we
promoted even before being elected to the presidency.
Today we are seeing how Colombian military forces
have reported on all their work over the past 50 years,
defending the legal system of our country and calling
for the opening of a class action suit based on the claim
that more than 400 members of the police and armed
forces were victims of violence. That is a documented
contribution without precedent in such cases. Today we
also hope that those most responsible for crimes against
humanity will tell the truth to Colombia about the
kidnappings, the recruitment of minors, crimes against
women and, of course, those attacks on the public
security forces. And I want to express our sincere desire
to make progress with effective reparations — the
Colombian State has followed through with that — but
those responsible for crimes against humanity must also
undertake economic, material and credible reparation
based on the fact that many of their contributions fall
far short of expectations.
I also want to discuss the challenges we face. We
have unfortunately seen violence during the peace
processes in Colombia. In many previous processes,
people viewed as former combatants were killed after
being demobilized. But it is important to put into context
what the Office of the Ombudsman of Colombia stated
in its most recent report.
“Studies conclude that the implementation process
following the peace agreements with the Fuerzas
Armadas Revolucionarias de Colombia (FARC)
has had the lowest number of fatalities per 1,000 in
the reintegration process.”

S/PV.9015

the lowest kidnapping rates since there were such
indicators in our country. However, I could not address
the Council without mentioning some concerns.
Drug trafficking is the greatest enemy of
peacebuilding in Colombia. Eradication and substitution
efforts have been made, and there have been historic
efforts in terms of seizures, reaching record levels last
year, with Colombia seizing 670 tons. But we see how
consumption in the world continues to grow. While
there is no sense of joint responsibility, by which the
countries that most affect consumption adopt more
direct and clearer public policies, it will continue to
be a great burden for Colombian society. It is therefore
appropriate to say that in this Chamber.
I would like to share a few final messages. One such
message has to do with what our Government, through
its budget plan, will leave for the next Administration.
We have moved on from fragility to a planned budget
process with measurable benchmarks, like the one used
by the United Nations.
In Colombia, there are no enemies of peace within
institutions and democracy. We all want peace. We
are all working for it, and the only enemies of peace
are those who have sought to undermine our nation
through violence.
Today, we can also say that significant progress
has been made on many important issues, regardless of
the peace agreement. The greatest challenge to a peace
process is not the signing; it is the implementation over
time, given that the process will take place over nearly
three Administrations.

That fact alone shows us the efforts that have
been made with regard to security. We cannot
consider it a victory because such incidents should
not occur. However, historically, we have seen how
the commitment to protecting those involved in the
demobilization, disarmament and reintegration process
has produced results.

Not even the pandemic prevented Colombia from
moving forward in the peace process. Not even a
migrant crisis, the largest-ever experienced by a Latin
American country, a category five hurricane or the
social and economic ravages of the pandemic deprived
us of the progress shared today, which is reflected in
the report of the United Nations Verification Mission in
Colombia (S/2022/267).

It is also sad to see how the murderous hands of drug
traffickers continue to wreak havoc in some areas of
Colombia. However, let us also start by acknowledging
that, over the four years of our Government, we will
have the lowest average and overall homicide rate of a
presidential term for more than 40 years.

Today, Colombia wants to continue moving towards
building peace with legality. But that also requires that
the many cases of recruitment of minors, harassment of
women and attacks against the security forces and the
impacts of drug trafficking be resolved in the context
of transitional justice.

That, too, is already an achievement for our society,
just as it is an achievement that we have recorded

It is, of course, very important that Colombia
continue to guarantee the actions of its security forces,

22-315447/23

S/PV.9015

Colombia

12/04/2022

while always respecting international humanitarian
law and human rights and always ensuring that it is the
oversight bodies that investigate any operation where
they have been involved in what are known as urgent
actions by our country’s investigative service.

We are a nation that has confronted violence, but
that will always defeat it through the rule of law and our
institutional capacity to deliver the services of the State
to our country’s most remote areas and to sow harmony
in the hearts of Colombians.

Our nation has a zero-tolerance policy towards
human rights violations by the security forces, but it
also has a security force that, in the country every day,
earns the affection of the citizens, including those being
reintegrated, to whom it provides protection.

As a Government, our position has therefore been
not to see any political agenda in this or to seek any
electoral opportunity. On the contrary, it has been to
establish institutionality so that such institutionality
can speak eloquently of what a country is capable of
achieving under article 22 of our Constitution, which
states that peace is a duty and a right that must be
complied with.

I will conclude by saying the following. Peace in
Colombia is not a political or an electoral issue. It is not
an ideological matter. It has no individual owners, but is
the joint objective of an entire nation and its institutions.
The future challenges for peacebuilding, given
the progress described, are based on the premise that
there is a genuine, indisputable, non-ideological and
impartial truth and that all the necessary measures
exist under international law, bearing in mind the
transitional period, but that there are real restrictions on
such freedoms for those who are ultimately responsible.
As we have requested, the Organization can assist
in the application of penalties under the transitional
justice system, which is a mechanism to strengthen the
peace process, resulting from our Government’s efforts.
Today, Colombia appears before the world with
visible, indisputable results and without bias, but
knowing that we face challenges ahead, which we do
not seek to hide, but which must unite our nation in
this objective.
I would like to end by sharing what SecretaryGeneral Guterres said last year during his visit to
Colombia. Amid so many difficulties in the world, so
much intolerance and such great adversity, Colombia
is a beacon of hope. The tasks still pending, due to
the reach of time, cannot conceal the achievements
that Colombia has consolidated, which, more than
the individual success of a Government or of me, as
President, are those of a society that has always wanted
to defeat violence.
I would like to thank each one of those present
for the way in which they have welcomed the periodic
reports. I would also like to thank the Verification
Mission for its irrefutable approach in acknowledging
what has been done well in Colombia.
8/23

The President: I thank HisExcellency President
Duque Márquez for his statement.
I shall now make a statement in my capacity as the
representative of the United Kingdom.
First, my thanks go to Special Representative Ruiz
Massieu for his detailed briefing and insights. I would
once again like to extend a particularly warm welcome
to President Duque Márquez. I also thank him for his
very detailed remarks and insights on the situation
in Colombia. His Excellency’s presence here today
testifies to the importance that he, himself, places on
the role of the United Nations and the Security Council
in supporting Colombia on its journey towards lasting
and sustainable peace.
It has been a huge privilege for the United
Kingdom to work alongside Colombia. May I offer our
congratulations to President Duque Márquez, the parties
and, indeed, the Colombian people on the progress
that has been achieved in just over five years since
the signing of the peace agreement. We recognize the
investment that the Government has made during that
time to support the reintegration of former combatants
into civilian life.
Colombia serves as an important example that
an enduring resolution of differences is possible only
through peaceful dialogue. During the past quarter,
as we heard again today, we continued to see some
significant progress in the implementation of the peace
accord. As the report (S/2022/267) notes, this year is
a real turning point for the transitional justice system,
and its three components continue to advance in their
crucial work.
We look forward to seeing the final report of the
Truth Commission in June and the first sentences being
22-31544

12/04/2022

Colombia

handed down by the Special Jurisdiction for Peace.
We recognize the fundamental importance, as part
of this process, of perpetrators acknowledging their
crimes before the victims themselves, and we share the
Secretary-General’s confidence in the real fortitude
and courage Colombians will continue to show as they
confront what has been a painful past in order to move
towards healing and true reconciliation.
Notwithstanding the important progress made,
our concerns remain for groups that continue to be
disproportionately affected by violence, displacement
and confinement. In this regard, as we have heard from
Special Representative Ruiz Massieu today, we continue
to be alarmed by the increase in violent incidents and
insecurity in several areas, which has claimed the lives
of former combatants, social and environmental leaders,
human rights defenders, women leaders and those from
indigenous and Afro-Colombian communities. Indeed,
if I may, in my capacity as the United Kingdom Prime
Minister’s Special Representative for Preventing Sexual
Violence in Conflict, I saw directly, when I engaged
with the representatives of these groups in a virtual
visit in late 2020, the powerful insights they provided
in this respect.
I am sure I speak for all colleagues when we
say we were shocked and saddened by the murder of
Jorge Santofimia in Putumayo. His commitment to
environmental protection and peace had made him
a real example of the benefits that come through
successful integration. To address this violence, we
urge the Government to continue to expand its efforts to
provide adequate protection and security, improve State
presence in conflict-affected areas, as we have heard
today, and strengthen the institutions that investigate
and prosecute those responsible for these crimes.
While challenges to full implementation remain, as
we have heard from His Excellency President Duque
Márquez, progress has been made. The election of
16 victims into special peace seats in Colombia’s
House of Representatives really does represent a
historic step forward. It presents an opportunity to
widen the democratic participation of victims and
the communities most affected by conflict. We also
welcome the restorative justice process and mechanisms
that have been introduced. As Colombia now looks
forward and ahead to presidential elections next month,
we again call on all political stakeholders to ensure that
these elections will be peaceful and inclusive and that

S/PV.9015

elected parties maintain their commitment to the full
implementation of this important peace agreement.
In conclusion, Colombia’s experience shows
us all the importance of holistic and inclusive
approaches — approaches that help to build and
sustain peace — as well as the real value of engaging
the full peacebuilding architecture of the United
Nations, including the Peacebuilding Commission
and the Peacebuilding Fund, to catalyse international
support. For its part, the United Kingdom remains fully
committed to supporting the peace process in Colombia,
as all parties continue on their path to lasting peace,
and, in partnership with Colombia, we will continue to
look to consolidate and strengthen and build upon the
gains that have been achieved thus far.
I now resume my functions as President of the
Council.
I now give the floor to those members of the
Council wishing to make statements..
Mr. Nebenzia (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We would like to thank the Head of the
United Nations Verification Mission in Colombia,
Mr. Carlos Ruiz Massieu, for presenting the report of
the Secretary-General on the situation in the country
(S/2022/267) and for his views.
We welcome today the President of Colombia, His
Excellency Mr. Iván Duque Márquez. His participation
in today’s meeting is, of course, significant. It is
perceived as wrapping up the work of his Administration
on implementing the peace process.
We are convinced that those taking the floor after
us, members of the Security Council, will say a lot of
nice words to try to avoid the thorny issues that abound
in the report of the Secretary-General. However, in
Russia, we speak the truth to our friends. Therefore,
today we are not going to gloss over the serious concerns
we have as to the fate of the peace process in Colombia.
Colombia is not just an ordinary country for the
Security Council. At one point, the Council became a
sort of guarantor of peace in the country, thus de facto
putting its reputation on the line. We therefore are all
very carefully following developments in Colombia. I
will not hide the fact that our grounds for concern are
increasing each year.
Of course, Colombia has achieved some progress
in implementing the Final Peace Agreement for Ending

22-315449/23

S/PV.9015

Colombia

the Conflict and Building a Stable and Lasting Peace,
but today we would like to focus on the problems with
implementing that Agreement. I shall start with the fact
that the Duque Administration has consistently avoided
mentioning the Final Peace Agreement. Instead, it
prefers to talk about the policy of peace with legality,
which is a programme that the Security Council did
not approve, nor was it agreed to by the other party to
the Final Peace Agreement, to which President Duque
Márquez referred today as the former combatants.
The very use of this term shows that genuine national
reconciliation in his country has unfortunately still not
been attained. The Final Peace Agreement’s plan for a
root and branch transformation of Colombian society
has therefore not occurred. With eight years having
elapsed since the Final Peace Agreement was signed,
this situation risks undermining the very basis of the
peace process and destroying what the Colombian
people have moved towards so painfully for so long.
We are not basing our views on subjective
considerations. There are many grounds for such
distressing conclusions in the report issued by the
Secretary-General for this meeting. The common thread
running through it is concern at the pace of Columbian
post-conflict settlement. The main problem remains
the inability of the Government to ensure the physical
safety of the participants in the peace process and of
community leaders. The challenge of filling the vacuum
in State authority in remote areas of the country is
unresolved, as is implementing comprehensive agrarian
reform and the coca crop-substitution programme.
It is clear that a decrease in the level of violence
and ensuring security of the participants of the peace
process is a key factor in achieving lasting peace.
However, it is precisely in relation to such issues that
there are significant failings. In the country there is still
an armed standoff, there is forcible redistribution of the
spheres of criminal influence fighting for control over
drug trafficking, and the shooting of participants in the
peace process. The security situation has deteriorated
to such an extent that even the Constitutional Court was
forced to announce an unconstitutional state of affairs
and require the Government to take urgent measures to
improve the situation. There is indeed a great deal to
improve, and it needs to be done urgently.
After the signing of the Final Peace Agreement,
315 participants in the peace process have been killed.
Over the past year alone, the number of cases of armed
violence has increased sixfold. According to the Office
10/23

12/04/2022

for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs and its
data from the first two months of this year, more than
274,000 Colombians, in one way or another, have come
up against various manifestations or consequences of
armed violence. Local non-governmental organizations
have also shared their data from the beginning of
the year : there were 31 large- scale reprisals, and
13 signatories of the Final Peace Agreement and 50
civilian activists were killed.
Warning signs have been signalled by the
International Committee of the Red Cross, which
on 23 March published a country report entitled
Humanitarian Challenges 2022. The document states
that there are currently six armed conflicts in the
country in which various rebel groups are countering
Government bodies. It appears that someone goes
missing without trace every two days. In Colombia today
almost 53,000 people are internally displaced, a figure
that is an increase of 120 per cent in 2021 compared
to 2020. The situation with advancing agrarian reform
does not encourage optimism. Of the 3 million hectares
promised under the peace programmes, twothirds have
been added to the land registry but only 16 per cent has
actually been transferred.
Against that backdrop, it is regrettable that
representatives of Colombian civil society were
not given the opportunity this time to present their
assessments of the Government’s work to the Council in
person. However, it is a positive that non-governmental
organizations can at least still inform the members of
the Council of their views in writing. One can conclude
from the content of those letters that as far as the peace
process is concerned the past four years have been
treading water or have reduced the security situation
in the country to the level of the period when the Final
Agreement was signed. The civil society organizations
agree that the Peace with Legality initiative is is not a
way to ensure compliance with the obligations under
the Final Agreement. That depressing assessment
confirms the general concern that the prospects are that
the country’s crisis may worsen and that the situation
is not stabilizing, let alone making any consistent
forward progress.
It is also important to remember that sustainable
peace cannot be achieved without the involvement of
all major political players and parties, including the
Ejército de Liberación Nacional. However acute the
internal differences may be, only dialogue without
preconditions can lead to mutual understanding. In that
22-31544

12/04/2022

Colombia

regard, unilateral decisions on a ceasefire, including
during electoral processes, play an unquestionably
positive role.
We are not about to ignore the fact that we also
noticed an unfortunate desire to gloss over reality in
the report of the Secretary-General (S/2022/267), with
the holding in March of the second parliamentary
elections since the signing of the Final Agreement and
the election of an additional 16 parliamentarians being
presented as a significant milestone and a historic
opportunity. In our opinion that is overdoing it, given
that parliamentary elections are a natural democratic
process that according to the Colombian Constitution
should take place every four years. As for the additional
16 seats, according to the Final Agreement they should
have been filled in 2018. In other words, this is actually
a four-year delay.
In the context of the forthcoming elections to
express the will of the Colombian people, I would like
to express the hope that the priority for the country’s
future leader will be scrupulous compliance with the
obligations under the Final Agreement. However, if a
policy that consists basically of substituting concepts
prevails once again, Colombia may very soon be facing
the worst possible effects of such a policy. We all would
very much like to see President Duque Márquez’s
country avoid that.
As a permanent member of the Security Council,
Russia will continue to support the Colombian peace
process with a view to making it sustainable and
irreversible. The responsible work that the United
Nations Verification Mission in Colombia is doing
under the leadership of the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General is critical in that regard, and we
hope to be able to count on it in future.
Mr. Kimani (Kenya): I want to express our
condolences to our American colleagues while the
nature of the attack on the subway station in Brooklyn
is being verified. We already know that some people
have been hurt and we express our sincere regrets to
our fellow New Yorkers.
I have the honour to deliver this statement on
behalf of the three African members of the Security
Council, Gabon, Ghana and Kenya (A3). We thank
Mr. Carlos Ruiz Massieu, the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General, for his briefing and welcome
the participation in today’s meeting of His Excellency
President Iván Duque Márquez.

S/PV.9015

The A3 congratulates the people of Colombia on the
successful congressional elections that have just been
concluded. The conduct of the election campaign in
relative calm underlines the resilience of the Colombian
people and their commitment to durable peace. We
wish them well in the upcoming presidential elections
and hope that the election of the 16 special district
representatives will mark the start of greater political
inclusion for the conflict-affected communities.
More than five years into the Final Agreement
for Ending the Conflict and Building a Stable and
Lasting Peace, the Colombian peace process remains an
inspiration to many countries seeking to end protracted
civil wars. For decades Colombia was known for its long
civil war and the extensive violence of paramilitaries
and drug cartels. Today, the country is a testament to
inspired leadership in seeking and maintaining peace.
The breadth and ambition of the Final Agreement
reflect the boldness of the vision of the Government
of Colombia and the Fuerzas Armadas Revolucionarias
de Colombia. The people of Colombia are rightly proud
of that hard-won peace. We also want to register our
sincere admiration for the victims and survivors who,
despite their deep scars, are rebuilding their lives
while supporting the peace process. The A3 recognizes
the significant progress that has been made in the
implementation of the Final Agreement, challenges
notwithstanding. Nonetheless, we reiterate our call for
its full and comprehensive implementation. We urge all
stakeholders not to lose sight of the dividends that will
come with sustainable peace. We are encouraged by
the assurances that the various presidential candidates
have committed to the comprehensive and full
implementation of the Final Agreement.
The full reintegration of former combatants into
Colombian society remains key to the success of the
peace process. In that regard, the A3 commends the
Government’s efforts in facilitating access to land for
productive projects, as well as the consolidation of
former territorial areas for training and reintegration.
We call for increasing the support and security given
to the former combatants living outside the former
territorial areas, including those of indigenous and
Afro-Colombian origin.
The A3 attaches the greatest importance to the
ethnic chapter of the Final Agreement and urges for
greater commitment to its implementation. We welcome
the plans in the Special High-Level Forum with Ethnic
Peoples to develop a road map for 2022 to address issues

22-3154411/23

S/PV.9015

Colombia

facing former combatants of indigenous and AfroColombian descent and reiterate the need for allocating
adequate, reliable resources to that initiative. We further
encourage the parties to capitalize on the Commission
for the Follow-up, Promotion and Verification of the
Implementation of the Final Agreement to resolve
any differences.
Transitional justice remains the cornerstone of
Colombia’s peace process. There can be no sustainable
peace without proper reconciliation. The A3 commends
the progress within the Comprehensive System of
Truth, Justice, Reparation and Non-Repetition. In
particular, we recognize the progress made by the
Special Jurisdiction for Peace in ensuring justice for
victims and underscore the importance of ensuring
its autonomy and independence. In addition, we look
forward to the report of the Truth Commission in June
this year and encourage the Colombian people to build
on its recommendations in order to further cement
national reconciliation.
We are cognizant of the complementarity between
terrorism and illicit trading, especially of narcotics.
We applaud the Government of Colombia for its arrest
of the renowned drug lord known as Otoniel and
hope that his arrest will facilitate the dismantling of
criminal organizations and their support networks.
The successful resettlement of former combatants
can be sustained only if they are kept away from the
illegal narcotics business. We urge the Government
to prioritize rural infrastructure development, as well
as the implementation of the National Comprehensive
Programme for the Substitution of Illicit Crops.
The A3 is deeply concerned about the persistent
violence targeting former combatants, conflictaffected communities, including the Afro-Colombian
and indigenous communities, social leaders, women
peacebuilders and human rights activists. We are
particularly concerned about the reports of intensified
violence by armed groups, including the Ejército
de Liberación Nacional (ELN), and their attacks on
innocent civilians. We underline the need for urgent
implementation of the security guarantees by the
National Commission on Security Guarantees for the
most vulnerable, taking into consideration gender
needs. We will continue to support all efforts aimed
at consolidating the peace process, including through
the incorporation of groups that are not parties to the
Final Agreement. The A3 urges for engagement in
constructive dialogue between the Government and
12/23

12/04/2022

the ELN in order to capitalize on the opportunity for
national reconciliation and stability in Colombia.
Finally, the A3 reaffirms its solidarity with the
Government and the people of Colombia in their pursuit
of peace and prosperity. We also offer our unwavering
support to the United Nations Verification Mission in
Colombia. We wish President Duque Márquez the very
best in his future endeavours.
The President: I align myself with the opening
remarks of the representative of Kenya with regard to
the evolving situation in Brooklyn. Our thoughts and
prayers are with all those who have been caught up in
that incident.
Mr. Hoxha (Albania) (spoke in Spanish): Allow me
to begin by thanking Mr. Carlos Ruiz Massieu, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Colombia,
for his briefing today as well as for his tireless efforts
and those of his team and the United Nations country
team on the ground.
I would like to welcome President Iván Duque
Márquez. His presence here today and the information he
has shared with us illustrate once again the importance
that the Colombian Government attaches to engagement
with the Security Council and the entire international
community. We greatly appreciate the direct exchange
that makes our discourse more transparent.
(spoke in English)
In the five years since the signing of the historic
peace agreement, much progress has been achieved.
Thousands of former combatants have laid down their
arms and been reintegrated into their communities.
Transitional justice mechanisms have been established
and proven effective. The former Fuerzas Armadas
Revolucionarias de Colombia-Ejército del Pueblo has
been transformed into a recognized political party.
Victims and previously excluded and marginalized
populations have been given a seat at the table and in
Congress, making processes more inclusive. There is
broad support for the peace accord and the transition
among Colombians. We sincerely commend the people,
Government and President of Colombia for those
efforts, the engagement and the activism aimed at
creating a more peaceful, just and prosperous country
for all.
At the same time, as we have heard here, many
challenges persist. In particular, some rural areas
have in recent months seen an increase in violence,
22-31544

12/04/2022

Colombia

including sexual violence and child recruitment, which
threatens the Final Agreement for Ending the Conflict
and Building a Stable and Lasting Peace and might risk
rolling back some of the progress made. The biggest
challenges to peace in Colombia remain the attacks and
violence by armed groups and criminal gangs against
community and social leaders, indigenous and AfroColombian representatives, human rights defenders
and LGBTI activists. Women are especially targeted
among those groups. Former combatants who have laid
down their arms are threatened, making it harder for
them to successfully reintegrate into society. We are
appalled by such attacks, which jeopardize the peace
process as a whole. A recent horrific example was the
attack on 27 March in Bogotá that killed Salomé and
Daniel and injured more than 30 people. There have
also been attacks, death threats and a kill list from the
Águilas Negras, who did not stop short of targeting the
vice-presidential candidate as well.
It is vital to ensure that the Colombian Government
continues and intensifies its efforts to protect and
safeguard all who are targeted and threatened, and
that it strengthens the institutions that can investigate
and prosecute the criminal actors responsible for such
violence. The Government has a responsibility to
protect its citizens, including in rural areas. Criminal
gangs and armed groups must be dismantled once and
for all. Rural security should be improved, the presence
of State services in rural communities and conflictaffected areas enhanced and alternatives for illicit crops
and economies developed. Without comprehensive rural
reforms that also include the right to land for victims of
the conflict, there will be no peace and development
in Colombia.
The gender provisions of the Final Agreement
continue to be implemented and financed at a slower
rate than other parts of it. As we stated in the joint
media stakeout in January with Norway and the
United Arab Emirates, the implementation of the
Agreement’s gender provisions and ethnic chapters is
an essential condition for lasting peace. After decades
of senseless conflict, the Colombian people in March
held their second congressional elections since the
signing of the Agreement. The elections have shown
that the Government and the people of Colombia are
indeed working hard to achieve a peaceful future for
their country. The creation of 16 special transitional
electoral districts for peace is an important step towards
implementing the agreement, by including the voices of

S/PV.9015

historically excluded populations in conflict-affected
areas, members of indigenous communities and
representatives of victims and women’s organizations.
We have been happy to see the highest number of
women candidates ever as well as an increase in the
number of women elected to Congress. We encourage
the Government to address gender-based political
violence in the upcoming presidential elections by
ensuring that security measures are in place so that the
right to vote for all Colombians is protected.
Finally, we welcome the progress that has
been made in transitional justice processes. The
Comprehensive System for Truth, Justice, Reparation
and Non-Repetition has delivered strong results to
hold perpetrators to account. We would welcome a
stronger focus on conflict-related sexual violence and
the opening of a dedicated special case for such crimes.
While it is important that all victims receive justice,
accountability is also key to reconciliation and building
a more peaceful society.
Let me conclude by thanking President Duque
Márquez for his Government’s positive engagement
with the Security Council during his tenure. We look
forward to continuing this work and wish him the best
in his future endeavours.
Mrs. Alhefeiti (United Arab Emirates) (spoke
in Arabic): At the outset, I want to thank the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Colombia
and Head of the United Nations Verification Mission
in Colombia, Mr. Carlos Ruiz Massieu, for his valuable
briefing and his efforts along with his team concerning
this dossier. I would like also to offer a warm welcome
to the President of Colombia, His Excellency Mr. Iván
Duque Márquez, who is participating in today’s meeting.
We thank his Excellency for his comprehensive briefing
on developments in his country.
As Colombia advances towards peace, it is
important to reflect on its successes so far, celebrate
the achievements of the Final Agreement and above all
stress the importance of being committed to building
on them. Notwithstanding the ongoing challenges, we
must also recognize that the Colombian Government and
other stakeholders have shown that they are determined
to overcome them. The incoming administration will
be faced with responsibilities but will also have great
opportunities to implement the Final Agreement for
Ending the Conflict and Building a Stable and Lasting
Peace comprehensively and completely.

22-3154413/23

S/PV.9015

Colombia

Since the Council’s last meeting (see S/PV. 8951) on
this issue, Colombia has successfully held congressional
elections. That constitutes another success that will
complement the efforts to comprehensively implement
the Final Agreement, which is essential to Colombia’s
path towards realizing lasting and sustainable peace.
In that context, we hope that the benefits of the recent
pact for non-violence during the elections, signed by
13 political parties, will extend beyond the elections
so as to represent a commitment to promoting
peace, tolerance and dialogue in the long term. We
also welcome the increased numbers of women
participating in parliamentary elections. Their full,
equal and meaningful participation will contribute to
sustainable peace. Although the elections were carried
out in a relatively calm environment, concerns remain
about the security situation and persistent violence in
Colombia, including in Arauca, Chocó and Putumayo.
Those challenges will need special attention, including
by implementing reintegration and the security
guarantees included in the Final Agreement with the
aim of ensuring protection and security in Colombia.
If peacebuilding initiatives are to be successful, they
must be led and owned by local communities. We have
recently witnessed the launch of a series of important
community integration efforts, the Council for Peace
and the Peace Mediators initiatives, that include local
authorities and former combatants and deserve to be
highlighted. In addition, the Government’s expanded
efforts to implement the community-based reintegration
strategy also stress the importance of achieving peace
through economic, social and political reintegration.
We encourage continued work to achieve those goals.
Lastly, the United Arab Emirates continues to
support the Special Jurisdiction for Peace and its
survivor-based approach and central role in restorative
justice, which enable reconciliation and justice to
take place simultaneously. We note in particular the
importance of the recent diversification and expansion
of its cases, including for example the impact of violence
on the environment and conflict-related sexual violence.
In the same vein, we look forward to the upcoming report
from the Truth Commission. We hope that Colombian
communities will support the process and the results
as much as possible, because the report is an essential
step on Colombia’s path towards reconciliation and the
acknowledgement of responsibility.
In conclusion, as the presidential elections in
Colombia approach, we look forward to a peaceful,
14/23

12/04/2022

safe and inclusive electoral process. The United Arab
Emirates reaffirms its full support for the Government
and people of Colombia in their efforts to achieve
sustainable peace, as well as for the United Nations
Verification Mission in Colombia and the valuable role
it plays in the country.
Mr. Lu (United States of America): I thank
Mr. Carlos Ruiz Massieu, the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General for Colombia, for his briefing
today. We appreciate the vital role that the United
Nations Verification Mission in Colombia continues to
play in supporting peace in Colombia. And we welcome
the presence here today of President Duque Márquez
and appreciate his consistent engagement with the
Security Council.
As indicated in the most recent report of the
Secretary-General (S/2022/267), Colombia continues to
make demonstrable progress in its efforts to implement
the peace accord. We are encouraged that the recent
legislative elections took place with few disruptions.
For the first time, 16 victims’ seats in Colombia’s
House of Representatives were filled. A record number
of women ran for office and were elected to Colombia’s
Congress, and the elections saw increased participation
by indigenous and Afro-Colombian candidates. We
are also encouraged that most presidential candidates
pledged to continue implementing the Final Agreement
for Ending the Conflict and Building a Stable and
Lasting Peace. We look forward to the release of the
final report of the Truth Commission in June. We know
it will include some difficult conclusions, and we call
on all parties to reflect carefully on its findings.
While we commend the progress made to date,
much work remains to be done. The Secretary-General’s
report indicates intensified levels of violence in several
departments, as well as ongoing attacks on former
combatants, human rights defenders and social leaders.
Violence, trafficking in persons and displacement
have disproportionately affected ethnic communities,
with six Afro-Colombian and 13 indigenous leaders
killed during the reporting period. Accelerating the
implementation of the Final Agreement’s ethnic chapter
remains critical, as its implementation has lagged in
comparison to its other chapters. The gender provisions
are also being implemented and financed at a slower rate
than other parts of the Agreement. Despite the success
of the recent elections, women’s participation in the
electoral process is affected by gender-based political
22-31544

12/04/2022

Colombia

violence and discrimination, as well as unequal access
to resources.
As we all know, the full implementation of rural
economic plans is a generational project. For that reason,
Colombia’s current and future elected leaders must
continue to support the peace accord’s implementation
for rural development and make progress on improving
rural security, addressing land tenure and tackling the
root causes of those challenges. It is equally critical that
the Security Council continue to support the United
Nations Verification Mission as it builds on Colombia’s
achievements. Colombia has made great strides towards
a just and durable peace since 2016. With the support
of the Verification Mission and the Security Council,
we look forward to continued progress in protecting
human rights, ensuring justice for the victims of the
conflict, advancing rural development and building a
secure and prosperous future.
Mr. Costa Filho (Brazil) (spoke in Spanish): It
is an honour for me and for my country to take the
floor to comment on the implementation of the Final
Agreement for Ending the Conflict and Building a
Stable and Lasting Peace in Colombia. At the outset,
we would like to congratulate the Government and
people of Colombia on their tireless efforts to find
and strengthen a path of peace and prosperity for all
Colombians. The presence of President Iván Duque
Márquez at this meeting is yet another demonstration
of the seriousness of Colombia’s commitment to the full
implementation of the Agreement. I would also like to
express my appreciation to Mr. Carlos Ruiz Massieu,
Special Representative of the Secretary-General for
Colombia, for his briefing.
With the presidential elections in Colombia
approaching, we are pleased to note that Colombian
society is united in its prioritization of the consolidation
of peace. In that sense, the peace process in Colombia
has achieved the most important thing, which is the
trust and commitment of Colombians and of the main
political forces in the country. Colombia continues to
make progress in implementing the Agreement in all
its dimensions. We realize that the road is long and
there are always new obstacles to overcome. Only
five years have passed since the signing of the historic
agreement with the Fuerzas Armadas Revolucionarias
de Colombia, a third of the estimated period needed to
fully implement its provisions, many of which demand
continued effort on the part of the Colombian State, with
gradual progress, in order to yield the desired results

S/PV.9015

on the ground. We hope that the next administration
of the country will be able to continue the efforts of
recent years.
As the Secretary-General has pointed out in his
report (S/2022/267), the persistent violence in several
regions of Colombia calls for
“the full implementation of security guarantees
provisions of the Agreement to reinforce the
security measures implemented by Government
and State authorities.”
Confronting the illegal armed groups and criminal
organizations that continue to operate in regions
characterized by poverty, illicit economies and
ineffective territorial control by the State will be an
unavoidable challenge for the next Government of
Colombia. Brazil is closely following every stage of the
process. Colombia has shown that it has the political will
and the conditions necessary to control violence against
ex-combatants — which in some cases is blended with
drug trafficking and urban violence — and to bring
development to the countryside and areas that have
historically lacked Government support. We are aware
of how difficult the challenge is, and we trust in the
willingness and ingenuity of the Colombian people to
continue moving forward.
The legislative elections in March point to another
challenge that Colombia has overcome. The security
and smoothness of the electoral process were assured,
especially in the 16 special transitional electoral districts
for peace. We are pleased that democracy has taken a
step forward in Colombia, ensuring more space for the
effective participation of regions historically affected
by poverty and conflict. Brazil looks forward to the
final report of the Truth Commission, which will be a
fundamental document for Colombian society’s efforts
to overcome the violence of the past and continue to
consolidate peace.
As we underlined at the meeting in January (see
S/PV.8951), Colombia is a special case on the Security
Council’s agenda. Colombia is here on its own initiative.
It was Colombia that invited the Council to play a role
in the implementation of the Peace Agreement, which
is a triumph for its people and one achieved without
this body’s participation. The Council should not lose
sight of the fact that its role is limited to verifying
the implementation of the agreement. The broader
development and security strategies are prerogatives of
the Colombian State.

22-3154415/23

S/PV.9015

Colombia

In addition, the verification of the Agreement in
Colombia allows this body to play an important and
innovative role for international peace and security. At
this sensitive geopolitical time, the dossier enables the
Council to help consolidate a concrete case of success
that changes for the better the lives of millions of
Colombians affected by decades of armed conflict. In
that sense, we gladly recognize that while the Council
is important to Colombia, Colombia is also important
to the Council. I believe firmly that the collaboration
between the Council and Colombia represents important
support for the consolidation of peace.
Mr. De la Fuente Ramírez (Mexico) (spoke in
Spanish): I would like to thank Mr. Carlos Ruiz Massieu,
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General for
Colombia and Head of the United Nations Verification
Mission in Colombia, for his briefing. We also welcome
the presence today in the Security Council of President
Iván Duque Márquez of Colombia. We recognize the
commitment of his Government to the Final Agreement
for Ending the Conflict and Building a Stable and
Lasting Peace. We are also pleased that his presence
has encouraged various delegations to speak in Spanish
during this meeting.
I want to mention and acknowledge in particular the
work of Colombian civil society, whose representatives
have joined us in previous meetings and shared their
perspectives, giving us a broad, diverse and multifaceted
understanding of both the successes and the persistent
challenges to peace in Colombia. The participation of
civil society in all United Nations platforms, including
the Security Council, establishes a favourable balance
that cannot and should not be ignored.
The recent legislative elections held throughout the
country, including in the 16 special transitional electoral
districts for peace, constitute an important milestone in
the process for the consolidation of peace that should
be underlined and recognized. The will of the people
was freely expressed, and we note the registration of
the largest number of female candidates in history.
That is certainly another step in the right direction.
However, there is still room for progress with respect
to the increased participation of women, particularly
in indigenous and Afro-Colombian communities. It is
important to continue making progress with respect to
all of the Peace Agreement’s pending gender indicators.
Although the incidents were isolated, the violence
we saw during the electoral process contravenes
16/23

12/04/2022

the pact for non-violence promoted by the National
Council for Peace, Reconciliation and Coexistence and
civil-society organizations. The indisputable progress
in the implementation of the peace agreement must
be strengthened, as is happening with programmes
and public policies that are having an impact on the
structural causes that foster violence. The effects
of violence on children are of particular concern.
The report of the Secretary-General on the matter
(S/2021/1022) contains some worrying figures. We hope
that once the Working Group on Children and Armed
Conflict adopts its conclusions, the recommendations
it makes will be addressed in full. We agree with the
Secretary-General’s observations regarding the need to
strengthen security measures in accordance with the
provisions of the Peace Agreement.
The report for this period once again highlights how
important the transitional justice system in Colombia
is to the consolidation of reconciliation efforts. We
reiterate our support for the United Nations Verification
Mission in Colombia in its delicate task, in particular
its support for the work of the Special Jurisdiction for
Peace and its painstaking commitment to disarmament
and demining actions. We are aware of the impact that
the reports issued by both the Special Jurisdiction for
Peace and the Truth Commission will have. The request
that Colombia made to the Security Council for support
in implementing the Final Agreement has been an
example to the rest of the world and a hallmark for the
Latin American and Caribbean region that demonstrates
the strength of our brother people of Colombia.
Mr. Flynn (Ireland): I would like to thank
Mr. Carlos Ruiz Massieu, the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General for Colombia, for his briefing,
and his team for their dedicated work. I also wish to
extend a warm welcome to His Excellency President
Duque Márquez. We recognize and commend the efforts
of the Colombian Government to comprehensively
implement the Final Agreement for Ending the
Conflict and Building a Stable and Lasting Peace and
to achieve reconciliation in Colombia. We stand ready
to support Colombia and the incoming Administration
through the transition period and beyond in order to
preserve the gains that have been made and continue
their implementation.
We meet in the wake of parliamentary elections in
Colombia, where — positively — the peace accord was
not subject to debate, where the majority of the voters
could fulfil their democratic right in peace and security
22-31544

12/04/2022

Colombia

and where for the first time citizens in conflict-affected
areas in rural Colombia could elect representatives to
16 special transitional electoral districts for peace.
Ireland welcomes the significant increase in the
representation of women in Parliament. The election
also saw the highest number of women candidates in
Colombia’s electoral history. We further welcome
the agreement by the parties to extend the mandate
of the Commission for the Follow-Up, Promotion
and Verification of the Implementation of the
Final Agreement until 2023 and encourage the full
utilization of this essential platform for dialogue. We
are concerned, however, about the threats, intimidation
and political violence that affected some electoral
candidates, especially women and members of the
Afro-Colombian community. We condemn the attempts
by illegal armed groups to intimidate and interfere with
the political process in some communities. As we look
forward to the presidential elections, it is essential to
ensure that both candidates and voters can take part in
the exercise of democracy without fear of intimidation
or violence.
We continue to be concerned about the persistent
violence in Colombia, especially the levels of
displacement, confinement, intimidation and targeted
killings. The increasing impact it is having on
indigenous and Afro-Colombian communities and their
leaders is worrying. Another 40 social leaders and
human rights defenders have been killed for standing
up for their rights and the rights of their communities,
including Luz Marina Arteaga, a human rights defender
from Meta department who was killed while awaiting
protection measures. The attack on a police station in
Bogotá on 26 March in which two children were killed
is also deeply deplorable. Such incidents show clearly
how important it is for the National Commission on
Security Guarantees to work to tackle illegal armed
groups and provide a safe environment in Colombia.
There can be no impunity for such crimes. The
security guarantees set out in the Final Agreement are
fundamental to the peace dividend for those who have
laid down their arms to work for a peaceful Colombia.
We note the Constitutional Court’s recent determination
to ensure the protection of former combatants and the
implementation of the security-guarantee provisions of
the Agreement.
Ireland commends Colombia’s transitional justice
system for fostering a victim-centred approach to
reconciliation and truth. We welcome the announcement

S/PV.9015

by the Special Jurisdiction for Peace to open three new
macro-cases, and specifically its commitment that
all three cases will address conflict-related sexual
violence, as well as its announcement that public
hearings on cases 01 and 03 will take place between
April and June. When those indicted recognize that they
committed war crimes and crimes against humanity,
and fully acknowledge their responsibility for those
crimes directly to the victims of the conflict and their
families and communities, it will be a seismic moment
for truth and reconciliation in Colombia. Ireland also
recognizes the watershed moment represented by
the Truth Commission’s publication this summer of
its final report, which will contain more than 27,000
testimonies from victims. We know from our own past
that such truths, while difficult to confront, can open
the space for building the stable peace and equal society
that every Colombian deserves.
Colombia’s peace accord remains an exemplar
of what can be achieved when parties to a conflict
dedicate themselves to peace and focus their efforts
on the victims and a better future. I would once again
like to recognize the work of President Duque and
his Administration in implementing the Agreement.
Ireland has stood with Colombia during the process to
peace and over these first five years of implementation.
We reaffirm our partnership and friendship as we look
to the important work ahead and the realization of the
dream of a peaceful, stable and prosperous Colombia
that benefits all of its peoples.
Mr. Tirumurti (India): At the outset, let me join
others in welcoming the participation of His Excellency
President Duque Márquez in today’s meeting. I
also want to thank Mr. Carlos Ruiz Massieu, the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General, for
his briefing.
This is the first time that the Security Council is
meeting in the presence of President Duque since the
historic signing of the Final Agreement for Ending the
Conflict and Building a Lasting Peace, five years ago
this past November. We join others in congratulating
the people of Colombia on the rapid progress they
have continued to make on the path to peace and
development since the signing of the Agreement.
We deeply appreciated President Duque’s statement
today, in which he highlighted Columbia’s many areas
of progress and the confident strides it has made in
recent years.

22-3154417/23

S/PV.9015

Colombia

The successful holding in March of congressional
elections, including the voting in the 16 newly created
special transitional electoral districts for peace, held for
the first time in the rural areas of the 167 municipalities
worst affected by the conflict, is a positive indicator of
the consolidation of Colombia’s peace process. It was
heartening to see the large-scale participation of women
candidates in the elections. We were also pleased to see
that political alliances included the implementation
of the Final Agreement in their policy priorities and
agenda platforms. We hope that positive trend will
continue in the upcoming presidential elections as well.
The progress made in the implementation of the
Final Agreement, especially in recent months, is
encouraging. Stabilization road maps for rural reform
have been prepared, illicit crop substitution is under
way, the Special Jurisdiction for Peace has held hearings
and expects its first indictments in June and the
Truth Commission has done commendable work. The
parties also extended the mandate of the Commission
for the Follow-Up, Promotion and Verification of the
Implementation of the Final Agreement until 2023. We
welcome those positive developments, which clearly
demonstrate the strong commitment to the Agreement
by the Government and the political parties in Colombia.
It is important to recognize the many ambitious
objectives the Final Agreement has set, particularly
on security, rural reforms, crop substitution and the
rehabilitation of former combatants. However, as we
have heard today, its implementation continues to face
challenges. For instance, incidents involving threats,
killings and displacements of members of cooperatives
have had a disruptive effect on the reintegration
initiatives. Disputes over territorial control between
illegal armed groups, including various Fuerzas
Armadas Revolucionarias de Colombia-Ejército del
Pueblo dissident groups, as well as illegal trafficking
routes, remain a concern. We appreciate that despite
those challenges, the Colombian authorities are
making progress in addressing the security, housing
and land guarantees enshrined in the Agreement.
We believe that prioritizing rural reform aimed at
increasing employment and livelihood opportunities is
fundamental to sustaining peace.
India values its bilateral ties with Colombia, with
whom we share a relationship spanning more than six
decades. The increase in the frequency of our highlevel visits and engagements, especially over the past
year, is a testimony to the strength of our partnership,
18/23

12/04/2022

which is based on shared democratic values and
development goals. Despite the disruptions caused
by the coronavirus disease pandemic, there has been
a steady increase in our bilateral trade, which grew
by 22 per cent in 2020 and 2021. India has built a
significant presence in Colombia. Over the years, the
bilateral relations between our countries have deepened
and diversified in areas such as space, health, science
and technology and biotechnology. We are committed
to expanding and deepening our cultural development
and trade partnership with Columbia.
In conclusion, I would like to emphasize that while
the peace process in Colombia continues to be a source
of inspiration, the international community has to
continue to fulfil its responsibility to support the people
and the Government of Colombia in their journey to
consolidate and sustain peace. As a long-standing friend
and partner of Colombia, India will continue to stand in
solidarity with its people and Government in their quest
for lasting peace and economic development.
Mrs. Broadhurst Estival (France) (spoke in
French): I would like to thank Mr. Carlos Ruiz Massieu,
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General,
for his briefing. I also welcome the presence here today
of the President of Colombia, Mr. Iván Duque Márquez.
In a world shaken by conflict, Colombia is an
example to the international community. The Final
Agreement for Ending the Conflict and Building
a Lasting Peace is a historic achievement. Former
guerrillas have laid down their arms. We are seeing the
gradual reintegration of former combatants. Justice is
paving the way for reconciliation. Society at large is
striving every day to build peace. After half a century
of violent conflict, we must therefore recognize and
commend the major progress that has been made.
However, building peace also means being able to
clearly assess the implementation of the Agreement
and highlight the challenges that remain. I would like
to address four specific aspects in that regard.
First, the holding of the congressional elections
without any major disturbances is a positive. The
fact that for the first time voters were able to elect
representatives from the 16 districts for peace is a step
forward, and that configuration should be strengthened
in the future. We hope that the presidential campaign
will continue without any tensions and that the election
will be held in a safe and inclusive manner in all parts
of the country.
22-31544

12/04/2022

Colombia

Secondly, the continuing violence, particularly in
the department of Arauca, is a major concern, as many
of my colleagues have pointed out. We learn of killings
of former combatants, human rights defenders and
social leaders in every report of the Secretary-General.
Every massacre, killing and displacement of people
endangers the peace agreement. As the Constitutional
Court has signalled, the current security guarantees are
inadequate. On a positive note, the National Commission
on Security Guarantees convened for the first time in
a year. It is important for the Commission to continue
meeting on a regular basis, as stipulated under the
agreement, in order to deliver on the implementation of
a policy to dismantle illegal armed groups.
Thirdly, it is important to strengthen the presence
of State authorities in remote areas, both for combating
violence in those areas and for providing viable
socioeconomic opportunities to those who have
suffered the most from the conflict. In order to achieve
a lasting peace, more needs to be done in terms of rural
reform and access to land and housing. The aspects of
the agreement that address inclusion and the needs of
women and youth are also essential.
Finally — and this will be my last point — we
welcome all the progress achieved on justice, as well
as the progress of the Special Jurisdiction for Peace,
especially in its decision to open three new cases,
demonstrating the maturity of its system. The handing
down of the first restorative sentences will mark
a turning point and place victims at the heart of the
process. We encourage all parties to speak the truth.
The Truth Commission is doing a remarkable job and
we look forward to its next report in June.
The peace agreement is gradually taking root. We
want it to become irreversible, and the best way to
guarantee that is by ensuring its full implementation.
Ms. Juul (Norway): I would like to extend a
warm welcome to President Iván Duque Márquez and
thank him for joining us today. I thank the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, Mr. Carlos
Massieu, for his comprehensive briefing.
Allow me to start by congratulating Colombia on
having carried out what were perhaps the most inclusive,
diverse and peaceful elections in recent times. Never
have so many women run for Congress and never have
the numbers of elected women been higher. Verified
victims from rural, conflict-affected areas were also

S/PV.9015

elected to represent transitional electoral districts for
peace. Those are indeed further concrete outcomes
of the Final Agreement for Ending the Conflict and
Building a Stable and Lasting Peace.
The Truth Commission’s report will be published
shortly. For most Colombians, it might be difficult to
come to grips with the country’s violent past, but the
Commission’s report and the subsequent follow-up
on its recommendations are necessary steps for the
national healing process, which is likely to take years
and generations. The victims must also remain in focus
for the years to come.
Norway appreciates and admires all those who
have given truthful testimony to the Commission and
to the Special Jurisdiction for Peace, be they former
members of the Fuerzas Armadas Revolucionarias de
Colombia-Ejército del Pueblo (FARC-EP), members of
the public security forces or third parties. At the same
time, we find the continuing reports of attacks and
threats against human rights defenders most worrying.
More must be done to ensure the protection of children,
human rights defenders and indigenous leaders and that
the perpetrators of attacks against them are brought
to justice. The security guarantees provisions of the
agreement need to be implemented fully in order to
tackle the persistent violence. To that end, we expect
the expedient implement of the orders issued to the
Government after the Constitutional Court declared an
unconstitutional state of affairs regarding the guarantee
of former combatants’ rights to life, physical integrity
and peace. Moreover, a public policy to dismantle
illegal armed groups is much needed, and civil-society
representatives should be permitted to contribute to it.
Competition over land and access to natural
resources have fuelled grievances and armed conflict in
Colombia. Deforestation accelerates land degradation,
increases Colombia’s vulnerability to climate change
and exacerbates natural disasters. The poor are then
impacted disproportionately, human security is
undermined and the cycle of environmental degradation
repeats. We do, however, commend Colombia as a
regional leader in the field of climate change mitigation
and forest protection, and encourage it to continue its
efforts on climate and environmental issues as part of
the peacebuilding process.
Relevant initiatives related to land use and rural
reform need to be fully implemented. That could help
solve one of the structural causes of Colombia’s conflict.

22-3154419/23

S/PV.9015

Colombia

We commend the Government for securing additional
land for former FARC-EP combatants and encourage
the acceleration of that strategic undertaking. We
also stress the importance of ensuring the effective
functioning of institutions for dialogue and conflict
resolution, and encourage the Government to make
sure that the Commission for the Follow-up, Promotion
and Verification of the Implementation of the Final
Agreement, as well as the National Reintegration
Council, are in full operation at the end of its term.
The same goes for the official entities that consider
gender and ethnic issues. The tripartite cooperation
on land mines is an excellent example of what can
be accomplished when all parties — the former
FARC-EP, the Government, the United Nations and
donors — collaborate.
Let me conclude by assuring President Duque
that Norway remains committed to accompanying
Colombia in his efforts to ensure the comprehensive
implementation of the peace agreement, both under the
present Government and in the future.
Mr. Zhang Jun (China) (spoke in Chinese): I thank
Special Representative Ruiz Massieu for his briefing. I
warmly welcome the presence of President Iván Duque
Márquez at today’s meeting.
China commends the Government of Colombia,
led by President Duque and other relevant parties, for
their efforts in implementing the Final Agreement for
Ending the Conflict and Building a Stable and Lasting
Peace. China welcomes the positive progress made in
the peace process over the past five years. This past
month, Colombia held congressional elections. Sixteen
representatives were elected to Congress to represent
special electoral districts for peace established for the
first time in conflict-affected areas, marking a very
important milestone.
According to the Secretary-General’s report
(S/2022/267), more than 10,000 former combatants have
been reintegrated and fully supported, tens of thousands
of rural families are gradually abandoning illicit crop
cultivation and the number of former combatants joining
productive projects and cooperatives has increased
steadily. Those achievements are worth cherishing.
The Colombian peace process has set an example for
ending conflict and rebuilding peace through dialogue
and negotiations. The peace agreement embodies the
Colombian people’s common aspiration to lasting peace
and development, and it will play an irreplaceable and
20/23

12/04/2022

important role in achieving long-term national stability
and regional peace and security.
Colombia will hold presidential elections in May.
We hope that the new Government will continue to
fully implement the peace agreement, address the
difficulties and challenges in its implementation and
consolidate the gains of the hard-won peace. The full
implementation of the agreement is a long-term effort
of systematic engineering and there is still a long way to
go to deepen and consolidate peace, which will require
the tireless efforts of all parties in Colombia and the
international community.
Since the beginning of the year, violent conflicts
have intensified in many areas, including in Arauca
department, with illegal armed groups seriously
threatening the safety of former combatants and
ethnic minorities. The process of reintegrating former
combatants has also suffered some setbacks. We
are confident that the people and the Government of
Colombia will be able to meet those challenges, fully
and effectively implement the security provisions of the
peace agreement, strengthen the protection of former
combatants, improve security controls and strengthen
effective governance in the former conflict areas, speed
up the dismantling of illegal armed groups and criminal
organizations, combat the recruitment of children by
armed groups and enable women and young people to
play their full roles in peacebuilding.
Accelerating
development
is
critical
for
consolidating peace dividends and ending violent
conflicts. We hope that the Government of Colombia
will overcome the current global energy, food and
supply chain crisis and the impact of the coronavirus
disease pandemic, accelerate the provision of land
and rural reforms for former combatants, ensure the
sustained alternatives to the cultivation of illicit crops,
expand basic social services in former conflict areas
and promote balanced development in all regions.
China supports Latin America in speeding up its
integration process and hopes that the countries of the
region will play an active role in helping Colombia to
fully tap its development potential and eliminate the
root causes of violent conflicts.
The peace process in Colombia is irreversible. That
is the solid consensus among people from all walks of
life in Colombia, as well as the international community.
We look forward to the people and the Government
22-31544

12/04/2022

Colombia

of Colombia making further gains in State-building
and development.
China commends the United Nations Verification
Mission in Colombia for its important role in supporting
the peace process. We hope that the Mission will
prioritize listening to the people and the Government
of Colombia, strengthen its coordination with the
United Nations country team and continue to provide
strong support for the full implementation of the peace
agreement. China is ready to work with the international
community, respect the leading role of the people and
the Government of Colombia in implementing the
peace agreement and play our constructive role in
Colombia’s journey towards comprehensive peace,
stability and development.
The President: The President of Colombia has
asked for the floor to make a further statement. I give
him the floor.
President Duque Márquez (spoke in Spanish):
First of all, I would like to thank everyone for their
statements during this historic meeting. As President of
Colombia, I reiterate that this is my first time coming to
the Security Council, at our request, to move forward,
show what we have built and point out the challenges
that lie ahead of us. I would like to express my gratitude
for the Council’s general attitude in support of that, and
in support of Colombia’s development of comprehensive
policies to bring together peace and the rule of law and
of the work that is being done throughout all of our
country’s institutions.
Colombia requested the support of the Security
Council. We also requested the establishment of the
United Nations Verification Mission in Colombia, which
has supervised and guided all of those developments
independently. I value the virtually uncontested and
unanimous general attitude with which the Council has
addressed the Colombian people. In addition, I believe
that while we share many of the concerns that members
have expressed here today, we are facing them with
determination. I would now like to briefly address
some of them.
With respect to gender issues, Colombia has taken
historic steps. For the first time in our history, we have
a woman Vice-President and Chancellor, who is here
with me today. Our Public Service Administration
Department has confirmed that for the first time,
about 46 per cent of all high-ranking State officials are
women. Today, members of the Council highlighted

S/PV.9015

the participation of women candidates, but the number
of women in the Colombian military forces is also
currently the highest it has ever been.
Let me also point out that the 13 March elections
were not the only time that gender parity was reflected
on the lists of those elected. In December, the names
on the lists for the municipal youth council elections
alternated equally between those of men and women,
with some 60 per cent of those elected being women.
Those are examples of participatory democracy. I
also want to emphasize that women make up more
than 50 per cent of beneficiaries of land provision
programmes and productive projects in each of the
areas we described this morning. It is very important to
take that into account.
When it comes to ethnic issues, as a State, Colombia
took a decisive step to make sure that our Government’s
development plan is aligned with the objectives
we shared this morning. We have a budget outline,
spending plan and follow-up for the largest public
investment in our history for indigenous communities
and communities of African descent.
It is also important to note that the security
challenges described in the Council this morning are
alive and well in Colombia today. We have had to face
dissidents of the Fuerzas Armadas Revolucionarias
de Colombia-Ejército del Pueblo. We have had to face
the threat of the Ejército de Liberación Nacional from
groups such as Los Pelusos, Los Caparros and Los
Puntilleros, all former unitary groups that are now
dismantled. We also determinedly faced down the
Clan del Golfo, a group that has killed more social
leaders than any other, and whose main leader has
been captured and will soon be extradited to the United
States and then extradited again, under the agreement
for continued collaboration with the Colombian justice
system, to return to Colombia to serve his sentences
for the crimes he committed against Colombian society.
During this presidential term, the aggregate indices
for homicides and kidnappings in our country are the
lowest they have been in recent history. We know,
however, that there are regions in the country that have
also been under threat, and I want to briefly share the
relevant data.
Between 2010 and 2015, illegal armed groups in
Colombia perpetrated homicides and kidnappings
against a total of 369 social leaders, with the highest
of those cases arising in 2012 and 2013. Between 2015

22-3154421/23

S/PV.9015

Colombia

and 2017, such cases increased by more than 21 per
cent. That trend continued from 2017 to 2018, with
cases tragically jumping from 84 to 115, for an increase
of 27 per cent. In 2019, there were 108 such cases, a
decrease that we cannot celebrate because we are
talking about people’s lives — about the victims of the
cruellest violence. However, through that decrease, we
were able to establish a stabilization and a downward
trend, confirmed from information collected by the
Ombudsman’s Office of Colombia. Between 2020
and 2021, we saw those crimes decrease by a further
20 per cent. We will not celebrate that either. In fact, we
refuse to celebrate it. But we have to defeat these armed
groups — these terrorist groups — because terrorism
lurks everywhere.
In that regard, I would like to reiterate before
the Council, in view of the reports of violence in
Arauca department, which borders Venezuela, that in
accordance with resolution 1373 (2001) of September
2001, States must not sponsor, support, participate in
or facilitate their territories for the purposes of attacks
in another State. That is another reality we have had to
fight. We know, however, that it is an ongoing battle
and we must never stop fighting. We will not stop
bringing social investment and security to all parts of
our territory.
Let me make something clear. Colombia’s
community action leaders are among the most
threatened social leadership groups in the country.
They are the most threatened group, but also the group
that has received the most financial support from
the Government. I personally attend their meetings.
There is a law that facilitates their protection, growth
and involvement in public investment, while also
offering them a generalized social leadership training
programme through the State. It is very important that
this message be heard. Of course, we value the progress
made in the electoral process, but it is absolutely clear
to us that our democracy must be strengthened day
after day.
I wish to conclude by making a comment that I
believe is timely. All the remarks I have heard here
seek to be constructive, but comments were also
made that should be viewed from the perspective not
only of consistency but also of moral authority. We
accept all constructive comments, because we are here
voluntarily, with a will to build our country. However,
it is very important that those who today are attacking
a defenceless country should not be broadcasting
22/23

12/04/2022

messages of peace to the world even as they commit
fratricidal acts that we all reject, because the sorrow
we see in Ukraine today is that of humankind calling
for that genocide to come to an end. There can be no
justification for whatsoever for such acts.
It is therefore very important that here, in the
Security Council, in this guiding body of the United
Nations system that was created for humankind to
resolve its conflicts through multilateral dialogue, we
should not hear talk of peace from those who today are
waging war and sowing destruction.
I wish to close by warmly thanking all present for
mentioning the possibility that we in Colombia can
know the truth. We will receive a report from the Truth
Commission, which will represent an opportunity to
bring us together, not divide us; to build, not destroy;
and to engage deeply in a process of reflection, without
bias and with complete independence. That is the wish
that we have in our institutions.
My visit here and my presence here as Head of
State of Colombia is to reiterate that our participation
in this multilateral forum, and the invitation for this
multilateral forum to be present in an ongoing manner
in Colombia, make it possible for us to demonstrate
with facts what we have achieved. We do not intend to
behave as if all challenges had been overcome. They do
exist, they are historical, and there are long-standing
debts in some regions. But Colombia, as a society
united in its desire for peace, unequivocally wishes to
overcome the challenges of violence.
That makes it possible for me also to offer a
clarification on the comment made about the Ejército
de Liberación Nacional, as follows.
When I became President, I asked for 90 days to
evaluate the 17 months of talks that had been held prior
to my Administration, in order to know where the point
of departure was, and, after carefully reviewing all the
indicators, it became clear that during those 17 months
more than 100 people had been killed, more than 400
acts of terrorism had taken place and more than a dozen
people had been kidnapped in Colombia.
Our message was clear. We would open the door
only to an understanding based on the release of all
those kidnapped and an end to the violence, because
accepting an approach to the State so long as those levels
of violence continued would represent a justification
22-31544

12/04/2022

S/PV.9015

Colombia

of violence as a legitimate mechanism of approaching
talks in a democratic State, and that should not happen.
We know that our challenges are great, but
Colombian State policy will continue to be based on
those two principles. Violence must be overcome, and
what we have said concerning truth, justice, reparation
and non-repetition is aimed precisely at ensuring that
violence does not lead to fresh expressions of fratricide.
Today our country, after long decades of suffering
violence, has more robust, better structured and more

stable institutions and a greater territorial presence. The
approach to peace with legality I have described means
that the Security Council and this multilateral forum,
accompanied by the intensive work of the Verification
Mission, can feel proud of the fact that, as SecretaryGeneral Guterres said, Colombia is a reference point
for peacebuilding in the world.
The President: I thank Mr. Duque, President of
Colombia, for joining us today.
The meeting rose at 12.15 p.m.

22-3154423/23
