S/2017/465

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
31 May 2017
Original: English

Report of the Secretary-General on the situation in Central
Africa and the activities of the United Nations Regional
Office for Central Africa
I. Introduction
1.
The present report is submitted pursuant to the request contained in the
statement of the President of the Security Council dated 11 June 2015
(S/PRST/2015/12), in which the Council requested me to keep it informed about the
activities of the United Nations Regional Office for Central Africa (UNOCA). It
provides an assessment of the major political and security trends in the Central
African subregion since the previous report, dated 28 November 2016 ( S/2016/996),
and provides an update on progress in the implementation of the mandate of
UNOCA and on efforts to implement the United Nations regional strategy to address
the threat and impact of the activities of the Lord’s Resistance Army (LRA)
(see S/2012/481).

II. Major developments in the Central African subregion
A.

Political, peace and security developments and trends
2.
Tensions from disputed electoral processes continued to affect the subregion,
mitigated in some cases by a ttempts to promote dialogue between governments and
opposition groups. Economic and social challenges aggravated prevailing political
grievances in several places. Despite regional efforts to counter Boko Haram,
continuing violence has deepened a serious humanitarian crisis and development
deficit in the Lake Chad basin region. During a visit from 2 to 7 March, the Security
Council took stock of the situation and raised awareness of the crisis. The visit led
to the adoption of resolution 2349 (2017) on 31 March 2017. Separately, national,
regional and international efforts to combat LRA continued, along with efforts to
reconfigure the African Union Regional Task Force, following the withdrawal of the
forces of South Sudan, Uganda and the United States of America.
3.
An economic downturn contributed to political and social tensions, provoking
strikes in some countries over austerity measures and delayed salary payments. On
23 December 2016, an extraordinary summit of the Central African Economic and
Monetary Community (CEMAC), held in Yaoundé, focused on the economic and
financial situation of member States adversely affected by the fall in the global
prices of raw materials, especially oil. The summit adopted a series of eco nomic

17-07685 (E)

020617

*1707685*

S/2017/465

resilience measures and decided to accelerate efforts to promote the free movement
of people and goods. On 17 February 2017, the thirteenth ordinary session of the
Conference of Heads of State and Government of the Central African Economic and
Monetary Community, held in Djibloho, Equatorial Guinea, assessed the status of
implementation of the reform programme on economic and financial affairs,
launched at the Yaoundé summit, and discussed the free movement of persons.
4.
The implementation of Security Council resolution 1325 (2000) on women,
peace and security, which seeks to ensure the effective participation of women in
decision-making, remains a challenge in the subregion. Some positive developmen ts
have been observed, including the mobilization of women’s networks and the
creation of a women’s regional platform on women, peace and security, but more
work is clearly needed.
5.
On 10 February, I appointed François Louncény Fall as my Special
Representative for Central Africa and Head of UNOCA (see S/2017/137).
Political developments and trends
6.
Following the announcement on 3 February by the President of Angola, José
Eduardo dos Santos, that he would not seek re-election, the ruling party, Movimento
Popular de Libertação de Angola, confirmed that the Minister of Defence, João
Lourenço, and the Minister of Territorial Administration, Bornito de Sousa, would
lead the party’s ticket during the August 2017 elections for the posts of President
and Vice-President, respectively. The opposition party União Nacional para a
Independência Total de Angola declared on 21 February that it would not join in an
electoral coalition with other opposition parties. Meanwhile, the voter registration
process was completed, with approximately 9 million voters registered, 2 million of
whom are newly registered.
7.
In Cameroon, social unrest continued in the North-West and South-West
regions over the imposition of the French language in judicial, educational and other
fields. While the initial protests in late 2016 were related to grievances expressed by
unions representing lawyers and teachers, accusations expanded to include
historical, political and economic discrimination against the anglophone population.
Numerous clashes with security forces took place, along with ongoing general
strikes (also referred to as “ghost towns”), arrests of anglophone activists and an
Internet blackout in the two regions (from 17 January to 20 April 2017).
8.
Government efforts to appease those tensions at the outset were not successful.
On 17 January, it banned the activities of the Cameroon Anglophone Civil Society
Consortium and the secessionist movement, the Southern Cameroons National
Council, accusing them of conducting actions contrary to the Constitution and
aimed at undermining State security. Leaders of the Consortium, Nkongho Felix
Agbor-Balla and Fontem Aforteka’a Neba, were also arrested on 17 January, and
journalist and activist Mancho Bibixy on 20 January. All three face charges of
terrorism and, if convicted, could face the death penalty under the country’s
anti-terrorism law of February 2014. The trial of the three lead activists and five
others, all civilians, commenced on 13 February at the Yaoundé military tribunal.
On 7 April, the court adjoined the case of 25 other defendants. Meanwhile, another
military tribunal was held, in the case of a reporter for Radio France Internationale,
Ahmed Abba, whom the Government alleges to have colluded with Boko Haram. He
had been in detention since 30 July 2015. The defendant, who pleaded not guilty,
was sentenced to 10 years in prison on 20 April 2017.
9.
On 15 March, the President of Cameroon, Paul Biya, appointed the president
and 13 representatives of the National Commission for the Promotion of
Bilingualism and Multiculturalism, which he established on 23 January. The
2/18

17-07685

S/2017/465

Presidency also contacted the Cameroon Anglophone Civil Society Consortium on
17 March, expressing willingness to engage in dialogue to address their grievances.
Moreover, on 30 March, the Minister of Justice unveiled a number of measures
taken by the Government to address the crisis, including the creation of a common
law section at the École nationale de magistrature, English law departments at a
number of universities, the redeployment of magistrates according to linguistic
criteria, and the appointment of additional anglophone magistrates at the High
Court. Those steps were deemed insufficient by the striking lawyers and the
leadership of the Consortium, who continued to demand the immediate release and
pardon of those detained and the restoration of Internet service in the two regions
where it had been blocked. Internet service was restored on 20 April.
10. In Chad, a new law was passed in December 2016, which prohibits strikes
from lasting more than three days. On 6 January, the Minister for Territorial
Administration and Local Governance banned the Mouvement d’éveil citoyen
platform, comprising political parties and civil society organizations calling for
strikes. The Minister cited the illegal and subversive nature of the group, which was
purportedly supported by opposition armed groups. On the same day, trade unions
announced the resumption of a nationwide strike, due to the lack of progress in
negotiations with the Government over salary arrears and austerity measures.
However, on 6 March, the trade unions suspended the strike as a gesture of goodwill
to allow negotiations to be held in a peaceful environment unde r the framework of
an ad hoc committee established that month.
11. In the context of the economic crisis facing Chad, on 2 February, the
President, Idriss Déby Itno, announced the indefinite postponement of legislative
elections, initially due to be held in 2015, citing a lack of funds. In response, the
opposition coalition, Front de l’opposition nouvelle pour l’alternance et le
changement, called for the holding of legislative elections without further delay,
declaring that it would not recognize the legitimacy of the National Assembly after
21 June 2017. Moreover, on 5 February, the President reshuffled the Government,
led by the Prime Minister, Albert Pahimi Padacké, and reduced the number of
ministerial posts from 33 to 21. The reshuffle followed the el ection at the end of
January of the Minister for Foreign Affairs, Moussa Faki Mahamat, as Chairperson
of the African Union Commission.
12. Meanwhile, as part of efforts to address lingering political tensions related to
the presidential election held in April 2016, on 9 February, the President of Chad
formally installed the 16 members of the Haut comité chargé des réformes
institutionnelles, which, among other responsibilities, will draft a new constitution
and design and implement other institutional refor ms. The body includes
Government ministers, members of the presidential cabinet, parliamentarians and
members of civil society.
13. In the Central African Republic, the President, Faustin Archange Touadéra,
continued efforts to foster dialogue with the ar med groups. Following robust action
by the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in the
Central African Republic (MINUSCA), and for the first time since the Bangui
Forum on National Reconciliation was held in May 2015, all 14 mai n armed groups
participated in a meeting of the Consultative Follow-up Committee on
Disarmament, Demobilization, Reintegration and Repatriation, which was held in
April 2017. The presence of armed groups was also successfully reduced in Bambari
as a result of the Mission’s robust posture, enabling the start of the restoration of
State authority. While Bangui remained relatively calm, violence escalated between
the armed groups in the centre and east of the country, causing high numbers of
civilian casualties, adding to the number of displaced people and hampering aid and
recovery efforts. In the worst attack against MINUSCA to date, on 8 May,
17-07685

3/18

S/2017/465

anti-balaka elements killed five peacekeepers and injured 10 peacekeepers, in the
south-east of the country. Following the decision of the United States and
subsequently of Uganda and South Sudan to cease operations and withdraw from
the African Union Regional Task Force, the Peace and Security Council of the
African Union requested that the Security Council include the disarmament of the
Lord’s Resistance Army in the mandate of MINUSCA.
14. In the Republic of the Congo, tensions related to the presidential election held
in March 2016 and the subsequent crisis in the Pool region continued to fester, with
main opposition leaders in detention pending trial, while others had had their
freedom of movement restricted. In addition, some segments of the opposition
continue to contest the legitimacy of the election and of the current Government. On
10 January, opposition leader and former presidential candidate, André Okombi
Salissa, was arrested in Brazzaville on charges of illegal possession of weapons and
an attempt to undermine State security. His parliamentary immunity was
subsequently lifted, on 19 January, by the National Assembly, paving the way for
possible prosecution. On 3 May, the head of the opposition party Cercle des
démocrates et républicains du Congo, Modeste Boukadia, was sentenced to
30 years’ imprisonment for undermining State security. On 5 May, ahead of the
legislative and municipal elections that are scheduled to be held on 16 July 2017,
the Government announced that the revision of the electoral list would occur
between 10 May and 20 June. It also appointed members of the administrative
commissions in charge of the revision.
15. From 5 to 7 March, some 300 delegates from political parties and civil society
held consultations in Ouesso, in the north of the Republic of the Congo, organized
by the Government, to prepare for the legislative and municipal electio ns in July
2017. At the meeting, opposition parties stressed the need to revise the electoral list,
while the opposition party Mouvement des jeunes démocrates criticized the fact that
the agenda excluded discussions on the release of political prisoners an d the crisis
in the Pool region. Key opposition members, including the leaders of the platforms
Front républicain pour le respect de l’ordre constitutionnel et l’alternance
démocratique and Initiative pour la démocratie au Congo, who contest the
re-election of the President, Denis Sassou Nguesso, were notably absent from the
meeting. They demand a national dialogue to find a political solution to the crisis in
the Pool region, among other things.
16. On 25 January, the President of Equatorial Guinea, Teodoro Obiang Nguema
Mbasogo, officially informed his Council of Ministers of his decision to grant
political asylum to the former President of the Gambia, Yahya Jammeh, drawing
criticism from the main opposition party, Convergencia para la Democracia Social.
Meanwhile, on 23 January, Equatorial Guinea officially requested membership in
the Organization of the Petroleum Exporting Countries.
17. The political scene in Gabon has been dominated by preparations for the
Government-led national dialogue, following the presidential election held in
August 2016; the continued rejection by opposition leader, Jean Ping, and his
supporters of President Ali Bongo Ondimba’s re-election and their refusal to
participate in the national dialogue, along with shifts in political alliances; and
strikes in the oil and education sectors, as well as by customs officers.
18. Pursuant to the decree by the President of Gabon regarding the convening of a
Government-led national dialogue to address political grievances, the process
commenced with civil society consultations, held from 29 March to 12 April. These
were followed by political consultations, held from 18 April to 3 May. Thematic
issues discussed included institutional and electoral reforms and the dialogue
explored ways to achieve national reconciliation and social cohesion.
4/18

17-07685

S/2017/465

19. A number of current and former high-level officials were arrested in the
context of an anti-corruption drive in Gabon. On 10 January, a special adviser to the
President and former holder of several ministerial portfolios was arrested for
allegedly embezzling nearly $1 billion of public funds. On 12 January, the former
Minister of Mines, Petroleum and Hydrocarbons was arrested over similar
allegations, after having been relieved of his functions a day earlier. On 2 March,
the Public Prosecutor announced that the Director General of Customs had been
arrested and jailed on charges of embezzlement. International arrest warrants were
issued against a number of individuals, including the son of opposition leader Jean
Ping.
20. In Rwanda, the Government announced on 10 December that the presidential
election would be held in August 2017. In addition to the incumbent President, Paul
Kagame, other candidates include a journalist, Philippe Mpayimana, and the head of
the Government-recognized opposition Democratic Green Party, Frank Habineza.
21. In preparation for legislative and municipal elections in Sao Tome and
Principe, to be held in 2018, the National Electoral Commission is presently
conducting a census to update the voter rolls for issuance of new biometric
identification cards.
Security developments and trends
Boko Haram
22. The concerted military operations of the Multinational Joint Task Force and
the national armed forces of the Lake Chad basin countries continued to degrade
Boko Haram’s ability to attack. While the group has shifted most of its attacks to
military positions, it remains capable of attacking the civilian population through
suicide bombings. During the reporting period, Boko Haram was responsible for at
least 76 attacks in Cameroon’s Far North region, of which 15 were suicide
bombings, causing the death of 48 people, and four attacks in Chad’s Lac region,
resulting in the death of 24 people.
23. On 22 January, a helicopter of the Cameroonian armed forces crashed in the
Bogo area of Cameroon, killing General Jacob Kodji, who had led the national
military response against Boko Haram for the previous two years, and three other
officers. On 24 April, three Cameroonian soldiers were killed when their vehicle hit
a landmine in the vicinity of Mora. On 15 March, the Government of Cameroon
announced the release of over 5,000 civilian hostages and the killing of 60 Boko
Haram fighters during a military operation along the border with Nigeria. Following
the announcement, a Boko Haram propaganda video, depicting Boko Haram leader
Abubakar Shekau, surfaced on social media, on 1 April. The video called on his
followers to attack sites in Cameroon, including its capital.
24. In Chad, on 5 May, an attack by Boko Haram against an army post in Kaiga, in
the Lac region, resulted in the killing of nine soldiers. Some 40 Boko Haram
elements were also killed as the army responded to the attack. While there have
been fewer Boko Haram attacks in the country, tight security restrictions have
disrupted the livelihoods of the local population, including seriously limiting
trans-border trade. By end of 2016, hundreds of people, mostly women and children,
reportedly associated with Boko Haram, surrendered to the Multinational Joint Task
Force, continuing a trend that began in July 2016. A mission led by the Executive
Director of the Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive Directorate and my Special
Representatives for Central Africa and for West Africa and the Sahel (see also
para. 59 below), found the Government open to international technical assistance to
handle those detainees. On 17 February, the Minister of Public Security and
Immigration and the African Union Commissioner for Peace and Security signed a
17-07685

5/18

S/2017/465

joint communiqué to that effect, documenting commitments to manage former
members of Boko Haram, including temporary detention, de -radicalization, vetting
and reintegration. The communiqué called for international assistance to address the
defection phenomenon, which is expected to increase with the weakening of Boko
Haram. Shortly after the signing of the communiqué, the Government releas ed the
vast majority of those who had surrendered, who returned to their communities of
origin, without a proper determination of their status, including any potential
association with Boko Haram, having been completed.
Lord’s Resistance Army
25. The Lord’s Resistance Army remains a significant threat to the population in
affected areas. Since the beginning of 2017, multiple LRA groups, usually
comprising 12 to 16 elements, according to defectors and local authorities, have
shown increased boldness by raiding villages in the Dungu, Niangara, Ango and
Bondo territories in the Democratic Republic of the Congo, as well as poaching
elephants in Garamba National Park. There has also been a surge of abductions of
young boys and girls by LRA, usually around the ages of 12 or 13, to boost LRA
ranks. On 11 March in Dungu, LRA elements clashed with the Armed Forces of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, resulting in the death of one army officer and
the injury of another, along with the deaths of three LRA comba tants.
26. LRA groups have also persistently attacked the civilian population in the
Central African Republic along the Obo-Zemio axis. On 10 March, an attempt by
unidentified armed elements, presumed to be LRA, to ambush a MINUSCA convoy
along the Zemio-Rafai axis resulted in an exchange of fire.
27. LRA also continued to operate within a broader context that facilitates its
activities, including illicit trafficking networks that exist in its areas of operation,
ongoing activities of other armed groups and conflicts over land rights and access
involving farmers and herders.
28. On 29 January, the Heads of State and Government of countries affected by
LRA held a summit on the margins of the twenty-eighth ordinary session of the
Assembly of Heads of State and Government of the African Union in Addis Ababa,
at the request of the President of Uganda, Yoweri Museveni. The summit
recommended, among other matters, the need for cross-border operations against
LRA, accurate intelligence about its movements and rebuilding the capacity of the
Central African Armed Forces.
29. The sixth ministerial meeting of the Joint Coordination Mechanism of the
Regional Cooperation Initiative for the Elimination of the Lord’s Resistance Army
was held in Addis Ababa, on 29 and 30 March, to review the revised strategic
concept of operations and coordination mechanisms for cross -border operations. As
earlier indicated, the Governments of Uganda and South Sudan commenced their
disengagement from the African Union Regional Task Force, following the
withdrawal by the United States, on 26 April, of its special forces and logistical
support from the Regional Task Force. South Sudan also indicated that it would no
longer host the sector headquarters of the Task Force in Yambio. Nonetheless,
Uganda, South Sudan and the Sudan offered to train the Central African armed
forces to take over the Task Force responsibilities. In addition, the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and the Sudan, the latter’s request for membership in the
Regional Cooperation Initiative having been accepted, expressed reservations
regarding cross-border operations in their territories.
30. On 19 April, a first batch of 31 Ugandan military personnel, of the 2,000 who
were deployed in the Central African Republic as part of th e Task Force, arrived in
Kampala. Since then, 800 additional personnel have left the Central African
6/18

17-07685

S/2017/465

Republic. At the time of writing, an imminent departure for Uganda was expected
for the remaining military elements.
Maritime security in the Gulf of Guinea
31. Since my previous report, 11 incidents of piracy and armed robbery at sea in
the Gulf of Guinea have been reported by the International Maritime Organization.
32. On 22 February, the leadership of the Interregional Coordination Centre for
Maritime Safety and Security in the Gulf of Guinea was formally installed at a
ceremony held in Yaoundé, following a decision taken by the Economic Community
of Central African States (ECCAS) and the Economic Community of West African
States at the African Union summit held on 30 and 31 January.
Poaching and the illicit trafficking in wildlife and natural resources
33. A research study released in February 2017 indicated that the elephant
population in the Minkebe National Park in Gabon had declined by nearly 80 per
cent — a loss of more than 25,000 elephants — between 2004 and 2014.
Transnational poaching networks drove the significant decline, despite the efforts of
the Government of Gabon since 2011.

B.

Humanitarian developments
34. Persistent violence and insecurity caused by Boko Haram have brought
devastation to families and communities in the Lake Chad basin region, where some
2.4 million people have been displaced and more than 7 million people require food
assistance. Across the region, more than 10 million people are in need of
humanitarian assistance, making it one of the world’s largest humanitarian cris es.
The year 2016 saw a significant scale-up in the humanitarian response across the
worst-hit areas. Owing to the collective efforts of Governments, donors, United
Nations entities and non-governmental organizations, in 2016 up to 1.6 million
people received life-saving food assistance; 1 million children were vaccinated
against measles; 4.4 million people accessed emergency primary health care; almost
300,000 boys and girls resumed their education; and the same number of children
under 5 and nursing mothers were treated for malnutrition, two thirds of whom were
at risk of dying. At an international humanitarian conference held in Oslo on
24 February, 14 donor countries pledged $672 million over three years in emergency
aid for the population in the Lake Chad region, 70 per cent of which has been
allocated for 2017.
35. Although military operations have degraded and scattered Boko Haram
fighters, attacks and suicide bombings continue in Cameroon’s Far North region,
where an estimated 220,000 persons have been displaced. The region also hosts
86,000 Nigerian refugees. In addition, the onset of the dry season has eased
movement, resulting in increased attacks along the main roads and hampering
humanitarian access. On 2 March, the Tripartite Agreement between Cameroon,
Nigeria and the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees was
signed in Yaoundé. The Agreement establishes the conditions and procedures for the
safe, dignified and voluntary return of Nigerian refugees. However, the Office of t he
High Commissioner reported that instances of refoulement of Nigerian asylum
seekers in Cameroon continued despite the agreement, and that by 21 March, more
than 2,600 refugees had been returned to Nigerian border villages against their will
in 2017. The Government of Cameroon denied the reports. In eastern Cameroon,
critical funding gaps are threatening the sustainability of vital food assistance
programmes for refugees from the Central African Republic, 276,000 of whom

17-07685

7/18

S/2017/465

remain in the country. For 2017, the humanitarian community in Cameroon is
seeking $310 million to provide life-saving assistance and address the acute and
chronic needs of 1.2 million people.
36. In Chad, some 4 million people, around one third of the country’s population,
are food insecure, among whom more than 1 million face severe shortages. Over
half a million children are expected to suffer acute malnutrition in 2017. In the
western Lac region, food insecurity has grown and persists as a result of Boko
Haram activities. The resulting population displacement has accentuated the
vulnerability of those forced to flee violence and the communities hosting them,
many of whom were already impoverished and needed assistance prior to the
upsurge in attacks. Additionally, Chad hosts some 615,000 refugees from the
Central African Republic, Nigeria and the Sudan, in addition to some 104,000
internally displaced people. In 2017, $589 million is required to provide life -saving
assistance for 2.6 million people affected by crisis in Chad.
37. In the Central African Republic, violent clashes between armed groups since
November 2016 have resulted in a sharp deterioration of the security situation,
causing the displacement of populations in Haute-Kotto and Ouaka districts. The
country remains one of the most dangerous environments for humanitarian workers,
as it accounted for 31 per cent of worldwide security incidents in 2016. As of March
2017, nearly 464,000 Central Africans have sought refuge in neighbouring
countries, while some 402,000 were internally displaced. Food scarcity across the
country remains acute, with nearly half of the population being food insecure.
Persistent insecurity and population displacements have disrupted agricultural and
pastoral activities, the main source of income and food for the vast majority of
Central Africans, particularly in rural areas, with 65 per cent unable to farm in 2016.
The 2016 Humanitarian Response Plan remains largely underfunded, with only
36 per cent of the needed $531.5 million received, resulting in nea rly half of the
population being left without humanitarian assistance. In 2017, almost $400 million
will be required to assist 2.2 million people.

C.

Human rights trends
38. Violations of human rights continued in many countries of the subregion. Th e
excessive use of force, arbitrary arrests and the detention of political opponents,
civil society activists and media practitioners illustrate a trend of the continued
narrowing of the democratic and political space in the subregion. The climate of
impunity that prevails in some States remains a concern and represents a serious
impediment to the creation of an environment conducive to the holding of peaceful
electoral processes and smooth democratic transitions.
39. In Cameroon, a peaceful demonstration held on 28 November by students from
the University of Buea was repressed by security forces, who resorted to the
excessive use of force, coupled with arbitrary arrests and detention. On 8 December,
protests organized by youth groups in Bamenda, the capita l of the North-West
region, escalated when police and security forces used tear gas and water cannons
against protesters, before eventually opening fire. At least two protesters were killed
and four police officers injured. A police precinct was burned dow n and
Government vehicles were set ablaze. There have also been other violations of the
rights to freedom of expression and association, peaceful assembly and access to
information, including the arrests and detention of journalists, as well as the
shutdown of Internet and two radio stations in Bamenda and Buea between
mid-January and mid-April.

8/18

17-07685

S/2017/465

40. A national action plan to guide the implementation of Security Council
resolution 1325 (2000) has been finalized and awaits official presentation to the
Government of Cameroon. In 2016, the country adopted a new penal code that
protects the rights of women and girls, in particular regarding the custody of minors,
female genital mutilation and sexual violence. The national strategy on addressing
gender-based violence and the national action plan on addressing female genital
mutilation were recently reviewed to conform to international human rights
standards.
41. The human rights situation in the Republic of the Congo continues to raise
concern, with reports from local civil society organizations and opposition parties
pointing to the continuous narrowing of the democratic space and allegations of
human rights violations, including cases of torture, arbitrary arrests, detention and
forced disappearances. The Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for
Human Rights continues to engage with the Government regarding the follow -up to
the recommendations made subsequent to its human rights assessment mission of
June and July 2016.
42. In Chad, several prominent civil society activists have been detained or have
reported being harassed by security officials since April, raising human rights
concerns. They included members of non-governmental organizations who were
undertaking or calling for civil disobedience, which goes against a recent law
passed by the Government prohibiting strikes lasting more than three days.
43. Since December 2016, in the Central African Republic, MINUSCA has
documented 986 new verified incidents of violations or abuses of human rights and
international humanitarian law committed against 1,410 victims, including 934 men,
157 women, 63 boys and 43 girls. The violations included arbitrary killings, cruel
and inhuman treatment, the expropriation of property and pillages, conflict -related
sexual violence, and arbitrary arrests and detentions, as well as abductions. In
addition to those verified incidents, investigations are ongoing into incidents that
occurred recently in Alindao, Bangassou and Niem.

D.

Socioeconomic trends
44. Economic activity in the subregion continued to decline. According to data
from the Bank of Central African States, the real gross domestic product growth rate
of countries of the Central African Economic and Monetary Community region was
0.2 per cent in 2016, compared to 1.7 per cent in 2015, as a consequence of the
continued decline in global commodity prices, notably oil. The security situation in
the subregion has further hampered the capacity of States to invest in the promotion
of sustainable human development. The Bank has forecast a 1.6 per cent growth rate
for 2017, linked to the slight rise in oil prices and the implementation of measures
for economic and financial reforms in the subregion.
45. Although the subregion has made some progress on human development,
particularly in the education and health sectors, much remains to be done to achieve
the related objectives and targets outlined in the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development. Several factors hamper such progress, including inequalities, the lack
of structural transformation and diversification, the lack of progress towards gender
equality and the full empowerment of women in the political, economic and social
spheres and vulnerability related to unpredictable shocks, such as food shortages
and the impact of climate change.

17-07685

9/18

S/2017/465

III. Activities of the United Nations Regional Office for
Central Africa
A.

Good offices, preventive diplomacy and mediation
46. During the reporting period, my Special Representative for Central Africa
continued to be actively engaged in the subregion in promoting regional peace and
security and preventing conflict, including by undertaking a number of country specific visits.
Central African Republic
47. On 28 and 29 December 2016, my Special Representative for Central Africa
travelled to Bangui to meet the President, the President of the National Assembly
and other interlocutors in order to discuss issues related to the situation in the
country, particularly its regional dimension. He also took part in a briefing given on
7 March by the Special Representative of the Chairperson of the African Union
Commission for the Central African Republic to United Nations entities and the
European Union regarding the African Initiative for Peace and Reconciliation led by
the African Union with ECCAS, the International Conference on the Great Lakes
Region, Chad, Angola and the Republic of the Congo. My Special Representative
for Central Africa continued to engage with regional leaders and the Secretary General of ECCAS, in cooperation with my Special Representative to the Central
African Republic, to urge for continued assistance to the Government in its efforts
to consolidate peace in the country.
48. On 6 February, my Special Representative for Central Africa travelled to
Luanda, where he met with the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Angola to discuss the
situation in the subregion, in particular in the Central African Republic, and the
need for enhanced coordination and harmonization of approaches between regional
and international actors involved in peace efforts in the country.
Cameroon
49. From 1 to 3 February, my Special Representative travelled to Yaoundé for
consultations with national authorities on the situation in Cameroon, particularly in
the anglophone regions, and the fight against Boko Haram. He met the Prime
Minister, the Minister for Foreign Affairs, the Minister of Territorial Administration
and Decentralization and civil society actors. He stressed the need for a peaceful
solution to the situation and reiterated United Nations support to the efforts of the
Lake Chad basin countries in fighting terrorism. Prior to his mission, a working level team from UNOCA travelled to the country to hold discussions with
stakeholders and explore possible entry points for United Nations support.
50. My Special Representative travelled to Yaoundé again from 9 to 13 April,
where he met senior Government representatives, opposition figures and civil
society actors, as well as the detained leaders of the Cameroon Anglophone Civil
Society Consortium, to encourage them to engage in dialogue in order to peacefully
address the crisis. During his visit, he encouraged the Government to consider
carrying out additional confidence-building measures to further defuse tensions,
including the release of the anglophone leaders and the restoration of Internet
services as a sign of goodwill. He further urged the authorities to fully implement
the measures announced in the justice sector. My Special Representative found the
imprisoned leaders of the Consortium to be in good form. They informed him that
they were well treated and underlined that they were against secession. They further
expressed their readiness to call for the suspension of the strike upon their release

10/18

17-07685

S/2017/465

should the Government give its assurances that it would address the grievances of
the anglophone regions through dialogue. My Special Representative conveyed the
request to the Cameroonian authorities, reiterating his call for their release, while
also exhorting all parties to resort to dialogue. He furth er reiterated the
Organization’s willingness to provide good offices in this regard, if requested by the
parties.
Gabon
51. My Special Representative held frequent meetings with key political actors,
including the President, the Prime Minister, Emmanuel Issoze-Ngondet, who was
leading the national dialogue process, and opposition leaders, as well as
representatives of civil society organizations and the diplomatic community, to
address outstanding post-electoral tensions. My Special Representative consistently
called for an inclusive, transparent and meaningful political dialogue that would
address governance challenges facing Gabon. He encouraged the Government to
address the opposition’s concerns, including through confidence -building measures,
while urging the opposition to engage in a constructive manner with the aim of
creating conditions conducive to peaceful and credible legislative elections, taking
into account the recommendations of the national dialogue. On the eve of the launch
of the national dialogue, my Special Representative issued a statement calling for
inclusive participation.
Republic of the Congo
52. On 29 and 30 December 2016, my Special Representative travelled to
Brazzaville to assess the situation in the Congo. He met the President and the
Minister for Foreign Affairs and reiterated the call for an inclusive dialogue and
confidence-building measures to pave the way for a peaceful political environment
in the run-up to the legislative elections scheduled for July 2017. He also di scussed
cross-border and subregional issues and called on the country to continue lending
support to efforts to defuse tensions and preserve regional peace and stability, in
particular regarding the Central African Republic and the Democratic Republic of
the Congo.
53. From 25 to 29 April, my Special Representative travelled to Brazzaville to
meet senior officials and other interlocutors to discuss the political and security
situation in the country, particularly in the Pool region. He underlined the
importance of all political stakeholders engaging in dialogue in order to address
grievances, in particular by taking advantage of the newly -created Conseil national
du dialogue. He also called on the Government to facilitate humanitarian access to
the Pool region; to ensure inclusive, transparent and fair legislative and local
elections; and to ensure that detained political leaders receive a fair and speedy trial.

B.

Support to United Nations, regional and subregional initiatives on
peace and security
United Nations Standing Advisory Committee on Security Questions in
Central Africa
54. In its capacity as the secretariat of the United Nations Standing Advisory
Committee on Security Questions in Central Africa, UNOCA facilitated the
evaluation of the work of the Committee, as requested by the Committee at its forty third ministerial meeting, held in Sao Tome and Principe from 28 November to
1 December 2016. The evaluation included the organization of a workshop in
Libreville on 27 and 28 April, attended by representatives of member States of the

17-07685

11/18

S/2017/465

Committee and the secretariat of ECCAS. The next meeting of the Committee is
scheduled to take place in Yaoundé from 29 May to 2 June 2017, during which
UNOCA will present the findings of the evaluation.
Collaboration with regional, subregional and intergovernmental organizations
55. The United Nations Regional Office for Central Africa further enhanced its
collaboration with key subregional organizations to address cross -border and
regional threats to peace and security in the subregion. On 17 January, my Special
Representative met the Secretary-General of ECCAS and discussed the status of
implementation of the cooperation framework agreed in June 2016 between the two
institutions, a component of the institutional capacity development strategy of
UNOCA. On 19 January, a working-level meeting between UNOCA and the
secretariat of ECCAS resulted in the identification of key priority areas for joint
action and the development of a joint plan of action for collabor ation in 2017.
Furthermore, within the framework of enhanced cooperation between the United
Nations and subregional organizations, the Secretary-General of ECCAS travelled
to Abuja to meet the members of the Security Council during their visit to the Lake
Chad basin region in order to discuss the regional impact of the Boko Haram crisis.
Mediation
56. The United Nations Regional Office for Central Africa and the secretariat of
ECCAS, in cooperation with the Department of Political Affairs, organized a
training workshop in Libreville from 24 to 26 April to strengthen the mediation
capacities of their personnel. Also participating were the peace and development
advisers in Cameroon and Chad, and personnel from MINUSCA and the United
Nations Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo
(MONUSCO). The workshop was attended by staff members with direct
responsibility for analysing conflicts, advising senior leadership on mediation
efforts and supporting the design and facilitation of mediatio n processes.
57. From 10 to 12 May, UNOCA, with assistance from the Department of Political
Affairs, hosted a training workshop in Libreville for the staff of the offices of
national mediators and ombudspersons in the subregion. The workshop aimed at
building the institutional capacity of the offices and enhancing working -level
collaboration within and among those offices, the secretariat of ECCAS and
UNOCA. Representatives from the offices of national mediators and ombudspersons
in seven countries, as well as staff of the secretariat of ECCAS and UNOCA,
attended the training.
58. The United Nations Regional Office for Central Africa continued to facilitate
efforts aimed at operationalizing the association of the mediators of States members
of the Economic Community of Central African States, created in July 2016. On
13 March, UNOCA met the Mediator of Gabon to advocate the drafting of the
founding documents of the association, the convening of a meeting of its Steering
Committee and ensuring its financial sustainability.
Boko Haram
59. From 13 to 17 February, my Special Representative for Central Africa,
together with the Executive Director of the Counter -Terrorism Committee Executive
Directorate and my Special Representative for West Africa and the S ahel, undertook
a joint visit to the four countries affected by Boko Haram (see also para. 24 above).
The delegation met senior officials, as well as representatives of the Lake Chad
Basin Commission and the Multinational Joint Task Force, the diplomatic
community and United Nations country teams. The visit served to reiterate the
12/18

17-07685

S/2017/465

Organization’s commitment to the affected countries and to determine how best the
international community could support national and regional counter -terrorism
efforts. The affected States acknowledged the need to strengthen regional police and
judicial cooperation. One of the main concerns for the affected countries is how to
deal with returning foreign terrorist fighters and develop and implement
prosecution, rehabilitation and reintegration strategies for them. Among other
things, the States of the region also need to improve their law enforcement and
criminal justice responses to the Boko Haram threat.
60. In Chad, the United Nations and non-governmental organizations are
extending their outreach to and presence in the isolated communities of return of the
released detainees, as well as helping the authorities with their reintegration and
community peacebuilding.
Regional integration
61. My Special Representative participated in the thirteenth ordinary session of
the Conference of Heads of State and Government of CEMAC, held in Djibloho on
17 February. The summit assessed current political, security and socioeconomic
challenges in the subregion. I reiterated, through my Special Representative, the
commitment of the United Nations to supporting the Governments and peoples of
the subregion in their efforts to tackle persisting challenges and promote regional
integration.
Maritime security in the Gulf of Guinea
62. On 7 February, in Luanda, my Special Representative discussed issues relating
to the full operationalization of the Interregional Coordination Centre and other
aspects of the implementation of the maritime security strategy with the Executive
Secretary of the Gulf of Guinea Commission.
63. The United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime (UNODC) supported the
holding of a workshop and training in December for prosecutors, judges and law
enforcement officers from Sao Tome and Principe on the international law of the
sea. In addition, through the support of UNODC, the coast guard of the Sao Tome
and Principe carried out a patrol operation with criminal investigation police and
fisheries experts, 45 nautical miles from the coast.
Regional strategy and plan of action on counter-terrorism and the
non-proliferation of small arms and light weapons in Central Africa
64. From 29 November to 1 December, UNODC organized a workshop to support
Chadian policymakers in harmonizing legislation with international legal
instruments, particularly the United Nations Convention against Transnational
Organized Crime and the Protocol against the Illicit Manufacturing of and
Trafficking in Firearms, Their Parts and Components and Ammunition,
supplementing the United Nations Convention against Transnational Organized
Crime, the Arms Trade Treaty and the Central African Convention for the Control of
Small Arms and Light Weapons, Their Ammunition and All Parts and Components
That Can Be Used for Their Manufacture, Repair and Assembly (Kins hasa
Convention). The latter entered into force on 8 March.
65. From 24 to 28 January, the United Nations Regional Centre for Peace and
Disarmament in Africa, in collaboration with the Government of Cameroon,
organized a workshop in Yaoundé for the training of trainers regarding the fight
against the illicit trade in small arms and light weapons.

17-07685

13/18

S/2017/465

66. On 27 January, UNOCA organized a joint meeting between the regional
coordinator for the strategy and plan of action on counter -terrorism and the
non-proliferation of small arms and light weapons in Central Africa and officials
from the secretariat of ECCAS to discuss the way forward regarding implementation
of the strategy.
Coordination of the implementation of the United Nations regional strategy to
address the threat and impact of the Lord’s Resistance Army
Operationalization of the Regional Cooperation Initiative for the Elimination of the
Lord’s Resistance Army
67. From 7 to 9 December, UNOCA participated in a meeting in Addis Ababa
aimed at updating the concept of operations of the Regional Cooperation Initiative
for the Elimination of the Lord’s Resistance Army and strategizing the way forward.
Subsequently, on 29 and 30 March, UNOCA participated in the above -mentioned
meeting of the Joint Coordination Mechanism (see para. 29 above).
68. In cooperation with the African Union, UNOCA organized the ninth meeting
of LRA focal points, held in Entebbe, Uganda, on 15 and 16 December. Participants
noted that while progress was made on the operationalization of the Regional
Cooperation Initiative and the protection of civilians, there were still gaps
concerning humanitarian assistance and long-term development. The need for a
redefinition of the African Union Regional Task Force mandate was highlighted, as
well as the need for further collaboration with United Nations missions in countries
affected by LRA, so as to fill operational gaps.
69. From 14 to 21 March, my Special Representative, together with the African
Union Special Envoy on the Lord’s Resistance Army, conducted a joint mission to
the Democratic Republic of the Congo and Uganda. The purpose of the mission was
to discuss, with senior government officials, representatives from United Nations
country teams and MONUSCO, diplomatic representatives and other stakeholders, a
range of issues connected with counter-LRA efforts, including cooperation with the
African Union Regional Task Force, the need for humanitarian assistance and early
recovery initiatives in areas affected by LRA, and enhanced information -gathering
on the strength and disposition of LRA elements. The planned withdrawal of
Ugandan forces from the Task Force and the need to devise actions to prevent LRA
from exploiting the resulting security gap, including through training for the Central
African armed forces to permit their effective deployment to affected areas, were
also key subjects of discussion. However, the issues of the Task Force’s sustainment
and payment to enable their deployment in remote areas remain unresolved.
70. The United Nations Mission in South Sudan continued to provide logistical
support to the African Union Regional Task Force, including access to United
Nations flights between Juba and Yambio to staff of the Task Force headquarters, as
well as vehicle maintenance and information technology support.
Protection of civilians and humanitarian assistance
71. Through Operation Red Kite, MONUSCO continued to provide logistical
support to the offensive against LRA launched by the armed forces of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, which has disrupted LRA routes and
movements. MONUSCO continued to provide information support to the armed
forces and established three mobile operating bases in Badolo, Nakale and Nagero
in Haut-Uélé province.

14/18

17-07685

S/2017/465

Disarmament, demobilization, repatriation, resettlement and reintegra tion
72. The United Nations Organization Stabilization Mission in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo continued to implement Operation Bienvenue à la paix to
encourage LRA elements to surrender, including through leaflets and radio
broadcasting campaigns. Since the beginning of 2017, 12 individuals have
surrendered.
Long-term development and peacebuilding support
73. Stabilization and recovery efforts in areas affected by LRA remain seriously
underfunded and mostly unaddressed. State authorities and humanitarian and
development actors, including United Nations entities, are largely absent.

C.

Enhancing United Nations coherence and coordination in
the subregion
74. On 6 and 7 December in Libreville, UNOCA participated in the seventh
meeting of the Subregional Coordination Mechanism for United Nations system
support to programmes of the African Union and the New Partnership for Africa’s
Development in Central Africa. The meeting explored ways in which the United
Nations system can further support, in particular, ECCAS and CEMAC in
implementing the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development and the African
Union’s Agenda 2063 in the subregion.
75. On 23 and 24 March, in Libreville, UNOCA hosted the annual meeting of the
heads of United Nations presences in Central Africa, comprising Special Envoys
and Representatives of the Secretary-General, regional directors of United Nations
system entities and resident coordinators. The meeting assessed current regional and
cross-border challenges, as part of a broader strategy to enhance coherence in the
Organization’s approach to and support for conflict prevention and peacebuilding
efforts in the subregion. The meeting recommended the development of a
subregional strategy to address threats to peace and security, reinforce the
preventive diplomacy and good offices mandate of UNOCA and enhance
collaboration between UNOCA, Special Envoys and Representatives, resident
coordinators, regional offices and the regional economic communities.
76. On 25 and 26 March, UNOCA participated in the eighteenth session of the
Regional Coordination Mechanism for Africa, held in Dakar, which discussed
United Nations support for harnessing the demographic dividend through
investments in youth.
77. On 4 and 5 April, my Special Representative participated in the joint regional
meeting of the United Nations Development Group for Eastern and Southern Africa
and Western and Central Africa, held in Gaborone. The meeting aimed to promote
greater coherence between the United Nations development, humanitarian, human
rights and peacebuilding agendas.

IV. Observations and recommendations
78. Taking note of the continued political tensions within the subregion linked to
contested electoral processes and social and economic difficulties, I encourage all
stakeholders to resolve their differences in a peaceful manner and in conformity
with existing legal frameworks. I welcome efforts that have been undertaken in the
subregion to calm tensions, including through processes of inclusive and genuine

17-07685

15/18

S/2017/465

dialogue. I encourage all stakeholders to work with each other in good faith to find
lasting solutions to political, social and economic challenges. In this regard, I
welcome the steps taken by the Government of Cameroon to address concerns
raised by the aggrieved parties in the North-West and South-West regions of the
country and I encourage the Government to continue to address the situation in a
proactive and peaceful manner. I also encourage the Government of Gabon to
continue to promote key governance reforms through a genuine and inclusive
dialogue. It is my sincere hope that such an approach will contr ibute to improving
the sociopolitical climate, create favourable conditions for the holding of peaceful
and credible legislative elections, and consolidate peace and democracy in the
country. My Special Representative will continue to carry out his good of fices role
and engage in preventive diplomacy with all relevant stakeholders.
79. I welcome the efforts made by Governments of the subregion to accelerate and
deepen regional integration, including as regards the free movement of persons. I
encourage Governments and populations to create the conditions for further
integration that will boost economic productivity, increase economic and social
opportunities and reinforce security cooperation. I welcome the ongoing evaluation
of the United Nations Standing Advisory Committee on Security Questions in
Central Africa and hope that its outcome will help harmonize regional efforts to
address common security threats and strengthen capacities. My Special
Representative will continue to work with ECCAS member States i n this regard.
80. I am greatly encouraged by the progress in the fight against Boko Haram and
by the commendable regional and international cooperation that have made this
possible. At the same time, the terrorist group remains a serious threat to regiona l
peace and security, and its activities continue to have devastating consequences for
the political, socioeconomic, humanitarian and human rights situations in the
affected areas. I urge all stakeholders to continue their efforts to bring an end to the
crisis, in full conformity with international humanitarian, human rights and refugee
law. I welcome the signing of the Tripartite Agreement between the Governments of
Cameroon and Nigeria and the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for
Refugees. I am, however, concerned by reports of the refoulement of Nigerian
asylum seekers in Cameroon. I reiterate my call for the safe, dignified and voluntary
return of all displaced persons. We stand ready to work with both Governments and
express the hope that the Tripartite Commission for the Voluntary Repatriation of
Nigerian Refugees is constituted as soon as possible.
81. I call on the Governments of the Lake Chad basin countries to focus efforts to
address the root causes that contributed to the emergence of the Boko Haram crisis,
beyond the military dimension, namely the political and socioeconomic needs of
people in marginalized areas. Additionally, as a consequence of the military
successes achieved by the Multinational Joint Task Force, countries of the region
must now deal with former Boko Haram members who have surrendered, in
addition to those already in custody, most of whom have been detained for months
and years. The cases of detainees, both national and foreign, need to be promptly
processed according to international standards.
82. I welcome the visit by the Security Council to the Lake Chad basin region,
which shed a much-needed spotlight on this long neglected crisis. The international
community must support the region, including by redoubling its support to the vital
humanitarian, early recovery and development needs of the region, as well as
through logistical and financial assistance to the affected countries, the
Multinational Joint Task Force and the Lake Chad Basin Commission. I welcome
the holding of the Oslo Humanitarian Conference on Nigeria and the Lake Chad
Region, on 24 February, which drew global attention to the serious humanitarian
crisis unfolding in the region. Continued political engagement and rapid and full
16/18

17-07685

S/2017/465

disbursement of donor commitments are essential. I also encourage ECCAS and the
Economic Community of West African States (ECOWAS) to strengthen cooperation
and coordination on addressing the root causes of the Boko Haram crisis. UNOCA
and the United Nations Office for West Africa and the Sahel (UNOWAS) stand
ready to support the two organizations in this regard.
83. I welcome the appointment of the leadership of the Interregional Coordination
Centre for Maritime Safety and Security in the Gulf of Guinea and call upon
regional States and international partners to provide the resources necessary to
enable the Centre’s full functioning and for the implementation of the maritime
security strategy. I call on ECCAS, ECOWAS and the Gulf of Guinea Commission
to deepen their cooperation and coordination. I also call on countries of the region
to redouble their efforts in countering incidents of piracy and armed robbery at sea
in the Gulf of Guinea. UNOCA, in collaboration with UNOWAS, will continue to
provide assistance and mobilize support in combating maritime insecurity.
84. I welcome the recent entry into force of the Kinshasa Convention, which will
serve as an important component to reduce the proliferation of small arms and light
weapons in the subregion. This positive development is a testament to the collective
commitment of the concerned States to prevent and eradicate the illicit trade in
small arms and reduce the human suffering they cause. I would like to encourage
the signatories who have yet to ratify the Convention to do so.
85. Poaching and illicit wildlife trafficking continue to threaten endangered animal
populations in the subregion and have a negative impact on the overall
environmental, governance and security situation, including the continuing links
between the illicit wildlife trade and armed groups. I urge Governments in the
subregion to focus efforts on eradicating poaching and on operationalizing the
existing decisions on countering the illicit wildlife trade, including those contained
in General Assembly resolution 69/314.
86. I am concerned by the pervasive instability in the Central African Republic
and the continued human rights violations in the country, as well as attacks against
United Nations peacekeepers in the south-east of the country. I encourage the
Governments of the subregion to remain actively engaged in stabilization efforts.
My Special Representative for the Central African Republic and Head of
MINUSCA, Parfait Onanga-Anyanga, and my Special Representative for Central
Africa and Head of UNOCA, François Louncény Fall, will continue to work closely
with regional and subregional organizations in support of national efforts towards
finding a peaceful solution to the crisis and to mobilize financial supp ort for the
humanitarian response programmes for the affected population. I call on regional
and subregional partners to redouble their efforts in support of the Central African
Republic, including by lending their full support to efforts to promote the ce ssation
of hostilities and by working cooperatively to jointly address cross -border
challenges that affect the situation in the country.
87. The Lord’s Resistance Army continues to demonstrate its ability to target
civilians in affected areas in the Democratic Republic of the Congo and the Central
African Republic and negatively affect the security situation there. A steady
commitment by the affected States and regional and international partners to address
the immediate manifestations of LRA violence, as well as to finance broader
protection, humanitarian and development programmes, will be crucial to end the
threat. Moreover, the withdrawal of Ugandan and South Sudanese forces from the
African Union Regional Task Force, along with the termination of the su pport from
United States special forces, will require redoubled commitment from national,
regional and international stakeholders to ensure that LRA does not exploit the
resulting vacuum, including through the necessary reconfiguration and
17-07685

17/18

S/2017/465

reinforcement of the Regional Task Force and training of the Central African armed
forces. I appreciate the dedication and commitment displayed by Ugandan forces
and by military personnel of the Task Force and contributing countries, for their
efforts and operations, which remain crucial to ending the threat posed by LRA.
88. I would like to express my appreciation to the Governments of Central African
countries, ECCAS, CEMAC, the African Union, the Gulf of Guinea Commission
and other regional and subregional institutions for their continued collaboration
with UNOCA. I would also like to express my appreciation to the Multinational
Joint Task Force and troop-contributing countries for their dedication and
commitment to peace and stability in the region. I am grateful to the Government
and people of Gabon for their generous hospitality and support to UNOCA. I would
like to thank the various entities of the United Nations system working in Central
Africa, including the heads of United Nations peace operations, regional offices ,
country teams and other entities, for their support to and cooperation with UNOCA.
89. Finally, I would like to thank my Special Representative, François Louncény
Fall, and the staff of UNOCA for their efforts to advance the cause of peace and
security in Central Africa.

18/18

17-07685
