S/2013/43

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
22 January 2013
Original: English

Letter dated 27 December 2012 from the Secretary-General
addressed to the President of the Security Council
I have the honour to refer to the statement by the President of the Security
Council of 19 October 2012 (S/PRST/2012/22) and resolution 2076 (2012) of
20 November 2012, in which the Council requested that I report on options, and
their implications, for the possible redeployment of contingents of the United
Nations Organization Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo (MONUSCO) and additional force multipliers to improve the Mission’s
ability to implement its mandate. In this regard, my Special Representative for the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, Roger Meece, and the Under-Secretary-General
for Peacekeeping Operations, Hervé Ladsous, held consultations with the major
troop- and police-contributing countries of MONUSCO, on 21 and 23 November
2012, respectively, to discuss the strengthening of the Mission’s capabilities and
posture. At the request of Council members, Mr. Ladsous also outlined the
additional requirements of MONUSCO during the consultations of the Security
Council on 7 December 2012.
The situation on the ground remains tense, as the presence of the Mouvement
du 23 mars (M23) in various areas in Rutshuru territory, North Kivu, continues to
pose a serious threat to the protection of civilians. MONUSCO is undertaking a
number of contingency plans and has enhanced its activities in and around Goma. In
this regard, the Mission’s night patrolling throughout North Kivu has tripled, while
14 temporary deployments of MONUSCO troops have been established in South
Kivu. A company of the Ghanaian battalion based in Kinshasa and a company of the
Egyptian battalion stationed at the Kavumu airfield in South Kivu have been placed
on alert for quick reaction should the situation so require.
In addition to the steps taken within the Mission’s existing resources,
additional capacities are required in the immediate term to achieve the following
objectives and tasks: (a) improve the ability of MONUSCO to protect civilians;
(b) monitor and report on flows of arms and related materiel across the borders of
eastern Democratic Republic of the Congo; (c) provide increased logistical and
technical support to the International Conference on the Great Lakes Region
Expanded Joint Verification Mechanism in monitoring the border areas in eastern
Democratic Republic of the Congo; and (d) ensure that MONUSCO has the
necessary surveillance capabilities in terms of both equipment and personnel.
In this regard, and in order to enhance the operational mobility of MONUSCO,
it will be critical to complete the deployment of the authorized number of attack and
utility helicopters, increasing them from the currently deployed 23 to the authorized 29.
13-21367 (E) 230113

*1321367*

S/2013/43

It has also been determined that acquiring one additional utility helicopter and two
attack helicopters is required, thus bringing the total number of needed military
helicopters to 32. The military helicopters require night vision capacities in order to
operate at night, a critical shortcoming that the Mission faces.
Additional information capabilities are also needed for advanced information
collation, analysis and dissemination to enhance situational awareness and to permit
timely decision-making. This includes external imagery/electronic equipment and
associated analysis capabilities, notably surveillance capability such as that
provided by unmanned aerial systems. A greater riverine capacity, including an
additional riverine unit and shore-based radar equipment, is required in order to
provide enhanced coverage on lakes and rivers in the Kivus.
With regard to potential financial implications, the Secretariat might need to
request additional funding through the established channels.
These immediate requirements will enable MONUSCO to better cope with the
current situation in North Kivu. However, the requirements do not include the
enforcement capacities that may be necessary to address the threat posed by armed
groups in eastern Democratic Republic of the Congo. In order to harmonize the
regional initiatives and proposals of the United Nations in that regard, I have
requested the United Nations Military Adviser, Lieutenant General Babacar Gaye, to
travel to the region early in January 2013 to meet the President of the United
Republic of Tanzania, Jakaya Mrisho Kikwete, and the President of Uganda, Yoweri
Kaguta Museveni, in their capacities as the Chairs of the Southern African
Development Community (SADC) and the International Conference on the Great
Lakes Region, respectively. Lieutenant General Gaye is then expected to convene a
meeting in Addis Ababa with the military representatives of the African Union, the
Conference and SADC to work out the modalities and options, including
incorporating the troops earmarked for the regional Neutral International Force
under the mandate and authorized strength of MONUSCO.
I intend to revert to the Security Council with detailed options in that regard
and the overall reconfiguration of the MONUSCO force, once the Secretariat has
completed its consultations with the regional partners and the troop-contributing
countries of MONUSCO.
(Signed) BAN Ki-moon

2

13-21367
