1630tl1

United Nations

GENERAL
ASSEMBLY

PLENARY MEETING
Thursday, 14 December 1967,
at 10,30 a.m.

TWENTY.SECOND SESSION

Official Records

NEW YORK

CONTENTS

5. I would ask the delegation of the People's Republic
of Southern Yemen to be good enough to communicate
to its Government and to the people of its country my
warmest wishes for happiness and success in the
building of a new, free life in accordance with their
national aspirations.

Page
Agenda item 99:
Admission of new Members to the United
Nations •••••..•.•••••••••••••••
Agenda item 23:
Implementation of the Declaration on the
Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples: report of the Special
Committee on the Situation with regard to
the Implementation of the Deolaration on the
Granting of Independenoe to Colonial Countries and Peoples (oontinued) ..•• , , . . . .

1

6. Mr. PACHACHI (Iraq): This is a historic moment
which will long be remembered by all those who have
had the privilege of being associated with the efforts
of the United Nations to accelerate the attainment of
freedom and independence by Southern Yemen. The
birth of a new nation and its admission to this Organization are joyous events, I have been fortunate to
witness and participate in many such occasions, but
that which we are celebrating today holds for us a
special meaning and evokes in us the deepest emotions.
A brother Arab people is atlonglast free from colonial
bondage and ready to take its place in this great
family of nations.

9

President: Mr. Corneliu MANESCU (Romania>.

AGENDA ITEM 99

7. The road to independence has not been easy. The
struggle was long, bitter and hard. The people who
fought heroically and valiantly for freedom spared no
sacrifice, and thousands of freedom fighters gave
their lives that their nation might live. They were
the architects of this new nation and our action today
is a fitting tribute to the memory of those heroes.

Admission of new Members to the United Notions
1. The PRESIDENT (translated from French): The
first item on our agenda concerns the admission of
the Peoplets Republic of Southern Yemen to membership in the United Nations. The Security Council, in
document A/6976, has unanimously recommended
[1384th meeting] that the General Assembly admit
the People's Republic of Southern Yemen to membership in the United Nations. In that connexion, the
General Assembly has before it a draft resolution
submitted by thirty-six countries [A/L.539].

8. The United Nations can be justly proud of the role
it has played in bringing about this happy result. The
General Assembly and the Committee of Twenty-Four
had from the start one main objective ill view-to
accelerate the process of national liberation so that
Southern Yemen could attain independence inharmony
and in peace, in accordance with the freely expressed
wishes of its people and on the basis of the preservation of its unity and territorial integrity. To all those
States which over the last five years have steadfastly
supported the people of Southern Yemen in their
struggle for freedom and whfch made it possible for
the United Nations to take such a forthright stand on
the side of the people we extend our gratitude and
appreciatioll.

2. May I take it that the General Assembly accepts
the recommendation of the Security Council and
adopts by acclamation the draft resolution providing
for the admission of the People's Republic of Southern
Yemen to membership in the United Nations?
The draft resolution was adopted by acclamation
[resolution 2320 (XXII)].

3. The PRESIDENT (translated from French): I
declare the People's Republic of Southern Yemen
admitted to membership in the United Nations.

9. I am honoured, on behalf of my Arab COlleagues,
to welcome on behalf of the Arab group the new State
which has joineJ our ranks and which, we are certain,
will make a valuable contribution to the work of this
Organization, endowed as it is with youth and enthusiasm and the experience of its epic fight for freedom.

The delegation of the People's Republic of Southern
Yemen was escorted to the seat set aside for it in the
General Assembly Hall.

4.. The PRESIDENT (translated from ·French): On
behalf of the General Assembly, I take grea t pleasure
in welcoming the People's Republic of Southern Yemen
to membership in the United Nations, and in extending
on this occasion the sincere congratulations of the
Assembly and its best wishes for prosperity to its
Government and its people. This event has now crowned
the selfless struggle waged by the people of Southern
Yemen to attain national independence.

10. Mr. PARTHASARATHI (India): Today is a very
happy day for freedom-loving people everywhere.
After more than a quarter of a century of colonial
rule the people of South Arabia have achieved their
cherished objective of full freedom and independence.
They had to struggle long and hard and to make many
sacrifices, including
supreme sacrifice
of the
Digitized bythe
Dag Hammarskjöld
Library
1

A!PV.1630

2

General Assembly - Twenty-second Session - Plenary Meetings

li ves of many valiant freedom fighters. Their struggle
has at long last been crowned with success. My delegation congratulates them and pays a sincere tribute to
the dynamic leaders and the people of the People's
Republic of Southern Yemen. The United Nations must
deri ve immense satisfaction from the fact that yet
another. colonial Territory, to whose intricate problems it has devoted considerable time and effort,
has at last joined the comity of nations as a free and
sovereign n a t i o n . '
.
11. My delegation took an active part In the deliberations on the question of Aden and strongly supported
the efforts of the world Organi:z;ation to help the
people of Aden in achievit)g their inalienable right
to freedom and independence. We did that because of
our firm oommitment to: th~ pr~noiple of the rights
of the colonial peoples everywhere to independence
and because of our long-stailding friendship with the
people of South Arabia. My delegation, therefore, is
particularly happy to welcome the Pe~ple's Republic
of Southern Yemen to our midst ,i,n the f~mi1y of the
United Nations.
. ,
.
12. My' Government, which had been following the
developments in regard to' the South Arabi~n question
with the greatest care and interest, was among the
first to extend its recognition to the new Republic
on the day of its independence. In announcing the
recognition of the new State in the Indian Parliament,
my Prime Minister extended to the Government and
people of the new nation the warm greetings and
good wishes of the people of India. She also expressed
our w1l1ingness to extend such economic assistance
as we oould and which the new Republic might need.
13. We warmly congratulate the Foreign Minister
of the People's Republic of Southern Yemen and his
colleagues on the admission of their country to the
United Nations, and we look forward to working with
them closely.
14. My delegation feels assured that the People's
Republic of Southern Yemen will be a dedicated and
loyal Member of our Organization and that it will
make an effeotive contribution to all our activities
here.
15. I,ord CARADON (United Kingdom): I have already
had the opportunity in this Assembly and in the
Security Council [1384th meeting] to weloome, on
behalf of my Government, the birth of a new nation
in the Southern Yemen. When the People's Republic
of Southern Yemen was formed, we immediately
recognized the new Government and wished it well,
and we sponsored the resolution of the Security
Council [243 (1967)] recommending the admission of
the new State to the United Nations. .
16. We have undertaken to give what practical
assistance we can to the new Government, and we are
in consultation with that Government in providing
financial aid to mee:;t immediate requirements. We
are confident that other states, and particularly the
GOV'3rnments of Arab oountries, will also be eager
to give their support to the new nation, and that
support has been generously confirmed by the Ambassador of Iraq this morning.
17. The people of this newly independent country face
formidable difficulties. All of us must join in hoping

that they will be overcome and that independenoe will
bring peace and happiness and progress to the million
and a quarter Arabs of the new nation. We trust that
past divisions will now give way to peaoeful cooperation and constructive endeavour.
18. In friendship and goodwill we extend to the
Foreign Minister who is here with us today our best
wishes for the suocess of his Government in overcoming obstacles and success in future advance in
amity and unity.
19. Mr. EL KONY (United Arab Republic): This
moment is a source of great satisfaction and of joy
to the people and the Government of the United Arab
Republic who have closely followed with admiration
and pride the struggle for independence ofthe People's
Republic of Southern Yemen, .which has emerged as
an independent sovereign State, the fourteenth Arab
State Member of our Organi:z;ation.
20. The people of the Republic of Southern Yemen
won their independence through sacrifice and through
a heroic struggle which has won the admiration of all
freedom-loving peoples of the world.

-

"

'\ i,

-.

I

,~

21. The people of the Republic of Southern Yemen
came to the United Nations several times before,
and they return today but in different ciroumstances.
They come to the United Nations today to join the
family of nations as a full and sovereign nation equal
with all other Member States. They come to the United
Natlons today seeking membership of this Organi:z;ation, willing to contribute to the struggle which we are
all waging against foreign domination and to contribute to the efforts of this Organi:z;ation to maintain
pe ace and security.
22. It is a historic occasion as we welcome today the
People's RepUblic of Southern Yemen among us. This
newest Member of the Organization, having gained its
independence through the application of the principles
of th8United Nations, no doubt will work to further the
principles and purposes of the Charter. On this occasion, the delegation of the United Arab Republic
wishes the people of Southern Yemen sucoess, peace
and prosperity.

~

+'l;'""
f

~:. ,+

23. Mr. SHAHI (Pakist1n): The Government and people
of Pakistan have been following with admiration and
sympathy the heroic struggle of the people of Southern
Yemen against colonial domination. We rejoioewith the
people of Southern Yemen that their long and arduous
struggle has now come to its fruition.
24. On this occasion, we wish to pay our homage to
the memory of the brave sons and daughters of
Southern Yemen who sacrificed their lives for the
cause of the freedom and independence of their
country.
25. Pakistan has always, supported the efforts of the
United Nations to bring about the speedy decolonization
of all the dependent peoples' of the world. In consonance with this policy, my Government fully endorsed
the efforts of the United Nations to enable the people
of Southern Yemen to exercise its inalienable right
of self-determination and independence.
26. The people of Pakistan are bound by imperishable
ties of faith and culture to the people of Southern
Yemen. We share with them a common spiritual
Digitized by Dag Hammarskjöld Library

i

;:"

ll..4 :.,.., .",'"..f1I'

~~/ ,~

1--i ~

1630th meeting - 14 December 1967
heritage. We therefore celebrate their victory as
much as any neighbouring people would.
27. On behalf of the Government and people of
Pakistan, I take this opportunity to offer our warmest
congratulations to the people of Southern Yemen on
their accession to independence and convey to them
and to the Arab nation of which they are a part our
best wishes for their unity, progress and prosperity.
28. The Pakistan delegation welcomes the adoption
.by acclamation of draft resolution A/L.539, endorsing
the recommendation of the Security Council for the
admission of Southern Yemen to the United Nations.
We are happy to see in our midst the delegation from
that new nation. Its entry into this Organiz ation will
add strength to the Asian African nations in advancing
the' causes which we all uphold. Its participation in
our deliberations will also consolidate the efforts of
the United Nations for the safeguarding of peace and
security and the promotion of freedom and justice.
29. Mr. PEREZ GUERRERO (Venezuela) (translated
from Spanish): My delegation wishes to associate
itself with the expression of joy we have heard here
on the occasion of the admission of the People's
Republic of Southern Yemen to membership in the
United Nations. I wish to refer especially to the
statement by the representative ofIraq, Mr. Pachachi,
who more than anyone else at the United Nations or
at least as much as anyone else, has done his utmost
to facilitate the accession to full independence of what
is now the people of Southern Yemen.
30. My colleagues on the United Nations Special
Mission on Aden, Mr. Shalizi and Mr. Keita, and I
have looked forward eagerly to the happy event we
have just witnessed.
31. On behalf of my delegation, I should like to offer
the valiant people of the People's Republic of Southern
Yemen our sincere wishes; may they enjoy the frui ts of
their independence in peace, harmony and prosperity.
I should also like to congratulate its representatives,
and also the United Nations on having a new Member
whose contribution to the cause of peace will undoubtedly be most valuable.
32. Mr. FAKHREDDINE (Sudan):.!! I deem it a
special privilege to welcome on behalf of the Republic of the Sudan and of my own delegation, the
newest Member of this Organization....,the People's
Republic of Southern Yemen. This is a day of special
significance for the United Nations, because the
admission of the People's Republic of Southern Yemen
to membership marks the final solution of a colonial
issue of which the United Nation!:? had been seized
for a long time, and which had faced it wit\'! a difficult
challenge. The fact that the People's Republic of
South Yemen 'has at last emerged as a strong and
confident State, with a progressive outlook and dynamic
poiitical orientation, is mainly due to the tenacity
and perseverance of its people in its struggle against
the combined forces of colonialism and the reactionary
and feudal heirarchy.
33. An emerging country which had its baptism in
armed struggle for liberation involving a great number

lJ Mr. Fakhreddine spoke in Arabic. The English version of his
statement was supplied by the delegation.

3

of its people will not fail to uphold the social and
economic values which will eventually ensure the
progress and prosperity of those people. We are confident that the People's Republic of Southern Yemen
will endeavour to do so. We are confident that the
new Republic will also shoulder its international
obligations and responsibilities with maturity and
confidence. To us in the Arab world, the People's
Republic of Southern Yemen is a valuable addition
to our family of sister countries. The vigour and
youth of its leaders will be a source of strength in
our common struggle in defending the Arab homeland
against the encroaching forces of evil. Southern Yemen
should indeed be an example and an inspiration to
those Arab Territories still under foreign domination;
and beyond the Arab world we are certain that
Southern Yemen will be an energetic partner in the
emerging pattern of inter-regional co-operation.
34. The Afro-Asian community of newly emergent
countries will also welcome a new member in the
People's Republic of Southern Yemen, with the experience of a revolution which emerged victorious
from a prolonged struggle. This victory enables the
new Republic to proceed swiftly with its development
efforts, and consequently become a useful and active
member of the Afro-Asian group of countries. The
Afro-Asian countries have been instrumental, together
with all peace-loving countries, in supporting the case
of the People's RepUblic of Southern Yemen in the
discussions that took place in the United Nations
during the years of struggle and the times of trial.
We are confident that these same countries will not
withhold their support and assistance from the young
Republic in the initial years of its independence. May
we also urge the United Nations and the specialized
agencies to move with all speed to render the technical
assistance for which the Republic stands in great
need so that it may overcome the problems arising
from the legacy of colonialism.
35. May I once again welcome our sister Republic of
Southern Yemen and wish it every advancement and
prosperity.
36. Mr. BUDO (Albania) (translated from French):
The delegation of the People's Republic of Albania
takes great pleasure at the opportunity provided it
today to greet from thi s 1'0 strum the birth of anew,
independent Arab State, the People's Republic of
Southern Yemen, and to welcome its delegation into
our Organization.
37. That historic event, the attaining of independence
by the people of Southern Yemen, is the well-earned
outcome of that people's long struggle for national
liberation. It demonstrates yet again that armed
struggle is the sole means for freeing oneself from
the bonds of imperialism and colonialism, and it is
an important contribution to the cause of freedomloving and peace-loving countries, as well as an added
incentive to the struggle of peoples still suffering
under colonialist and imperialist domination.
38. The victory won by the people of Southern Yemen
is a victory for the entire Arab world. It assumes a
special importance, following as it does the Israel
imperialist aggression against Arab countries-the
United Arab Republic, Jordan and Syria-and at a
Digitized by Dag Hammarskjöld Library

IIIIIIII""--.-----------------------------------------General Assembly - Twenty-second Session - Plenary Meetings

4

time when new plots are being hatched against them
by the American imperialists and their chief collaborators. The independence of Southern Yemen represents the first step in the liberation of the entire
southern part of the Arab peninsula and gives a
powerful impetus to the struggle for liberation of the
Arab peoples who, relying first and foremost on
their own strength, will inevitably liberate the Arab
territories occupied by the Israel forces following
the aggression of 5 June, as well as the sacred homeland of che martyred people of Palestine.
39. The people of Albania and its Government have
steadfastly supported the people of Southern Yemen
in its resolute and unrelenting struggle to free itself
from colonial domination. The Albanian Government,
faithful to its revolutionary policy based on the
principle of unstinting support of the cause of colonial
and dependent peoples, has always supported, even
here in the United Nations, the just struggle of the
people of Southern Yemen for their sacred right to
freedom and independence.
40. Welcoming once more the delegation of the
People's Republic of Southern Yemen, the Albanian
delegation addresses to the people and the Government
of that country its most sincere wishes for success in
their struggle to eliminate all vestiges of colonialism,
to strengthen independence and national sovereignty,
and to build a prosperous and happy life.
41. Mr. BERARD (France) (translated from French):
The French delega tion already had the opportunity
two days ago to make known in the Security Council
[1384th meeting] its feelings on and its complete
agreement to the admission to membership in the
United Nations of the People's Republic of Southern
Yemen. It would like once again today, in this Hall,
to hail the accession to independence of the people of
Southern Yemen.
Aden, which enjoys a privileged position between
East and West and is situatedononeof the great trade
routes of our era, has always been one of the centres
of the Arab world. Along with its surrounding region,
it has made a signal contribution to the civilization
and prosperity of that part of the globe. We have no
doubt that this young republic will honourably perform the role that has fallen to it, within the Arab
world as well as within the wider international community, and particularly within our Organization.
42.

43, It is for chat reason that in renewing our wishes
for happiness and prosperity to its leaders and its
people, the French delegation takes pleasure in
welcoming to our midst the People's Republic of
Southern Yemen and in greeting once again the
Minister for Foreign Affairs and the other representatives of this new State who are. present in this
Hall.
44. Mr. PEDERSEN (United States of America): The
United States was happy to give its support to the
admission of the People's Republic of Southern Yemen
to membership of the United Nations. Like other
Members of the United Nations, the United States has
watched with close interest the efforts of Southern
Yemen to consolidate Its Territory and achieve
independence. That the representati ves of that Government are with us today. testifies to the courage and
J

determination of the people of that country in bringing
their nation to independence. We also acknowledge
the role of the United Kingdom, whose interest and
statesmanship have contributed to the emergence of
this new nation. And it is appropriate also to note
that Southern Yemen's independence has been achieved
in the course of the world-wide independence movement which the United Nations has fostered and
supported.
45. In welcoming the Foreign Minister of Southern
Yemen to this hall today, may I wish him and the
people of his country every success in their efforts
to build their new nation. Southern Yemen will face
many problems in the years ahead. But it brings to
these problems a substantial asset in its people, its
experienced civil service, its educational system,
its labour unions and its business community.
46. Having been represented in the area for over
eighty years, the United States looks forward to
friendly and mutually beneficial relations with the
now independent State of Southern Yemen.
47. Mr. SZYMANOWSKI (Pol and): It is my privilege
to speak today on behalf of the delegations of BUlgaria,
the Byelorussian Soviet Socialist Republic, Czechoslovakia, H\mgary, Mongolia, Romania, the Ukrainian
Soviet Socialist Republic, the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics and, of course, my own delegation
of Poland. From all of us, I beg to extend to the new
State, the People1s Republic of Southern Yemen, our
heartfelt congratulations and sincere good wishes
upon the achievement of independence and upon its
admission to the United Nations.
.
48. In the achievement of freedom and independence
by the people of Southern Yemen we welcome a very
significant manifestation of two facts. First, it shows
that the firm determination of a people to obtain freedom, and the resolute persistent struggle for it,
must eventually prevail over forces of colonialism.
Secondly, it is a welcome and encouraging sign of the
fact that in spite of difficulties and obstacles, of
which all of us here are only too painfully aware,
the process of decolonization does move forwardslowly and haltingly, it Is true, but inevitably.

".

;

I

,

....

_.

49. We are also fully aware that the new State is facing
great and difficult tasks. We wish the people of
Southern Yemen all possible success in meeting these
tasks in the full preservation of their country's territorial integrity and sovereignty, in the constant
raising of the standards of living, in the economic,
social and cultural development of their country.
50. In welcoming the People's Republic of Southern
Yemen to the United Nations family, we feel assured
that the new Member State will make a most significant
contribution in our work. n can count on the friendliest and fullest co-oper ation of all the delegations
for which I have the honour to speak.
.
51. Mr. FARAH (Somalia): On 29 November, in the
Fourth Committee [1730th meetin-gj, the Somalidelegation had the pleasure of extending its congratulations
to the neW State which is located almost across from
the shores of our own country. That new State was
then on the eve· of its independence. Since then, the
People's Republic of Southern Yemen has entered

-

Digitized by Dag Hammarskjöld Library

4 .-

n'

1630th meeting - 14 December 1967
the international community as a sovereign nation.
May I be permitted to greet this historic event with
a few additional words.
52. I am speaking not only on behalf of the Somali
Government, but also as the present Chairman of the
African Group. In this double capacity, then, I express
our warmest felicitations to the People's Republic of
Southern Yemen and Our fervent wishes for its peace
and prosperity. I also express my sincere personal
sentiments.
53. Close ties have through the ages existed between
the Somalis and the people of what has now become
the youngest independent nation in our region. These
ties are based on social, cultural and political realities. There has always been a lively movement of
ideas and of people and a lively economic relationship
between our two countries. I am confident that the
ties of friendship and trust will become even stronger
in the future.
54. On behalf of the African Group, I express my deep
satisfaction that for our friends in the People's Republic of Southern Yemen the struggle against colonialism has ended. They have had to face trials and
tribulations and they have overcome great difficulties,
as other colonial peoples have overcome them and as,
I am sure, the peoples still under colonial domination
will also overcome them.
55. I join my fellow representatives in paying tribute
to the organs of the United Nations, and especially
to the Committee on Decolonization and the Special
Mission to Aden, for the role they have played in the
emergence of the People's Republic. I must also
agree with other speakers who have pointed out on
this occasion and on other occasions that, had the
administering Power heeded the decisions and recommendations of the various organs ofthe United Nations
at an earlier stage, heavy and unnecessary losses of
life and much sorrow for the people of the new State
would have been avoided.
56. The evolution of the People's Republic of Southern
Yemen to full statehood should be an occasion for
those Member States which are still putting obstacles
in the path of the freedom of colonial peoples to
reflect and to realize that the principles of the United
Nations Charter, and the actions based on them, are
still the best and the only rules for a better and more
harmonious world.
57. The people of Somalia are familiar with the
qualities of the people of the new State. We are confident that as they are now taking their destiny into
their own hands, they will act wisely and constructively,
and that their State will be a valuable asset to the
peace an,d prosperity of the entire region. We are
confident that as a Member of the United Nations, the
new State will play a worthy part in our Organization.
58. Mr. KJARTANSSON (Iceland): In taking this
rostrum today, I have the doubly pleasant duty of
speaking on behalf of the five Nordic countries and on
behalf of the members of the group of Western
European, and other States, with the exception of
France and the United Kingdom.
59. On behalf of those delegations, I wish to extend
a warm welcome to the People's Republic of Southern

5

Yemen as a Member of the United Nations. We congratulate the people of this new sovereign State upon
their attainment of independence. It is the crowning
event of the long and arduous struggle for freedom
of the people of South Arabia, and it is gratifying
that this has resulted in an agreement freely negotiated and concluded between this newly independent
nation and the former administering Power. For the
people of Southern Yemen this is a historic event.
It is also a memorable occasion in the history of
the United Nations, for this Organization has indeed
played an important role in the process which led
to this conclusion. Credit is also due to all parties
concerned who have contributed towards a successful
accomplishment in this matter.
60. My delegation and the delegations on whose
behalf I speak have noted with pleasure that one of
the early steps taken by the Government of the
People's Republic of Southern Yemen following independence was to apply for membership in the
United Nations, and to declare its acceptance of the
solemn obligations contained in the United Nations
Charter and to undertake to fulfil them. We feel
confident that this new Member State will be guided
by the noble purposes and principles of the Charter
and will participate constructively in our common
work, striving successfully to serve the great objectives of our Organization, and will thus fulfil its
responsibilities and obligations as a Member of the
United Nations.
61. We welcome the distinguished Foreign Minister
of the People's Republic of Southern Yemen and his
delegation in our midst. We look forward to co-operating with them and shall welcome their participation
in our common efforts within this Organization to
maintain international peace and security and to
build a better world for all the peoples of this earth.
62. To the people and Government of their country
we offer our best wishes for a peaceful and prosperous future.
63. Mr. GHAUS (Afghanistan): I am particularly
happy to have this opportunity to welcome, on behalf
of the Afghan delegation, the People's Republic of
Southern Yemen 011 its admission to membership in
this family of nations. My delegation conveys its
warmest greetings to the delegation of the People IS
Republic of Southern Yemen and is happy to note
that their presence among us bri.ngs this Organization
one step nearer to its professed goal of universality
in which we so ardently believe. Once again, we should
like to extend our heartfelt and most sincere congratulations to them, to their people and their Government, on their very recent accession to independence.
As a member of the United Nations Mission to Aden,
Afghanistan is very keenly aware of the extremely
difficult and arduous road that the people of Southern
Yemen have travelled in pursuit of their right to
self-determination and their cherished aim of independent statehood.
64. The burden has been heavy and the costs too
dear. However, through courage and persistence
these brave people have reached their goal. The
Afghan delegation wishes them well as they continue
along the road to prosperity and growth, and hopes
Digitized by Dag Hammarskjöld Library

6

..

General Assembly - Twenty-second Session - Plenary Meetings

that their future development wlJl take place in conditions more peaceful and less difficult than those
they have known in recent years.
65. Mr. SALIM (United Republic of Tanzania): I
have come to this rostrum to salute the gallant
people of the Republic of Southern Yemen. They have
concluded their struggle against oppressive British
colonialism by expelling the British Government
from their shores. They have been exploited. They
have been divided. The colonialists nave so manipulated them as to cause brothel' to fight brother. and
father to kill son. But. in achieving independence,
. they have achieved their highest political goal. Now
is their period for national reconstruction. We feel
sure that in the absence of a foreign, exploiting and
dominating Power. the people of Southern Yemen
will find a formula for true unity and fraternal accommodation. We, in Tanzania, wish them godspeed
in this endeavour.

"66.

The accession to independence of tne People's
Republic of Southern Yemen marks another significant
milestone on the long march to the culmination of a
hated British colonial domination of poor. peaceful
and trusting people. It marks, too. another nail in
the coffin of the criminal practice of the doctrine
of colonialism itself. Colonialism is in itself a crime
against humanity. It must be repulsed everywhere
and denounced from every forum. The notorious claim
by the British Government that they have led more
than 800 million people to independence is really a
claim that successive British Governments, over the
centuries, have perpetrated a crime against all
humanity by criminally colonizing BOO million people,
By British colonialism, 800 million people all round
the world have been cajoled, robbed, exploited, dehumanized and driven into circumstances leading to
senseless fratricidal wars, and suffered the scourge
of racial discrimination, the direct legacies of British
colonial rule, We raise this point in order to highlight
and reject this false claim of the British Government
that they have led 800 million people to freedom.
They robbed the people of their human freedom in
the first place. Then the people had to fight for their
freedom from the British at the heavy cost of rivers
of human blood in many cases.

67. We therefore all the more hail the gallant and
successful struggle of the people of Southern Yemen,
and welcome them to this family of free nations.
Finally the people of Southern Yemen have come here,
but not without much difficulty. But I am sure they do
not regret having taken the journey.
68. Once again, on behalf of the Government and
people of Tanzania, we extend our sincere congratulations to the people of free Southern Yemen,
69. Mr. VAKIL (Iran): My delegation takes particular
pleasure in welcoming into our midst the newly born
People's Republic of SOli-them Yemen, with which we
are bound by common religious ties. The path of the
peoples of Southern Yemen has been long and painful,
yet their sacrifice has not been in vain. Through
their own efforts, their struggle for freedom and
independence has been crowned with success. Nevertheless, we must also acknowledge the valuable and
important part played by the United Nations in this
regard. As a member .of the Committee of Twenty-

Four, we have taken a keen interest in the emancipation of the people of the RepUblic of Southern Yemen
and have spared no effort to help and support them
in the realization of their aspirations for freedom
and independence.

"'-

" r--

70. As they take their rightful place among the family
of nations, the people of the Republic of Southern
Yemen face a formidable task of reconstruction and
deve~opment. We wish them success in this new
endeavour, and we also look forward to their participation in the work of the United Nations and we
will extend to them our full co-operatipn. We are
confident that they will play a valuable part and make
important contributions in the councils of the United
Nations.

-~

,

..

"

71. Mr. MOLINA URENA (Dominican Republic)
(translated from Spanish): In the absence of the Chairman of the Latin-American group, the distinguished
representative of Ecuador, it is myprivllege, on behalf
of the group and on behalf of my own delegation, to
express the great pleasure we feel at welcoming the
People's Republic of Southern Yemen to membership
in the United Nations.
72. The peoples of Latin America, forged in the
heat of their own hard struggle for freedom, sovereignty and independence, spiritually embrace this new
sQn of the United Nations, this near brother of us all.
May the people of Southern Yemen continue to enjoy
their sovereignty, independence and freedom, bringing happiness to themselves and joy to the world.
73. Mr. GEGHMAN (Yemen): In 1839 the British
occupied Aden by force-the first step in a long process
of colonization and forceful occupation which dissected
my country; a process which continued during the
nineteenth and well into the twentieth centuries; a
process dlJ.ring which all the major cities of Yemen
and, more often than not, even small Villages and
farms were subjected to gunboat diplomacy. air attacks
and intimidation. When, for one reason or another,
the British decided to bring their expansion to a halt,
they were in control of about half of Yemen. The
process started to reverse itself. Our people. who
had never recognized the authority of the invader or
the right of his might; our people, who never weakened,
slackened or relaxed their struggle against the occupation forces from the very first day of invasion;
our people were gaining strength and confidence
every day.
74. For 130 years they fought with every weapon at
their command. They fought in the city, in the village,
in the mountains, in the desert. They fought a colossal
Power, but they never gave up. For they are, and will
continue to be, firm believers in the dignity and
equality of men. They are, and will continue to be,
firm believers that man is born free and should live
free. They are, and will continue to be, firm believers
that countries and peoples must lead their own free
life according to their own free will, without intervention from anyone, without subjugation to anyone,
but in harmony, brotherhood. and free co.,.operation
with all.
75. Today we celebrate the triumph of those courageous people and their ideals. We remember with
reverence their sufferings and sacrifices. We pay
Digitized by Dag Hammarskjöld Library

-

,~

(

-

~I-

R
1630th meeting - 14 December 1967
homage to their martyrs and we rejoice at their
victory. At last, after 130 years, they have regained
their freedom.
76. The revolutton of our people in the Yemeni south,
which followed the heroic example of the great revolution of our Algerian brothers, will go down in history
as a source of inspiration to all oppressed peoples and
freedom fighters. The Algerian and Yemeni revolutions
will continue to illuminate the way for all peoples
under a colonial or tyrannical yoke and to assure them
of the freedom awaiting them.
.
.
77. It is wtth great pride and gratification indeed
that we sPE;lak· today of the long and tireless struggle
of our people in Southern Yemen-pride and gratification for us in Northern Yemen who look forward to the
day of reunification; pride and gratification for those
who work endless hours to see to it that the General
Assembly Declaration on the Granting of Independence
to Colonial Countries and Peoples [resolution 1514
(XV)] is implemented and the United Nations principles
respected; pride and gratification for the children,
mothers and wives who lost their beloved ones on the
battlefield.
78. But this hard-won victory and dearly paid for
freedom are just the beginning of a long road which
will tax every effort. all patience, all energy and all
creative imagination. The tasks and responsibilities
facing our people in both Northern and Southern Yemen
are numerous. One of the first concerns their unity.
In this connexion, the Prime Minister of the Yemen
Arab Republic, Mr. Mohsin Alaini, has stated:
"We strongly believe in the unity of the South and
the North, which imperialism and reactionary forces
in the past tried to divide. Today, after the disappearance of reactionary forces from the North and
imperialism from the South, we feel that the time
has come for the reunification of the land and people
of Yemen. The Yemen Arab Republic welcomes the
independence of Southern Yemen from foreign rule
and considers the withdrawal of British troops a
first st~p towards the Yemen unity. We extend our
hands to our brothers in the South, confident that with
understanding, co-operation and common endeavour
we will be able to achieve national unity, which is the
common objective dear to the hearts of all Yemeni
citizens. "
79. It is our hope. indeed our only hope, for a better
tomorrow that all Yemenis will join hands t9 build a
new life based on liberty, unity and social justice.
Here and nowhere else is the true meaning of the
Yemeni revolution. Only with the attainment of that
goal can we pay our debt to our martyrs and give
substance to the ideals for which they gave their lives.
True, the tremendous task of remoulding and rebuilding the new Yemeni SOCiety after generations of
domestic oppression and foreign occupation will never
be easy. It is like the rebirth from smoke and ashes
of the Arabian bird. But with the high principles and,
ideals of the Yemeni revolution as our gUide, with the
optimism, energy and determination pf our people and
with the understanding, sympathy, co-operation and
support of friendly and peace-loving peoples throughout the world no obstacle will be insurmountable.
The Arabian bird always and for ever manages to be
born. again and again.

7

80. The PRESIDENT (translated from French): I
invite His Excellency SaU' Ahmad Dhalee, Minister
for Foreign Affairs of the People's Republic of
Southern Yemen, to come to the rostrum and to
address the Assembly.
81. Mr. DHALEE (SouthernYemen):.Y At this historic
moment, while the struggle of our people for their
liberty and independence is being crowned by your
accepting the People's Republic of Southern Yemen
as a Member of the United Nations, !find it necessary
to hail our people, who have struggled for years to
free their country from foreign domination.
82. During the long and tedious struggle our people
have exerted every effort and have chosen to sacrifice
the blood of their young men and women to achieve
their noble goal. Here and now, we must ask God to
have mercy on the souls of our martyrs, who have
given their blood as an offering for the freed.om of
their people and the glory of their country.
83. Yesterday we wept for them, and today we hail
their sacrifices and take pride in what they have
offered as a price for their country's independence.
Yesterday we offered them our sorrow, while today
we honour them with pride, glorification and gratitude.
84. I should like to take this opportunity to express
to you, on behalf of the People's Republic of Southern
Yemen, the President, Kahtan Mohammed El-Shaabi.
and our Government, our thanks and appreciat.ion for
accepting the People's RepUblic of Southern Yemen
as a Member of this international Organization. .
85. The unanimous vote by which you have accepted
us is welcomed by our people with gratitude. It cannot but strengthen their belief that our admission is
an appreciation of their struggle and an acknowledgement of their effort to achieve freedom and independence. I have to thank also all those representatives
of Member States who have this morning greeted and
welcomed the admission of our Republic to the United
Nations.
86 1 At this glorious and historic moment our people
register their appreciation of the role the United
Nations has played in the liberation of all colonized
peoples-including our own people.
87. The United Nations has been true to its Charter
and to the General Assembly's historic resolution
1514 (XV), which emphasized that independence must
be granted to all peoples and countries which had
not attained independence.
.
88. On behalf of our people, I should like to thank
the United Nations General Assembly for that resolution, which was the basis for the liberation of our
country within this international framework.
89. Our thanks must go also to the Fourth Committee
and to those representatives who have played a great
role in the achievement of our independence.· Our
special thanks also are directed to the Committee
of Twenty-Four and the Special Mission on Aden for
their continuous efforts to end colonialism in our
country.
.Y Mr. Dhalee Bpoke In Arable. The Engllsh version of his statement
was supplied by the delegation.
Digitized by Dag Hammarskjöld Library

8

General Assembly - Twenty-second Session - Plenary Meetings

90. The resolutions and recommendations which
were adopted by those organs, and the debates which
took place, had a great influence in fostering the
struggle of our people and in strengthening their
confidence that the peoples and countries of the world
were supilOrting their struggle to free themselves
from the shackles of colonialism and for complete
unity. That was reflected in the decision of the
General Assembly which recognized that the islands
of Kuria Muria are an integ ral part of the People 's
Republic of Southern Yemen.
9L 1 must also mention, with great appreciation, the
role played by the peoples of Africa and Asia and the
socialistcountrie·s arid other nations which, through
their national and popular organizations, have supported the Tights of our people and have stood by us
during our struggle, and specifically during the period
of our armed stTuggle in the past four years.
92. I should like to emphasize the role played by our
Arab brethren who, through their popular organizations and Governments, have supported our people
and helped us morally and materially in our struggle.
93. Our people, just like other peace-loving peoples,
put nothing above their love for peace except their
love for freedom and independence. As peace-loving
people, we tried for years to persuade Britain, through
peaceful means, to acknowledge our right to freedom
and sovereignty over our own country. But Britain
refused to listen to logic and reason, and our people
had no alternative but to resort to arms in order to
regain their rights and achieve their independence
and, of course, to force Britain to acknowledge those
Tights.
94. British militancy forced our people to follow a
long and difficult path filled with tears and blood from
the time our people declared the glorious armed
revolution in the Mountains of Radfan on 14 October
1963 under the leadership of the National Front for
the Liberation of Occupied South Yemen.
95. OUT people have managed through their struggle
for over four years to reach their objectIve and
achieve their independence in spite of the difficulties,
great losses and sacrifices they have sustained. We
were able, through that struggle, to liquidate colonialism and eliminate military bases, unify our nation
and put an end to the state of disintegration which
was impos ed on the al'ea in the form of Sultanates,
Emirates and Sheikhdoms.
96. The People's Republic of Southern Yemen is a
new-born nation which emerges into the free, independent world from the world of colonialism a.nd
tyranny. Our Republic, accordingly, feels that it has
a special responsibility towards the peoples and
nations which are· still subject to colonial rule. We
pledge ourselves and promise before this international
Organization that we will work unceasingly to support
the struggle of those nations so that they, too, can
spTing from the world of tyranny and foreign domination into a world of freedom and independence.
97. We believe that our freedom will be incomplete
as long as there are peoples who do not enjoy their
freedom and independence, Our freedom will become
complete only through the freedom of those nations

and our independence will become secure only through
their independence. Pursuant to this principle, which
is also our conviction, we shall not spare any effort
and we shall not hesitate to give whatever is needed
of us; nor will we feel at ease as long as the Arab
people of Palestine are deprived of their right to
self-determination and sovereignty over their own
country.
98. We should like to assure the people of Palestine
of our fullest support and we pledge to give them
whatever they need to enable them to regain their
legitimate rights. And pursuant to that, we pledge
to give every help that is needed to the Arab people
in any territory which is· still subject to foreign
domination and to enable them to rid themselves of
the shackles of colonialism and to attain their soveTeigntyand independence.

I.

99. Our Republic is part of the Arab Nation and
homeland. Therefore. we will work diligently to help
realize the great Arab aspiration of achieving complete Arab unity. And working towards Arab unity,
we shall strive to achieve the unity of Yemen by
unifying the Yemeni Arab people in the south and in
the nOTth. It is also natural that the Islands of Kuria
Muria should remain an integral part of the People's
Republic of Southern Yemen.
100. Britain's attempt to take these .islands away
from Our Republic is something which we categorically
regret and oppose. And on this subject, we appreciate
the United Nations support of our legitimate rights,
a support which was reflected in the consensus of
the General Assembly.
101. As an Asian country we believe in co-operation
and solidarity with the peoples of the continents of
Africa and Asia. We proclaim from this rostrum
our willingness to co-operate with those peoples
within the present patterns and framework of such
co-operation.
102. As a developing country, we also believe in cooperating and working closely with all the developing
countries in an effort to build a better future for our
peoples and to stTengthen our economies and develop
our resources.
103. In our foreign policy we shall follow the principle of positive neutrality and non-alignment in our
international relations. We shall strive to achieve
peace in the world and to avert war and its horrors.
We shaH try to judge each question on the strength
of its own merits without prejudice, and we shall try
to bridge differences and to follow. the principles of
truth, justice and, logic in accordance with the Charter
of the United Nations.
104. In our internal policy we shall be guided by a
basic principle, which is the transformation of the
individual who has been colonized into a free and
productive person. We shall achieve this through a
progressive revolutionary programme which will
tackle our economic· and social problems and aim at
producing a better standard of liVing for every citizen
in our young Republic. We hope to eliminate all causes
of backwardness-especially in the rural areas, which
have been totally neglected during the era of colonialism and feudalism.
Digitized by Dag Hammarskjöld Library

if

1630th meeting - 14 December 1967

J

r

105. In our effort to improve our society we shall
need foreign aid, whether it is international in
character or from individual countries, provided that
such aid is not coupled with any conditions or ties.
106. This has been a quick glimpse into the history
of our struggle and the jubilation of our people in
their moment of happiness. It has been also a brief
review of the position of our people with regard to
their responsibilities and the main features of our
internal and external policies. Now the past has gone
and the present is being made. As for the future, our
people are determined to build the nation with the
same zeal and determination that symbolized the period
of their struggle against colonialism.
107. With the help of our friends who care about the
welfare and progress of our country, our people will
work diligently to establish a stable nation in the
People's RepUblic of Southern Yemen.

AGENDA ITEM 23
Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of
Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples:
report of the Special Committee on the Situation
with regard to the Implementation of the Dec loration
on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countr ies
and Peoples ('continued)*

108. Mr. TARABANOV (Bulgaria) (translated from
French): It has been stressed on more than one occasion that the process of the national liberation of
peoples. the disintegration of the colonial system and
the emergence and strengthening of a large number
of independent States in Africa, Asia and Latin
America represent one of the characteristic features
of mankind's development today. Now, despite the
results achieved-and I should like to hail one of those
results, the entry into the United Nations family of
the People's Republic of Southern Yemen-it must
be sta~ed once again that the process of eliminating
colonialism and of liberating the peoples under colonial
domination has not yet been completed. The task that
oppressed peoples have set themselves in their
struggle for national independence is far from being
completed.
109. Immense territories on the African continent
and in other parts of the world are still under colonial
domination. The national liberation struggle is continuing in the jungles of Angola and Mozambique, on
the South Wes t African veldt and in Southern Rhodes ia,
and on the islands of the Pacific, Indian and Atlantic
Oceans, wherevercolonialist and racist forces are
attempting to keep peoples in a state of colonial
dependence and oppression.

;..

llD. Not only is colonialism still a reality, but, in
some regions colonialist forces are trying to join
and to strengthen their positions, and even to take
action against national liberation movements. As
the peoples' struggle for national liberation is intensified,. and following on the successes achieved in
that struggle, the colonialist and imperialist forces
are organizing a stubborn opposition and even attempting to go over to the offensive.
·Contlnuation of diSCUSSion at the [1628th meeting].

9

111. The southern part of the African continent, its
riches and its vast natural and human resources,
continue to be ruthlessly exploited by monopolies of
the United States, the United Kingdom, the Federal
Republic of Germany. South Africa. and other Western
countries. It would seem that Western culture has
become synonymous with colonialism in that part
of the world. In particular, it is from that last colonial
stronghold-South Africa-that colonialists and imperialists are planning to go into action against independent Africa as well.
Mr. Khatri (Nepal), Vice-President. took the Chair.

112. Recent events, as well as the report of the
United Nations Committee on Decolonization [A/6700 /
Rev.1], reveal that the problems of Southern Rhodesia
and South West Africa cannot be dissociated from
the other colonial problems that exist on the African
continent, particularly in southern Africa.
113. Events in Southern Rhodesia have revealed the
danger to Africa of the alliance between the Smith
regime, South Africa and Portugal, and the way in
which that alliance, backed by foreign monopolies,
operates.
114. The recent Security Council debates on the
complaint brought by the Democratic Republic of the
Congo against Portugal1J provided a further illustration of that danger and furnished one of the most
recent examples of the evil activities carried on by
the colonialists and their supporters in order to
regain their lost positions on the other side of the
Zambesi. A further proof of the nefarious role played
by the political, economic and military co-operation
of certain Western Powers-and principally of the
United States of America, the United Kingdom and
the Federal Republic of Germany-with the colonialist
and racist r€lgimes in Africa, was prOVided in the
course of the discussion on Southern Rhodesia and
the Portuguese colonies that took place in the Fourth
Committee, and that on South Africa ' s policy of apartheid in the Special Political Committee.
115. It has become perfectly clear that without the
assistance of NATO, Portugal would not have been
able to combat the uprising of the national liberation
movement in Africa. The report of the Special Committee is a virtual indictment of the unlawful activities of the foreign monopolies in Southern Rhodesia,
the Portuguese colonies, South West Africa and other
colonial territories.
11€. In that connexion. my delegation would like to
direct the General Assembly's attention to document
0./6941, which contains a statement by the Government of the German Democratic Republic that sets
forth extremely pertinent facts concerning the role
played by West German interests and monopolies in
southern Africa. The collaboration of the western
Powers and their monopolies, led by those of the
United States, the United Kingdom and the Federal
Republic of Germany, as well as their military alliance and the political, economic and other support
they are providing to Portugal, to South Africa and

.1/ Official Records of the Security Council, Twenty-second Year,
Supplement for October, November and December 1967, docwnent
[8/8218].
Digitized by Dag Hammarskjöld Library

10

General Assembly - Twenty-second Session - Plenary Meetings

to the Smith r6gime, form the backbone of colonialist
and racist r€lgimes.
117. The struggle for freedom and for the eradication
of the colonial r€lgime is also going on in smaller
territories, and it should be noted that there is a
tendency on the part of the colonial Powers to make
more complete use of those territories by setting up
military bases in them aimed against the peaceloving peoples and countries and by using those bases
for aggressive purposes. The island of Guam, for
e~ample, has become one of the bases for the aggression carried on against the Vietnamese people
by the United States.
118. It has become perfectly obvious that so far as
the United Nations is concerned, the attitude of the
Western Powers is at the present time the main
obstacle standing in the way of deco10nization. In
Southern Rhodesia, the obstacle is the refusal of the
British to use force against the Smith r(Jgime; in
the Portuguese colonies, it is thfl assistance being
lent by certain Western countries; in South Africa and
South West Africa, it is the British, American and
West German economic interests; in every territory
under colonial domination it is the refusal of the
Western Powers to implement United Nations resolutions on colonial problems.
119. Yet it is the duty of everyone to participate in
the final eradication of colonialism and the completion
of the process of the peoples' national liberation
struggl,e. Consequently, the efforts being made by
reactionary and oppressive forces to halt that progress must meet with firm opposition from all anticoloniaiist forces.
120. The Conference of the Organization of African
Uldty which was held recently at Kinshasa iJ and the
decisions taken there mark an important step towards
the future strengthening of the African States, as well
as towards the liberation of those African territories
and peoples that are still being oppressed. So long as
colonialism is not completely eliminated and so long
as the struggle of peoples for national liberation
has not been successfully concluded, it is the duty of
the United Nations to take an important and active
part in the fulfilment of those goals.
121. The United Nations has taken practical and
useful decisions designed to assist peoples struggling
under the colonial yoke. By the resolute way in which
it has come out in favour of the independence and
national liberation of all colonial peoples, by recognizing that the national liberation struggle is a just
and lawful struggle, and further by asking that moral
and material assistance be given to peoples struggling
for their independence, the United Nations has done
no more than take action on behalf of the aspirations
of peoples and in compliance with the will of the
vast majority of Member States.
122. The decisions and steps that have been taken
have strengthened the legal basis and the international
political basis of every anti-colonialist action being
undertaken in the present-day world. During sessions
of the General Assembly, in the Special Committee

:Y Fourth Session of the Assembly of Heads of State and Government
of the Organization of African Unity, held at Kinshasa from 11 to 14
September 1967.

on decolonization, and in other bodies as well, the
systematic examination of the question of the implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of
Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples, both
as a whole and with respect toeachindividual colonial
territory, has considerably broadened the opportunity
for undertaking practical political efforts on behalf of
oppressed peoples.
123. The work being accomplished by the United
Nations Committee on Decolonization, which has
again this year carried out its mandate with linflagging devotion, is a signal contribution in the
struggle for the liberation of peoples oppressed by
the colonial yoke.
124. The Special Committee meetings held in Africa
have greatly contributed to enabling the United Nations
to establish more direct contacts with nationalliberation movements and better to understand and assist
colonial peoples.
125. During the period covered by the report of the
Committee on Decolonization, the solidarity with and
support for colonial peoples and national liberation
fighters evidenced by the anti-colonialist forces has
continued to increase. Those forces, in the main the
Afro-Asian countries and socialist countries faithful
to their consistent and determined anti-colonialist
stand, have stepped up their aid to national liberation
movements. It is no exaggeration to say that the
United Nations itself has also made a definite contribution to the process of decolonization. Yet if it is
to be equal to its tasks and responsibilities, it must
do a great deal more than it has up to now to assist
the peoples' anti-colonialist struggle.
126. Everyone has the duly to contribute to making
the work of the United Nations and its bodies ever
more closely linked to the peoples' national liberation
struggle and to the demands imposed by that struggle.
The United Nations and United Nations bodies.
especially the United Nations Committee On decolonization, must with inqreased energy oppose colonialist
policy, as well as the policy of certain States who
by their attitude and their support are responsible
for the arbitrary machinations of racist minorities,
as is the case in Southern Rhodesia, South Africa
and South West Africa.
127. The General Assembly must take an even more
vigorous stand than it has in the past. so that Member
States lend more effective moral and material assistance to colonial peoples who are struggling for their
national independence and in order that they abandon
all co-operation with colonial and racist regimes. The
specialized agencies and international bodies affiliated
with the United Nations must lend more active assistance to national liberation movements in the efforts
they are making to ensure the education of young
people in the colonial territories, set up medical
services, wipe out epidemics, and prOVide food for
children.
128. For its part, the General Assembly must
designate as a violation of the Charter, ofthe Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial
Countries and Peoples and of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights, not only colonial wars and
repressive measures against freedom fighters, but
Digitized by Dag Hammarskjöld Library

'l!l

J "

.

,

I"

1630th meeting - 14 December 1967
also all neo-colonialist machinations aimed at setting
up puppet r€lgimes in colonial territories, at maintaining military bases in them, at using various
manoouvres and stratagems to conceal colonialism,
deceive world public opinion and in that way hinder
colonial peoples from gaining the right to se1£determination and independence.
129. Once again, the Bulgarian delegation would
like to emphasize the importance of popularizing the
struggle for national liberation. In this sense, the
constructive activities being carried out by revolutionary movements in liberated regions are making an
effective contribution. As we have previously stated,
that problem, given its importance, deserves closer
study by the Special Committee and by the General
Assembly itself. All Member States must give most
particular attention to the implementation of the
resolutions dealing with colonial problems that have
been adopted by the United Nations and by United
Nations bodies. In that connexion, it would be useful
for the Special Committee to prepare an analytical
report for the next. session of the General Assembly.
130. It is our Organization's duty to come to the
assistance of peoples struggling for their national
liberation and to bend all its efforts towards
the implementation of the principles set forth
in the Charter' and in the historic Declaration on
decolonization.
131, The delegation of the People's Republic of
Bulgaria is prepared to contribute, to the limit of
its modest means, to any United Nations effort
designed to bring about the complete eradication of
colonialism and, by so doing, the liberation of oppressed peoples everywhere in the world.

-~

,;:ihi&..

~'-.

132. Mr. MOD (Hungary) (translated from French):
After some three months of discussion in the Fourth
Committee on the situation in colonial territories
and on the causes contributing to the preservation
of their populations' colonial status, we are nOw
discussing in plenary meeting the most important
obstacles standing in the way of implementation of
resolution 1514 (XV).
133. Deliberations in the Fourth Committee as well
as the present discussion were based on the detailed
and painstaking reports submitted each year by the
Committee of Twenty-four, reports that are greatly
appreciated by most delegations. The Special Committee is a General Assembly body with a reputation
for its devotion to its work. Its annual reports
provide an increasingly thorough analysis of the
situation in the colonial territories and of the causes
that are preventing their peoples from acceding to
independence.
134. In order to show the value that Committee's
work has for the General Assembly, I would single
out two points from its over-all activity this year.
One new matter of unques tionable importance, des igned
to promote the eradication of the colonial system,
that was considered by the Fourth Committee at its
current session, is the question concerning the role
played by foreign interests. The discussiol} pointed
to a certain number of facts, including the basis of
the colonial system as a whole, that have a decisive
bearing on the United Nations and its Members in the

11

struggle for the elimination of colonialism; here
again, the discussion was based on the Special Committee's report [A/6700/Rev.1].
135. Another very important fact is that each year
the Special Committee holds a session in Africa.
Those meetings, held far from the depressing atmosphere of New York, enable Committee members
to become more closely acquainted with the ideas of
the African populations and to have discussions with
national liberation movements. Thanks to all that.
the Assembly is always aware of the immediate
objectives of the forces struggling against colonialism
and can thus lend them assistance. General Assembly
resolutions on decolonization rightly bring out the
problems of the assistance, to be given national
liberation movements. Small wonder, then, that the
Committee's activities have revived the wrath of
those who see their plots exposed and made them
resort to fresh manoouvres.
136. My delegation wishes to join with those previous speakers who have expressed their appreciation
of the effective work accomplished by the Special
Committee. At the same time, I hasten to add that I,
much more sincerely than its critics, hope for the
early dissolution of the Special Committee: however,
along with the majority of the General Assembly, my
hope is conditional on the total implementation of the
provisions of resolution 1514 (XV) and, after the
elimination of the shameful colonial system on there
being nothing more for the Special Committee to do.
What mus t . be eliminated is the colonial sys tern. and
not the bodies attempting to fight against it.
137. I should like to add, in addition, that it is at the
same time just and timely to reflect on the way in
which the Special Committee's future tasks can be
decided; before broaching that question, however, I
believe we should mention certain important characteristics of the colonial system as it is at present.
A glance at the map of the territories still under the
colonial yoke is most instructive. Those territories
can be divided into two main categories.
138. After acceding to independence, some territories that are small in size become so-called "miniStates". For the most part, they are made up of one
or more islands or enclaves. Their importance is
not solely political, in the sense that they are colonial
territories demanding their independence; their problems are not solely economic and financial in the
sense that they do not in themselves meet the conditions of viability and economic self-sufficiency. Of
course, the Secretary-General, as is shown in his
message this year, is aware of that problem, and so
is the General Assembly. One of the duties before
the Special Committee is undoubtedly that of studying
that problem in depth and of making the appropriate
recommendations.
139. In the economic sphere, the examination of the
activities of foreign monopolies has revealed in a
very instructive way that frequently even the larger
territories lack viability, precisely because of the
conditions brought about by the activities of exploiting
foreign monopolies. At the same time, the independence of the smaller territories, of those small
islands, is faced with an even more insurmountable
Digitized by Dag Hammarskjöld Library

12

General Assembly - Twenty-second Session - Plenary Meetings

obstacle; the military interests of the principal
colonial Powers. Among the islands under colonial
rllgimes are many that are being used by the United
States and the United Kingdom as military bases.
Suffice it to mention here Guam, Mauritius and Puerto
Rico. In the case of the United Kingdom, we could
also mention examples in the Middle East.
140. Another group of colonial territories forms
a single bloc in southern Africa, a bloc bound to the
main NATO powers by such a maze of economic,
politioal and military ties that it is almost impossible to consider those territories individually. That
fact was convincingly brought out during the discussion
On the activities of foreign monopolies in those territories, During the discussions on the South West
African question-a question closely bound up with
the one we are currently examining-my delegation
furnished evidence in support of this, evidence that
I do not think need be repeated. I should, however,
like to reject decisively.one discordant opinion. When
the resolution dealing with the activities of foreign
interests [2288 (XXII)) was being adopted, the United
Kingdom representative informed the General Assembly, in his explanation of vote:
"I am not speaking today on the countries of
southern Africa. There the problem is racial rather
than colonial." [1622nd meeting para. 34]
I

141. I should like to make two points in that connexion.
First, Southern Rhodesia, South West Africa, Angola
and Mozambique are colonies, and no sophistry, no
misleading- statement, can alter that fact. Second, the
very essence of the racial problem is inextricably bound
up with a social system based on monopolies. It is
common knowledge that South Africa and Southern
Rhodesia are not the only countries that are victims
of the outrageous crimes of racism; yet it is true
that the colonial powers are making adeliberate effort
to foment racial conflicts and to take advantage of
them in southern Africa as well as everyWhere else.
142. The Government of t11e German Democratic
Republic was completely justified in stressing the
following in its statement before the current session
of the General Assembly:
"These dangers and the threat posed to the independent States, especially in Africa, by the enclaves
of the imperialist power system, are considerably
heightened by the efforts backed by the principal
imperialist Powers to form a bloc of racist regimes
in the south of Africa which is to consist of the RepUblic of South Africa. South West Africa, Southern
Rhodesia and the Portuguese colonies of Angola
and Mozambique." [A/6941]
143. Thus there are in this area as well many tasks
to be accomplished and many linkages to be uncovered
by the Special Committee and towards the solution of
which it can make recommendations. It can analyse
the ways and means by which the United Nations and
the specialized agencies can and should lend a more
effective assistance to the Organization of African
Unity, to the independent African States and to national
liberation movements. It can also analyse the extent
of the interdependence among South African and nonAfrican members of the unholy alliance and the extent
of the threat inherent in their aggressive activities.

I should like to stress the urgent and important
nature of the problem by two factual statements.
"

144. One of them was made by the Second VicePresident of the United Republic of Tanzania at the
opening of the Special Committee's meetings at
Dar-es-Salaam. I quote from the record:
"Mr. Kawawa does not intend to speak at length
about South Africa. He would not even have mentioned
it at all had he not been convinced that it was impossible to speak of colonialism in Africa without
mentioning apartheid and racial discrimination,
which are closely linked in an unholy alliance; the
methods which they employ and their objectives
closely resemble each other and have the same
economic structure, and the same unhappy and
destructive effects on their victims.
"There is no more typical example than that of
South West Africa, where colonialism and apartheid
are closely linked. ft El
145. The second statement was made by President
Kaunda at the opening of the Special Committee's
meetings in Zambia:
"The problems of southern Africa present a very
grave danger for international peace and security.
Southern Africa is so to speak a dormant volcano:
no one knows when it will erupt, but everyone knows
that it· will surely do so. When that happens, the
results will be disastrous."~
146. Noteworthy corroboration is provided in that
connexion by information such as, for example, that
furnished by the Government of the German Democratic RepUblic, from which I shall quote two very
instructive passages:
"In May 1967, it became known that representatives
of West German monopolies and the West German
Government had reached agreement with the regimes
in Lisbon, Pretoria and Salisbury concerning the joint
exploitation of the uranium deposits in Mozambique.
Prospecting for the abundant deposits is already
being done in the uranium fields of Cahora Bassa
by a group of specialists working for the Krupp
concem." [A/6941]

f·

Further on, it is stated:
"The West German Government sees in the
maintenance and consolidation of colonial domination the strongest guarantee ensuring that the
profit interests of the West German monopolies are
preserved and that the raw material supplies are
not interrupted, so that the implementation of the
economic and strategic plans is assured. Therefore
it protects by political, economic and not least by
military measures the capital investments of the
West German monopolies which draw huge profits
from their capital reports to the still dependent
Territories. It participates directly in Portugal's
colonial war against the national liberation movements in Angola, Mozambique and in so-called
'Portuguese Guinea '. It supplies Portugal with
arms and aircraft, erects military bases in Mozambique, assists in raiding mercenary troops for the
fd Statement at the [S29th meeting] of the SpeCial Committee.

El Statement at the [5l9th meeting] of the Special Committee.
Digitized by Dag Hammarskjöld Library

filii

1630th meeting - 14 December 1967
protection of West German capital investments in
Angola, and sends military experts to Portugal."
[Ibid.]
147. Among the many questions raised at the current
session of the General Assembly that have become
the subject of resolutions aimed at implementing
resolution 1514 (XV) on the Granting of Independence
to Colonial Countries and Peoples, I have singled
out only two problems thut fall within the competence
of the Special Committee. I should like now to raise
three questions dealing with method. The first two
are concerned with material submitted to us by the
Special Committee: records of discussions, hearings
of petitioners, resolutions, statistics and miscellaneous information, as well as pertinent material
from the General Assembly and the Security Council.
The third question is related to the situation with
regard to the implementation of General Assembly
resolutions concerning colonies.
(1) The documents prepared by the Special Committee. the General Assembly and the Security
Council, representing thousands of pages, contain
very important and highly interesting material Concerning one of the main objectives of the United
Nations: elimination of the COlonial system. Inresolulion 13 (1), annex I, the General Assembly rightly
stated that the United Nations could not achieve its
goal unless the peoples of the world were fully informed
of United Nations objectives and activities. I do not
wish to go too far back in time. I shall therefore
mention only paragraph 14 of resolution 2105 (XX),
paragraph 18 of resolution 2189 (XXI) and the relevant paragraphs of resolutions 2262 (XXII), 2270
(XXI) and 2288 (XXII). Each of those resolutions
reques ts the Secretary-General to promote. by means of the various United Nations organs and information
services, the dissemination of the results of the
labours of the United Nations and its organs, and to
inform world public opinion of the situation that prevails in colonized territories as well as of the successes achieved by the national liberation movements.
My delegation is not alone in noting that the work of
the United Nations information services leaves much
to be desired in that respect. Nevertheless, without
going into detail, I should like to propose that the
Assembly should request the Secretary-General to
draw up a concrete report with regard to-the implementation. in 1968, of the aforementioned resolutions
and the steps envisaged for 1969.
(2) We believe that the voluminous documentation
so far prepared by the Special Committee calls to
some extent for the introduction of new working
methods. It might, for example, be useful for the
Special Committee to prepare concise summaries of

Litho in U.N.

13

the most important subjects. along with its conclusions
and recommendations, which would enable smaller
delegations to have an over-all view of the problems
and which would make it easier to decide on the
measures to be taken.
(3) Since about 1960, the General Assembly has
every year adopted resolutions aimed at doing away
with the colonial system, In point of fact, those
resolutions contain two kinds of provisions: those
concerned with the solution of new problems and those
that the General Assembly finds it must repeat year
after year because those concerned refuse to implement them. My delegation considers that the Special
Committee should be instructed to examine the stage
we have reached with regard to the implementation
of resolutions dealing with the larger Territories and
to submit an analytical report to the General Assembly
explaining why the colonial Powers concerned have
not given effect to those resolutions and indicating
what urgent measures could be most effectively
adopted to speed up the final eradication of colonialism.
148. I should like to add to what I have said in prefacing the report of the Committee of Twenty-Four
that the statements we have heard up to now also show
that the Special Committee's activity is and will be
necessary until such time as it is in a position to
report on the total eradication of colonialism in all
its guises. In that connexion, I should like to quote
a passage from the Introduction to the SecretaryGeneral's annual report on the Work of the Organization in 1966:
"The extent towhich decolonization has progressed
in the last few years serves only to underline the
anomaly of the fact that several million people are
still subject to colonial rule-and, worse still, that
most of these live under regimes which offer them
no hope of an early and peaceful emancipation. It
must be admitted that, while the United Nations has
been in the forefront of support for the principle
of self-determination. and while it has done much
to encourage and at times to assist the emergence
of dependent peoples, it has so far failed to provide
or facilitate effective solutions to the several difficult and serious colonial problems which remain. "V
149. Thus there is a wide field of activity still open
to members of the Committee of Twenty-Four. It is
up to us to support them in the fulfilment of their
great task.

The meeting rose at 1 p.m.
-first Session

nOOI-November 1970-2.300
Digitized by Dag Hammarskjöld Library
