66

General Assembly-Twenty-fourth Session

conformity with General Assembly resolution 1514
(XV), and the legitimacy of their struggle against the
foreign occupation of their country;
2. Condemns the Govemment of South Africa for
its persistent refusal to withdraw its administration
from Namibia and, in particular, for its defiance of
paragraph 5 of Security Council resolution 269 ( 1969) ;
3. Draws the attention of the Security Council to
the deteriorating situation which has arisen as a result
of the refusal of South African authorities to comply
with Council resolution 269 ( 1969).
1797th plenary meeting,
31 October 1969.
2507 (XXIV). Question of Territories under
Portuguese administration

The General Assembly,
Having considered the question of Territories under
Portuguese domination,
Having heard the statements of the petitioners,2
Recalling its resolution 1514 (XV) of 14 December
1960 containing the Declaration on the Granting of
Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples,
Recalling also all the relevant resolutions of the
General Assembly, as well as those adopted by the
Special Committee on the Situation with regard to the
Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting
of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples
and by the Security Council on the question,
Expressing its deep concern over the persistent refusal of the Govemment of Portugal to recognize the
inalienable right of the African peoples under its
domination to self-determination and independence and
to co-operate with the United N ations in seeking solutions that would bring colonialism rapidly to an end,
Deeply disturbed by the continued and intensified
activities of economic, financia! and other interests
which impede the realization by the African peoples
of those Territories of their legitimate aspirations for
self-determination and independence,
Deploring the aid which the Govemment of Portugal
continues to receive from its allies in the North Atlantic
Treaty Organization and from other countries, which
enables it to pursue its military operations against the
African population of those Territories,
Recalling the Manifesto on Southem Africa,3 adopted
by the Assembly of Heads of State and Govemment
of the Organization of African Unity at its sixth
ordinary session,
1. Reaffirms the inalienable right of the peoples of
Angola, Mozambique and Guinea (Bissau) and of
other Territories under Portuguese domination to selfdetermination and independence in accordance with
General Assembly resolution 1514 (XV);
2. Reaffirms the legitimacy of the struggle by the
peoples of those Territories for their independence and
freedom;
3. Condemns the persistent refusal of the Govemment of Portugal to implement resolution 1514 (XV)
and all other relevant resolutions of the General Assembly and of the Security Council;
2 See Official Records of the General Assembly, Twentyfourth Session, Fourth Committee, 1827th and 1828th meetings.
3 /bid., Twenty-fourth Session, Annexes, agenda item 106,
document A/7754.

------------~-·--------------

4. Condemns Portugal's policy of using the Territories under its domination for violations of the territorial integrity and sovereignty of independent African
States, as in the recent case in the Republic of Guinea;
5. Condemns the colonial war which is being waged
by the Government of Portugal against the peoples of
the Territories under its domination;
6. Condemns the collaboration between Portugal,
South Africa and the illegal racist minority régime in
Southern Rhodesia, which is designed to perpetuate
colonialism and oppression in southern Africa;
7. Condemns the intervcntion of South African
forces against the peoples of the Territories under
Portuguese domination;
8. Deplores the policy of the Government of Portugal, which violates thc economic and political rights
of the indigenous population by the arbitrary eviction
of the African population and the settlement of immigrants in the Territories, and calls upon Portugal to
cease those practices immediately;
9. Deplores the activities of the financia! interests
which obstruct the struggle of the peoples under Portuguese domination far self-determination, freedom
and independence and which strengthen the military
efforts of Portugal;
10. Calls upon the Government of Portugal to adopt
immediate measures far the implementation of resolution 1514 (XV) in the Territories under its domination;
1 1. Calls upan all States, the specialized agencies
and all the international organizations concerned to
increasc, in co-operation with the Organization of
African Unity, thcir moral and material assistance to
the peoples of the Territorics under Portuguese domination who are struggling for their freedom and independence;
12. Recommends that the Security Council, with a
view to the immediate implementation of resolution
1514 (XV) in the Territories under Portuguese domination, should take effective steps in conformity with
the relevant provisions of the Charter of the United
Nations and in view of the determination of the international community to put an end to colonialism and
racial discrimination in Africa;
13. Urges all States, and particularly the States
members of the North Atlantic Treaty Organization,
to withhold or dcsist from giving further military and
other assistance to Portugal which enables it to pursue
the colonial war in the Territories under its domination;
14. Invites the Sccretary-General, in the light of
General Assembly rcsolution 2431 ( XXIII) of 18
December 1968 and in consultation with the specialized agencies and the host Governments, to develop
and expand training programmes for the indigenous
inhabitants o[ the Tcrritories under Portuguese domination, taking into account their needs for qualified
administrativc, technical and professional personnel to
assumc rcsponsibility for the public administration and
the economic and social development of their own
countries;
15. Requests the Secretary-General to assist in the
implementation of the present resolution and to report
thereon to the General Assembly at its twenty-fifth
scssion;
16. Requests the Special Committee on the Situation with regard to the lmplementation of the Declara-

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fourth Committee

tion on the Granting of Independence to Colonial
Countries and Peoples to keep the situation in the
Territories under review.
1816th plenary meeting,
21 November 1969.

2508 (XXIV).

Question of Southern Rhodesia

The General Assembly,
Having considered the question of Southem Rhodesia,
Hav;.ng heard the statement of the petitioner,4
Recalling its resolution 1514 (XV) of 14 December 1960 containing the Declaration on the Granting
of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples,
Recalling further all previous resolutions conceming
the question of Southem Rhodesia adopted by the
General Assembly and by the Special Committee on
the Situation with regard to the Implementation of
the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to
Colonial Countries and Peoples,
Bearing in mind the relevant resolutions of the
Security Council, and particularly its resolutions 232
(1966) of 16 December 1966 and 253 (1968) of 29
May 1968, in which the Council determined that the
situation constituted a threat to intemational peace
and security,
Deeply concerned about the deteriorating situation
in Southem Rhodesia resulting from the introduction
by the illegal racist minority régime of new measures
aimed at entrenching itself as well as repressing the
African people in violation of resolution 1514 (XV),
and about the continued presence of South African
forces in the Territory,
Deeply concerned also about the persistent threat
to the sovereignty and territorial integrity of neighbouring African States resulting from the existing situation
in Southem Rhodesia and the presence of South African
forces in the Territory,
Bearing in mind that the Govemment of the United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northem lreland, as
the administering Power, has the primary responsibility
far putting an end to the illegal racist minority régime
in Southern Rhodesia and transferring effective power
to the people of Zimbabwe on the basis of majority
rule,
1. Reaffirms the inalienable right of the people of
Zimbabwe to freedom and independence and the legitimacy of their struggle to attain that right in conformity
with the provisions of General Assembly resolution 1514
(XV);
2. Declares illegal all measures taken by the racist
minority régime to deprive the people of Zimbabwe
of their legitimate rights and to entrench its policies
of apartheid in Southem Rhodesia;
3. Condemns the failure and refusal of the Government of the United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland, as the administering Power, to take
effective measures to bring down the illegal racist
minority régime in Southern Rhodesia and to transfer
power to the people of Zimbabwe on the basis of
majority rule in accordance with all the relevant resolutions of the General Assembly;
4 /~id., Twenty-fourth Session, Fourth Committee, 1822nd
meetmg.

67

4. Condemns the intervention of South African
armed forces in Southem Rhodesia, which constitutes
an act of aggression against the people and territorial
integrity of Zimbabwe, and calls upan the United
Kingdom, as the administering Power, to ensure the
immediate expulsion of all South African forces from
Southem Rhodesia;
5. Condemns the policies of the Governments
of South Africa and Portugal and other Govemments
which continue to have political, economic, military
and other relations with the illegal racist minority
régime in Southern Rhodesia in contravention of the
relevant United Nations resolutions, thereby violating
their obligations under the Charter of the United
Nations;
6. Condemns the policies of those Statcs which
make it possible far their nationals to emigrate to
Southern Rhodesia in violation of Security Council
resolution 253 (1968);
7. Calls upon the Government of the United Kingdom, in fulfilment of its responsibility as the administering Power, to take effective measures. including
the use of force, to put an immediate end to the
illegal racist minority régime in Southern Rhodesia and
to transfer all powers to the people of Zimbabwe on
the basis of majority rule;
8. Calls upon the administering Power to ensure
the immediate release of the African nationalists who
are in detention and to prevent further assassination
and imprisonment of African nationalists in Southem
Rhodesia;
9. Calls upon all States which continue to maintain
political, economic, military and othcr relations with
the illegal racist minority régime in Southern Rhodesia
to bring them to an immediate end;
10. Calls upon all States, specialized agencies and
other international organizations concerned to extend
ali moral and material assistance to the national liberation movements of Zimbabwe, in co-operation with the
Organization of African Unity;
11. Calls upon the Government of the United Kingdom, in view of the armed conflict in the Territory
and the inhuman treatment of prisoners, to ensure the
application to that situation of the Geneva Convention
relative to the Treatment of Prisoners of War11 and
of the Geneva Convention relative to the Protection
of Civilian Persons in Time of War, 6 both dated 12
August 1949;
12. Draws the attention of the Security Council
to the gravity of the situation arising from the intensification of suppressive activities against the people
of Zimbabwe and from armed attacks perpetrated
against neighbouring States in violation of intemational peace and security;
13. Reaf]irms its conviction that the sanctions will
~ot put an end to _the illegal racist minority régime
m Southern Rhodes1a unless they are comprehensive,
mandatory, effectively supervised, enforced and complied with, particularly by South Africa and Portugal;
14.. Further draws the at~ention of the Security
Co~ncil to the urge!}t necess1ty of applying the followmg measures env1saged under Chapter VII of the
Charter:
6 United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 75
6 United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 75

(1950), No. 972.
(1950), No. 973.
