S/PV.6300 (Resumption 1)

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Sixty-fifth year

6300th meeting
Thursday, 22 April 2010, 3 p.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Okuda . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Japan)

Members:

Austria . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Bosnia and Herzegovina . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Brazil . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Gabon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Lebanon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Mexico . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Nigeria . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Turkey . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Uganda . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . .
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Mr. Lutterotti
Mr. Vukašinović
Mr. Garcia
Mr. Hu Bo
Ms. Tétreau
Mr. Mandoukou Ombegue
Mr. Jaber
Mr. Pintado
Mr. Onowu
Mr. Safronkov
Mr. Gümrükçü
Mr. Muhumuza
Ms. Adams
Mr. DeLaurentis

Agenda
Implementation of the note by the President of the Security Council (S/2006/507)
Letter dated 1 April 2010 from the Permanent Representative of Japan to the
United Nations addressed to the Secretary-General (S/2010/165)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-506.

10-32436 (E)

*1032436*

S/PV.6300 (Resumption 1)

The meeting resumed at 3.05 p.m.
The President: I wish to remind all speakers to
limit their statements to no more than five minutes in
order to enable the Council to carry out its work
expeditiously.
I now give the floor to the representative of the
Philippines.
Mr. Sorreta (Philippines): I join the other
delegations in congratulating Japan on its presidency
this month. Your outstanding and inspiring leadership,
Sir, have proven valuable to the work of the Security
Council.
We appreciate Japan’s proactive and enthusiastic
role in advancing today’s issue. We commend Japan for
circulating a concept paper (S/2010/165) for the
Security Council’s debate on the implementation of the
measures set out in the note by the President of the
Security Council contained in document S/2006/507.
The concept paper provides us with a concise and
comprehensive view of the present work of the Council
and has been very useful in guiding our debate today.
The Philippines associates itself with the
statement made by the representative of the Arab
Republic of Egypt on behalf of the Non-Aligned
Movement. The enthusiastic participation of many
Member States in this debate reflects the utmost
importance they attach to this issue. Our delegation
strongly shares that sentiment. The Philippines is
among those countries that consider the improvement
of the working methods of the Council to be crucial,
not just to the Council’s effectiveness but also to the
overall success of the United Nations system. Its
working methods are key to the Council’s role as a
guardian of international peace and security, for they
greatly influence and enhance its effectiveness in
performing its mandate.
Various attempts have been made to increase the
Council’s transparency and openness. We saw in recent
months the efforts made by the Council to provide
more and timely information regarding its work
programme and schedule and the issues to be tackled
by the incoming president of the Council. We are
indeed pleased by these positive developments and
urge the Council members to continue this practice.
Recently, we have also observed a higher degree
of interaction and dialogue between Council members

2

and non-members, especially on such relevant issues as
peacekeeping and peacebuilding. Indeed, the greater
participation of non-members to express their views on
issues germane to them creates the impression that the
Council also cares about the views of non-members.
Not only does this reflect a growing sense of
inclusiveness, but it also keeps unilateralism at bay.
However, as new developments and threats
emerge, the work of the Council continues to grow and
expand. These, of course, absorb the Council’s
resources, energy and attention. There is a need to
refocus the Council’s attention on the basic and core
issues — peace and security — in order to achieve
greater efficiency. The Council should therefore
refrain, if possible, from tackling cross-cutting issues
such as those more appropriately dealt with by the
General Assembly, the Economic and Social Council or
other United Nations organs. Having said this,
however, the Philippines wishes to reiterate some of its
previous proposals for specific amendments contained
in the paper that the Philippine Mission transmitted to
the General Assembly and which it gave to the
permanent missions in February last year.
Mr. President, your laudable effort to convene
this debate has truly rekindled the enthusiasm of
non-members of the Security Council to share their
views and has renewed their hope that the Council is
capable of improving its working methods, which in
turn will redound to the benefit of the membership of
the United Nations and the international community as
a whole.
The reform of the Council’s working methods is
itself a work in progress and much remains to be done.
To this end, let me assure you that the Philippines is
ready and willing to support the work of Japan and
other like-minded States in achieving this lofty goal.
The President: I now give the floor to the
Permanent Representative of Canada.
Mr. McNee (Canada): Canada welcomes this
opportunity to address the Security Council on this
important issue. At the outset, my delegation would
like to commend Japan for its long-standing
commitment and very practical contributions to the
discussion of how to improve the working methods of
the Council.
The working methods of the Council are of
interest to Council members and non-members alike.

10-32436

S/PV.6300 (Resumption 1)

Canada believes that there is a need for a continuing
dialogue on this issue. Canada would therefore support
the idea of regular annual or biannual open debates on
this subject.
The Security Council has primary responsibility
for the maintenance of international peace and security
and the authority to make decisions that are binding on
all Member States. Given the heavy responsibility
entrusted to the Council, there is a need to ensure that
it is accountable, inclusive and transparent in its
decision-making. The presidential note contained in
document S/2006/507 outlines a number of important
areas where the Council could improve its working
methods to make them more transparent and more
efficient. In the past four years, there has been some
progress in implementing those measures. However,
this implementation has not been consistent, and even
those measures that have been implemented seem to
rely disproportionately on the individual efforts of the
Council President or elected members of the Council.
Canada believes that full implementation of the
measures contained in presidential note S/2006/507
would go a long way towards creating a Security
Council that is more transparent, efficient and
accountable. It is for this reason that Canada requested
a comprehensive review of the presidential note during
the open debate two years ago. It is our sincere hope
that the Informal Working Group on Documentation
and Other Procedural Questions can undertake such a
review and present its findings to the Council before
the end of the year.
For the vast majority of Member States,
membership of the Security Council is a rare
occurrence, yet the decisions of the Security Council
affect all Member States greatly. While it is clear that
each Council member must act in accordance with its
national responsibilities, the wider membership has a
legitimate interest in knowing how these decisions are
made and in contributing to them as appropriate.
One practical suggestion for improving the
contribution of non-members of the Council is to
resume the holding of orientation debates before
discussions are scheduled on specific items on the
Council’s agenda. In recent years, most of the open
debates of the Council have been on thematic issues.
Canada would urge the Council to return to the practice
of having orientation debates on country-specific
agenda items, as well as on thematic issues. That

10-32436

would allow non-members of the Council to have input
into these discussions before decisions are made.
Canada would also urge the Council to increase
the transparency of its deliberations. While Canada
acknowledges that private meetings of the Council are
sometimes necessary, there is also a need to keep the
wider membership informed about the Council’s
deliberations. In practical terms, this means that the
Council should hold as many meetings as possible in
public format. When there is a need to hold closed
consultations, the members of the Council should
provide systematic briefings to other interested
Member States.
One area in which the Council has recently made
some progress is in consultations with troopcontributing countries, and I would like to thank the
delegation of Japan for its efforts in this regard as
Chair of the Working Group on Peacekeeping
Operations. In the past year, there has been a
noticeable improvement in the quality of the
consultations with troop-contributing countries. The
most effective change has been an improvement in the
scheduling of consultations so that they occur before
the decision on a peacekeeping mission’s mandate has
already been taken. This allows the Council to benefit
from the significant experience of the troopcontributing countries and also ensures that there is
broad support for Council decisions.
However, these improved consultations still seem
to be carried out in a rather ad hoc manner. Canada
would urge the Council to systematize this practice so
that the input of troop contributors can be heard before
the discussions on all peacekeeping mandates. A more
predictable consultation mechanism would also
improve the participation of troop-contributing
countries and the quality of their input, thereby
increasing the information available to the Council for
its deliberations.
(spoke in French)
While presidential note S/2006/507 was an
important step forward, it is also worth noting that the
United Nations has changed over the past four years.
As a result, there are other areas in which
improvements could be made to Council working
methods beyond those outlined in the presidential note.
One of the most important developments of recent
years is the evolution of the Peacebuilding
Commission, which has a unique role to play in

3

S/PV.6300 (Resumption 1)

assessing, prioritizing, and mobilizing support for key
peacebuilding challenges that fall outside the core
competencies of a peacekeeping operation.
The Commission also works to ensure that the
efforts of the many actors involved in peacebuilding
are better coordinated, including with respect to the
mandate of United Nations missions. The holding of
regular briefings is a good start, but closer and more
substantive interaction between the Council and the
Commission is needed. Canada would therefore
recommend that the Security Council cooperate
systematically with the Peacebuilding Commission
earlier in the post-conflict period.
In conclusion, I would like to thank you again for
having convened this meeting, Sir. Reform of the
Security Council’s working methods is an ongoing
process to which all Member States must continue to
contribute. However, it is also an area in which early
action is possible in order to achieve tangible results to
the benefit of Member States. Canada looks forward to
continuing to engage constructively in this process in
the months ahead.
The President: I now give the floor to the
Permanent Representative of New Zealand.
Mr. McLay (New Zealand): New Zealand
welcomes the opportunity to contribute today and
thanks the delegation of Japan, which has a long and
commendable history of promoting reform of Security
Council working methods, for convening this debate.
New Zealand strongly believes that, in addition to
any structural change, there needs to be wide-ranging
reform of the Council’s working methods. In that
regard, New Zealand rejects outright the suggestion
that the Council’s working methods are a matter for the
Council alone to decide. That is no more legitimate
than arguing that citizens have no valid interest in the
proceedings of their countries’ courts or in the rules
and procedures of the legislatures that they elect. The
Council has the authority to make binding decisions.
Its permanent members are here by agreement of the
international community, as embodied in the United
Nations Charter. And the remaining members are
elected to serve the 187 Member States that do not
enjoy the privilege of permanently sitting in the
Council Chamber, often behind closed doors.
For those 187 — the overwhelming majority of
the United Nations membership — this Council’s

4

working methods are vitally important. They affect our
ability to understand and contribute to the Council’s
work and, in the end, like the Council’s structure,
directly affect the legitimacy of the Council itself.
Over time, an opaque and insular Security Council will
lose credibility and will not enjoy the support of the
wider membership, and its role in maintaining
international peace and security could diminish and
perhaps, over time, even be usurped. Such a Council
would at best be viewed as irrelevant; at worst,
illegitimate. Furthermore, such is the overriding
importance of the Security Council’s role in
maintaining global peace and security that its
legitimacy bears directly on the very legitimacy of the
United Nations itself. New Zealand believes that it is in
everyone’s interest to ensure that both the United
Nations and its Security Council are credible, effective
and strong.
The presidential note in document S/2006/507
sets out over 60 concrete steps that might improve the
Council’s working methods and, in turn, its legitimacy.
They are steps that, as Japan’s concept paper
(S/2010/165) makes clear, would increase the
Council’s
transparency,
its
interaction
with
non-members and its efficiency. In the interests of
time, I will highlight just five proposals that New
Zealand considers important.
First, while we accept that, in line with rule 48 of
the provisional rules of procedure, private
consultations are sometimes necessary, overall we
believe that Council meetings should be public
whenever possible. Further, essential information
should be shared at those meetings, and such meetings
should be outcome-focused, lest the issues be diluted
by a day’s worth of bland statements from Council
members and non-members alike.
Secondly, thanks to the efforts of Japan, France,
the United Kingdom and others, the Council’s
interactions with troop- and police-contributing
countries have greatly improved. However, as the
recent discussions on Chad demonstrated, key troop
contributors are sometimes still unable to participate
meaningfully in timely and sustained high-level
consultations with Council members. To address this,
New Zealand advocates the creative use of such
Council meeting formats as informal interactive
dialogues. As Council President during the Rwandan
crisis in 1994, New Zealand organized regular informal
meetings with troop-contributing countries. Our

10-32436

S/PV.6300 (Resumption 1)

experience in that case and others convinces us that
such informal meetings can allow very useful
communication and that they should be used more
regularly. And of course, they better reflect the spirit of
our Charter.
Thirdly, Member States with which the Council is
dealing should also be able to participate meaningfully
in high-level Council consultations. The informal
interactive dialogue format used last year in
discussions on Sri Lanka, and more recently on Chad,
worked well. This format should become a standard
Council tool for sustained interaction with
non-members whose cooperation is sought by the
Council. It would provide opportunities for prevention
of conflict and better use of the Council’s role as set
out in Chapter VI of the Charter. However, while
recognizing that such issues do often require private
discussion, the Council also needs to remember the
need to maintain a balance of transparency.
Fourthly, New Zealand would like to see draft
Council documents shared with non-members sooner
and with more frequency, and believes that interested
parties should have greater influence in the preparation
of those documents. Such sharing could be part of
wider efforts to revitalize the way the Council and its
secretariat make use of modern information
technology. Websites, such as that used by Slovakia
during its Council tenure, and now by Security Council
Report, are good current examples, but more
systematic sharing through email and other modern
media would be welcome.
Finally, as France and others have pointed out,
more effective discussions among Council members
are desirable. New Zealand recalls that, during its most
recent term on the Council, informal discussions were
both interactive and strategic and allowed for
substantive discussion and negotiation. Interactive
engagement would improve Council effectiveness and
collegiality and should be encouraged.
Those are just five of the many changes that
could improve this Council’s working methods. As a
next step, New Zealand looks forward to Japan, as
Chair of the Informal Working Group on
Documentation and Other Procedural Questions,
issuing a revised version of presidential note
S/2006/507, and urges that it be accompanied by a
concrete implementation plan, and we call for regular,

10-32436

annual or biannual
implementation.

debates,

to

assess

that

If the Security Council is to maintain
international peace and security, it must have the
support of the Member States from which it derives its
authority. Those Member States — the 187
non-permanent
members
—
deserve
better
transparency, they are entitled to better interaction and,
above all, they seek a more effective Security Council.
Such outcomes may be in the hands of the members of
this Council, but they are in the interests of all Member
States.
The President: I shall now give the floor to the
representative of Australia.
Mr. Goledzinowski (Australia): Mr. President, I
thank you for convening this important debate. I would
like first to take this opportunity to commend the
efforts of Japan to advance the Council’s working
methods, including your role as Chair of the Informal
Working Group on Documentation and Other
Procedural Questions now and in 2006. The Working
Group, of course, gave us the presidential note in
document S/2006/507, which we are considering here
today.
Australia supports a Council that better reflects
the modern world and that is well placed to meet its
demands. This, of course, involves reforming the
composition of the Council. But improving the
Council’s working methods, including transparency, is
an integral part of working towards that goal. We
appreciated the point made this morning by the
representative of Saint Vincent and the Grenadines,
representing the Caribbean Community, in regard to
the particular needs of the small island developing
States. His is a sentiment that we share, together with
our colleagues from the Pacific region.
The basic mindset of the Council should be one
of active accountability and deliberate transparency.
We, the Members of the United Nations, expect the
Council to regard the need to justify its decisions, to
share information, to consult widely and to accept
input not as burdensome or optional extras, but as core
elements of its working methods.
With this in mind, we recall the last debate on the
Council’s working methods in August 2008 (see
S/PV.5968), and in particular we recall Costa Rica’s
suggestion that Member States should convene at least

5

S/PV.6300 (Resumption 1)

every two years to monitor progress on reform of
working methods. The idea of the Ambassador of Costa
Rica, as I remember it, was that every elected member
should have at least one opportunity during its term to
participate in such a debate. When we heard Costa
Rica’s idea, we immediately endorsed it. It is therefore
very pleasing to note that Japan has acted to bring this
about. The next step, we would suggest respectfully, is
to ensure that this debate be institutionalized on at least
a biennial basis.
There are things to welcome and there are plenty
of things to do more of. Monthly briefings by the
Council President are appreciated; their quality has
improved in recent years. We welcome recent
innovations to improve the quality of consultations
with troop- and police-contributing countries. Informal
interactive dialogues do seem to have been useful,
although Council members must keep in mind the need
to provide transparency to others when it uses such
closed-format vehicles. The innovations with regard to
the process pursuant to resolution 1267 (1999) and the
creation of an ombudsman are also welcome.
As we have heard from so many speakers,
including the representative of Canada most recently,
greater interaction with the Peacebuilding Commission
(PBC) is important. But as we mentioned in this room
just last week, we consider it vital that peacebuilding
needs be considered at the inception of a peacekeeping
mission. This will demand a closer and more organic
relationship between this Council and the PBC
throughout the Council’s consideration of a situation.
The precise modalities for achieving that should be the
subject of further discussion between the Council and
the PBC.
We welcome the Council’s engagement with the
Chairs of the respective PBC country-specific
configurations in its mandate renewal deliberations.
This is a good first step. But how should broader
peacebuilding considerations be brought to the
attention of the Council when there is no PBC countryspecific configuration? How does the Council, in
planning a peacekeeping mission, engage with all
interested peacebuilding actors — including members
of the United Nations family, the international financial
institutions and the relevant regional and subregional
organizations — to ensure that all these actors are
working in unison and that the early peacebuilding
tasks undertaken by peacekeepers are part of a

6

coherent, integrated plan? These are the sorts of
questions the Council will need to address.
We join others who believe that there is much
more that needs to be done. The work by the so-called
group of five small countries, for example, is
impressive and we agree with their recommendations,
including ensuring, as the representative of
Liechtenstein said earlier today, that briefings by
United Nations officials are, as far as possible,
accessible to all Member States. We also agree that
consultations with non-members should take place as
part of the standard operating procedures, and draft
resolutions and presidential statements be made
available to non-members of the Council once they are
introduced in informal consultations. We think that the
points made by the delegation of Jordan in regard to
interaction with troop- and police-contributing
countries were very well made.
We continue to believe that, fundamentally, the
Council needs to commit to a vision of active
accountability and deliberate transparency. It needs to
establish metrics, qualitative and quantitative, and
assess progress against them with a more effective
annual report, although the earlier remarks this
morning in praise of the annual report we think were
entirely apposite. It should also keep in mind external
assessors, such as Security Council Report, and harness
technology, not just to bring the Council into the
twenty-first century, but to look ahead as to how it
should operate in five or 10 years time.
It is true that the Council’s efficiency depends in
part on the performance of we the non-members. We
should contribute to open debates in an interactive and
responsive manner rather than just read statements
prepared days in advance that too often exceed time
limits and disrespect our fellow members.
On this question of open debates, we were
particularly struck by a suggestion made just before
lunch by the Ambassador of Portugal. He suggested
that, in these open debates, perhaps non-members
should speak first and Council members last. We would
encourage Council members to consider this. We
would certainly encourage Council members to listen
more attentively when non-members speak, perhaps
even at the level of permanent representative. It would
afford an opportunity for Council members to reflect
and comment on the ideas they have heard in the
course of the day at the end of the day. We think that

10-32436

S/PV.6300 (Resumption 1)

would be interesting, and we would appreciate the
Council’s thoughts on that idea.
In conclusion, there is a tradition in the
Australian army that the officers eat only after the
troops have been fed. Perhaps that could be food for
thought.
The President: I shall now give the floor to the
representative of Costa Rica.
Mr. Hernández-Milian (Costa Rica) (spoke in
Spanish): At the outset, I would like to thank you,
Mr. President, and your delegation for convening this
important debate and for your leadership of the
Informal Working Group on Documentation and Other
Procedural Questions. We hope that this open meeting
will establish the practice of reviewing Security
Council working methods regularly with other States
Members of the Organization, as we have suggested in
the past and has been stressed by the representative of
Australia, a country which, among others, has
supported that measure.
Costa Rica associates itself with the statement
made this morning by the Permanent Representative of
Liechtenstein on behalf of the group of five small
countries. My delegation, as an active member of that
group, is contributing with a sense of responsibility to
the consideration of various elements of Security
Council reform, and specifically of its working
methods.
During its recent tenure as an elected member of
the Council, Costa Rica contributed to the significant
progress made by this organ in the implementation of
the note contained in document S/2006/507. Our
country welcomed the increase in the number of open
meetings compared to previous years. This trend
should be extended because we are still far from
complying with the provisional rules of procedure
establishing the public nature of Council meetings as a
general rule. As we have said on other occasions, the
Secretariat has the duty to facilitate the application of
this rule, offering open formats for all meetings as the
first option in the draft programme of work that it
prepares for each presidency. It would be for members
of the Council to argue for and convince the Council of
the need to use the private format on an exceptional
basis, when necessary.
The Council has also made greater efforts to
interact in greater depth and a timelier manner with

10-32436

troop- and police-contributing countries. The Council
should maintain the new practice of holding private
meetings with those countries at least one week before
it considers an item so that their points of view can be
taken into account in decisions. We urge troopcontributing countries to make greater and better use of
these meetings, to contribute with information and the
views of their mission personnel, and to refer to
specific issues relating to the implementation of
mandates in the field.
The Security Council has committed to
implementing the measures contained in the note
contained in document S/2006/507. My country
considers that the progress made in these and other
fields should not depend on the will of each individual
presidency, but should be affirmed in the daily practice
of the Council.
Costa Rica also has first-hand experience of some
other ways in which this organ still does not comply
with agreed measures. The desire for all Council
members to participate in the preparation and drafting
of resolutions and other Council products is reaffirmed
in note S/2006/507. However, in practice some very
sensitive issues are somehow removed from the
Council’s purview and essentially defined by the
permanent members, other States that are not members
of the Council and the so-called groups of friends. As
recommended in note S/2006/507, Costa Rica is in
favour of consultations with interested States.
However, these should never be to the detriment of the
full participation of the elected members of the
Security Council. All issues of international peace and
security are of interest to and within the competence of
all members.
We welcome the Secretariat’s ongoing internal
review of its reporting mechanisms in response to the
reiterated concerns of Member States on the tardy
circulation of the reports of the Secretary-General. As
stated in paragraph 11 of note S/2006/507, these
reports “should be circulated to Council members and
made available in all official languages of the United
Nations at least four working days before the Council
is scheduled to consider them”, including Council
meetings with troop-contributing countries. Should
there be significant changes in the situation in the field,
these can be communicated via an addendum to the
reports. The fact that reports need to be updated should
not be an excuse for circulating them late.

7

S/PV.6300 (Resumption 1)

Although my country welcomes the practice of
holding monthly open debates, it is important to
consider the use the Council makes of such debates.
This format can be very useful not just in addressing
thematic issues, as is currently the case, but also in
learning about situations in various countries, whether
they are new or familiar to the Council. We are also
concerned about the message sent when decisions
adopted by the Council in such debates are agreed
upon before they take place. This would seem to
indicate that the Council is not interested in hearing the
points of view of the broader membership before
making decisions. We invite the Council to change this
practice and to initiate the negotiation of resolutions
and presidential statements after having heard from the
rest of the members, and not to adopt them on the same
day, as has been its custom to date.
Beyond the contents of note S/2006/507, in
December last year my country submitted a draft note
by the President to the Informal Working Group on
Documentation, with the aim of ensuring the inclusive
and uniform participation of all members in Security
Council missions to the field. Our intention in doing so
was to clarify a number of administrative and
procedural aspects of Council missions. We hope that
this proposal will receive the attention of the Informal
Working Group, and my country remains fully
available to contribute to this process. I take this
opportunity to congratulate the delegation of Japan for
its leadership on this issue.
Finally, it is important to mention a mandated
task on which the Security Council still falls short,
although it is established in the very Charter of the
United Nations. We refer to the submission of special
reports to the General Assembly, a tool which could be
of use in such situations as the establishment of a new
peacekeeping operation or sanctions regime, or the
non-action of the Council due to the use of the veto,
among others.
Our delegation reaffirms its conviction that
working methods are a fundamental component of the
process of comprehensive Security Council reform.
The implementation of the measures already agreed to
improve its working methods and the adoption of new
measures would lead to greater effectiveness in the
work of the Council and thus to greater transparency
and accountability. We believe that progress on
working methods should not hinge on progress or
success in other areas of reform. We are convinced

8

that, through substantive reform of the working
methods, we can help to remove the obstacles that
occasionally impede the smooth running of the
Security Council and its relations with other bodies.
The President: I now call on the representative
of Argentina.
Mr. Argüello (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish): We
thank the delegation of Japan for having organized this
open debate on working methods. Argentina has
witnessed the constructive efforts pursued by Japan on
this issue, having participated in 2006 in the drafting of
the presidential note contained in document
S/2006/507, a legal instrument that has become the
document of reference for this topic, filling, to some
extent, the gap in the Security Council’s rules of
procedures.
The issue of the lack of transparency in the
working methods of the Security Council is directly
related to questions regarding the effectiveness and
representativeness of the Council. In this regard, we
believe that the valuable efforts deployed by Japan,
Slovakia, Panama, Belgium, Viet Nam, Uganda and
Costa Rica in recent years are valid and commendable,
but we also believe that they are not enough. We still
do not have measures that genuinely improve the
transparency, participation and effectiveness of the
work of the Council.
We believe it very important to pursue reform
aimed at strengthening the institutional balance and
relations between the Security Council and the other
principal organs of the United Nations through regular
official consultations, cooperation mechanisms and
adequate exchange of information. In addition to
enhancing cooperation between the Council and the
General Assembly, regular and substantive dialogue
should be established with the Economic and Social
Council, reinforcing the communication provided for
by Article 65 of the Charter of the United Nations, as
well as with the Human Rights Council and the
Peacebuilding Commission.
With regard to the accountability of the Security
Council for its actions to the membership of the United
Nations as a whole, a more detailed and analytical
substantive annual report should be submitted to the
General Assembly. The Council should also, whenever
necessary or relevant, submit special reports to the
General Assembly, pursuant to Articles 15 and 24 of
the Charter.

10-32436

S/PV.6300 (Resumption 1)

Finally, we believe that there is a tendency to
convene too many open thematic debates, which run
the risk of becoming marathons of speeches without
specific, clear and effective results. As I already noted,
we recognize the progress that has been made in
several areas, such as the monthly programme of work,
the monthly briefings and assessments by the
President, the clear improvement of the annual report
to the General Assembly, and relations with troopcontributing countries.
In closing, we note our recognition of the
substantial and very useful nature of the latest report
on working methods produced by the organization
Security Council Report.
The President: I call on the representative of
Cuba.
Mr. Benítez-Versón (Cuba) (spoke in Spanish):
Cuba welcomes the convening of this important debate
on a topic of interest to us all. We should also like to
express our full support for the statement made by the
representative of Egypt on behalf of the Non-Aligned
Movement.
The position of Cuba is clear. The Security
Council needs to undergo comprehensive, urgent and
far-reaching reform. There can be no genuine reform of
the United Nations until the Security Council is
reformed.
Security Council reform must by necessity
include the modification of its working methods. In
recent years, there have been modest changes in the
working methods of the Council, including on some of
the issues raised in the note contained in document
S/2006/507 and subsequent notes by the President of
the Council. But the majority of the changes have been
somewhat formal and, in reality, the Council is neither
transparent, democratic nor efficient.
Unfortunately, the permanent members — and on
occasion not even all of them — in particular when
dealing with highly important issues, continue to
negotiate behind closed doors, where they take
decisions of fundamental importance that are later
presented as faits accompli to the other members of the
Council and the rest of the membership of the United
Nations.
Cuba believes that, as a minimum, the following
urgent changes, to mention but a few, are necessary to
the working methods of the Council.

10-32436

The number of public meetings should be
increased, in accordance with Article 31 and 32 of the
Charter of the United Nations. Closed meetings and
unofficial consultations should take place only in very
exceptional circumstances. The State concerned should
be allowed to participate in Council discussions on
topics that affect it directly, in accordance with Article
31 of the Charter. The opinions expressed by Member
States in thematic open debates should be reflected in
the resolutions and presidential statements of the
Council. Those countries that are not members of the
Council should be guaranteed access to subsidiary
bodies and the right to participate in their discussions.
The Council’s rules of procedure, which remain
provisional after more 60 years, should be formalized
in order to increase transparency and accountability.
Cuba notes with serious concern the growing
tendency of the Council to consider matters and
assume functions that are not within its competence,
usurping the role granted by the Charter to other
bodies, in particular the General Assembly. This trend
must be stopped as a matter of urgency. The Council
needs, as soon as possible, to carry out a profound
revision of its agenda and to bring it in line with its
mandate. The Council should strictly observe the
provisions of the Charter and all the resolutions of the
General Assembly as the main deliberative,
policymaking and representative organ of the United
Nations.
The Council must give due account of its work to
the General Assembly by submitting truly analytical
annual reports, as well as special reports as provided
for under Articles 15 and 24 of the Charter of the
United Nations. Such special reports, unfortunately,
still do not exist.
The question of the veto is intrinsically linked to
the working methods of the Council, especially its
decision-making mechanism. The veto is an
anachronistic and anti-democratic privilege that should
be eliminated as soon as possible. Until that happens, it
would be important as a first step to consider various
options for limiting the use of the veto, such as limiting
the use of the veto to votes on measures adopted by the
Council under Chapter VII of the Charter; allowing for
the possible annulment of the veto through an
affirmative vote by an agreed number of Council
members in line with the number of members of an
expanded Council; or allowing for a possible

9

S/PV.6300 (Resumption 1)

annulment of the veto by a two-thirds majority in the
General Assembly.

enhance the transparency and effectiveness of the
Council’s work.

In conclusion, I stress our conviction that a more
transparent Council would be a more legitimate
Council. A more inclusive and accessible Council that
truly takes into account the opinions of the Member
States of the Organization would be a more effective
Council. We already have a significant number of
specific proposals to improve the Council’s working
methods, such as those presented by the Non-Aligned
Movement. What we need now is to take action
without further delay.

Another area that cries out for urgent reforms
relates to the Council’s annual report to the General
Assembly. At present, the annual report continues to be
a statistical compilation of events — a bland summary
and listing of meetings and outcome documents. It is
important that the General Assembly be aware not only
of what decisions were taken, but also of the rationale,
efficacy and impact of the Council’s decisions in terms
of crystallized take-aways for the membership of the
General Assembly. Further, it is important for the
Council to submit, when necessary, special reports to
the General Assembly, in accordance with Article 24 (3)
of the Charter, for the consideration of the Assembly in
accordance with Article 15 (1) of the Charter.

The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of India.
Mr. Hardeep Singh Puri (India): I thank you,
Mr. President, for convening today’s debate on an issue
to which we attach great importance. We thank the
Japanese presidency for the concept paper
(S/2010/165) and for its continued stewardship since
2009 of the Council’s Informal Working Group on
Documentation and Other Procedural Questions.
The very fact that the Security Council is holding
an open debate on the issue of its working methods is
in and of itself of some significance. While we
acknowledge the prerogative of the Council to set its
own working methods, we have always argued that,
since the Council acts on behalf of the United Nations
membership, it is both natural and legitimate for the
latter to discuss the Council’s working methods.
India associates itself with the growing clamour
for early reform of the working methods of the
Council, which is an integral part of the broader
imperative of the comprehensive reform and expansion
of the membership of the Council in both the
permanent and non-permanent categories. The
overwhelming majority of the membership of the
United Nations has already reiterated its support for
such reforms.
The Council will render great service to the cause
of maintaining international peace and security by
deepening and enriching its consultations with troopand police-contributing countries in the devising,
revision and implementation of the mandates of United
Nations peacekeeping and peacebuilding missions. In
addition, such constructive consultations can and will
have a salutary impact on the ongoing efforts to

10

Apart from the specific areas of reform that I
have already mentioned, my delegation believes that
the Council should urgently undertake the following
measures.
First, as a general rule, the Council must meet in
meetings open to all United Nations Member States.
Secondly, it must implement Articles 31 and 32
of the Charter by consulting on a regular basis with
non-members, especially those with a special interest
in the substantive matter under consideration by the
Council.
Thirdly, it must grant non-members access to its
subsidiary organs, including the right to participate as
appropriate.
Fourthly, it should make available to
non-members draft resolutions and presidential
statements, as well as other draft documents that are
submitted at the Council’s informal consultations of the
whole for action on its agenda items, as soon as such
documents are submitted or earlier, if so authorized by
the author of the draft.
Fifthly, it must hold frequent, timely and
substantive briefings for non-members on the matters
discussed in the Council and its subsidiary organs,
including briefings on its ad hoc missions, their terms
of reference and the findings of such missions.
Sixthly, it should hold regular consultations with
the Presidents of the General Assembly and the
Economic and Social Council.

10-32436

S/PV.6300 (Resumption 1)

My delegation is supportive of the ongoing
efforts, including and particularly those of the group of
five small countries (S-5), to bring about
improvements in the Council’s working methods. Such
efforts have succeeded in keeping the issue of working
methods high on the reform agenda.
Yet we must acknowledge that real progress has
been minimal, despite years of efforts. Some
permanent members continue to argue that the reform
of the working methods cannot be discussed by
non-members. Even many of the decisions adopted by
the Council in the note contained in document
S/2006/507 remain unimplemented, and there appears
to be little appetite for the far-reaching reforms that the
large majority is demanding. This only strengthens our
view that the many flaws in the Council’s working
methods are merely symptoms of a deeper malaise
rooted in its structure and composition.
Clearly, genuine and lasting improvement of the
working methods of the Council can be possible only
as part of a comprehensive process of Security Council
reform, based on both the reform and expansion of its
composition in the permanent and non-permanent
categories. Until there is a change in the real power
structure of the Council — its permanent membership —
we cannot realistically expect the deep-seated changes
that the large majority seeks.
We invite the S-5 and others to work closely,
actively and in lock-step with the wider international
community seeking comprehensive reforms of the
Council. In the absence of such comprehensive reform,
a fundamental improvement in the working methods
will either elude us, as it has for more than 60 years,
or, even if miraculously achieved, would not last
without the institutional memory, continuing
commitment and peer example of new permanent
members.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Uruguay.
Mr. Vidal (Uruguay) (spoke in Spanish): Greater
transparency,
efficiency
and
interaction
with
non-Council members are goals shared by all. We are
aware of the commitment of the delegation of Japan to
the permanent improvement of the Council’s working
methods, and we congratulate it on that initiative.
The review of the Security Council’s working
methods is a subject of great importance to Uruguay.

10-32436

We believe that Member States have the right to
participate in the negotiation and decision-making
processes of the Organization’s organs, especially
when they have a direct interest in the results of the
deliberations and when those results affect their
citizens or their highest objectives. A concrete example
of this is the interaction between the Council and
troop- and police-contributing countries in the context
of decisions on peacekeeping operations.
It is fair to acknowledge here that, since the most
recent open debate on this subject (see S/PV.5968),
tangible and substantive progress has been achieved
with regard to this legitimate demand by police- and
troop-contributing countries. On the one hand, private
meetings with troop- and police-contributing countries
have been convened further in advance of mandate
renewals. At least in principle, that gives the Council
time to consider the inputs of those countries. We hope
that this practice will continue and that the
implementation of resolution 1353 (2001) will be
stepped up.
On the other hand, we highlight the reactivation,
in 2009, of the informal consultation mechanism
involving the members of the Security Council, troop
and police contributors and the Secretariat in the
context of the Council’s Working Group on
Peacekeeping Operations. We believe that the
exchanges at various meetings on significant
challenges to specific missions have been very useful
and productive. We hope that the Working Group will
relaunch such meetings with troop and police
contributors as soon as possible. We also hope that it
will be possible to debate cross-cutting issues that have
been identified as relevant to the entire peacekeeping
system. We also hope that such meetings will be made
part of the institutional framework, rather than being
left up to the presence or absence of a given country in
the Security Council.
On another front, we express our general concern
about the link that has been established between the
issue we are debating today and the reform of the
composition of the Council, as if they were
inextricably linked. As we have said on other
occasions, these are two inexplicably linked issues that
cannot serve as a mutual basis for negotiation. Some
time ago, the group of five small countries (S-5)
submitted to the General Assembly draft resolution
A/60/L.49, which contained worthwhile suggestions
and proposals that could be adopted today itself by the

11

S/PV.6300 (Resumption 1)

vast majority of Members. The way in which that
valuable proposal was received was not especially
productive. The fact is that the working methods of the
Security Council have been held hostage to the
Council’s enlargement, which is an extremely difficult
issue.
Uruguay supports draft resolution A/60/L.49
submitted by the S-5, as well as similar documents put
forward in connection with it. In the context of that
proposal, we are prepared to consider a package that
moves us towards the single undertaking referred to by
some States. However, we reiterate that we believe that
the Council’s working methods and expansion are two
separate issues that can be resolved on different tracks.
Let us rekindle the spirit of draft resolution
A/60/L.49 and of the worthwhile efforts of the S-5. Let
us now propose a set of measures that will make it
possible to improve the Council’s working methods.
Let us make it possible to realize those valuable
proposals on which almost all of us agree.
The President: I now give the floor to the
Permanent Representative of Malta.
Mr. Borg (Malta): My delegation would like to
join other delegations in expressing appreciation to
you, Mr. President, and to the other members of the
Security Council for giving us this opportunity to
participate in this interesting open debate on the
implementation of the measures set out in the note
contained in document S/2006/507, concerning the
working methods of the Security Council. I would also
like to take this opportunity to thank you, Sir, for your
concept paper (S/2010/165), which is making a
valuable contribution to this debate.
Improving the transparency, efficiency and
effectiveness of the working methods of the Security
Council must continue to serve as a pillar of Council
reform, which also continues to be the subject of
debate in the context of the five inextricably linked key
issues within the framework of the intergovernmental
negotiations. Increased transparency in the working
methods of the Security Council would increase not
only the credibility and legitimacy of the Council, but
also its accountability, in particular at a time when the
effectiveness of the Council is continually being tested.
In that regard, Malta welcomes the measures taken
recently by the Security Council to improve those three
dimensions of a progressive and open Security
Council.

12

While much more has to be done to reach an
optimal level of transparency, Malta believes that the
monthly briefings by incoming Council Presidents on
the programme of work and the increase in detail
contained in the annual report of the Security Council
that is presented to the General Assembly have
enhanced the relationship between the members of the
Council and the wider membership of the United
Nations. We also welcome the missions to the field
undertaken by Security Council members, thereby
bringing the work of the Council closer to
Governments and peoples.
It is an acknowledged fact that the adoption of
improved working methods depends in principle on the
members of the Security Council themselves. However,
we believe that the views of the general membership of
the United Nations should continue to receive positive
consideration by the Security Council membership,
including through the holding of open debates and
briefings and fewer closed meetings. That would in
turn enhance access to and participation in the work of
the Council for all members, especially small States.
There is a false perception that many issues
before the Security Council are the exclusive
responsibility of its members, and in particular of
permanent members. However, that perception is
fading with time owing to the growing recognition that
current threats are becoming increasingly global and
transnational in nature. No boundaries exist for such
threats. The matters that are brought to the attention of
the Council are therefore issues that call for the greater
involvement of and engagement by and with
non-members or the Council.
My delegation acknowledges that some progress
has been made with regard to regular consultations
between the Council and the Chairperson of the
Peacebuilding Commission (PBC) and the Chairs of
the Commission’s country-specific configurations. In
welcoming such an improvement, we feel that the
Security Council needs to make more space for the
Peacebuilding Commission in order to allow it to
further secure its place within United Nations
structures.
As a small State, Malta believes that an improved
and enhanced working relationship between the
Security Council and the other principal organs, in
particular the General Assembly, through regular and
institutionalized consultations should be a matter for

10-32436

S/PV.6300 (Resumption 1)

further consideration by the Council. The ongoing
dialogue between the President of the General
Assembly and the President of the Security Council is
commendable and should be further encouraged.
The number of challenges facing the Council is
on the increase, thereby placing additional burdens on
the workload and efficiency of the Council. In that
context, consideration must be given to making
existing United Nations technical information and
information-gathering capabilities more effective
through the use of information technology. Such
information — including prompt, relevant and current
information on matters with which the Council is
seized — should be made accessible not only to the
members of the Security Council, but also to the
membership of the United Nations a whole. That would
enable all Member States to better assess conflicts and
disputes that require an urgent, if not immediate,
response by all countries concerned. That would be
especially helpful in assisting the members of the
Council to take timely and appropriate action to
prevent the aggravation of particular situations or
disputes.
The working methods by which the Council
operates are crucial to the way the Council is held
accountable for the maintenance of international peace
and security. While noting the valid contribution being
made by the group of five small countries, Malta
encourages Council members to continue to explore
ways on how to improve the working methods of the
Security Council by ensuring enhanced transparency,
effectiveness and interaction with non-members of the
Council.
It is important that all Member States not only
feel that they own the United Nations reform process,
including that of the Security Council, but also that
they continue to assume the guardianship of our
Organization, of which the Security Council is a
principal organ.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of the Islamic Republic of Iran.
Mr. Khazaee (Islamic Republic of Iran): Let me
express my gratitude to you, Mr. President, for
convening this important meeting and for distributing
the concept paper (S/2010/165) to facilitate the
implementation of the note contained in document
S/2006/507 on the working methods of the Security
Council. While associating my delegation with the

10-32436

statement of the Non-Aligned Movement, delivered by
the representative of Egypt, let me also share and
emphasize the following points.
As is correctly stated in the concept paper
annexed to the letter contained in document
S/2010/165, the lack of improvement in the three
interlinked and key issue areas of transparency,
interaction with non-members and efficiency in the
working methods of the Security Council is at the core
of today’s discussion. I wish to build on those
shortcomings by further elaborating, as follows.
First, according to Article 24 of the United
Nations Charter, the Security Council should act on
behalf of all United Nations Member States. However,
in reality, the Council’s decisions not only decreasingly
reflect the wish and the views of the general
membership, but also, in many cases, do not even
represent the genuine opinion of its own general
membership.
Secondly, despite the requirement of the
Council’s own decisions on its working methods,
including those contained in document S/2006/507,
which, for instance, call for consultation by the
Council with:
“the broader United Nations membership, in
particular interested Member States, including
countries directly involved or specifically
affected, … when drafting, inter alia, resolutions,
presidential statements and press statements,”
(S/2006/507, section VII, para. 42)
in many cases the general membership and even the
countries concerned are kept totally uninformed of the
negotiations on resolutions or statements directly
affecting them, let alone their views on the Council’s
outcome documents being sought. That is also the case
for non-permanent members when they are frequently
faced with the situation of secretive negotiations being
held among a few permanent members on important
issues.
Thirdly, the refusal to allow non-members of the
Council to participate in discussions on matters
affecting them and their interests, and the denial to the
countries concerned of the right to brief the Council on
their positions on issues having a direct effect on their
national interests, and, more crucially, of their right of
reply to countries against which allegations are raised

13

S/PV.6300 (Resumption 1)

during certain formats of the Council’s meetings are in
total disregard of Article 31 of the Charter.
A fourth shortcoming is the ongoing trend of
selective notification of Council meetings and the
failure to convene regular and necessary briefings.
Fifthly, the quick and unnecessary resort to
Chapter VII of the United Nations Charter and the
threat or use of sanctions in cases where no action has
been necessary are other disturbing facts that have
undermined the credibility and legitimacy of the
Council’s decisions.
Sixthly, as has been mentioned by various
delegations on different occasions, the veto power has
always raised concerns and criticism on various
grounds among a significant majority of Member
States. There is a strong sense of injustice and
discrimination between the haves and the have-nots. In
fact, the veto is a non-constructive instrument that
undermines the possibility of action by the Council in
many cases where it is needed.
To increase the transparency of its work, to strike
a balanced approach in interaction with non-members,
and to improve the efficiency of its working methods,
the Council should seriously address the said
shortcomings and take into consideration the relevant
provisions of the Charter and of the resolutions that
clarify its relationship with the General Assembly and
other organs of the United Nations.
Finally
and
undoubtedly,
impartiality,
transparency and fairness are key premises on which
the Security Council should base its approach to
discharging its responsibilities mandated by the
Charter. Every effort should be made to render the
Council more democratic, representative and
accountable. My delegation stands ready to contribute
to the achievement of those goals.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Singapore.
Mr. Menon (Singapore): I thank you,
Mr. President, for convening this open debate on the
implementation of the note contained in document
S/2006/507 on the Security Council’s working
methods. Member States last had the opportunity to
express their views on this important topic in August
2008 (see S/PV.5968).

14

Singapore fully subscribes to the statement
delivered by the representative of Liechtenstein on
behalf of the group of five small countries, of which
we are a member.
Among the areas of Security Council reform, we
believe that the issue of working methods is one that
commands widespread support and resonance with
Member States. It is also an area that is objectively
logical to develop, but has been practically mired in the
reluctance of the Council to open itself up to scrutiny
by fellow Member States.
The provisional rules of procedure of the Council
state that meetings shall be held in public.
Unfortunately, that premise of transparency has been
eroded over the years in favour of so-called
effectiveness and functionality. It is supposed to be
easier to broker deals to save the world in back rooms
than in boardrooms. Yet, it strains the bounds of
credulity for Member States to hear each year, in the
face of constant threats to regional peace and human
dignity, that the Council has discharged its
responsibility for maintaining peace and security. It is
absolutely true that the Council has to manage serious
global complexities with less than adequate resources,
but it is also true that the Council is sometimes prey to
its own practices, which add to the complexities rather
than solve them.
Thus, it was significant that the Council adopted
note S/2006/507, signalling recognition of the need to
improve how it functioned. That document contains
many measures to address the three areas identified by
the President for possible discussion during this open
debate, namely, transparency, interaction and dialogue
with non-members, and efficiency. In practice,
however, the implementation of the document’s
contents has been uneven.
Transparency is one area of great interest to
Singapore, as it promotes a sense of accountability in
the Organization. However, we should not mislead
ourselves into believing that reports and briefings
alone can ensure greater transparency. The notion of
openness extends to developments as simple as an
explanation for the sudden shift in the date of this open
debate or the provision of adequate notification of
important meetings of the Council.
It should also extend to the access that
non-members, the Secretariat and even members of the
press have to Security Council members and, where

10-32436

S/PV.6300 (Resumption 1)

relevant, their deliberations. In that connection, there
has been some concern over the perceived curtailing of
such access, ostensibly due to the limitations imposed
by the relocation of the Security Council Chamber as
part of the Capital Master Plan. That is an issue of
transparency and needs to be addressed.
We acknowledge that there has been some
improvement in the opportunities for interaction and
dialogue between the Council and non-Council
members. That includes interactions with troop- and
police-contributing countries, as well as regional
organizations, consultations between the Security
Council and Member States in the preparation of the
annual report, and briefings by Security Council
presidents on each month’s programme of work.
However, much more could be done, particularly
on issues of interest and concern to Member States. For
example, countries directly affected by a particular
issue being considered by the Security Council should
be given every opportunity to participate in the
deliberations. Beyond interaction and dialogue, the
Council should also not fear opening up its
proceedings to non-members. Ultimately, it is in the
interest of the Council to create a climate of trust,
which is possible only if Member States are better able
to appreciate and understand the decision-making
considerations, processes of and challenges faced by
the Council.
The Council’s scorecard on efficiency is
middling. The Security Council, in document
S/2006/507,
undertook
to
maintain
regular
communication with the General Assembly and the
Economic and Social Council for better coordination
among the principal organs of the United Nations.
However, its implementation has been cursory when it
could easily be a catalyst to streamline processes
within the Organization and demonstrate the Council’s
commitment to promoting greater efficiency within the
United Nations system. As a simple example, when the
Security Council decides to establish a special political
mission, it makes sense to ensure that the Fifth
Committee is notified without delay and provided with
as comprehensive a picture as possible, enabling it to
factor such information into its consideration of the
overall resource requirements necessary for such
missions.
Without this basic coordination, unnecessary
complications can arise and precious resources wasted.

10-32436

In December 2009, the Council took decisions on three
special political missions. At the same time, the Fifth
Committee had been considering the budget for such
missions for the coming biennium 2010-2011. Even
though the Council’s decisions had been taken before
the Fifth Committee concluded its work for the main
session, information on the three special political
missions that would have affected the outcome of the
Committee’s deliberations was not forthcoming.
While the appropriate course of action is for the
Fifth Committee to be notified through a report of the
Secretary-General, accompanied by recommendations
of the Advisory Committee on Administrative and
Budgetary Questions, this process takes time. As a
result, the resource requirements for these three
missions had to be taken up separately when the Fifth
Committee resumed its work in March 2010. This led
to difficult negotiations, as some countries were
resistant to the idea of increasing the overall budget for
special political missions to accommodate these
additional resource requirements, while others were
concerned that absorbing this cost under the overall
budget for such missions would negatively impact
existing missions. While a solution was eventually
found, many of the complications could have been
avoided if a system had been in place to better
facilitate the flow of information between the Security
Council and the Fifth Committee from the inception of
these special political missions. It is incumbent upon
Member States to see what we can do to improve such
working methods and thereby enhance the efficiencies
of both the Security Council and the General
Assembly.
Singapore appreciates the opportunity of this
open debate. We are encouraged by the Security
Council’s willingness to continue its engagement on
this issue and its efforts to better implement the
contents of document S/2006/507. We look forward to
continuing our discussions with the Informal Working
Group on Documentation and Other Procedural
Questions later this year, and to further open debates.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Ukraine.
Mr. Sergeyev (Ukraine): I would like to thank
you, Sir, for holding this important meeting and
congratulate you on a successful presidency. We
broadly share the priorities for today’s debate arising
from the concept paper (S/2010/165), namely,

15

S/PV.6300 (Resumption 1)

transparency, interaction with members at large and the
efficiency of the Council. Japan’s valuable contribution
to reinforcing these three pillars is well known and
much appreciated.
The effectiveness and efficiency of the Council,
coupled with its openness and transparency, were the
guidelines of Ukraine’s first and so far only Council
tenure as an independent State in 2000 and 2001. One
of the main lessons we learned was that greater
transparency and interaction with the general
membership are essential to the support of the
Council’s decisions and their implementation in the
most critical areas, such as peacekeeping, counterterrorism, sanctions and others.
We welcome the number of new positive
developments
thereafter,
including
the
2006
presidential note under discussion today (S/2006/507).
One of these relates to the strengthening of the
thematic edge of the Council’s agenda. It bodes well
for the United Nations relevance that such pressing
issues as maritime piracy, the protection of civilians,
post-conflict peacebuilding, drug and arms trafficking
and other challenges have been featured more and
more prominently among the Council’s activities.
Against this backdrop and with due consideration
for the primary responsibility of the Council in the
maintenance of interventional peace and security, we
would like such major topics as conflict prevention to
be more visible on the Council’s radar. The sheer
complexity of this issue should not discourage the
Council from digging deeper into the richness of
preventive diplomacy. There are far too many crises in
which no timely alarm goes off before their eruption.
The way the Council interacts with the troop- and
police-contributing countries is of great importance to
Ukraine. We take positive note of some welcome
changes in this area thanks to collective and individual
efforts within the Council. The collective input,
channelled through the Working Group on
Peacekeeping Operations established in 2001 with the
active support of Ukraine, proved to be particularly
instrumental. Private consultations with troopcontributing countries well in advance of Council
meetings on relevant missions, such as those held this
month, are among the features that have to become
customary.
Yet there is room for further progress in the
Council’s techniques in the area of peacekeeping,

16

especially in giving troop-contributing countries a
stronger voice in the decision-making process. In our
view, more regular consultations between the Working
Group and the General Assembly’s Special Committee
on Peacekeeping Operations would serve that purpose.
The choice of the Working Group to close capability
gaps as one of its priorities for this year is quite fitting
for such cooperation.
Ukraine welcomes improvements in the Council’s
handling of sanctions regimes by ensuring their
targeted and, where possible, time-bound character,
spelling out concrete conditions for lifting, improving
listing and de-listing, and providing for periodic
assessment. We encourage the Council’s members to
further refine its methodology in this sphere.
We know, including from our own experience in
the Council, that much of what has been achieved by
this body can be attributed to the contribution of its
rotating members. They enter the Council with
innovative ideas, creative energy and an appetite for
making a mark on its work. That is why we believe that
the Council should look further into the most effective
ways of channelling and maximizing the profit from
this contribution. The need for more insight into the
Council’s affairs is widely recognized by nonmembers. In this regard, one could make a practical
suggestion for formalizing the currently ad hoc yet
valuable practice of holding regular briefings for the
regional groups by the non-permanent members they
delegated to the Council. In the same vein, we see
merit in giving due consideration to the idea of
revisiting the practice of interactive end-of-presidency
wrap-up meetings. In our view, members and nonmembers of the Council alike would equally benefit
from this.
Ukraine encourages the Council to maintain and
build on the positive dynamic in streamlining its
modus operandi, while becoming more open and
transparent. In this regard, we believe that some recent
changes in terms of access to the Council are of a
technical and temporary nature.
We look forward to the revised version of the
2006 presidential note and to continuing today’s
discussion in a more systematic manner. Ukraine
remains fully committed to a strong, effective, efficient
and transparent Security Council.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Germany.

10-32436

S/PV.6300 (Resumption 1)

Mr. Ney (Germany): Let me express my gratitude
to you, Sir, for having prepared and convened this very
useful debate. Your concept paper (S/2010/165)
provides a helpful summary of what has been achieved
since the Council’s last debate on the issue (see
S/PV.5968) and where there is still room for
improvement. I would also like to thank the group of
five small countries — Costa Rica, Jordan,
Liechtenstein, Singapore and Switzerland — for their
valuable ideas on and unwavering commitment to this
significant issue.

Let me add that interaction should also be
strengthened with other institutions within the United
Nations, for example the Peacebuilding Commission.
The Security Council needs to consider ways to
maximize the use of the Peacebuilding Commission’s
advisory role, particularly with regard to early
peacebuilding activities carried out by peacekeepers.
To that end, we need a stronger, organic and more
dynamic linkage between the Council and the
Commission throughout the various stages of the
Council’s consideration of a specific conflict.

The three issues highlighted in the concept paper —
transparency, interaction and efficiency — rightfully
continue to occupy centre stage in this debate. Let me
address transparency first.

The fact that the Security Council is today
holding its third open debate on this subject under
Japan’s tenure is in itself an expression of the welcome
attention this body is paying to improving the
interaction with non-members of the Council. The long
list of speakers for this meeting in turn demonstrates
the great interest of the general membership in further
pursuing this path.

With the increased involvement of the United
Nations in conflict resolution around the world in
recent years, the role of the Security Council has
become ever more prominent. This heightened level of
activity has been accompanied by a growing interest of
the general membership in the Council’s proceedings.
Thus, now more than ever, transparency is of
paramount importance if the Council is to meet
expectations. While we welcome progress in this
regard, transparency could be enhanced by further
moving the consultative process into the open. There is
little rationale for having routine meetings take place
behind closed doors. Also, Council documents such as
reports, statements and draft resolutions, as well as
briefing notes, should be made available to
non-members in a timely fashion.
With regard to enhanced interaction with the
general membership, we strongly support the notion
that access to the Council by affected parties should be
facilitated. This should include, first and foremost,
Member States that have a vested interest in the item
under discussion, such as countries contributing troops
or police to a peacekeeping operation. This should also
include increased cooperation with the main financial
contributors. It is certainly fruitful to also consider
enhanced interaction with stakeholders outside the
United Nations membership, such as non-governmental
organizations or non-State actors, that play a crucial
role in solving a specific conflict. These forms of
interaction could provide the Council with an even
better basis for its decisions and ultimately make it
more effective. In this regard, we welcome the use of
new formats such as informal interactive dialogue.

10-32436

Of course, increased access for non-members
must not undermine efforts to make the work of the
Council more efficient. We are convinced, however,
that transparency, interaction and efficiency can be
enhanced hand in hand. Let me assure members that
Germany, as a candidate for a non-permanent seat on
the Council for 2011-2012, remains deeply committed
to the aim of improving the Council’s working methods
and that this commitment will continue should we take
a seat at this table.
While efforts to further improve the working
methods of the Council remain necessary, we must not
lose sight of the one big step this Organization has yet
to take: a comprehensive reform of the Security
Council that will make this body more legitimate, more
representative and thus more effective. The question of
its working methods cannot and must not be de-linked
from the overall reform debate, as improving working
methods alone will not bring about the change desired
by the general membership.
We must address the fundamental issue: the
necessity of bringing the Council into line with the
geopolitical realities of today’s world. We must address
the untenable underrepresentation of Africa, Latin
America and Asia, as well as the need to ensure
adequate representation of other major contributors to
the maintenance of peace and security. To improve
working methods without reforming Security Council
structures would ultimately create a source of political

17

S/PV.6300 (Resumption 1)

frustration among the general membership and risk
eroding the authority of the Council.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Colombia.
Ms. Blum (Colombia) (spoke in Spanish): My
delegation welcomes the convening of this debate on a
matter of special importance to our Organization, in
particular in the context of the ongoing process of
Security Council reform. The note by the President of
the Security Council contained in document
S/2006/507 contains guidelines that deserve careful
consideration with a view to enhancing the Council’s
transparency and effectiveness. Colombia welcomes
the efforts made by the members of this organ to
implement the practices outlined in that document.
We highlight the interaction by countries holding
the Council presidency with Member States and the
briefings given at the beginning of each month.
Equally useful are the exchanges held by the
Permanent Representative of the country in the
presidency with media representatives and the
webcasts of those exchanges.
Nevertheless, these practices must continue to be
expanded in order further improve transparency and
the participation of the membership in the Council’s
activities and decision-making. Efforts should be made
to reduce the number of closed meetings that limit
access by Member States and to guarantee the
participation of States non-members of the Council in
the discussion of matters that affect them directly.
Moreover, it would be important to create greater
opportunities for consultation with regional groups and
organizations as well as with other actors, as necessary,
to gain a greater understanding of the specific
characteristics of each situation.
Advance circulation of or access to draft
resolutions would be another step towards greater
transparency in the work and decision-making of the
Council. Member States should be fully informed
about decisions the Council intends to make before
they are finalized. A predictable and transparent
decision-making process is necessary to strengthen the
legitimacy of the Council’s actions. To that end, efforts
must be made to establish formal rules of procedure.
We recognize the efforts of the permanent
members to limit the use of the veto, but we consider
that regulating its use under clear parameters would be

18

an important step towards greater transparency in the
work of this organ. One could seek to limit the use of
the veto to situations under Chapter VII of the Charter
and only in situations calling for the use of force or the
imposition of sanctions. That would be in accordance
with the Council’s mandate to guarantee the
maintenance of international peace and security.
In a similar vein, the use of the veto could be
limited to substantive, not procedural, matters, and
consideration could be given to increasing the number
of negative votes required by permanent Council
members. For example, the veto might come into play
only with the negative votes of at least two of those
members.
In a broader sense, the relationship between the
Security Council and the General Assembly is another
element of particular relevance to this debate. There is
a significant imbalance in that relationship. This is
explained to a great extent by the Council’s
appropriation of General Assembly matters. According
to the United Nations Charter, the General Assembly is
the
principal
deliberative,
policymaking
and
participatory body. Its mandate is comprehensive and
includes matters related to disarmament and the
maintenance of peace and security, as well the
consideration of matters related to human rights and
humanitarian law.
While the Council’s working methods and its
relations with the General Assembly have improved,
there is still room for improvement, including periodic
meetings among the Presidents of the General
Assembly, the Economic and Social Council and the
Security Council and the submission of regular
analytical reports by the Council to the Assembly.
To conclude, allow me to emphasize that for my
delegation modifying the working methods of the
Security Council is an important part of the
comprehensive Security Council reform process. We
will therefore support all efforts and initiatives aimed
at making the Council an organ that is more democratic
and representative and more transparent and effective.
The President: I now give the floor to the
Permanent Representative of Kenya.
Mr. Muita (Kenya): Mr. President, I thank you
for giving me this opportunity to contribute to this
important debate. I wish at the outset to associate
myself with the statements made by the representative

10-32436

S/PV.6300 (Resumption 1)

of Sierra Leone, who spoke on behalf of the African
Group, and by the Permanent Representative of Egypt,
who spoke on behalf of the Non-Aligned Movement.
Since the World Summit of 2005, momentum has
been building on the question of Security Council
reform. Member States have shown keen interest in the
process of reform, as is evidenced by their robust
engagement throughout the past year.
My delegation considers the subject of the
Security Council’s working methods to be an extremely
important part of the wider debate on Security Council
reform. Indeed, we understand the reform of the
working methods to be an integral part of the
comprehensive discussions that we have been holding
during the course of the past year. We look forward to
actively participating in the forthcoming round of
intergovernmental negotiations.
In July 2006, the Security Council adopted the
presidential note contained in document S/2006/507,
which seeks to improve the working methods of the
Council. We acknowledge that the adoption of the note
was a significant step forward aimed at advancing the
call for meaningful reform of the Council’s working
methods. That having been said, we, like many others,
are of the view that further measures, coupled with the
continued and systematic implementation of note
S/2006/507, are necessary to achieve credible reforms.
In that regard, my delegation urges the Council to
revisit the note, take stock of the measures that the
Council has taken decisions on and subsequently
address the shortcomings in their implementation.
In a continuing bid to improve the Council’s
working methods, my delegation supports the idea of
the Council going a step further in such reform. In that
respect, it is important that the implementation of the
measures contained in note S/2006/507 be consistent
and predictable, rather than ad hoc.
The Council should also strive to improve
perceptions of accountability by improving its
reporting mechanism to the General Assembly. The
discussion of the annual Security Council report to the
Assembly should be conducted in an environment of
frankness and openness, which in turn allows for a
genuine exchange of views between the general
membership and the Council. The Council should also
improve its working methods by submitting special
reports to the General Assembly apart from its annual

10-32436

report, as stipulated under paragraph 3 of Article 24 of
the United Nations Charter.
As a troop-contributing country (TCC), Kenya
appreciates the recent efforts that the Council has
undertaken to improve interaction with TCCs.
Strengthening cooperation between the Council, the
Secretariat and TCCs enhances the possibility for
success in peacekeeping operations. The importance of
the mutual undertaking between those who mandate
peacekeeping operations, those who plan and manage
them and those who implement the mandates cannot be
overemphasized. My delegation therefore welcomed
the
presidential
statement
of August
2009
(S/PRST/2009/24) that advocated for the forging of
stronger and more transparent cooperation between the
United Nations and TCCs through transparent
consultations at all stages of peacekeeping operations.
As for the improvement of working methods,
Kenya also suggests the following measures. The
Security Council should finalize its provisional rules of
procedure, including new methods of work and
practices that have already been agreed upon. The
Council should hold open public meetings at all stages
of the consideration of a subject. The Council should
endeavour to keep written records of formal meetings
of the Council for future reference. Non-members of
the Security Council should be accorded more and
more regular access to the work of the Council. The
Council should enhance measures to guarantee
transparency in decision-making, especially in
developing fairer procedures for sanctions regimes.
Regular and frequent consultations and exchanges of
views with other major organs of the United Nations,
especially the General Assembly and the Economic and
Social Council, should be scheduled. Briefings by the
President of the Council to the General Assembly
should be regular, substantive and conducted promptly
after each informal consultation of the whole. Lastly,
members of the Security Council should be encouraged
to take a transparent approach in dealing with
non-members of the Council with respect to the
Council’s work, with a view to deriving benefit from
different perspectives on a given subject.
Kenya reiterates that the democratization of the
United Nations can only occur if there is a holistic and
realistic reform of the Council that will make it more
transparent, accountable and legitimate. One way of
achieving that is by improving the working methods of
the Council and its relationship with the General

19

S/PV.6300 (Resumption 1)

Assembly
through
genuine
cooperation
coordination between the two organs.

and

In conclusion, Mr. President, let me assure you of
my delegation’s continued engagement in the process
of reforming the Security Council with a view to
achieving the objectives set forth in the 2005 World
Summit Outcome (A/60/RES/1). I would also like to
thank the delegation of Japan for organizing this
debate.
The President: I now give the floor to the
Permanent Representative of Namibia.
Mr. Mbuende (Namibia): Mr. President, at the
outset, I thank you for convening this debate on the
working methods of the Security Council as set out in
the presidential note contained in document
S/2006/507.
Namibia fully aligns itself with the statement
delivered by the Deputy Permanent Representative of
Sierra Leone on behalf of the African Group. We also
fully support the statement made by the Permanent
Representative of Egypt on behalf of the Non-Aligned
Movement.
At the 2005 World Summit, world leaders agreed
that the Security Council needed to adapt its working
methods so as to increase the involvement of States
that are not members of the Council in its work,
enhance its accountability to the membership and
increase the transparency of its work.
It therefore cannot be business as usual. The
Security Council has to change the way in which it
conducts its business and interacts with the General
Assembly and the wider United Nations membership.
We note that some aspects of the Council’s working
methods have evolved, but that evolution has tended to
be ad hoc and often is not reflected in any formal
decision of the Security Council. Some of the changes
in the working methods have been captured in the
notes of successive Presidents of the Security Council.
However, often, the language is drafted in aspirational
terms rather than as firm commitments.
To the best of our knowledge, there has never
been any change in the provisional status of the rules
of procedures of the Security Council. It is regrettable
that the rules of procedure have continued almost
unchanged since their adoption, in 1946. In the view of
my delegation, it is time for the rules of procedure of
the Council to be formalized. We believe it to be in the

20

interest of the Organization that this step be taken. We
therefore urge Member States, especially the
permanent members of the Security Council, to replace
the provisional rules of procedure of the Council with
standing rules of procedure. In our view, that would
greatly enhance the transparency of the work of the
Council.
Article 31 of the United Nations Charter provides
that any Member of the United Nations that is not a
member of the Security Council may participate in the
discussion of any question brought before the Council
whenever the interests of that Member State are
specially affected. Quite often, the Security Council
discusses issues without giving Member States with an
interest in those issues an opportunity to participate in
any meaningful way. Namibia shares the concern
expressed by many delegations that this practice is
contrary to the provisions of Article 31 of the Charter
of the United Nations.
Similarly, we have noted that, at times, elected
members of the Council experience difficulties in
participating effectively, particularly when draft
resolutions have been negotiated behind the scenes
among the five permanent members. While recognizing
the need for the Council to adopt its decisions
expeditiously, sufficient time should be allotted for all
members of the Council to be consulted as well as for
their consideration of drafts prior to any action by the
Security Council on specific items.
The majority of military personnel participating
in United Nations peacekeeping missions come from
countries not represented on the Council. At the same
time, the nature of peacekeeping operations has
become substantially more risky and complex than that
of the traditional peacekeeping operations of the past.
Namibia would like to see further improvement in the
interaction between the Council and troop-contributing
countries.
Finally, the report of the Security Council to the
General Assembly, which, under paragraph 3 of
Article 24 of the Charter, must be submitted annually,
is the most visible source of information about the
work of the Council. It is therefore important that the
report be analytical, providing not only an account of
the matters considered by the Council in the year under
review, but also an assessment of the Council’s ability
to deal with the problems at hand and signalling
difficulties and areas where improvements could be

10-32436

S/PV.6300 (Resumption 1)

made. In addition, the report should continue to include
an account of the work of the Military Staff Committee
and of the subsidiary bodies of the Security Council.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of the Czech Republic.
Mr. Kaiser (Czech Republic): First of all, I
would like to thank the delegation of Japan for
organizing this open debate on the implementation of
the presidential note contained in document
S/2006/507. We believe — and today’s debate confirms
our conviction — that the topic of the improvement of
the working methods of the Security Council is a very
important one. We acknowledge and appreciate the
long-standing commitment of Japan in this regard,
especially its stewardship of the Informal Working
Group on Documentation and Other Procedural
Questions.
The Czech Republic fully recognizes the primary
responsibility of the Council for the maintenance of
international peace and security, as stipulated in the
Charter. This role requires the Council to be actionoriented and efficient in its proceedings. However, this
goal cannot and should not be achieved at the expense
of transparency. The key United Nations organ should
be accountable to the broader membership and the
whole United Nations system; that is the only way to
maintain and enhance its legitimacy when acting on
behalf of us all.
The Czech Republic recognizes that the Council
has already undertaken a number of important
initiatives, including those referred to in the
presidential note. At the same time, we are of the
opinion that further steps are required in order to build
trust among the Member States and create a sense of
ownership of the Council’s decisions, which they are
all are obliged to implement.
We have studied with great interest the concept
paper prepared by the Japanese presidency
(S/2010/165), and we agree with its outline of the main
topics: transparency, interaction of the Council with
non-members and, last but not least, efficiency.
I will turn now to the issues of transparency and
access. In our view, more transparency can be achieved
by advancing prompt information-sharing and better
access. All Member States should receive as much
information as possible about the current deliberations
of the Council and its subsidiary bodies. We welcome

10-32436

the practice of briefings by new Council Presidents, as
well as greater coverage of the subsidiary bodies and
all the improvements in reporting to non-members in
general. Nevertheless, such reporting should be more
substantial and analytical. This applies primarily but
not exclusively to the annual report to the General
Assembly. In this context, let me express appreciation
for the recent increase in open debates of the Security
Council. We welcome this progress and believe that it
should be further developed.
The Czech Republic would also like to welcome
the adoption of resolution 1904 (2009), improving the
transparency of the listing and de-listing procedures in
the Committee established pursuant to resolution 1267
(1999). We hope that the newly adopted measure — the
establishment of the ombudsperson — will be fully
explored in order to ensure the due process rights of
concerned individuals and entities, including
petitioners filing de-listing requests.
I would like now to say a few words on the other
two issues mentioned in the concept paper, namely,
interaction and effectiveness. There is no doubt that
interaction with the parties that have direct interest in
an issue on the table of the Security Council is of
crucial importance. We appreciate the efforts made so
far in this regard, but there is still room for
improvement. This applies also to the relations
between the Security Council and the troopcontributing countries. Despite recent important
initiatives, much remains to be done in engaging the
troop-contributing countries in the whole decisionmaking process concerning peacekeeping operations,
from the initial phases of shaping their mandates to
their deployment and management.
Regarding a more general problem of dialogue
between the Council and affected or otherwise
interested non-member States, we believe that we can
more benefit from such measures as ad hoc
consultations or Arria Formula meetings.
In the presidential note, the Security Council
expresses its intention to maintain regular
communication with other principal organs of the
United Nations. It is our conviction that enhancement
of the working relations between the Security Council,
on the one hand, and the General Assembly, the
Economic and Social Council and the Peacebuilding
Commission (PBC), on the other, is a precondition for
making the whole United Nations system more

21

S/PV.6300 (Resumption 1)

efficient. We therefore share the opinion expressed by a
number of speakers today that we should further
strengthen the relations between the Council and the
PBC. We believe that the PBC and its country-specific
configurations can contribute substantially to the work
of the Council, specifically on issues relating to
peacekeeping and early peacebuilding.
We believe that it is hardly possible to
overestimate the importance of the interaction of the
Council with regional organizations.
We are convinced that the measures aimed at
increasing transparency and improving interaction
should not be detrimental to the effectiveness of the
Council. On the contrary, they could form the basis for
a better response and a more effective decision-making
process based on better knowledge of the actual
challenges that the Member States are facing. At the
same time, we would like to stress that all efforts
aimed at improving the working methods of the
Security Council are extremely important, but that they
are just part of a more complex task, which is the
adaptation of the Council to the realities of today’s
world. In other words, the improvement of the working
methods will bring about meaningful difference only if
the Council itself is reformed to be more representative
and legitimate.
Finally, let me assure you, Mr. President, of the
readiness of the Czech Republic to work with the
Council and all the Member States in further improving
the working methods of this key body of the United
Nations system.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela.
Mr. Escalona Ojeda (Bolivarian Republic of
Venezuela ): On behalf of the Government of the
Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela, I would like to
thank the Permanent Representative of Japan who is
presiding over the Security Council in the month of
April. We also welcome the initiative of convening this
open debate to consider the implementation of the
measures described in the presidential note on the
working methods of this Council (S/2006/507).
Our delegation associates itself with the
statement made on behalf of the Non-Aligned
Movement by the representative of Egypt.
The review of the Council’s working methods is a
subject of special interest to our Government. This

22

issue, linked to the wider sphere of the reform of this
organ, is key to the full exercise of the sovereign
equality of nations and to the legitimacy of the United
Nations as a promoter and guarantor of international
peace and justice.
The most recent rounds of intergovernmental
negotiations on this subject showed that most Member
States agree on the need to make the Security Council
more transparent and accountable. There have also
been repeated calls to reverse the Council’s tendency to
take control of issues that have been the exclusive
responsibility of the Economic and Social Council or
the General Assembly; to take into account the
recommendations of the General Assembly on
questions relating to international peace and security;
and to improve the Council’s accountability to the
General Assembly by submitting substantive and
analytical reports to it.
Venezuela has joined in these calls and hereby
reaffirms its support for those proposals. In that regard,
the definitive approval of Security Council rules of
procedure is a crucial step to establish the explicit
procedures necessary for the Council to comply with
its obligations to the General Assembly under the
provisions of the Charter.
We here to stress the need to guarantee that
non-members of the Council enjoy early and timely
access to all resolutions and statements of this organ,
as well as the importance of promoting the access and
participation of non-permanent members in all its
deliberations and consultations. We are certain that the
consideration of different perspectives will make the
Council’s work more efficient because it will ensure a
more all-encompassing and balanced treatment of
issues within its authority, effectively and fairly
reflecting the interests and needs of countries of the
North and the South. However, this aspiration can
become reality only if the closed meetings and
briefings of the Security Council are limited and the
number of open sessions is increased.
To conclude, the Bolivarian Republic of
Venezuela would like to recall that, as the
representative of Egypt stated, any effort to improve
the working methods of the Security Council will
require significant political resolve within the Council
itself and the implementation of the diverse and
constructive proposals made by Member States to

10-32436

S/PV.6300 (Resumption 1)

make the workings of this organ more transparent and
more legitimate.
The President: I shall now give the floor to the
representative of Malaysia.
Mr. Zainal Abidin (Malaysia): I thank you,
Mr. President, for convening this meeting and for your
concept paper (S/2010/165). My delegation aligns
itself with the statement made by the representative of
Egypt on behalf of the Non-Aligned Movement.
The concept paper that we have before us all too
quickly assumes that the aim of prompt and effective
action is inherently incompatible with that of gaining
the support of the wider United Nations membership.
By contrast, Malaysia firmly believes that in many
situations, effective action requires the support of the
entire international community. By the same token,
Malaysia firmly believes that the principles of
transparency,
interaction
and
dialogue
with
non-members, as well as efficiency, must be applied to
the entire spectrum of the Council’s work, including in
the implementation of its resolutions.
Malaysia notes that some measures contained in
document S/2006/507 to enhance the efficiency and
transparency of the Council’s work have been
implemented. However, as this exercise has yet to be
completed, regular interactions such as today’s meeting
will provide the necessary impetus for their
implementation.
Some of the measures contained in document
S/2006/507 — such as referring to all speakers at
political and ambassadorial level by name and title and
ensuring that draft documents be made available to
non-Council members when these documents are
introduced within informal consultations — lend
themselves to quick implementation; others less so.
Those include such measures as having subsidiary
bodies of the Council seek the views of Member States
and having sanctions committees seek the views of
those States affected by sanctions, which have either
not been put in place or have been done sporadically
and sparingly. This statement is focused on those
measures.
In cases where sanctions committees meet to
discuss the requests of States to de-list entities or
individuals from consolidated lists, that particular State
should have the opportunity to either listen in on the
proceedings of the Committee or be officially informed

10-32436

of the proceedings in which their requests were
considered. This would enable the State concerned to
better understand why certain de-listings took place,
while others did not.
Further, we believe that the briefings given by the
special representatives or heads of United Nations
missions or by the Secretariat to the Council are
inherently useful because they provide an account of
what is actually happening on the ground.
We advocate, therefore, greater transparency in
the briefings made to the Security Council and for
non-Council members to be allowed to hold watching
briefs without the right to interject or interact. This
would not only generate greater interest in these issues
among the entire membership, but would also afford
non-members of the Council the chance to understand
subjects and viewpoints of the Council.
Finally, we would like to touch on the thematic
debates that now form the norm in the Council’s
monthly programme of work. Malaysia appreciates the
fact that regional and subregional organizations are
also invited to speak and participate in open thematic
debates, particularly when such debates are relevant to
a given organization. Further, we hope that the new
trend of increased interaction with troop-contributing
countries will be further expanded, given the
indispensable role that those countries play in the
maintenance of peace and security worldwide.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Ecuador.
Mr. Carrión-Mena (Ecuador) (spoke in
Spanish): At the outset, allow me to thank you,
Mr. President, for having convened this open debate,
which will enable us to improve the implementation of
the practices and new and existing measures contained
in the note by the President in document S/2006/507 on
the Council’s working methods, taking into
consideration the results of the last debate held in
August 2008 (see S/PV.5968), as well as the most
recent practices of the Council.
In the same way, thank you, Sir, for the concept
paper circulated as an annex to your letter of 1 April
(S/2010/165), in which you propose to focus this
meeting on three basic issues: the transparency of the
Security Council, interaction with non-members of the
Council and the efficiency of the Council. You also

23

S/PV.6300 (Resumption 1)

provide several examples of the possible issues you
believe might be discussed at this meeting.
In that respect, my country, Ecuador, associates
itself with the statement made by the representative of
Egypt on behalf of the Non-Aligned Movement,
reiterating the Movement’s position at the fifty-first
session of the General Assembly, as well as the
relevant paragraphs of the Final Document of the
Fifteenth Summit Conference of Heads of State and
Government of the Movement of Non-Aligned
Countries Sharm el-Sheikh, of 2009, without prejudice
to which I would like to make the following comments
in my capacity as representative of Ecuador.
In the debate that took place on 27 August 2008
(see S/PV.5968), my country stressed that, despite
some progress made in Security Council practices, the
application of the measures in note S/2006/507 had
been insufficient and uncertain. Unfortunately, almost
two years later, we have seen that much still remains to
be done to improve the implementation of these
measures, especially those relating to transparency and
to interaction with the rest of the Members of the
United Nations, on whose behalf the Council should
act, in accordance with Article 24 of the Charter of the
United Nations.
On the question of transparency, we note that
Council Presidents have continued to hold informal
briefings on the programme of work, after its adoption,
and we note the informational meetings held by the
chairs of subsidiary bodies of the Security Council on
their respective activities.
However, with regard to the reports submitted by
outgoing Presidents of the Council, there is no real
systematic method in place or follow-up on the
problems identified during their terms of office, which
impedes the discussion and implementation of practical
solutions.
Similarly, while we recognize the benefit for our
region of the presentation of monthly reports by the
Permanent Missions of the countries of Latin America
and the Caribbean that are members of the Security
Council, it must be stated, in all honesty, that in many
cases those reports have simply confirmed the lack of
transparency between the permanent members of the
Security Council and other Council members, thus
contradicting the purposes and principles of the Charter
of the United Nations and the duty of the Council to
respect them in carrying out its functions.

24

With regard to interaction and dialogue with
countries that are not members of the Council, Ecuador
appreciates the increased number of meetings open to
participation by all Members of the United Nations
over recent years, but regrets that such meetings
continue to be the exception, while private
consultations continue to be the rule. This is something
that my country finds regrettable.
In this context, while we recognize the important
role that closed consultations can play in seeking
solutions to specific problems that come under the
authority of the Security Council, my country reaffirms
that priority should be given to incorporating the
opinions of the other Members of the United Nations,
in respect for the provisions of Articles 31 and 32 of
the Charter. The same criterion should be implemented
and strengthened for regional organizations and for
countries that contribute troops to peacekeeping
operations.
Likewise, I must point out that many of the open
meetings held by the Security Council correspond
precisely to topics that fall outside its jurisdiction, but
which, regrettably, it continues to seek to cast, in a
forced way, as threats to international peace and
security in order to interfere with the mandates of the
General Assembly and the Economic and Social
Council.
Appropriate Security Council interaction with
other Member States and the other principal organs of
the Organization, within the scope of their respective
areas of authority, would contribute to improving the
effectiveness of the Council and would facilitate the
elimination of those matters previously placed on its
agenda but not covered by its mandate.
A permanent and transparent dialogue between
the Council and the General Assembly, with each
keeping to its proper purview, would also translate into
higher quality for the annual and special reports which
should be submitted in accordance with the Charter of
the United Nations.
We hope that the ideas and proposals shared on
the implementation of the measures contained in note
S/2006/507 and on additional measures will be
followed up on appropriately and that a timely report
will be issued on their implementation, which should
not be limited to the Security Council Informal
Working Group on Documentation and Other
Procedural Questions.

10-32436

S/PV.6300 (Resumption 1)

In conclusion, I wish to emphasize that, beyond
the formalities of this debate, all members of the
Security Council need to translate the concerns and
proposals regarding the working methods of the
Council into specific action that will make it possible
to achieve the ultimate goal of guaranteeing the
transparency, open interaction and effectiveness of the
Council, without prejudice to other necessary and
urgent reforms relating to its membership and
representativeness.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Qatar.
Mr. Al-Nasser (Qatar) (spoke in Arabic): It is a
pleasure to see you, Sir, preside over the Security
Council this month, and to see that you have chosen
the issue of the working methods of the Council for
consideration in an open debate during your
presidency. Four years ago, we enjoyed working and
coordinating with your delegation on this issue during
our membership of the Security Council, and we
appreciated your work as Chair of the Informal
Working Group on Documentation and Other
Procedural Questions.
We welcome this opportunity to make some frank
observations on the theme of this meeting, out of a
genuine interest in improving the performance of this
important body.
I should like at the outset to express our support
for the statement delivered by the representative of
Egypt on behalf of the Non-Aligned Movement.
Developing and improving the working methods
of the Security Council and related procedural issues
are particularly important now as they are an integral
part of the process of Security Council reform, which
has both structural and functional dimensions. The
previous review of the Council’s working methods
established the need for modernization and
development, identified shortcomings that should be
rectified and measures that should be taken in order to
enable the Security Council to fully discharge its
mandate in accordance with the Charter of the United
Nations, to revitalize its work and to maintain its
credibility.
The note by the President contained in document
S/2006/507 was an achievement in itself. However,
further useful suggestions have been made by various
parties. At least during our membership of the Council,

10-32436

we did not see adequate implementation of the note’s
recommendations,
however
useful
those
recommendations were. Here, I would like to highlight
a number of points, from which the Council may
benefit when updating its rules of procedure — which
it is called upon to adopt in Article 30 of the Charter.
Since the Council represents all the Members of the
United Nations, it should take their views into account
when adopting its rules of procedure.
First, the question of the veto, although a
sensitive one, remains one of the central issues of
Security Council reform. I will not discuss here the
radical changes that are being proposed and discussed
in the framework of the intergovernmental negotiations
on Security Council reform, the increase in its
membership and other related matters. I will only stress
that it is important that the veto not be used to thwart
decisions of paramount importance for the maintenance
of peace and security and the protection of human
beings.
Second, we are also of the view that the Security
Council should adopt resolutions invoking Chapter VII
of the Charter only when necessary and in a manner
that is fair, and when deploying peacekeeping
missions. Even in those cases, the invocation of
Chapter VII should be limited to those paragraphs of
the resolution that are relevant to the self-defence of
the mission and other provisions that require the use of
Chapter VII.
Third, I want to stress the issue of coordination
between the Security Council and other United Nations
organs, in particular the General Assembly, in the
discharge of their mandates. In this context, we call
upon the Security Council to improve the annual
reports it submits to the General Assembly, in
particular with regard to the quality of their analytical
aspects and their recommendations. We also have
views concerning the frequency of meetings between
the Presidents of the General Assembly and the
Security Council, which are at the heart of the
coordination between the two organs. Increasing the
benefits resulting from these meetings can enhance the
work of both organs. Already, it appears to be possible
for the State holding the presidency of the Council to
transmit a monthly assessment of the Council’s work to
the General Assembly.
Fourth, the Security Council should not only
coordinate with other United Nations organs, but

25

S/PV.6300 (Resumption 1)

should also enhance its coordination with regional and
subregional organizations and entities, in line with the
provisions of Chapter VIII of the Charter, in order to
enhance the success of Council measures to address
issues on its agenda and contribute to the legitimacy of
its work.
Fifth, the majority of United Nations Members
have repeatedly stressed that the Security Council
should not go beyond its mandate under the United
Nations Charter, specifically Article 24. We stress here
that the Council should not infringe on the functions of
other United Nations organs on issues that do not
involve international peace and security. At the same
time, the Security Council should take into account the
recommendations of the General Assembly on matters
concerning the maintenance of international peace and
security, in accordance with Article 11, paragraph 2, of
the Charter.
Sixth, while we are aware of the complexity and
sensitivity of the issues of which the Security Council
is seized, which frequently require confidentiality, we
emphasize the need to strike a balance between that
requirement and the Council’s responsibility to achieve
transparency in its work and to serve the general
membership of the United Nations. Here, we stress also
the importance of consultation with the relevant
authorities and of not making decisions behind closed
doors. We have found it odd that, on a number of
occasions, closed formal meetings have been held to
consider items that do not require confidentiality, such
as the periodic meetings with the President of the
International Court of Justice. In the same context, we
believe it would be useful to hold more Arria Formula
meetings, which have proven more effective than
formal meetings in addressing certain issues.
Seven, the Council has taken praiseworthy action
to improve the listing and de-listing procedures of its
counter-terrorism and sanctions committees, with a
view to avoiding legal problems that have arisen. But
the methodology of listing individuals and entities on
the sanctions lists should be amended to conform to
court decisions and follow legal due process.
Eight, while we know that the Security Council is
a political organ, the documents it issues feed into
international law and have an impact on it. We should
therefore improve the work of the Council by involving
legal experts from the Secretariat in the consideration

26

of legal matters on its agenda and the agendas of its
subsidiary bodies.
Ninth, we want to stress the importance of the
careful selection of members of groups of experts
working with subsidiary bodies, subject to the principle
of equitable geographical distribution and in
consultation with all Council members.
Finally, the Security Council website has proven
to be an indispensable tool for following and
facilitating the Council’s work, and we are delighted
that is being developed to keep pace with increasing
demand on the part of many actors. We also welcome
the endeavours of the Secretariat to promote the
institutional memory of the Council.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Pakistan.
Mr. Sial (Pakistan): I would like to thank you,
Mr. President, for holding this open debate on the
working methods of the Security Council. We
appreciate the interest of Japan in the subject, as
reflected in document S/2006/507 and the in concept
paper for today’s debate annexed to the President’s
letter dated 1 April 2010 (S/2010/165).
We avail ourselves of this opportunity to
acknowledge the role played by the group of five small
countries (S-5) on the issue of working methods. The
group that modestly calls itself the small five has
always provided big input on the subject.
We associate ourselves with the statement made
by the Permanent Representative of Egypt in his
capacity as Chair of the Non-Aligned Movement
(NAM), and endorse his letter (S/2010/189) dated 15
April 2010 addressed to the Presidents of the General
Assembly and the Security Council. We hope that the
NAM position reflected in the comprehensive
negotiating paper (see A/51/47) and the relevant
paragraphs of the Sharm el-Sheikh final document
(S/2009/514, annex) will be given due consideration in
our collective deliberations.
Article 24, paragraph 1, of the United Nations
Charter stipulates that, in carrying out its primary
responsibility for the maintenance of international
peace and security, the Council acts on behalf of the
United Nations Member States. Therefore, the
efficiency and transparency of the Council’s work and
its decision-making process are issues of great interest
and importance to the United Nations membership. It is

10-32436

S/PV.6300 (Resumption 1)

therefore also essential for the Council to comprehend
the perception of the general membership of its work
and of the methods it employs to carry out its mandate.
My delegation wishes to share with the Security
Council our reflections on the Council’s work. We will,
however, limit ourselves to three areas outlined in the
President’s concept paper for today’s debate, namely,
transparency, interaction with non-members and the
efficiency of the Council.
On transparency, we acknowledge some
improvement in the working methods with respect to:
presidential briefings on the programme of work;
post-presidency
assessments
by
respective
presidencies; more frequent open debates; and
improved reporting practices of the subsidiary bodies.
These measures have, however, not comprehensively
addressed the exclusivity of the Council’s work.
The Pakistan delegation underscores the need for
greater compliance with Articles 31 and 32 of the
United Nations Charter and rule 48 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure.
The transparency of the Council warrants a
semblance of balance between its open and closed
meetings. We find the equation tilted towards
confidentiality, even in areas where greater
transparency would certainly help. Open debates and
public meetings should not be a mere formality for
decisions taken in informal or closed consultations, but
should be a prominent factor in the Council’s decisionmaking process.
The Security Council’s progress in its interaction
with non-member States will remain dependent on the
level of transparency it wishes to attain. More
structured interaction with the General Assembly, the
Economic and Social Council and the Peacebuilding
Commission, as well as with troop- and policecontributing countries, will broaden the existing
channels of communication. The consultation
mechanisms should involve timely, two-way exchanges
of information and views, which should be duly
reflected in the Council’s decision-making.
In our view, enhanced interaction with regional
organizations can also be an effective channel of
communication with the wider United Nations
membership. In this context, the Council’s increased
interaction with the African Union is a good example
to emulate with other regional organizations.

10-32436

We agree with the assessment in the concept
paper that the efficiency of the Council is constrained
by the volume and diversity of its workload. However,
we do not share the view that the efficiency of the
Council is compromised by lengthy statements or the
time period required each year for the adjustment of
five new non-permanent members to the workings of
the Council.
The efficiency of the Council can be enhanced if
the necessary and due attention is paid to the issues on
the basis of their merit rather than narrowly focusing
on the national interests of those who matter. Besides,
the Council should focus on its primary role for the
maintenance of international peace and security instead
of taking up issues that are better dealt with by other
relevant bodies.
Efficiency is also closely linked to effectiveness.
In recent years, the Security Council has been
relatively effective in peacebuilding ventures and in
addressing internal crises. Its record has been less
impressive in resolving inter-State conflicts, where the
Council seems constrained either due to the use of the
veto or the failure to have substantive recourse to the
pacific settlement of disputes in the terms of
Chapter VI of the Charter.
Today’s debate has underscored the fact that
transparency, interaction with non-member States and
the efficiency of working methods are interlinked and
mutually reinforcing. That also validates the most
widely held view that improving the working methods
of the Council in their entirety would make the Council
more democratic, inclusive and accountable to the
wider membership. Such a change could be brought
about by a process of election and rotation.
In the constructive spirit of today’s debate, we
believe that the Security Council should continue its
introspection with regard to improving its working
methods. At the same time, this issue is also an integral
part of the comprehensive reform process that is
currently at the stage of intergovernmental
negotiations. We would like to conclude by stating that
the consideration of this issue must continue in both
forums, with a view to seeking fresh ideas. One track
should not obviate the scope and importance of the
other.

27

S/PV.6300 (Resumption 1)

The President: I now give the floor the
representative of the Republic of Korea.
Mr. Park In-Kook (Republic of Korea): I would
like to thank you, Mr. President, for convening today’s
meeting to discuss an issue of great interest to the
entire membership, namely, enhancing the working
methods of the Security Council. We appreciate this
follow-up after the debate held last August, and believe
it will be helpful to assess the progress made thus far.
My delegation is also grateful to the Informal Working
Group on Documentation and Other Procedural
Questions, whose work is instrumental in meeting the
expectations of the membership with regard to the
functioning of the Council.
The President’s note of 2006 (see S/2006/507)
was an important starting point that laid out concrete
measures that, if implemented, would largely address
the concerns and grievances widely voiced by the
membership, while simultaneously raising overall
satisfaction with the way in which the Council
conducts its business. In that regard, we believe that
efforts have been made to enhance the overall
transparency, accountability and inclusiveness of the
Council, in spite of its ever-increasing workload.
We are particularly pleased to note that the
number of open meetings has increased steadily vis-àvis closed meetings and consultations. However, the
substantive nature of these open meetings could be
further improved, as they are frequently adjourned
after the introductory adoption of the agenda, and the
core discussions proceed largely in closed
consultations.
We also believe that the participation of
non-members that are parties to any dispute under
consideration in the Council’s discussions should be
ensured to the maximum, as we have found from our
own experience that such interactions are immensely
helpful.
Members of the Council are also making a
commendable effort to share the work of the Council,
for example by routinely providing briefings to their
respective regional groups. Those are all steps in the
right direction that go a long way towards addressing
the frustrations felt by the wider membership.
We also appreciate the dedication of the
Secretariat in providing relevant documents, including
the reports of the Sectary-General, in a timely manner,

28

as they are primary sources of information for Member
States that do not sit on the Council. However,
transparency and inclusiveness could be even better
served by more substantive and analytical reports from
the Security Council. The publications and submissions
of the Council could be qualitatively improved to allow
the wider membership more insight into its work. The
Council may start out by refining its annual reports to
the General Assembly to add analytical value, rather
than stopping at simply giving descriptions of the work
of the Council in a given year.
In addition to the measures contained in the
President’s note, we recognize that the Council has
utilized innovative ad hoc meeting formats on a
case-by-case basis in order to allow greater interaction
with concerned parties and to garner meaningful input
from them. It would be useful to structure and
institutionalize practices that have proved productive,
so that the Council’s efficiency and effectiveness, as
well as access by interested non-members, can be
strengthened.
As a troop-contributing country (TCC) and one of
the major financial contributors to peacekeeping
operations, the Republic of Korea finds TCC meetings
to be very useful and informative. We appreciate
having more meaningful and substantive participation
in the early decision-making process for peacekeeping
missions.
Lastly, we would like to stress that improving the
working methods of the Security Council is an
important component of Council reform. That linkage
sometimes results in the tendency to put the issue of
working methods on the back burner while we wait for
a comprehensive reform to materialize. The working
methods of the Council should certainly be pursued in
tandem with overall reform, but it is by its own merit
too important to delay or neglect. In addition, we
believe that implementing feasible measures to
enhance working methods can add impetus and
much-needed energy to the broader reform.
The President: There are no further speakers
inscribed on my list. The Security Council has thus
concluded the present stage of its consideration of the
item on its agenda.
The meeting rose at 5.40 p.m.

10-32436
