S/PV.8968

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-seventh year

8968th meeting

Thursday, 17 February 2022, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Vershinin . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  (Russian Federation)

Members:

Albania . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Brazil. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Gabon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Ghana . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
India . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Ireland. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Kenya. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Mexico. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Norway . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
United Arab Emirates . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland.
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Mr. Hoxha
Mr. De Almeida Filho
Mr. Zhang Jun
Mr. De Rivière
Mr. Biang
Mr. Agyeman
Mr. Tirumurti
Ms. Byrne Nason
Mr. Kimani
Mr. De la Fuente Ramírez
Ms. Heimerback
Mrs. Nusseibeh
Mr. Cleverly
Mr. Blinken/Mrs. Thomas-Greenfield

Agenda
Letter dated 13 April 2014 from the Permanent Representative of the Russian
Federation to the United Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council
(S/2014/264)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

22-26033 (E)
*2226033*

Ukraine

S/PV.8968

Although seemingly intractable, given the stakes
involved for our collective security and European
stability, those issues can and must be solved through
diplomacy and the full use of the many available regional
and other mechanisms and frameworks. We support all
such efforts, including through the Secretary-General’s
good offices.

The meeting was called to order at 10.05 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Letter dated 13 April 2014 from the Permanent
Representative of the Russian Federation to the
United Nations addressed to the President of the
Security Council (S/2014/264)
The President (spoke in Russian): In accordance
with rule 37 of the Council’s provisional rules of
procedure, I invite the representatives of Germany and
Ukraine to participate in this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the following
briefers to participate in this meeting: Ms. Rosemary
DiCarlo, Under-Secretary-General for Political and
Peacebuilding Affairs; His Excellency Mr. Mikko
Kinnunen, Special Representative of the Organization
for Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE)
Chairperson-in-Office in Ukraine and in the Trilateral
Contact Group; His Excellency Mr. Yaşar Halit Çevik,
Chief Monitor of the OSCE Special Monitoring Mission
in Ukraine; and Ms. Tetiana Montian, Ukrainian civilsociety activist.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I now give the floor to Ms. DiCarlo.
Ms. DiCarlo: I last briefed the Council on the
situation in Ukraine as it relates to the implementation
of the Minsk agreements on 11 February 2021
(see S/2021/159).
At that time, I drew attention to the fragile security
situation that prevailed despite the nominal ceasefire
in place.
Today, a year after that briefing, tensions in and
around Ukraine are running higher than at any point since
2014. Speculation and accusations around a potential
military conflict are rife. Whatever one believes about
the prospect of such a confrontation, the reality is that
the current situation is extremely dangerous.
The issues underpinning the current crisis are
complex and long-standing. They tie together the eightyear conflict in eastern Ukraine with the larger issues
relating to the European security architecture.
2/30

17/02/2022

Regrettably, there has been little, if any,
meaningful progress in the implementation of the
various provisions of the Minsk agreements. Despite
repeated efforts, both the talks in the Normandy Four
format and the discussions led by the Trilateral Contact
Group remain deadlocked. We welcome the efforts by
France and Germany to host the recent Normandy Four
discussions to break the current impasse and hope that
those will continue.
The Minsk agreements remain the only framework
endorsed by the Council, in resolution 2202 (2015),
for a negotiated, peaceful settlement of the conflict in
eastern Ukraine. In that regard, we note with concern
the reports of fresh ceasefire violations across the
contact line over the past several hours. If verified,
those violations must not be allowed to escalate further.
We call on all sides to exercise maximum restraint
at this time. We also call on all concerned to refrain
from any unilateral measures that may go against the
letter and spirit of the Minsk agreements or undermine
their implementation and result in further tensions,
including related to the status of certain areas of
Luhansk and Donetsk.
We commend the important work of the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in
Europe (OSCE). The Council will hear shortly from
Ambassador Mikko Kinnunen, Special Representative
of the OSCE Chairperson-in-Office in Ukraine, and
Ambassador Halit Çevik, Chief Monitor of the OSCE
Special Monitoring Mission. It is essential that we
support their work, particularly at this critical time.
The Special Monitoring Mission, which carries out
its crucial functions despite considerable challenges,
must enjoy safe and secure conditions.
On 14 February, the Secretary-General expressed
his deep worry regarding a potential military conflict
in Europe. He reminded the international community
that the price in human suffering, destruction and
damage to European and global security is too high
to contemplate.
22-26033

17/02/2022

S/PV. 8968

Ukraine

The Secretary-General has remained fully engaged
with key actors, including the Governments of the
Russian Federation and Ukraine, and has reiterated
the same unambiguous message: there is no alternative
to diplomacy.
It is incumbent on all Member States to fully respect
the key principles of the United Nations Charter, to
settle disputes by peaceful means and to refrain from
the threat or use of force against the territorial integrity
or political independence of any State. In that regard, let
me restate the commitment of the United Nations to the
sovereignty, independence and territorial integrity of
Ukraine within its internationally recognized borders,
as called for in General Assembly resolutions.
The recent diplomatic contacts, including between
Heads of State, are welcome, But more urgently needs
to be done, including tangible steps on the ground and
an end to inflammatory rhetoric to defuse tensions.
As we have done throughout the eight years of the
conflict, the United Nations continues to stand with the
people of Ukraine. The United Nations country team in
Ukraine remains fully operational. Our humanitarian
colleagues are committed to providing assistance
in accordance with the humanitarian principles of
neutrality, impartiality, humanity and independence.
That includes, for example, three humanitarian
convoys that have delivered more than 140 metric tons
of life-saving assistance across the contact line since
the start of 2022, benefiting thousands of people in
need. It is imperative that safe and unimpeded access
by humanitarian actors be respected by all sides, under
any circumstances.
Amid the current tensions, we should not lose sight
of the existing dire humanitarian needs impacting
2.9 million people, with the majority living in
non-Government-controlled areas of eastern Ukraine.
Donor support allowed us to provide aid to more
than 1.5 million people during the first nine months
of 2021 — the highest level since 2017. That critical
achievement must be sustained amid the increasing
severity of the humanitarian needs. Early and adequate
funding of the $190-million 2022 humanitarian
response plan is needed to continue to meet the urgent
needs of 1.8 million vulnerable people, including more
than 1 million in Government-controlled areas and
750,000 in non-Government-controlled areas.
For the war-weary people of the Donetsk and
Luhansk oblasts, the impact of the coronavirus disease

(COVID-19), on top of the conflict, has caused even
graver disruption and suffering. Millions of people
who, prior to the pandemic, could still maintain family
and community connectivity have been unable to travel
freely across the contact line due to the COVID-19related restrictions. As a consequence of their increased
isolation and abrupt loss of access to basic services
and livelihoods, the needs of that already vulnerable
population have been exacerbated.
At the same time, the Office of the United Nations
High Commissioner for Human Rights (OHCHR)
continues to document civilian casualties and the
impact of hostilities, monitor freedom of movement
and receive and report on allegations of human rights
violations. Despite the persistent tensions, last year saw
the lowest number of civilian casualties documented by
OHCHR since the beginning of the conflict. Overall
adherence to the ceasefire has been an important factor
in that trend. It must continue.
More than 14,000 people have already lost their lives
in the conflict in eastern Ukraine. As the SecretaryGeneral said this week, we simply cannot accept even
the possibility of a new conflict in Ukraine. Indeed, we
are facing a test. The world is looking to the collective
security mechanisms in Europe, but also to the Security
Council, to help ease tensions and ensure that the only
skirmishes will be diplomatic. We cannot afford to fail.
The President (spoke in Russian): I thank
Ms. DiCarlo for her briefing.
I now give the floor to Mr. Kinnunen.
Mr. Kinnunen: The Trilateral Contact Group
(TCG) supports the implementation of the settlement
provided by the Minsk agreements. However, in times
such as these it is impossible to address the Donbas issue
without paying attention to the bigger context, which is
the tense security situation around Ukraine and in the
region, as well as intensive, high-level diplomacy.
Arguably, that bigger context has a strong
interlinkage with the work of the Trilateral Contact
Group (TCG). That argument is based on views
according to which finding a solution to the main task
of the TCG, namely, the implementation of the Minsk
agreements, could help in solving many of the issues of
the bigger picture. However, currently, the positions of
the participants to the discussions of the TCG are too
far from each other. Consequently, as of now, it is not

22-260333/30

S/PV.8968

Ukraine

17/02/2022

yet possible to resolve the conflict related to eastern
Ukraine within the TCG. We need to continue our work.

have sadly become part of everyday life for countless
Ukrainian citizens.

At the same time, it is important to note that all
the elements of the three Minsk agreements are relevant
and need to be addressed. Those agreements — the
Minsk protocol, the Minsk memorandum and the Minsk
package of measures — continue to form the basis
of our work. It is crucial that all sides continue to
remain committed.

In late December 2021, two months ago, participants
in the discussions of the Trilateral Contact Group fully
agreed to adhere to the ceasefire agreement of July 2020.
This New Year’s commitment two months ago did not
hold up well enough. However, on the positive side, for
a one-month period following the commitment, there
were 70 per cent fewer ceasefire violations than there
had been the month before. This once again indicates
that if there is political will, it is possible not to use
arms and possible not to fire.

It is popular to accuse one or another participant
to the discussions of violating the Minsk agreements
or not wanting to implement those agreements. In
that regard, my message would suggest caution.
The fact is that none of the elements of the Minsk
agreements have been implemented or, at least, fully
implemented. Furthermore, in my experience, it is not
possible or appropriate to single out only one party for
being responsible for that. Everyone involved in the
discussions of the Trilateral Contact Group needs to
bear their responsibility for carrying out what has been
agreed. We need more flexible positions and readiness
to compromise.
The security situation along the 480-kilometre
contact line that separates the Government-controlled
area from the non-Government-controlled area of
eastern Ukraine is one of the key focuses of the work
of the TCG. In the current situation, particularly
with reference to the bigger context, it is important
to continue to also stay calm along the contact line.
Provocations are to be avoided. At the end of the day,
no one would benefit from new military activities.
A concrete, fresh example of a potentially
provocative situation is the alleged shelling that
occurred this morning in Luhansk region, close to the
contact line. It is important to try to establish the facts
in a swift manner and avoid escalation. A participant
to the discussions of the TCG has requested an
extraordinary meeting of the TCG.
The armed conflict related to eastern Ukraine is
eight years old, as we heard from the Under-SecretaryGeneral. The continuing conflict has resulted in more
than 14,000 victims and hundreds of thousands of
internally displaced persons and refugees. Civilian
crossings of the contact line have dropped by 95 per
cent since the closing of checkpoints two years ago,
resulting in additional civilian suffering and hardship.
Conflict-affected areas with ongoing military activity
4/30

Secondly, there have been small positive steps with
our work, such as the creation of an environmental
expert group. A recent visit by the International Atomic
Energy Agency to the non-Government controlled area
shows that when there is a will on all sides, agreeing
is possible. But clearly not enough progress has been
made. One reason for this is State-related issues,
which may from the outside appear procedural, but are
actually part of the core substance.
During this week, the State Duma of the Russian
Federation approved a resolution calling upon the
Russian President to recognize the independence of
certain areas of Donetsk and Luhansk regions. This
has raised questions and internal discussion within
the TCG. While I note that the Duma resolution does
not reflect the official line of the Government, it is
important to emphasize that all participants need to
remain committed to the goal of restoring Ukraine’s
sovereignty over the totality of its territory.
At the same time, the bigger picture — the
unprecedented international focus on Ukraine and the
region — should be used as an opportunity to unblock
the work of the TCG. I am grateful for the recent highlevel contacts between the leaders of the Normandy
Four, as well as the two meetings of the Normandy Four
political advisers and, for example, the discussions
of the Chairman-in-Office of the Organization for
Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE) in Kyiv
and Moscow during the past days. These all could
give new impetus to unblocking the TCG’s work. They
could, for example, give us an opportunity to have
substantial discussions on certain concrete draft laws
at the very heart of the Minsk agreements.
Finally, the TCG has now met in video format in
online meetings for almost two years. Meetings in
video format lack drive and confidentiality. For several
22-26033

17/02/2022

Ukraine

reasons, they do not offer possibilities for genuine
negotiations and interaction. My goal remains to return
to the face-to-face meetings of our unique platform,
which brings together Ukraine, Russia and the OSCE,
as well as representatives of certain areas of Donetsk
and Luhansk regions.
Mr. President (spoke in Russian): I thank
Mr. Kinnunen for his briefing.
I now give the floor to Mr. Çevik.
Mr. Çevik: I would like to thank Council
members for the opportunity to brief the Security
Council today. In my capacity as Chief Monitor of the
Special Monitoring Mission to Ukraine (SMM) of the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe
(OSCE) and as the Coordinator of the working group on
security issues in the Trilateral Contact Group (TCG), I
will update Council members on key developments on
the situation in eastern Ukraine during the past year.
These include the security situation along the contact
line, the impact of nearly eight years of the conflict
on civilians and the SMM’s increasingly challenging
operational environment.
The security situation remains fraught with tension.
The gradual fraying of the ceasefire, which I described
to the Council last February (see S/2021/159, annex III),
has regrettably accelerated, and inevitably civilians
on both sides of the contact line continue to bear the
burden of the tensions and resulting insecurities.
I further have to acknowledge with deep concern
that the impediments to the SMMs mandated freedom
of movement have not only persisted, but also escalated
in the past year. In times of heightened tensions in
and around Ukraine, when the Mission’s impartial
and objective reporting is vital, these restrictions
are especially unacceptable, since they limit the
Mission’s capabilities.
The SMM has been vilified in public rhetoric and
Mission members have at times been intimidated. Our
technical monitoring tools are subjected to intense
interference daily. The Mission suffered temporary
blockades of operations in the Donetsk region last
October. In Luhansk region, the SMM is also subjected
to a blockade. The SMM’s sustainability is at risk,
as it has been deprived of its operational freedom
and independence.
In this context, I also wish to highlight my concern
over the fact that the contact line remains exceedingly

S/PV. 8968

difficult to cross, both for SMM members and civilians.
It increasingly looks like and feels like a border that
transects and divides families and communities and
provisional services.
Before elaborating on these developments, I wish
to stress that in such challenging circumstances,
the political will of the sides to strictly adhere to the
ceasefire and reduce tensions is imperative. Silence
along the contact line is of utmost importance for
allowing space for negotiations; abstaining from
inflammatory public rhetoric is also essential.
Since I last briefed the Security Council, the overall
security situation along the contact line in eastern
Ukraine has remained volatile. After the unprecedented
period of relative calm that followed the 22 July 2020
The agreement on measures to strengthen the ceasefire,
throughout 2021 we saw a gradual but sustained increase
in the level of armed violence. In 2021, between August
and December in particular, the Mission recorded a high
number of ceasefire violations, including the increased
use of heavy weapons that the sides had committed
to withdraw, as well as their consequences in civilian
casualties and damage to infrastructure.
In November, the SMM reported levels of
kinetic activity, including more destructive weapons,
worryingly close to those recorded prior to the
22 July measures agreement. At the 22 December
2021 TCG meeting, the participants expressed a strong
determination to uphold the ceasefire regime. The
first month following that meeting saw a considerable
decrease — by some 60 per cent — in the level of
violence, but tensions nevertheless remain high, fuelled
also by the wider discussions surrounding the security
situation in and around Ukraine.
Of serious concern is the fact that, in 2021, the
SMM reported ceasefire violations in and near the
three symbolically important pilot disengagement
areas, including with the use of proscribed weapons.
The Luhansk region, in particular the wider parametres
of the Zolote area, consistently remain a hotspot. On
3 December, the SMM recorded a violent exchange
of fire inside and near the Stanytsia Luhanska
disengagement and crossing point. This was an
especially dangerous situation, as civilians in transit,
including children, were put at risk. This was the first
time since April 2020 that SMM reported ceasefire
violations inside this area. Importantly, the benefits of
disengagement have been clearly demonstrated — as it

22-260335/30

S/PV.8968

Ukraine

allowed for the reconstruction of the Stanytsia Luhanska
bridge, one of the symbols of discord — by underlining
the significance of violence in those three areas and
providing insight into the sides’ willingness or, at
times, unwillingness, to adhere to their commitments.
In that context, I also wish to share my deep concern
about the sides’ holding of live-fire exercises inside the
security zone throughout 2021 and since the start of
2022. Those ceasefire violations deserve our particular
attention, as they violate both the comprehensive
ceasefire regime and the specific decision of 3 March
2016, prohibiting the conduct of such exercises. Last
month, they made up approximately 10 per cent of all
ceasefire violations recorded by the SMM.
Since the beginning of 2022, the Mission has
already been recording, on average, twice as many
ceasefire violations per day as it did over the same
period in 2021, when the sides’ adherence to the
ceasefire had already started fraying. As I noted, the
increasing levels of violence, with the use of heavy
weapons, inevitably led to an increase in the number
of corroborated civilian casualties, due to shelling and
small arms fire.
In 2021, the SMM corroborated more civilian
casualties due to shelling and small arms fire — 48
casualties — than those caused by mines and other
explosive objects. Nearly 60 per cent of the corroborated
civilian casualties were as a result of shelling and small
arms fire. In addition, nearly 70 per cent of all cases of
damage to civilian objects and infrastructure sites were
recorded between October and November of last year.
Other violations of commitments undertaken by
the sides have also continued. The SMM recorded new
trench extensions and improvements to positions, the
presence of heavy weapons, military and military-type
positions in residential areas and the increased use of
non-SMM unmanned aerial vehicles (UAVs). As the
last point on this issue, it is worth mentioning that
violations occur on both sides of the contact line.
Regrettably, discussions in the Working Group on
Security Issues have been at an impasse for the past
year. Agreements in principle reached in 2020 on 19
demining areas, an updated mine action plan and four
new disengagement areas that has been drafted and
verified, as well as on some aspects of the framework
decision on disengagement, have not been actioned.
The security-related conclusions of the 2019 Normandy
6/30

17/02/2022

Four Paris summit require new political impetus to be
translated into tangible progress.
Since April 2021, participants have discussed a draft
addendum to the measures to strengthen the ceasefire
agreement of 22 July 2020, but common ground has yet
to be found. As I underlined last year, such a mechanism
would facilitate de-escalation, address the persistent
issue of impunity and contribute to building confidence
on the ground. It would demonstrate the sides’ political
will to act in line with their commitments.
I wish to underline the fact that the communities
along the contact line are deeply traumatized by living
in constant danger and uncertainty. I already mentioned
the 48 casualties caused by small arms fire or shelling.
In 2021, the SMM corroborated another 43 cases of
people injured or killed by mines, unexploded ordnance
and other explosive devices. It is imperative that the
sides do their utmost to mitigate those constant threats,
even unilaterally, in parallel with the negotiation of
overall solutions.
The challenges posed by the ongoing pandemic
have also endured and continue to make daily life
even more challenging for civilians on both sides of
the contact line. The past year saw no improvement
in the freedom of movement of civilians between the
Government- and non-Government-controlled areas
of Ukraine. Crossing the contact line remains limited
to two of the five existing crossing points. Only the
pedestrian crossing at the Stanytsia Luhanska bridge is
accessible on a daily basis. There has been no progress
in the opening of the two new crossings at Zolote
and Shchastya, although the agreement to open them
opening was reached in July 2020.
Although some of the pandemic-related restrictions
were eased last year, official data show that crossings
in 2021 remain at a mere 5 per cent of pre-pandemic
levels. Those are not just statistics. They represent the
elderly, who can no longer access their pensions, as
well as young people who are losing out on educational
and economic opportunities. Access to other services,
including health care and documentation such as
passports, birth and death certificates is being
seriously affected, while people — family, friends
and communities — are being separated from each
other. Estrangement between communities spanning
the contact line should not become entrenched. The
needs and rights of civilians should take precedence.
All existing and new crossing points should be fully
22-26033

17/02/2022

Ukraine

open and all restrictions on both sides of the contact
line should be lifted without delay.
In those challenging circumstances, it is also vital
that critical infrastructure on which civilians depend
for their basic needs remain operational and protected
from armed violence. Last year, the SMM continued
facilitating and monitoring repairs to gas, water and
electricity infrastructure objects, thereby benefiting
millions of civilians on both sides of the contact line.
Regrettably, since February 2021, and especially in the
wake of an incident inside the disengagement area near
Zolote in October, the process of exchanging security
guarantees between the sides has been at an impasse,
particularly in the Luhansk region. I would like to
underline that the exchange of security guarantees,
which are essential for conducting vital repairs, has
not been linked previously to increased tensions on the
ground. That process should not be politicized, as is
being done now.
In reviewing those challenges, it appears to me
that never before has there been a greater need for
impartial and objective monitoring delivered by the
SMM. The sides also recognize the importance of
the Mission’s work. Their reaction to the temporary
relocation of some Mission members last weekend was
a clear indication. Throughout the past year, the SMM
has continued managing the challenges I described
and performing its mandated tasks. However, since I
last briefed the Council (see S/PV.8726), the Mission’s
work has continued to be undermined by persistent and
escalating constraints on its freedom of movement,
predominantly in areas outside of Government control.
I need to underline that freedom of movement is
what allows monitoring to take place, as foreseen in
the mandate. It is essential for enabling the SMM to
serve as impartial eyes and ears of the international
community in Ukraine. I wish to recall that that freedom
of movement is enshrined in the Mission’s mandate as
well as in the Minsk agreements.
In 2021, some 91 per cent of all freedom of
movement restrictions experienced by the SMM took
place in non-Government-controlled areas. The past
year saw the Mission’s movement across the contact
line increasingly denied and delayed or allowed
with conditions. Those impediments continued to
undermine the SMM’s operational unity and threaten
the sustainability of its work in non-Governmentcontrolled areas. Impediments to the SMM’s use of
technical monitoring tools have also continued on both

S/PV. 8968

sides of the contact line. Instances of gunfire and the
targeting of the SMM’s unmanned aerial vehicles have
almost doubled. The intensity of GPS signal interference
in 2021 reached unusually high levels. The degradation
of our aerial environment in 2021 particularly affected
the SMM’s long-range UAVs. That platform is the only
one that can monitor the full length of the contact
line and areas near the border outside of Government
control on a 24/7 basis. However, more than 80 per cent
of the flights encountered interference.
The past year has been difficult on many levels. At a
time of heightened tensions on the ground and in public
rhetoric, it is imperative for the signatories to the Minsk
agreements to adhere to all their commitments. The
first and foremost among them is strict adherence to the
ceasefire regime. The political impasse and increased
violence reinforce one another. I hope that the recent
resumption of the Normandy Four consultations and
other confidence-building efforts under the auspices of
the OSCE will provide much-needed political impetus
to relieve tensions in the region and for the conflictresolution process to move forward. Meanwhile, the
restoration of the SMM’s freedom of movement is
paramount so that the Mission can do its job. The SMM
should be actively supported by sides in installing
new cameras and opening long-planned forward patrol
bases. The SMM should once again be able to cross the
contact line without arbitrary conditions or denials.
Its unimpeded and unconditional access through the
contact line, especially in the Luhansk region, must be
restored without delay.
Attempts to redefine the Mission by accusing it of
bias should also come to an end. The impasse in the
exchange of security guarantees among the sides also
requires an urgent resolution to daily crossings of the
contact line. The capacity on the ground exists. The
will to use it needs to be strengthened. This needs to be
resolved for the sake of the needs of the long-suffering
civilians. The SMM remains available to facilitate
constructive efforts in that regard.
Before concluding my remarks, I would like to
highlight two points.
I remain convinced that the SMM’s role remains
critical to the reducing tensions and supporting peace,
stability and security. Yet our key challenge has been to
ensure the space for the implementation of that mandate.
Lacking any way to enforce its implementation,
we need the strong and sustained support of the

22-260337/30

S/PV.8968

Ukraine

international community to urge the sides to implement
their commitments and restore the SMM’s freedom
of movement. Where there is political will, there is a
way. I particularly remember the reconstruction of the
Stanytsia Luhanska bridge after so many years and the
encouraging periods of quiet that briefly followed the
22 July 2020 package of measures agreement. Progress
is possible.
I am also compelled to highlight the continuing
plight of civilians. I earlier described the death and
injury caused by continued exchanges of fire and by
mines. Furthermore, allow me to also note that the
contact line has been nearly completely sealed off for
two years. People-to-people contacts have been greatly
disrupted, and communities and families have been
divided, owing to no fault of their own. That is taking
place against the background of other developments
that are further deepening the divide between people
living on both sides of the contact line. The political
challenges of the eight-year conflict should not eclipse
the human costs. I implore the signatories to the Minsk
agreements to be mindful of those costs and redouble
their efforts. I also urge the members of the Council to
work with the sides and support their efforts to that end.
I should also like to provide some information
on this morning’s developments. For the period from
yesterday evening to 11.20 a.m. today, Kyiv time, the
SMM recorded 500 explosions along the contact line.
The vital disengagement areas near Stanytsia Luhanska
and Zolote were particularly impacted. Since 11.20
a.m., we have recorded approximately 30 explosions.
Tensions, therefore, seem to be easing. Around noon,
the SMM asked the sides to strictly adhere to their
ceasefire commitments. It is critically important to
de-escalate immediately to avoid further aggravation
of the situation.
The SMM is aware of, and following up on, the
reports of civilian casualties and damage to civilian
infrastructure along the contact line during the past 24
hours. We will continue to follow up the security situation
to the extent that our resources allow. The increase
in kinetic activity occurred along approximately 200
kilometres of the contact line, primarily in Luhansk
oblast. Many SMM patrols are continuing to return and
are in the process of reporting.
SMM patrols have visited the sites of the alleged
damage to a kindergarten and a railroad station in the
Government-controlled part of Stanytsia Luhanska.
8/30

17/02/2022

At the kindergarten, the SMM saw fresh damage to
its facade. Of course, details will be reported after all
corroboration efforts have been completed. We will
do that as soon as possible, as we are aware of the
importance of the reports in reducing the tensions in the
area. In Marinka and Kremenchuk, where there were
allegations, the SMM itself did not register ceasefire
violations. We will continue to follow up the allegations
that have reached us, but it is important to tell the sides
to reduce tensions and cease fire and be mindful of the
high level of tensions in the region.
The President (spoke in Russian): I thank Mr. Çevik
for his briefing.
I now give the floor to Ms. Montian.
Ms. Montian (spoke in Russian): I listened very
carefully to everything that the briefers who spoke
before me said. I would like to say to the members
of the Security Council that I am completely certain
that they know very well that the authorities in Kyiv
absolutely never had the intention of implementing
the first package of the Minsk agreement and, to an
even lesser degree, the subsequent Minsk package of
measures agreement. This simply gives pause to say
that, yes, we will implement that; in the meantime,
the West will provide us with weapons and strengthen
our armed forces; and we hope that at some point in
the future we will be able to recover the rebellious
republics by force. \
As Zelenskyy said only recently, they do not only
not want to talk to the republics. He said that he sees
no reason to have dialogue with Donetsk or Luhansk.
They do not wish to have conversations with civil
society even within Ukraine. People who do not want
to go to Europe or join NATO, who are against the coup
d’état and who want to live in peace and friendship in
Russia and other countries — not only are those people
not politically represented within Ukrainian politics,
but they are also being criminally prosecuted. I am a
criminal lawyer. All Ruslan Kotsaba did was post a
video on YouTube saying that he was in favour of peace
and against war in Donbas. He has been on trial since
2015, accused of high treason. When I went to Donbas
personally to meet one of the field commanders, the
late Alexei Mozgovoi, in order to pick up a detainee,
a soldier from the Ukrainian armed forces, my name
was listed on the “Peacemaker” website, along with the
names of a huge number of people guilty of opposing
22-26033

17/02/2022

Ukraine

S/PV. 8968

the Maidan, opposing a coup d’état or opposing NATO
and Europe.

of Ukraine would have been compelled to implement
the Minsk agreements a long time ago.

Am I really meant to believe that those people who
prosecute ordinary people because they liked something
on social media, for example, the State Emblem of the
Soviet Union , which is one of the recent cases — people
who cut off all opposition channels and are persecuting
all opposition politics — are the same people who will
engage in negotiations with Donetsk and Luhansk? It is
very clear that, in principle, that is impossible. It is like
matter and anti-matter: they annihilate one other.

Since that has not happened, there is one explanation
to make clear: the West wants a war with Russia, and it
wants that war to take place on Ukraine’s territory. It is
being used as a chessboard, and the people of Ukraine
and those of the unrecognized republics are being used
as pawns in geopolitical games. There is nothing else
that can be said here, and I am sure that Council members
themselves are well aware of that. I am glad that I had
the opportunity to say that to members’ faces. And I
believe that they are allowing this war to happen. The
events that occurred today in the republics — shelling
along the entire contact line — ultimately convinced
me in that regard.

Where was the difficulty in providing special status
in the past five years? They are not going to provide
it because any form of dissent in Ukraine is being
quashed. Those in Ukraine who oppose the Maidan,
a coup d’état or war itself are considered enemies of
the people. They have no right to take the floor and
make their voices heard anywhere at all. They have no
political parties; they have no civil society associations.
They are deprived of the right to vote in their own
country. They do not have that right at all. In the light of
that, how can one expect that Kyiv will negotiate with
Luhansk and Donetsk? I am sure that Council members
understand that that will never, ever happen.
One of the previous speakers said that, allegedly,
despite the efforts of Germany and France, the Kyiv
regime does not want to comply with the Minsk
agreements. I am convinced that the West is allowing
the Kyiv regime to get away with non-compliance. If
that were not the case, all of the Minsk agreements
would have been implemented a long time ago. There is
no use in stating that Kyiv is an independent entity or
that Ukraine is independent. It is a colony of a collective
West where everything is decided by external parties
who staged the Maidan and the coup d’état, plunging
my country into slavery.
Those same people are obstructing the
implementation of the Minsk agreements and will
continue to do so. I am certain of it because the West’s
real goal, despite all the peace-loving speeches I have
heard, including in this Chamber, is to turn Kyiv against
the republics and drag Russia into this war. There is
absolutely no explanation for the Western hysteria
about Russia being about to invade — I heard President
Biden say that just now, while we have been having this
meeting. The West’s one and only goal is to incite war.
If that were not the case, then the puppet Government

For almost eight years now, the Kyiv regime has
been shelling 100,000 people using heavy artillery. The
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe
has so-called observers, but the people in the territories
call them “blind observers” because they seem to be
blind to that fact and have not reacted at all.
Meanwhile, on the territory controlled by Kyiv,
not a single child has been killed, and buildings are
still standing. That happens only in the unrecognized
republics. I have visited them personally. I am describing
it first-hand, because I travelled down the entire contact
line and I saw how peaceful civilians — unprotected,
vulnerable people — are being killed. The people
who did not manage to leave are largely the elderly,
women with children and persons with disabilities.
Those who could leave left the area a long time ago.
Those long-suffering people — 100,000 of them — are
hostages there.
The whole of Europe is, for the eighth consecutive
year, duplicitously and bloodthirstily watching the
suffering of those people while claiming that there is
no alternative to the Minsk agreements. Fine — in that
case, either compel the puppets from the Kyiv regime
to implement them or stop saying that there is no
alternative to them.
The President (spoke in Russian): I thank
Ms. Montian for her briefing.
I shall now make a statement in my capacity
as the Deputy Minister for Foreign Affairs of the
Russian Federation.
We would like to thank the Under-SecretaryGeneral for Political and Peacebuilding Affairs,

22-260339/30

S/PV.8968

Ukraine

Ms. Rosemary DiCarlo; the Special Representative
of the Organization for Security and Cooperation in
Europe (OSCE) Chairperson-in-Office in Ukraine and
in the Trilateral Contact Group, Mr. Mikko Kinnunen;
and the Chief Monitor of the OSCE Special Monitoring
Mission in Ukraine, Mr. Yaşar Halit Çevik, for their
assessments and views. We are grateful to Ms. Tetiana
Montian for her valuable first-hand information on how
the decisions of the Security Council on the settlement
of the intra-Ukrainian conflict are being implemented
in practice.
The date of today’s meeting was not chosen at
random. On this day seven years ago, the Security
Council, through its resolution 2202 (2015),
unanimously adopted the package of measures for the
implementation of the Minsk agreements as the only
international legal basis for resolving the civil conflict
in the east of Ukraine (see S/PV.7384). That is why we
consider the main goal of today’s meeting to be the
Security Council’s reaffirmation of the fact that there is
no alternative to that momentous document for Ukraine.
Unfortunately, after seven years, we have more
and more reasons to believe that the implementation
of the Minsk agreements still does not feature in the
plans of our Ukrainian neighbours. They are already
talking about that openly. Here are just a few of the
most recent examples.
Just yesterday, the Deputy Prime Minister of
Ukraine, Ms. Iryna Vreshchuk, stated that “there would
be no new laws on the special status of Donbas and
no direct coordination”. That came after Zelenskyy’s
meeting with Chancellor Scholz. She also acknowledged
the fact that Kyiv does not feel any pressure from the
West to implement the Minsk agreements.
On 4 February, in an interview with the Ukrainian
television channel 1+1, the Minister for Foreign Affairs
of Ukraine, Mr. Dmytro Kuleba, said that the Minsk
agreements could not be implemented on Russian
terms, to which he for some reason ascribed the direct
dialogue between Ukraine and Donbas, despite the fact
that it is clearly stated as one of the conditions in the
package of measures. The same idea was put forward
by the Head of the Presidential Administration of
Ukraine, Mr. Andriy Yermak, at the recent Normandy
format meeting of political advisers in Paris.
Earlier, on 2 February, Mr. Kuleba said that no
Ukrainian region will have the right to veto State
decisions, and that that was set in stone. He said that
10/30

17/02/2022

there would be no special status, as Russia supposedly
imagines, and no veto power. A day earlier, on
1 February, President Zelenskyy also reminded the
entire world of Ukraine’s inability to negotiate. Hinting
at the existence of an alternative solution to the conflict
in Donbas, he said that Kyiv has varying views on the
order of implementation of certain provisions of the
Minsk agreements.
On 31 January, in an interview with the Associated
Press, the Secretary of the National Security and
Defence Council of Ukraine, Mr. Danilov, stated
that the implementation of the Minsk agreements
meant the destruction of the country. He said that the
agreements were signed at the barrel of Russian guns,
with the Germans and the French looking on, and that
every rational person understood that implementation
was impossible.
Ukrainian politics are trying to implant the opinion
in the West that the Minsk agreements go against the
national interests of Ukraine. But if the goal of building
peace on its own territory is in the national interest of
Ukraine, such statements are out of place.
Another excuse that we hear here is that Russia
is not implementing some of its obligations under the
Minsk agreements; it is very possible that we will also
hear this today. At the same time, it is obvious that there
are absolutely no grounds for that, because there is no
mention of Russia in the text of the agreements. Let me
just offer one opinion on this issue — not that of just
anyone but that of a judge of the Constitutional Court
of Ukraine, Mr.Shishkin. He very recently proposed
undertaking criminal prosecutions against those who
participated in the elaboration of the agreements,
Leonid Kuchma and Petro Poroshenko, and the reason,
he says, is that:
“Minsk provides for 20 obligations placed on
Ukraine, six on the OSCE, two on Donbas and not
a single one on Russia”.
Allow me to once again very briefly recall the
contents of the document that we are discussing at this
meeting. Let me list them item by item. The order in
which they are to be implemented is very clearly stated
and cannot be changed.
First, a ceasefire; second, the withdrawal of
weapons; third, OSCE monitoring; fourth, the
launching of a dialogue between Kyiv and Donbas;
fifth, amnesty; sixth, the exchange of detainees;
22-26033

17/02/2022

Ukraine

seventh, humanitarian access; eighth, the lifting of
the economic blockade; ninth, the transfer to Kyiv of
border control, provided item 11 is implemented; tenth,
the withdrawal of foreign formations and mercenaries;
eleventh, new constitutions providing special status
for Donbas; twelfth, an agreement on the order of the
elections; and thirteenth, intensifying the work of the
Minsk Contact Group.
Seven years down the road, it is clear that none
of the provisions of the package of measures has been
implemented by Ukraine in full, starting with the
first one, a ceasefire. The root of the problem here is
a systematic lack of will on the part of Kyiv to initiate
a direct dialogue with the authorized representatives of
Donetsk and Luhansk in the Contact Group. However,
that is a dialogue that is clearly directly provided for
in the fourth, ninth, eleventh and twelfth items of the
document. That is not our requirement; that is something
that is stated in the document. It is an obligation on
Ukraine and something that our neighbours increasingly
bring into question, thus risking the undermining of the
entire Minsk process, which could lead to devastating
consequences for Ukraine.
Ukraine stubbornly refuses to implement the
provisions of the Minsk agreements on direct dialogue
with Donbas, interim self-governance, restoring
socioeconomic links and constitutional reform to grant
special status to the region. Currently the Verkhovna
Rada has a draft on decentralization; it is not agreed
with Donbas and does not provide for special status.
The Ukrainian side has completely moved away
from a direct interaction with Donbas within the
coordination mechanism. It is providing various options
but does not allow for an effective reaction in case of
violations of the ceasefire regime. Attempts to place the
blame on Russia and to imply that it is a party to the
conflict are futile and baseless.
I must say that we are very disappointed by the
ostrich-like position of our Western colleagues, who are
trying hard not to see obvious things. We are surprised
that they are sidelining the Minsk measures but are
placing emphasis on the Normandy format. I should
like to recall that the Normandy format, according to
annex II to resolution 2202 (2015), is a mechanism to
oversee implementation but not a forum where new
decisions can be discussed. For seven years Russia has
been calling from all platforms for Western sponsors

S/PV. 8968

to exert pressure on Kyiv to implement the Minsk
agreements; they have been doing exactly the opposite.
So the increasing feeling of impunity and
permissiveness pushed Ukrainian hotheads to use new
excuses and undertake military adventures against
their own people, and the internal armed conflict has
resulted in thousands of victims. Many millions of
people in Donbas are still viewed as foreigners in their
own country. Automatic rifles, sniper rifles, Howitzers
and strike drones are aimed at them. Ukrainian
representatives continue to come up with new excuses
not to implement the agreements and to give orders to
shell their own people.
The Alley of Angels, a memorial complex in
Donetsk, commemorates the children who died at
the hands of the Ukrainian military, including those
who died at the children’s beach in Zugres, a town in
Donbas, on 13 August 2014, targeted by the Ukrainian
air force. More than twenty people died and dozens were
wounded. A 24-year-old local, Anastasia Ruban, was
there with her two-year-old son when the Ukrainian air
force started shelling the town from its multiple rocketlaunch systems. One of the charges exploded right next
to them. “Everything was covered in blood and smoke,
and the bloodied bodies of children were everywhere,”
says the woman. That and other similar episodes were
gathered by the investigative committee of Russia and
the RT network in a compilation showing the crimes
committed by the Ukrainian military using prohibited
means and methods of warfare. Our United Nations
Mission has disseminated it to members of the Security
Council. I would ask them to please take a look; they
will be horrified.
Kyiv’s commitment to the complex of measures
can also be illustrated by the abduction last year of
Andrey Kosyak, an observer from Luhansk, from the
Joint Centre for Control and Coordination. We would
be very grateful if Mr. Kinnunen could tell us about
that episode. We know it was a treacherous event and
a direct violation of the fifth item under the measures,
which prohibits
“the prosecution and punishment of persons in
connection with events that took place in certain
areas of the Donetsk and Luhansk regions of
Ukraine”.
Finally, let me say that I hope that my colleagues
from the Western countries will be able to resist the
temptation to play to the cameras, to make this meeting

22-2603311/30

S/PV.8968

Ukraine

17/02/2022

into a forum for baseless and aggressive rhetoric and
to present their groundless accusations that Russia
allegedly was going to attack Ukraine. I think that we
have had enough speculation on that, including in the
meeting of the Security Council held on 31 January
convened by the United States (see S/PV.8960).

and occupied Crimea. Russia says that it is drawing
down those forces. We do not see that happening on
the ground. Our information clearly indicates that those
forces, including ground troops, aircraft and ships, are
preparing to launch an attack against Ukraine in the
coming days.

We long ago clarified and explained everything,
and the date announced for the so-called invasion is
behind us, so therefore my advice to my colleagues is
not to put yourself in an awkward situation.

We do not know precisely how things will play out,
but here is what the world can expect to see unfold. In
fact, it is unfolding right now, today, as Russia takes
steps down the path to war and reissued the threat of
military action.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.
I now call on the Secretary of State of the United
States of America.
Mr. Blinken (United States of America): The
Security Council is convened today to discuss the
implementation of the Minsk agreements, a goal that we
all share despite Russia’s persistent violations. Those
agreements, which were negotiated in 2014 and 2015
and signed by Russia, remain the basis for the peace
process to resolve the conflict in eastern Ukraine.
The Council’s primary responsibility, the very
reason for its creation, is the preservation of peace and
security. As we meet today, the most immediate threat
to peace and security is Russia’s looming aggression
against Ukraine. The stakes go far beyond Ukraine. This
is a moment of peril for the lives and safety of millions
of people as well as for the foundation of the United
Nations Charter and the rules-based international order
that preserves stability worldwide.

First, Russia plans to manufacture a pretext for its
attack. That could be a violent event that Russia will
blame on Ukraine or an outrageous accusation that
Russia will level against the Ukrainian Government.
We do not know exactly the form that it will take. It
could be a fabricated so-called terrorist bombing inside
Russia, the invented discovery of a mass grave, a staged
drone strike against civilians or a fake, even a real,
attack using chemical weapons. Russia may describe
such an event as ethnic cleansing or a genocide,
making a mockery of a concept that we in this Chamber
do not take lightly, nor do I take lightly based on my
family history.
In the past few days, Russian media have already
begun to spread some of those false alarms and claims,
maximize public outrage and lay the groundwork for
an invented justification for war. Today that drumbeat
has only intensified in Russia’s State-controlled media.
We have heard some of those basic allegations from
Russian-backed speakers here today.

This is the exact kind of crisis that the United
Nations, specifically the Security Council, was created
to prevent. We must address what Russia is doing right
now to Ukraine.

Secondly, in response to that manufactured
provocation, the highest levels of the Russian Government
may theatrically convene emergency meetings to
address the so-called crisis. The Government will issue
proclamations declaring that Russia must respond to
defend Russian citizens or ethnic Russians in Ukraine.
Next, the attack is planned to begin. Russian missiles
and bombs will drop across Ukraine. Communications
will be jammed. Cyberattacks will shut down key
Ukrainian institutions. After that, Russian tanks and
soldiers will advance on key targets that have already
been identified and mapped out in detailed plans. We
believe that such targets include Ukraine’s capital,
Kyiv, a city of 2.8 million people.

Over the past months, without provocation or
justification, Russia has amassed more than 150,000
troops around Ukraine’s borders and in Russia, Belarus

Conventional attacks are not all that Russia plans to
inflict upon the people of Ukraine. We have information
that indicates that Russia will target specific groups

This crisis directly affects every member of the
Council and every country in the world, because
the basic principles that sustain peace and security,
principles that were enshrined in the wake of two World
Wars and a cold war, are under threat: the principle that
one country cannot change the borders of another by
force; the principle that one country cannot dictate
another’s choices or policies or with whom it will
associate; and the principle of national sovereignty.

12/30

22-26033

17/02/2022

Ukraine

of Ukrainians. We have been warning the Ukrainian
Government of all that is coming. Here today we are
laying it out in great detail with the hope that, by sharing
what we know with the world, we can influence Russia
to abandon the path of war and choose a different path
while there is still time.
I am mindful that some have called into question
our information, recalling previous instances where
intelligence ultimately did not bear out. But let me be
clear: I am here today not to start a war but to prevent
one. The information that I presented here is validated
by what we have seen unfolding in plain sight before
our eyes for months. One should remember that, while
Russia has repeatedly derided our warnings and alarms
as melodrama and nonsense, it has been steadily
amassing more than 150,000 troops on Ukraine’s
borders, as well as the capabilities to conduct a massive
military assault.
It is not just we who are seeing that. Allies and
partners see the same thing. Russia has been hearing
not only from us. The international chorus has grown
louder and louder.
If Russia does not invade Ukraine, we will be
relieved that Russia changed course and proved our
predictions wrong. That would be a far better outcome
than the course that we are currently on. We will gladly
accept any criticism that anyone directs at us.
As President Biden said, this would be a war of
choice. If Russia makes that choice, we have been clear,
along with allies and partners, that our response will
be sharp and decisive. President Biden reiterated that
forcefully earlier this week.
There is another choice that Russia can still make
if there is any truth to its claim that it is committed to
diplomacy. Diplomacy is the only responsible way to
resolve this crisis. An essential part of that is through
the implementation of the Minsk agreements — the
subject of our meeting today. There are a series of
commitments that Russia and Ukraine made under the
Minsk agreements, with the Organization for Security
and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE) and the Normandy
format partners involved as well. If Russia is prepared
to sit with the Ukrainian Government and work through
the process of implementing those commitments, our
friends in France and Germany stand ready to convene
senior-level discussions in the Normandy format to
settle these issues. Ukraine is ready for that, and we
stand fully ready to support the parties.

S/PV. 8968

Progress towards resolving the Donbas crisis
through the Minsk agreements can reinforce the broader
discussions on security issues in which we are prepared
to engage with Russia, in coordination with our allies
and partners. More than three weeks ago, we provided
Russia with a paper that detailed concrete reciprocal
steps that we can take in the near term to address our
respective concerns and advance the collective security
interests of Russia, the United States and our European
partners and allies. This morning we received a
response, which we are evaluating.
Earlier today I sent a letter to Russia’s Foreign
Minister, Sergey Lavrov, proposing that we meet in
Europe next week, following on our talks in recent
weeks, to discuss the steps that we can take to resolve
this crisis without conflict. We are also proposing
meetings of the NATO-Russia Council and the OSCE
Permanent Council. Those meetings can pave the
way for a summit of key leaders, in the context of
de-escalation, to reach understandings on our mutual
security concerns. As lead diplomats for our nations,
we have a responsibility to make every effort for
diplomacy to succeed and to leave no diplomatic stone
unturned. If Russia is committed to diplomacy, we
are presenting every opportunity for it to demonstrate
that commitment.
I have no doubt that the response to my remarks
here today will be more dismissals from the Russian
Government about the United States stoking hysteria or
that it has no plans to invade Ukraine. Let me make this
simple. The Russian Government can announce today,
with no qualification, equivocation or deflection, that
Russia will not invade Ukraine. Russia should state
that clearly and plainly to the world and should then
demonstrate it by sending its troops, tanks and planes
back to their barracks and hangers and its diplomats to
the negotiating table. In the coming days, the world will
remember that commitment or the refusal to make it.
Mr. Cleverly (United Kingdom): I thank the
briefers for the information that they have provided
today. The United Nations, the Organization for
Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE) and the
mandate of the OSCE Special Monitoring Mission to
Ukraine continue to command our full support. The
rights of all Ukrainians, whether they are in Kyiv, Lviv,
Donetsk or Luhansk, can be served only by peace,
diplomacy and dialogue.

22-2603313/30

S/PV.8968

Ukraine

I want to make absolutely clear the United
Kingdom’s support for the implementation of the Minsk
agreements, as endorsed by resolution 2202 (2015).
That resolution reaffirmed the Security Council’s full
respect for the sovereignty, independence and territorial
integrity of Ukraine. It remains the responsibility of all
parties to implement fully their commitments and seek
a peaceful resolution of the conflict. In that respect,
we condemn the actions taken by the Russian Duma
to propose that the Russian President recognize the
regions of Luhansk and Donetsk as independent. That
would directly undermine the Minsk agreements and
must be rejected by the Russian authorities, in line with
the commitments that they have made. We welcome
all efforts to support the process and avoid escalation,
including the role of the OSCE and the Normandy
format. This remains our long-standing position.
Let us remind ourselves of the context for the
Minsk agreements and the situation in which Ukraine
finds itself today.
In March 2014, Russia invaded and illegally annexed
Crimea, in flagrant violation of international law. A
few weeks later, in April, Russia instigated a conflict
in Donbas, which it continues to fuel today. More than
14,000 people have lost their lives in the fighting.
Now, today, the Ukrainian people are yet again
living under the threat of invasion, with well over
130,000 Russian troops, heavy weaponry and military
vessels amassed and exercising on their northern,
eastern and southern borders, from Belarus to the
Black Sea.
Let us say clearly what the whole world can see:
Russia has deployed the forces necessary to invade
Ukraine, and now has them readied for action.
In the past days we have heard Russian claims that
some units are returning to barracks. It is, however,
all too clear that the opposite is in fact true, and the
Russian military build-up continues.
Russia will say that it has the right to move its
forces within its own territory, but no one has the right
to threaten the use of force. Russia is patently failing
to live up to the international commitments that it has
made around military transparency, by refusing to
adequately explain its military build-up or provide the
necessary transparency to build trust and de-escalate
the situation.
14/30

17/02/2022

If the Kremlin is serious about a diplomatic
resolution, then it needs to show up to the diplomatic
meetings and commit to meaningful OSCE talks,
including via chapter III of the OSCE Vienna Document.
They did not show up on Wednesday, and do not intend
to show up on Friday.
Russia’s actions are clearly designed to intimidate,
threaten and destabilize Ukraine. We know it, they
know it and the international community knows it.
Russia called this meeting today to discuss
resolution 2202 (2015). That text is very clear on two
points that reflect the core tenets of the Charter of the
United Nations, emphasized by the Secretary-General
when he addressed this situation only a few days ago:
first, that resolving the situation in the eastern regions
of Ukraine can be achieved only by peaceful means,
and secondly, that there must be full respect for the
sovereignty, independence and territorial integrity
of Ukraine.
Yet we are seeing increasing disinformation about
events in Donbas that are straight out of the Kremlin
playbook: a blatant attempt by the Russian Government
to fabricate a pretext for the invasion of Ukraine. It
is therefore clear that we are at a critical juncture to
prevent further escalation. Upholding the core tenets of
the Charter of the United Nations in respect of peaceful
resolution and respecting sovereignty and territorial
integrity has never been more important.
Russia must now engage with the diplomatic
process that we have built up over several decades
and on which global security depends, and resolve the
situation through peaceful means.
If Russia chooses to launch an attack at this time of
heightened tension, using disinformation as a pretext,
it will show that Russia was never serious about
diplomatic engagement. Any Russian invasion now
would be a conflict of choice for President Putin, and an
abdication of Russia’s responsibility under the Charter
of the United Nations to refrain from the use of force
and to maintain international peace and security.
There should be no doubt that any further Russian
incursion into Ukraine would be a massive strategic
mistake and a humanitarian disaster that will be met
with strength, including significant coordinated
sanctions. And we will continue to call out the pattern
of deception and disinformation from the Russian State.
22-26033

17/02/2022

Ukraine

If Russia is serious about the Charter of the United
Nations and its role as a permanent member of the
Security Council, it should give the Minsk agreements
the chance to be implemented, free from coercion; it
should engage seriously with diplomacy; and it should
stand down all its troops. There is still time to change
path. Conflict can be avoided.
We urge Russia to match its words with actions, to
withdraw its troops, to engage meaningfully in talks
and to act in the best interest of peace, security and
stability in Europe.
Ms. Heimerback (Norway): I thank the briefers for
their statements. Let me also use this opportunity to
thank all personnel at the Special Monitoring Mission
to Ukraine of the Organization for Security and
Cooperation in Europe (OSCE). They contribute on a
daily basis to reducing tensions and fostering peace,
stability and security on the ground.
The threatening security situation in and around
Ukraine is alarming. Norway is deeply concerned by
the Russian large-scale military build-up in occupied
Crimea to the north, east and south of Ukraine, as well
as in Belarus and the Black Sea. The alleged reports
of increased shelling are disturbing. They must not be
used as a pretext for any military action. Norway calls
on Russia to de-escalate and to engage in dialogue,
constructively and in good faith, through established
international mechanisms.
It remains a major obstacle that Russia falsely
seeks to portray the conflict in eastern Ukraine as an
internal Ukrainian conflict. The reality is that Russia
has fuelled the conflict by providing financial and
military support to the armed formations it backs.
Norway expresses strong concern regarding
the resolution of the Russian State Duma calling
for the recognition of the self-proclaimed “People’s
Republics” of Donetsk and Luhansk. We warn against
such a step, which would constitute a further violation
of Ukraine’s sovereignty and territorial integrity
and directly contradict the spirit and the letter of the
Minsk agreements.
Norway supports the negotiations in the Normandy
format and in the Trilateral Contact Group aimed at
ending the conflict through a political settlement and
the implementation of the Minsk agreements. Norway
calls on the parties to uphold their commitments and to

S/PV. 8968

engage constructively towards resolving the conflict by
peaceful means.
We welcome the OSCE Chairmanship’s Renewed
European Security Dialogue initiative. We encourage
Russia to engage in that format. We also urge Russia to
respect its commitments under the Vienna Document
and contribute to a constructive dialogue and exchange
under chapter III.
Norway upholds a European security order based
on international law and national sovereignty and
territorial integrity. Those principles have repeatedly
been invoked by Russia in Council discussions. Norway
calls on Russia to respect those principles when it
comes to Ukraine.
By threatening posture and rhetoric and unrealistic
demands, Russia is challenging European security.
Every country has the right to freely choose its security
alignment. We cannot allow the established security
architecture to be replaced by spheres of influence.
We are concerned about the fact that the ceasefire
in Donbas from July 2020 has become increasingly
fragile. We call on the parties to seek a durable ceasefire
and do their utmost to prevent civilian casualties.
The humanitarian situation is severe after eight
years of conflict. Civilians are increasingly losing
access to essential life-saving services, as civilian
infrastructure is damaged and destroyed. Any
escalation of the conflict would lead to devastating
humanitarian consequences.
Let me conclude by reiterating Norway’s
unwavering support for Ukraine’s sovereignty and
territorial integrity within its internationally recognized
borders, in accordance with the purposes and principles
of the Charter of the United Nations. That includes the
Crimean peninsula and its territorial waters.
Mr. De Almeida Filho (Brazil): Brazil follows
with concern the situation in eastern Ukraine. The
persistent political stalemate and prolonged crisis have
reached a critical point. In the present circumstances,
renewed and reinvigorated political resolve on the part
of all parties is crucial in addressing the conflict.
Achieving and maintaining peace is our collective
responsibility. We appreciate the ongoing political and
diplomatic efforts aimed at restoring peace and stability
in Ukraine and the wider region. We firmly believe that
a diplomatic solution must be found to the crisis, and

22-2603315/30

S/PV.8968

Ukraine

17/02/2022

will continue to support credible initiatives to bring
about a peaceful settlement to it.

recognize the presence of the high-level participants in
the Council today.

We reiterate our understanding that resolution 2202
(2015) provides the general guidelines for a peaceful
solution to the situation and permanent stability in
eastern Ukraine. Unfortunately, resolution 2202 (2015)
has not been fully implemented. Brazil urges all parties
to fulfil the letter and the spirit of the Minsk agreements.

As I begin my remarks, it is important that I be
clear — Ireland is a steadfast and consistent supporter
of Ukraine’s sovereignty and territorial integrity within
its internationally recognized borders.

We urge the parties concerned to pursue genuine
dialogue on the implementation of resolution 2202
(2015), which provided the parameters not only to
address the situation in eastern Ukraine, but also to
assist in diplomatic efforts to overcome the current
security challenges in the region. Brazil also welcomes
the resumption of talks in the Normandy format and
calls for a renewed commitment to finding ways to
bring about lasting peace in eastern Ukraine.
A comprehensive ceasefire, which is the first
point of the Minsk agreements, remains an essential
element in that process. Beyond that, we need further
disengagement of forces and military equipment on the
ground. Disengagement must allow unimpeded access
of humanitarian relief to people in most desperate
need. Furthermore, trust among the relevant parties
is crucial to strengthening dialogue and achieving a
sustainable solution.
Negotiations on the parameters to grant
special status to certain areas of the Donetsk and
Luhansk regions must be conducted with a sense of
urgency, flexibility and a spirit of compromise. The
implementation of the Minsk agreements must observe
full respect for the sovereignty, independence and
territorial integrity of Ukraine. All parties must bear in
mind the letter of the agreements.

Ireland believes in and is fully committed to
the core principles enshrined in the Charter of the
United Nations. They include the sovereign equality
and territorial integrity of States. Ukraine has the
same fundamental right as every other sovereign and
independent State to choose its own foreign policy and
ensure the security and defence of its territory. That is a
right we hold to be self-evident. It is a right that Ireland
struggled to obtain.
As Russia’s military build-up at Ukraine’s border
continues to raise tensions, Ireland again calls for calm,
de-escalation and the pursuit of diplomacy. We need to
see sustained and credible moves on the ground towards
de-escalation. Genuine de-escalation will imply the
significant withdrawal of both troops and equipment.
We commend all who are engaged in dialogue,
including through the Normandy format and Poland, as
OSCE Chair-in Office of the Organization for Security
and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE), for launching
the Renewed OSCE European Security Dialogue. We
support urgent, constructive and resolute engagement
through all diplomatic channels.

We firmly believe that the Security Council has
the utmost responsibility to prevent and condemn any
attempt to impose a military solution on the crisis.
Dialogue and negotiation are the only way to lasting
peace. We urge all to parties take the necessary measures
to de-escalate tensions and play a constructive role in
reaching a political settlement to the Ukrainian crisis,
in accordance with international law, particularly the
Charter of the United Nations.

The full implementation of the Minsk peace
agreements and the related conflict-resolution efforts
in the Normandy format and Trilateral Contact Group
are important priorities for us. There is no doubt that
we are now at a sensitive moment. Today, we call on
all parties to act constructively within both formats. In
that regard, we deeply regret the decision of the Russian
State Duma to submit a call to recognize as independent
entities the non-Government-controlled areas in the
Donetsk and Luhansk oblasts of Ukraine. That would
be a clear violation of the Minsk agreements. We
are also concerned about reports of alleged shelling
today in eastern Ukraine, as mentioned by Special
Representative Kinnunen, which would also be a
violation of the Minsk agreements.

Ms. Byrne Nason (Ireland): I would like to offer
special thanks to Under-Secretary-General DiCarlo and
to Ambassadors Kinnunen and Çevik today for their
helpful and informative briefings. I would also like to

All signatories of the Minsk agreements agreed
on the need for safe and secure access for the OSCE’s
Special Monitoring Mission to Ukraine (SMM) to the
entire territory of Ukraine. The mandate of the SMM

16/30

22-26033

17/02/2022

Ukraine

was agreed by all 57 OSCE participating States. We
therefore remain very concerned about the continuing
restrictions imposed on the SMM’s freedom of
movement. We also regret the fact that SMM equipment
has been damaged or interfered with. I would like to
express our deep regret concerning the decision by the
Russian Federation to refuse to extend the mandate
of the Border Observation Mission to monitor the
border crossings.
We commend the tireless efforts of Ambassadors
Kinnunen and Çevik in the Trilateral Contact Group.
We see the agreement reached by the Group at the end
of last year on adherence to the July 2020 ceasefire as
an important achievement and a sign that there can be
progress if there is genuine political will.
Eastern Ukraine has already endured 8 years of
conflict, resulting in humanitarian disaster, serious
human rights violations and abuses as reported by the
Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for
Human Rights.
Just as we know that further conflict is not
inevitable, we know, too, that wherever conflict occurs,
it is civilians who bear the brunt. Ireland therefore
sincerely calls on all sides to work peacefully towards
an effective and sustainable political settlement of the
conflict and to jumpstart that work today.
Mr. Tirumurti (India): Let me begin by thanking
Under-Secretary-General Rosemary DiCarlo; Special
Representative Mikko Kinnunen and Chief Monitor
Yaşar Çevik for their comprehensive briefings on the
occasion of the seventh anniversary of the package
of measures for the implementation of the Minsk
agreements, endorsed unanimously by resolution
2202 (2015). I also welcome Ms. Tetiana Montian to
our meeting.
We welcome the efforts under way for the
implementation of the Minsk agreements, including
through the Trilateral Contact Group and under the
Normandy format. We believe that the Minsk agreements
provide a basis for a negotiated and peaceful settlement
of the situation in eastern Ukraine. Accordingly,
we urge all parties to continue to engage through all
possible diplomatic channels and keep working towards
the full implementation of the Minsk agreements.
We also believe that meetings under the Normandy
format will further facilitate the implementation of
the provisions of the Minsk agreements, including its

S/PV. 8968

key security and political aspects. In this context, we
welcome the recent meetings of political advisors of the
Normandy format countries in Paris and Berlin. We also
welcome the unconditional observance of the July 2020
ceasefire, the reaffirmation of the Minsk agreements as
the basis of work under the Normandy format and the
commitment of all sides to reducing disagreements on
the way forward.
Any steps that increase tension may best be
avoided by all sides in the larger interest of securing
international peace and security. Quiet and constructive
diplomacy is the need of the hour.
India has been in touch with all concerned parties.
It is our considered view that the issue can be resolved
only through diplomatic dialogue. India’s interest is in
finding a solution that can provide for the immediate
de-escalation of tensions, taking into account the
legitimate security interests of all countries and aimed
towards securing long-term peace and stability in the
region and beyond. More than 20,000 Indian students
and nationals live and study in different parts of
Ukraine, including in its border areas. The well-being
of Indian nationals is of priority to us.
In conclusion, we reiterate our call for the peaceful
resolution of the situation by sincere and sustained
diplomatic efforts to ensure that the concerns of all sides
are amicably resolved through constructive dialogue.
Mr. Kimani (Kenya): We thank the UnderSecretary-General for Political and Peacebuilding
Affairs, the Special Representative of the Organization
for Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE) and the
Chief Monitor of the OSCE Special Monitoring Mission
in Ukraine for their briefings.
Kenya cannot contemplate the continued insecurity
in eastern Ukraine and the impact it could have
on broader security in Europe. Global security is
intertwined. Instability in Europe, beyond threatening
lives and economies, also disrupts the ability of that
important region to play a constructive role in solving
the most pressing challenges globally. Insufficient
progress in the implementation of the Minsk agreements
has been realized since 2014, and that needs to change.
Kenya wants to offer three brief recommendations.
In doing so, we hope that they will contribute to a
renewed push by all relevant stakeholders to stabilize
a situation that, left to escalate, would threaten the
very foundations of global stability and the Security

22-2603317/30

S/PV.8968

Ukraine

17/02/2022

Council’s ability to fulfil its mandate in multiple
conflict situations.

Monitor of the OSCE Special Monitoring Mission in
Ukraine, for their comprehensive briefings.

First, Kenya maintains that respect for the territorial
integrity and sovereignty of all countries by all States is
a cornerstone of global peace. If multilateralism is to be
reborn into a system that delivers sustained peace to all,
the most powerful States must consistently adhere to
international law and to respect for the sovereignty and
territorial integrity of all countries, in all regions and at
all times. We therefore strongly urge all actors respect
the peace, security, sovereignty and territorial integrity
of Ukraine. The people of Ukraine deserve inclusive
governance, peace and a vibrant economy, which are all
deeply dependent on regional stability and cooperation.

We also took note of the briefing by Ms. Tetiana
Montian, Ukrainian civil society activist

Secondly, as we indicated on 31 January in
this Chamber (see S/PV.8960), we believe that this
standoff is imminently resolvable. Major military
Powers, particularly those represented in the Security
Council, must make a specific and sustained effort
to reach arrangements that deliver a minimum level
of deconfliction and mutual respect. Otherwise, third
countries and global peace and security will suffer
greatly as a result of their confrontations.
Thirdly, Kenya reiterates the obligations of all
the parties to fully implement their commitments
in accordance with the Minsk agreements, which
provide the most promising road map for the peaceful
settlement of the current hostilities, including in
eastern Ukraine. All parties must take responsibility
and reflect that responsibility in a new willingness to
agree to compromise
Kenya welcomes the Normandy format advisors
meeting held earlier this month and the followup meeting, which is scheduled for next month, on
implementing the Minsk accords and the consensus
reached at the group leaders’ summit in Paris in
December 2019. We commend the diplomatic leaders of
the Russian Federation and the United States and their
partners and allies for showing a willingness to meet in
the coming days to make further progress.
Mrs. Nusseibeh (United Arab Emirates) (spoke
in Arabic): At the outset, I would like to thank
Ms. Rosemary DiCarlo, Under-Secretary-General for
Political Affairs and Peacebuilding Affairs; Mr. Mikko
Kinnunen, Special Representative of the Organization
for Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE)
Chairperson-in-Office in Ukraine and in the Trilateral
Contact Group; and Mr. Yaşar Halit Çevik, Chief
18/30

Since our meeting on 31 January (see S/PV.8960),
we have seen intensive diplomatic efforts at various
levels — including at the highest levels — to reduce the
current tensions in Eastern Europe. We also welcome
the further engagement within the Normandy format
and hope that these discussions will continue. Such
structured formats, particularly those bringing together
Russia and Ukraine, along with other stakeholders, are
important for furthering dialogue and reducing tensions.
They will also help us to find a peaceful and sustainable
solution addressing all parties’ security concerns.
In this regard, my country stresses the need
to maintain and build the current momentum in
diplomatic efforts, in particular through steps taken by
all concerned parties to engage in constructive dialogue
in the interest of de-escalation and the maintenance of
regional security and stability. We stress the importance
of all parties’ implementing the Minsk agreements
in full and in good faith, in line with resolution 2202
(2015). In this context, we urge all stakeholders to avoid
steps that would make the implementation of the Minsk
agreements more difficult.
We also note the important role of the OSCE Special
Monitoring Mission in Ukraine, the presence of which
supports efforts for dialogue and confidence-building
between the parties and contributes to easing tensions.
At the same time, we must pay attention to the
critical situation of civilians in eastern Ukraine, where
United Nations reports mention that 3.4 million people
are in need of humanitarian assistance, 55 per cent of
whom are women and 16 per cent children. Furthermore,
there are obstacles for the delivery of humanitarian
assistance to some of those in need, particularly in
areas near the contact line in eastern Ukraine.
We therefore emphasize the importance of not
escalating existing tensions, as that may cause serious
harm to civilians. In that regard, we call upon all parties
to refrain from obstructing access to humanitarian aid or
the movement of civilians in conflict areas in accordance
with their obligations under international law.
Finally, we reiterate the importance of respecting
international law and the Charter of the United Nations,
particularly the principles of territorial integrity,
22-26033

17/02/2022

Ukraine

S/PV. 8968

sovereignty and good neighbourliness, as they are
essential references for resolving the current crisis and
calming tensions in the region.

implications of the situation in Ukraine for regional,
as well as international, peace and security have also
been dire.

In conclusion, the United Arab Emirates reiterates
the importance of constructive dialogue and ongoing
efforts to reach peaceful solutions consistent with
international law and the Charter of the United Nations.

While recognizing the complex fears and
complicated concerns that have been expressed by the
parties through the Minsk agreements, we nonetheless
believe that good faith, in conformity with existing
obligations under the Charter of the United Nations,
by concerned Member States should provide clarity
to seize the opportunities for supporting continuing
dialogue and the engagements required to address the
concerns of all parties.

Mr. Agyeman (Ghana): I would like to begin by
thanking Under-Secretary-General Rosemary DiCarlo
for her briefing on the prevailing situation in eastern
Ukraine as it relates to the implementation of the
Minsk agreements. I also thank Mr. Mikko Kinnunen,
Special Representative of the Organization for Security
and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE) Chairperson-inOffice in Ukraine and in the Trilateral Contact Group,
and Mr. Yaşar Halit Çevik, Chief Monitor of the
OSCE Special Monitoring Mission in Ukraine, for
highlighting the efforts of the OSCE in facilitating the
political and diplomatic settlement of the conflict in
eastern Ukraine.
We have also taken note of the views expressed
by Ms. Tetiana Montian, civil society representative
from Ukraine.
I further welcome the participation of the
representatives of Germany and Ukraine in this meeting.
In welcoming today’s discussions, which enable the
Council to take stock of the package of measures for the
implementation of the Minsk agreements, adopted on
12 February 2015, my delegation recalls the adoption
of resolution 2202 (2015), wherein the Security
Council expressed its firm conviction that the crisis
in the eastern regions of Ukraine could be settled only
through peaceful means. Seven years after the adoption
of resolution 2202 (2015), the Council’s obligation to
the maintenance of international peace and security
requires it to reiterate its conviction and support for
the processes for the further implementation of the
Minsk agreements.
Unfortunately, the Minsk agreements remain
largely unimplemented and the conflict continues to
fester in parts of the Donbas region, with increasing
civilian casualties and deepening vulnerabilities, mostly
among elderly persons and women-led households.
More than 14,000 deaths have been recorded since the
conflict in eastern Ukraine began. Several thousands
of people have been displaced and 2.9 million people
are presently in need of humanitarian assistance. The

In that respect, Ghana is concerned by the increasing
tensions along the borders of Ukraine. We recall, in that
regard, the provisions of the Charter that establish the
fundamental norms of the post-1945 international order
and require that international relations among Member
States not involve threats of or use of force against the
territorial integrity or political independence of other
States. We therefore entreat all parties to maintain
the path of dialogue and diplomacy in addressing any
differences that exist between and among them.
Towards the further implementation of peaceful
measures for resolving the crisis in the eastern regions
of Ukraine, we wish to make the following points.
First, Ghana reaffirms its support for the
sovereignty and territorial integrity of Ukraine, a
bona fide State Member of the United Nations, whose
membership of the Organization provides guarantees
over its internationally recognized borders.
Secondly, we note the security concerns of other
Member States in Europe, especially those in Eastern
Europe, and urge restraint by all in maintaining the
pacific order in Europe, even as efforts continue to
address any concerns with the contemporary European
security architecture.
Thirdly, we welcome the high-level diplomatic
engagements to address existing concerns over the
situation in Ukraine, including recent discussions among
the leaders of the Normandy Four, which reaffirmed
the ceasefire in the eastern region of Ukraine, as well
as the OSCE-facilitated dialogues at different levels.
We continue to urge restraint on the part of all sides,
calling on the parties to bear in mind the prospective
outcomes of ongoing escalation that do not lead to any
strategic gain for any party, and encouraging efforts

22-2603319/30

S/PV.8968

Ukraine

to address both immediate and long-term interests
through diplomacy and dialogue.
Fourthly, we urge renewed dialogue within the
Normandy Four process to resolve differences in
the interpretation of the sequencing of the package
of measures for the implementation of the Minsk
agreements. As the saying goes, how can two go on a
journey unless they be agreed on the path they intend
to take?
Fifthly, we urge the parties to guarantee unimpeded
access for humanitarian assistance in both Governmentcontrolled and non-Government-controlled areas, in
line with humanitarian principles and international
humanitarian law. We further commend the efforts of
humanitarian agencies in Ukraine and welcome the 2022
humanitarian response plan to save lives, ensure access
to basic services and strengthen the protection of those
affected by the conflict and the coronavirus disease.
Finally, let me conclude by stressing Ghana’s
support for the renewal of the spirit of the Minsk
agreements. We urge the parties to work in good faith
and with flexibility to make the necessary concessions
for an enduring peace in Ukraine, with beneficial
outcomes for the rest of Europe and, indeed, the world.
Mr. De la Fuente Ramírez (Mexico) (spoke in
Spanish): I thank Under-Secretary-General DiCarlo,
Special Representative Kinnunen and Ambassador
Çevik for their briefings. We also take note of
Ms. Montian’s remarks. We acknowledge the presence
of the high-level participants at this meeting and
welcome the representatives of Ukraine and Germany.
The review by the Council of the status of the
Minsk agreements concerning the Luhansk and
Donetsk regions of eastern Ukraine takes place against
a backdrop of high tensions that have generated great
concern in the international community.
We therefore believe that it is urgent, first and
foremost, to send out a clear and unequivocal signal
of the will of the parties to reverse the escalation of
tensions and make room for political negotiations. That
path comprises three elements: détente, diplomacy
and dialogue. We have noted with great interest the
announcement of the withdrawal of some troops from
the border with Ukraine. If that can be done as soon
as possible, it will generate the confidence that only
actions can provide and which circumstances demand.
20/30

17/02/2022

Given that a diplomatic solution is the only real
solution, we welcome the willingness that has been
displayed by the various stakeholders to continue on the
path of dialogue. Mexico acknowledges and is grateful
for the efforts of those world leaders who, having
influence that they can bring to bear, have personally
become involved in order to try to find a peaceful
exit to this crisis that can address the various security
concerns in the region.
Any solution will mean putting an end to tensions
in the east of Ukraine. Eight years into the conflict, the
Minsk agreements remain the framework for achieving
a negotiated solution. The Trilateral Contact Group and
the Normandy format offer that possibility.
As we have heard, the conflict in the east of Ukraine
has had a serious impact on the civilian population.
It is estimated that approximately 3 million people
require humanitarian assistance, while approximately
1.5 million are displaced. The population is also facing
restrictions on its freedom of movement, which limits
access to health-care and education services.
Mexico asks that freedom of movement for civilians
be guaranteed on both sides of the contact line. We also
call upon the parties to facilitate humanitarian access
to the area in a secure and unrestricted manner, as
well as to guarantee the free movement of the Special
Monitoring Mission of the Organization for Security
and Cooperation in Europe, which is vital to the
comprehensive implementation of its mandate.
We also would like to highlight the fact that mines,
unexploded ordnance and other explosive artifacts pose
a real threat to and disproportionately affect the civilian
population. We call upon the parties to eliminate
existing mines and not to place any new explosives.
Mexico reiterates its commitment to respect for
the sovereignty, political independence and territorial
integrity of Ukraine within its internationally
recognized borders, in accordance with the Charter of
the United Nations, international law and the relevant
resolutions of the United Nations.
I conclude by stressing that the tensions around the
situation in Ukraine and its potential consequences make
the situation very clear, as the Secretary-General has
stated. Replacing diplomacy with confrontation would
be tantamount to diving over a cliff. The time has come
to endorse efforts channelled in one single direction
and engage in détente, diplomacy and dialogue.
22-26033

17/02/2022

Ukraine

S/PV. 8968

Mr. Zhang Jun (China) (spoke in Chinese): I thank
you, Sir, for presiding over today’s meeting. My thanks
also go to Under-Secretary-General Rosemary DiCarlo;
Ambassador Mikko Kinnunen, Special Representative
of the Organization for Security and Cooperation in
Europe (OSCE) Chairperson-in-Office in Ukraine and
in the Trilateral Contact Group; and Ambassador Halit
Çevik, Chief Monitor of the OSCE Special Monitoring
Mission in Ukraine, for their briefings. I also listened
carefully to the remarks made by Ms. Tetiana Montian.

mechanism will provide a solid foundation for lasting
peace and stability across Europe. We trust that
European countries will take independent and strategic
decisions in line with their own interests.

This year 12 February marked the seventh
anniversary of the new Minsk agreements. The
consideration of the implementation of the new Minsk
agreements is the subject of this Security Council
meeting. The agreements, which are universally
recognized, are a fundamental and binding political
document for the settlement of the Ukraine issue and
were unanimously endorsed by the Security Council
in its resolution 2202 (2015). They therefore deserve
complete and effective implementation by all the
parties concerned.

We support the Secretary-General’s good offices
aimed at reducing tensions and subscribe to his views.

Regrettably, however, to date the majority of
the agreements’ provisions have yet to be truly
implemented. New ceasefire violations have occurred
on the line of contact. China believes that efforts to
resolve the Ukraine issue must go back to the starting
point, that is, the implementation of the new Minsk
agreements. We hope that all parties concerned will take
a constructive posture and resolve through dialogue
and consultation whatever differences may arise in the
implementation of the agreements and draw up a road
map and timetable to implement the agreements to the
letter without delay, so as to pave the way for a political
solution to the Ukraine crisis.
Concerning the tensions on the eastern border of
Ukraine, China believes that in the current context all
parties concerned should let reason prevail, adhere to
the overarching goal of a political solution and refrain
from any act that may provoke tensions or hype the
crisis. The parties should fully consider each other’s
legitimate security concerns and show mutual respect,
and, on that basis, properly resolve their differences
through consultations held on an equal footing.
China supports all efforts conducive to easing
the tensions and notes the Russian Federation’s recent
diplomatic engagement with France, Germany and other
European countries at the leadership level. A negotiated,
balanced, effective and sustainable European security

In his most recent public appeal, Secretary-General
Guterres said:
“There is no alternative to diplomacy. All issues...
can and must be addressed and resolved through
diplomatic frameworks”.

Everything happens for a reason. NATO’s
enlargement is an issue that cannot be overlooked when
dealing with the current tensions related to the current
issue. NATO’s continual expansion in the wake of the
cold war runs counter to the trend of our times, that
is, the maintenance of common security. One country’s
security cannot be obtained at the expense of that of
another one. By the same token, regional security
cannot be guaranteed through the strengthening or
even expansion of a military bloc. That applies as much
to the European region as to other regions of the world.
One country refuses to renounce its cold war
mentality. It says one thing and does another in order to
seek absolute military superiority. It has been clanning
up in the Asia-Pacific region, creating trilateral and
quadrilateral small circles or cliques bent on provoking
confrontation. What it is doing will only sow division
and turmoil in the Asia-Pacific region and seriously
threaten the region’s peace and stability, to the
detriment of the countries in the region and with no
benefit to itself.
China urges the countries concerned to learn
from history, subscribe to the notion of common,
comprehensive, cooperative and sustainable security,
adhere to the approach of enhancing mutual trust and
settling disputes through dialogue and consultation
and do more to contribute to world peace and
regional stability.
Mr. Hoxha (Albania): I thank Under-SecretaryGeneral DiCarlo and Ambassadors Kinnunen and
Çevik for their briefings. We welcome the high-level
participation in this meeting.
Let me first express our gratitude to the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe’s
(OSCE) Special Monitoring Mission to Ukraine, which

22-2603321/30

S/PV.8968

Ukraine

is continuing to work in a volatile and unpredictable
environment and, as we heard from Ambassador
Çevik, under multiple challenges and restrictions. We
must continue to support the women and men of the
Special Monitoring Mission and their tireless efforts
in contributing to reducing tensions and fostering
peace, stability and security and to monitoring and
supporting the implementation of all OSCE principles
and commitments throughout Ukraine.
Albania supports the implementation of the Minsk
agreements. We reject any pressure on Ukraine to
implement the Minsk agreements according to the
interpretation of one side.
Albania expresses its full support for the rights of
minorities in Ukraine and anywhere else. Minorities
should enjoy their rights and actively participate in the
social and political life of the country where they live.
That must be part of the overall commitments to equally
serving the entire population and building an inclusive
and democratic society. Yet, as we have seen more than
once, problems start when minorities are intentionally
instrumentalized to create dysfunctional States.
Asking for executive powers for Russian minorities
in Ukraine means nothing less than taking control of
the decision-making power in Kyiv to dictate foreign,
security and defence policies and undermine the
democratic processes. We should not accept such a
policy of fabricating dysfunctional States either in
Ukraine or anywhere else.
In that very context, we are deeply concerned by
the Russian Parliament’s call for the recognition of the
independence and sovereignty of parts of the territory
of Ukraine. In that regard, we are with a stereotyped
playbook that we saw in Georgia in 2008. If taken, such
decisions would have no legal validity. They are against
international law and the Charter of the United Nations.
They run completely counter to the substance of the
Minsk agreements.
We continue to be alarmed by the very large-scale,
unprovoked and unjustified Russian military build-up in
and around Ukraine and in Belarus. The much-claimed
withdrawal of some of the troops stationed there is not
verified, and credible reports indicate the contrary — a
further reinforcement with active combat troops and
weapons, which, reportedly, now number 150,000.
That continued and reinforced military surrounding
is a sword of Damocles over the Government and the
22/30

17/02/2022

people of Ukraine. It instigates fear in the population.
It frightens domestic and foreign investors and seeks
to bring the economy to a collapse and the country
to its knees. The decision to partially block the Black
Sea, the Sea of Azov and the Kerch Strait under the
pretext of holding regular naval exercises only adds to
that strangulation effort. Furthermore, the most recent
reports of heavy shelling from the occupied territory in
Donbas only reinforce the concerns about the pretext to
start executing a long and carefully designed scenario.
In that context, let me reiterate our firm position
in support of the sovereignty and territorial integrity
of Ukraine within its internationally recognized
borders. We demand the removal of the occupying
troops from the occupied territory. We condemn the
illegal annexation of Crimea and its military support
to the separatist forces in the country. Albania remains
committed to the fundamental principles underpinning
European security, including that each nation has the
right to choose its own security arrangements.
Any renewed attack on the sovereignty and
territorial integrity of Ukraine would be a clear and
further breach of international law and would severely
affect European security. It should be met with outright
and vigorous condemnation. We call on the Security
Council and the international community not to let
Ukraine down and not to accept policies and actions
that threaten the existence of a sovereign nation.
Despite everything indicating an acceleration
of the escalation, we will continue to emphasize the
value and the importance of diplomacy and dialogue in
reaching a peaceful solution to the conflict in eastern
Ukraine and in dealing with Russian concerns. Russia
should take the offer to engage in a renewed European
security dialogue, initiated by Poland as the current
OSCE Chair. We support the call of Secretary Blinken
for talks with Minister Lavrov as soon as possible
and renewed NATO-Russia Council meetings. Every
mechanism for diplomacy and de-escalation must be
used and fully exploited.
Finally, we welcome the calls of the SecretaryGeneral to defuse tensions and de-escalate actions on
the ground. We would support the intensification of
such efforts and the availability of his good offices in
the search for a peaceful solution.
Mr. De Rivière (France) (spoke in French): I
thank the Under-Secretary General for Political and
Peacebuilding Affairs, the Special Representative
22-26033

17/02/2022

Ukraine

of the Organization for Security and Cooperation in
Europe (OSCE) Chairperson-in-Office in Ukraine and
the Chief Monitor of the OSCE Special Monitoring
Mission to Ukraine for their briefings.
The implementation of the Minsk agreements
cannot be seen in isolation from the situation on
Ukraine’s borders, where tensions have reached an
unprecedented level in recent days due to increased
Russian military activity.
Together with its partners, France has made ongoing
efforts over the past few weeks towards de-escalation
and dialogue. Our position is based on two pillars.
First, the accumulation of considerable military
capabilities on the border of a neighbouring State is
threatening and unacceptable behaviour, especially
since Russia has already undermined Ukraine’s
sovereignty and territorial integrity in the past. Any
further aggression would have massive consequences
and a severe cost for Russia. Europeans are united,
and they are ready to act in coordination with all their
partners on that issue.
Secondly, France is convinced that de-escalation
is possible through dialogue and diplomacy. That is
the direction of the efforts led by President Macron,
in coordination with the German Chancellor. We are
ready to engage in that dialogue, not only with regard
to the conflict in Donbas — that is the work that we
are doing in the Normandy format — but also on the
issues of security and stability in Europe, in line with
the fundamental principles set out in the Charter of
the United Nations and the founding documents of the
OSCE, namely, the Helsinki Final Act and the Charter of
Paris for a New Europe. In that regard, we fully support
the process launched by the Polish OSCE chairmanship
for a renewed dialogue on European security.
I would now like to return to the implementation of
the Minsk agreements, which has mobilized France and
Germany since 2015. Efforts in the Normandy format
have continued in recent weeks. The meeting in Paris
on 26 January made it possible to reiterate the support
of all parties for unconditional respect for the ceasefire.
It is necessary to go further, which was unfortunately
not possible at the meeting of 10 February, and to finally
make tangible progress in implementing the Minsk
package of measures in all its dimensions, namely,
security, humanitarian and political.

S/PV. 8968

France is firmly convinced that the Minsk
agreements are the appropriate framework for
continuing the dialogue and that they provide the
necessary space to identify mutually acceptable
concrete solutions, particularly within the Trilateral
Contact Group. We call on the parties to refrain from
any statement or action that would undermine the
implementation of those agreements.
In that regard, we express our concern about the
adoption by the State Duma of the Russian Federation of
a resolution calling for the recognition of the separatist
territories of Ukraine. If enacted, the resolution would
constitute an implicit violation of Ukraine’s sovereignty
and territorial integrity by Russia and a fundamental
challenge to the Minsk agreements.
We also welcome the role of the OSCE Special
Monitoring Mission to Ukraine, which plays a vital
role in the de-escalation efforts. It is the eyes and ears
of the international community. France, like Germany,
will keep its nationals deployed in the field so that the
Mission remains operational during this critical period.
We note the information provided by the OSCE
concerning possible violations of the ceasefire during
the past hours. We should like to see the Special
Monitoring Mission systematically establish the facts
in an impartial manner.
The defence of the principles of the Charter of the
United Nations, in particular respect for the sovereignty
and the territorial integrity of States and the peaceful
settlement of disputes, must be the shared objective of
all the members of the Council. France will continue to
mobilize in that direction, as well as for the construction
of a just and lasting peace and for the restoration of full
Ukrainian sovereignty over certain regions of Donetsk
and Luhansk.
Mr. Biang (Gabon) (spoke in French): I thank
Under-Secretary-General Rosemary Di Carlo for her
briefing. I also thank Organization for Security and
Cooperation in Europe (OSCE) Special Representative
Mikko Kinnunen and the Chief Monitor of the OSCE
Special Monitoring Mission in Ukraine, Yaşar Halit
Çevik, for their briefings. I further welcome the
presence of Ms. Tetiana Montian.
My country continues to follow with great attention
the situation along the borders between Russia and
Ukraine. We hear the fears and alarming calls of those
who fear imminent military action. Above all, we note

22-2603323/30

S/PV.8968

Ukraine

with interest the will expressed by all stakeholders to
keep the political and diplomatic channels open, as well
as the various calls to avoid escalation.
Alongside the rhetoric of alarm and displays of
force, the past 10 days have been particularly marked
by intense activity on the diplomatic front, which has
resulted in European and American initiatives, with
the aim of sowing the seeds of dialogue and avoiding
the irreparable.
Russia’s recent announcement of its withdrawal of
some of its troops from duty at its borders is no doubt an
auspicious sign of a desire for de-escalation, in addition
to Russia’s repeated assurances that it has no bellicose
intentions. This should contribute significantly to
lowering the level of tension and regenerating the thread
of trust essential to the conduct of preventive diplomacy.
Along the same lines, my country noted in the
recent address of the President of the United States of
America an expressed desire to favour dialogue and a
rejection of confrontation, which would have disastrous
consequences for all.
The situation is certainly not simple, but it is
precisely because it is not that it deserves to be
approached with serenity and the greatest sense of
responsibility. It is to that end that we reiterate our
appeal to all stakeholders to demonstrate restraint and
to favour the path of dialogue and negotiation, with a
view to preserving stability and peace in the region.
We encourage all initiatives that are carried out in
favour of de-escalation and the resumption of dialogue,
and call on the parties involved to take advantage of the
existing diplomatic channels to initiate de-escalation.
To this end, the Normandy format and the Minsk
agreements constitute reference frameworks.
The Minsk agreements set the stage for an overall
peaceful outcome to the various claims of the parties,
and it is surely for that reason that they were endorsed
by the United Nations. The implementation of the
agreements is crucial — in particular to achieve a truce
in hostilities, the restoration of Ukraine’s borders and a
better humanitarian response — while paving the way
for a lasting pacification of neighbourhood relations
and, ultimately, the promotion of a resumption of
economic relations.
My delegation invites the parties to respect the
commitments they have undertaken, to capitalize on
this foundation of achievements and to return to the
24/30

17/02/2022

negotiating table. In that regard, the call for dialogue
by the United States Secretary of State Antony Blinken
is a step in the right direction. Of course, my country
remains firmly committed to respect for the sovereignty
and territorial integrity of each State. These cardinal
principles, enshrined in the Charter of the United
Nations and the Constitutive Act of the African Union,
are the cement of our social contract as members of the
international community.
To conclude, I would like, on behalf of my country,
to call on the Council to be mobilized more than ever
to stem the spectre of fear and reject any logic of
confrontation. That is one of the Council’s missions.
The effectiveness of the tools of peace at our disposal
is guaranteed when we show unity and responsibility.
The President (spoke in Russian): I shall now make
a further statement in my capacity as Deputy Minister
for Foreign Affairs of the Russian Federation.
I have listened very carefully to the statements
that have been made by colleagues, and I would like
to dwell on some of the issues that were touched upon.
First, I would like to draw the attention of Council
members to the unnecessary speculation concerning
the appeal of the members of the State Duma to
President Putin with a request to acknowledge Donbas.
It is a proposal to consider this issue, although the
fact that it exists reflects the Russian people’s feelings
about Donbas. The people of Donbas have been subject
to shelling by the Ukrainian army for many years, as
we have heard today. It should not be forgotten that
hundreds of thousands of people in that Ukrainian
region have Russian citizenship. They had no other
option after Ukraine stopped upholding its social
responsibility towards them. But let me underscore
once again that this is an initiative — an appeal from
the members of the State Duma. Therefore, what we
need to do is to concentrate on the implementation of
the Minsk agreements, as many have said today, rather
than speculate about this. It is equally important to
make sure that we avoid discussing these issues in the
Security Council. Otherwise, we will be discussing any
decision of any parliament in the world.
Let me draw attention to another thing that
President Putin said. He said that we need to do our
utmost to make sure that the solution to the problem
in Donbas is found through the implementation of the
Minsk agreements.
22-26033

17/02/2022

Ukraine

Mr. Cleverly talked today about the prehistory of
this the issue, and I do not believe that the picture that he
painted was accurate. It was one-sided and superficial.
Let me just recall the historic period that preceded many
an issue, namely, the illegal and bloody coup d’état in
Kyiv in 2014. The radicals and nationalists took power
at that time. They refused to engage in dialogue with the
Russian-speaking people. They threatened them. The
Russian language was and continues to be discriminated
against. Versions of history are being put forward that
include even the glorification of Nazi criminals. That
is something that happened and continues to happen.
It led to the separation of Crimea and its reunification
with Russia as the result of a referendum. Therefore, we
must have a clear and necessary picture of the current
conflict that reflects the real situation.
With regard to the alleged prepared aggression
of Russia against Ukraine, some people have “very
usefully” laid out the military scenarios. That was
done by the Secretary of State of the United States. He
listed the provocations that could be used as a pretext to
invade Ukraine. Such unsubstantiated insinuations are
regrettable. I would even go so far as to say that they
are dangerous, because they introduce more tension
into an already tense atmosphere. But those are just
words and statements.
We made several statements at various levels that
underscored our proposals and intentions. It is very
unfortunate that those statements at the highest level,
from Moscow, were not heeded by everyone. What are
the facts? The fact is that Russian forces were stationed
on Russian territory and remain on Russian territory.
The day before yesterday, after their exercises, some of
the units started to return to their home base in Russia.
Russian officials say — and I will repeat today — that
my country is conducting drills on our own territory in
a way we find appropriate.
There are other facts, bedsides the rhetoric to
which I would like to draw the Council’s attention.
Ukraine is in violation of the Vienna Document of 2011,
on confidence and security-building measures. There
are 120,000 troops deployed on the border with Donbas
on the Ukrainian side. According to open-source data,
the United States provided weapons to Ukraine last
year worth $650 million. Those are not toys. Those are
weapons that can shoot. Another $200 million worth
of weaponry was provided in January. That does not
include what is being provided by the United Kingdom,
Canada and the Baltic States. All those States send lethal

S/PV. 8968

weaponry to Kyiv: combat drones, Stinger air-defence
systems, Javelin antitank weapon systems, small arms
and ammunition. Poland provides ammunition for
122- and 152-millimetre weapons, which, as we know,
are banned under the Minsk agreements. Why are the
aggressive rhetoric and constant warnings about the
Russian military threat needed? To supply all of those
weapons and to use this situation as a pretext.
It is obvious to us that the final goal of this
campaign is to downplay the talks on long-standing
legally binding security guarantees for our country. We
demanded such guarantees from NATO and the US — in
a frank and transparent manner. We are ready for serious
dialogue — not an imitation of dialogue, but genuine
dialogue. As members know, today the United States
Ambassador to Moscow received our written reaction
to the United States response on security guarantees.
We hope that it will receive careful consideration in
Washington, D.C., as it is a very detailed document.
I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.
The representative of the United States of America
has asked for the floor to make a further statement.
Mrs. Thomas-Greenfield (United States of
America): I had hoped that we would have heard
from our Russian colleagues a response to Secretary
Blinken’s call for Russia to announce today, without
equivocation, that it does not plan to invade Ukraine.
Instead, it was a continuation of the disinformation and
rhetoric we have heard before and continue to hear.
The Secretary of State laid out the facts. He laid
out the facts that we see on the ground. There are facts
that we all see very clearly on the ground. What we all
see is escalation, including the decision by the Russian
Duma to call for recognition of a separatist movement,
in total disdain for the Minsk agreements. As stated, I
hope that this will not go any further.
Let me just say clearly to all members who called
for diplomacy: we will continue to intensify. We will
continue to escalate our diplomatic efforts. We call for
Russia to cease confrontation and accept our invitation
to dialogue. We will look forward to engaging at
the negotiating table to discuss the response that the
Russians sent to us this morning.
I will end by saying what Secretary Blinken said
today. He did not come here to promote war. He came
here to prevent war and find a way to a peaceful solution.

22-2603325/30

S/PV.8968

Ukraine

The President (spoke in Russian): I now give the
floor to the representative of Ukraine.
Mr. Kyslytsya (Ukraine): On this day seven years
ago, the Ukrainian city of Debaltseve sustained a
full-fledged offensive by Russian regular troops and
their proxies. Heavy artillery and rocket shelling did
not spare the Ukrainian military or civilians. All that
happened despite the disengagement line agreed by
Ukraine and Russia under the Minsk memorandum of
19 September 2014 — the second document in the set
of Minsk agreements, which clearly defined Debaltseve
as a Government-controlled area. That happened
despite the fact that the Minsk package of measures had
been signed a week earlier and that its first provision
contained a commitment to a comprehensive ceasefire.
That is just one example of how Russia violated the
agreements almost immediately after signing them.
Thus far, disregard for honouring commitments
remains a hallmark of Russia’s strategy. Only this
morning, Ukrainian Stanytsia Luhanska was shelled
with heavy weaponry from the occupied territory
of Donbas. Civilian infrastructure was damaged,
including a day-care centre.
Upon the instructions of my Government, I must
bring to the attention of the Security Council another
outrageous situation that undermines the Minsk
agreements and the entire process of a peaceful
settlement. Two days ago, the Russian Duma appealed
to the Russian President to recognize the occupied
parts of the Donetsk and Luhansk regions of Ukraine
as so-called Donetsk and Luhansk People’s Republics.
That decision runs counter to the commitments
undertaken by Russia as a signatory to the Minsk
agreements. Therefore, in my letter dated 16 February
2022, I requested the Security Council to consider the
situation today.
Our standpoint remains unchanged. Russia’s
recognition of the so-called Donetsk and Luhansk
People’s Republics will be tantamount to its deliberate
withdrawal from the Minsk agreements. Such a move
will deal a serious blow to the political diplomatic
settlement that Ukraine and its partners have been
actively engaged in promoting. Recognition of the socalled republics will have no legal implications. Russia
will not succeed in masking the Russian-occupation
administration of the temporarily occupied territories
of Luhansk and Donetsk regions as independent
entities, or in disguising its own involvement as a party
26/30

17/02/2022

to the armed conflict in Donbas. Instead, if the Russian
President endorses the ruling of the State Duma, it will
have much broader destructive consequences for the
international rules-based order and the global security
architecture. Therefore, Russia has the choice to
embarking upon the path of de-escalation and diplomatic
dialogue, or experiencing a decisive, consolidated
response from the international community.
It is a matter of practical concern that the same
pattern has been implemented before. The same
language was used in 2008, despite the fact that the
Russian Deputy Minister for Foreign Affairs just
referred to it as just an appeal from the Duma.
In 2008, the appeal by the State Duma of the
Russian Federation to then Russian President Medvedev
concerning the need to recognize the Republic of South
Ossetia and the Republic of Abkhazia preceded the
presidential decree on such recognition, adopted on
26 August 2008. Let us not call it a “mere appeal” by
the Duma.
I thank Secretary of State Blinken for his powerful
statement of 16 February on the issue of the Duma’s
decision. I thank Foreign Minister Le Drian of France
for his clear statement. I thank Minister Cleverly of
the United Kingdom for his statement; and I thank
the representatives of Norway, Ireland, Albania and
the many other partners and responsible members of
the international community for their statements on
the issue. I would like to ask the Security Council
secretariat to include my letter, dated 16 February
2022, as part of the proceedings.
It is important as well, as the soft and feeble
reaction of the United Nations in 2008 resulted in the
lasting occupation of parts of Georgian territory. I will
not quote what former Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon
and the former President of the General Assembly said
at that time. We hope that the United Nations leadership
today has learned its lesson from the occupation of
Abkhazia and South Ossetia and that we all — Member
States and the Secretariat — will be more vocal in
defending the Charter of the United Nations. I have sent
my letter on the issue to the Secretary-General, and I
am waiting for a meaningful reply on his part.
We call on Russia to take a constructive stance
towards achieving progress within the framework of
the existing negotiation formats. Otherwise, Russia
will bear full responsibility for undermining the Minsk
agreements and the process of peaceful settlement
22-26033

17/02/2022

Ukraine

S/PV. 8968

of the armed conflict. The Minsk agreements are
the compilation of three documents, and we should
approach their implementation from that standpoint,
starting with the Minsk protocol of 5 September
2014. Let me recall that, according to paragraph 4
of the document, Ukraine and Russia agreed on the
establishment of security zones in the border areas of
Ukraine and Russia, with the permanent monitoring
and verification of the Organization for Security and
Cooperation in Europe (OSCE) on the border. Ukraine
expects Russia to deliver on that agreed commitment,
which could greatly contribute to resolution efforts.

We reiterate the need to further explore all political
means to ensure de-escalation. Reinvigorating the
Normandy format and the Trilateral Contact Group is
one of the necessary steps. Both include Russia and
Ukraine as parties to the conflict and constitute the
proper framework for the direct dialogue that Russia
continues to avoid, while hiding behind its puppet
occupation administrations. As long as Russia sets
preconditions for direct dialogue between Ukraine and
Moscow’s proxies, which are effectively a non-starter,
progress on the implementation of the Minsk agreements
will remain elusive.

It is more urgent than ever, as about 150,000 Russian
troops have been deployed in the vicinity of Ukraine’s
borders. We note the statements by Russian officials
on their withdrawal, although verification and credible
proof are required. Unusual military activities on
Ukraine’s borders that Russia has refused to explain, in
violation of the Vienna Document 2011 on Confidenceand Security-Building Measures, are already having a
detrimental economic and social impact on Ukraine,
regardless of Russia’s ultimate plans.

It was therefore important that political advisers met
in Paris and Berlin, despite the fact that many divergences
on the implementation the Minsk agreements persist.
We are ready to resume the Normandy Four talks in
all formats, including at the leadership level. We regret
that Russia remains unwilling to hold a Normandy
Four summit.

The military build-up on the ground has been
coupled with a blockade by Russia of large parts of
the Black Sea under the pretext of naval exercises.
That has made navigation and international shipping
extremely complicated, causing serious challenges for
the major Ukrainian ports. All those actions conform
to the concept of the hybrid war being waged against
Ukraine, with disinformation and cyberattacks as
the other important components. For instance, most
recently, Russia played another propaganda ace-up-itssleeve, blaming Ukraine for genocide in the occupied
territories. Those are fake and irresponsible allegations
by Russia, aimed at hiding its responsibility for the
occupation of Ukrainian territories and subsequent
human rights violations there.
Ukraine remains committed to the peaceful
resolution of the Russian-Ukrainian conflict by
political-diplomatic means. Ukraine wants peace,
security and stability, not only for itself, but also for
all of Europe. At the same time, I reiterate that, in the
event that Russia opts for escalation, Ukraine will
defend itself. We welcome all diplomatic and other
efforts taken at different levels to prevent the worstcase scenario. We are grateful for the support for
and solidarity with Ukraine that have been explicitly
demonstrated worldwide.

Since our leaders previously met in Paris in
December 2019, the decisions then adopted remain
unimplemented by Russia despite the fact that Ukraine
has regularly proposed concrete initiatives for a
ceasefire, humanitarian demining, the withdrawal of
troops and hardware, the mutual release of detained
persons, opening new entry-exit points, ensuring
unimpeded access for the OSCE Special Monitoring
Mission to Ukraine (SMM) throughout the conflictaffected area and the implementation of the political
provisions of the Minsk agreements.
On 22 December 2021, we managed to find a
common understanding on resuming the ceasefire
regime, initially launched in July 2020. We offered farreaching compromises to strike a deal, but ceasefire
violations by the Russian occupation forces have not
yet ended.
Restrictions on the SMM’s freedom of movement
continue to be a major impediment for the full
implementation of the SMM mandate. At the most
recent meeting of the Trilateral Contact Group on
February 9, Chief Monitor Çevik provided statistics
confirming that 90 per cent of restrictions imposed on
the freedom of movement of SMM patrols occur in the
temporarily occupied territories of Donbas.
We call on Russia to ensure unfettered access for the
SMM to the entire territory under its effective control,
in particular in the border areas. That is particularly
important against the backdrop of Russia’s decision not

22-2603327/30

S/PV.8968

Ukraine

to extend the mandate of the OSCE Observer Mission
on the border at the Russian checkpoints at Gukovo and
Donetsk, which were shut down in September 2021.
In that regard, we support the initiative of France and
Germany to establish a coordination and verification
mechanism for the OSCE SMM.
On the political track, discussions on issues, such
as the implementation of the so-called Steinmeier
formula, the special status of local self-government
in certain areas of the Donetsk and Luhansk regions,
the amnesty law and the modalities of local elections
continue to be blocked by the Russian side. The Russian
representatives simply refuse to continue discussions
on the working proposals submitted by the Ukrainian
delegation in June 2020, relating to the special status
of local self-government in certain areas in the Donetsk
and Luhansk regions of Ukraine and other issues on the
agenda of the political working group.
Ukraine has taken steps on the implementation of
agreed provisions relating to the political process. In
particular, we have submitted initial proposals for the
consideration of the Trilateral Contact Group on the law
on the special status of local self-government in certain
areas of the Donetsk and Luhansk regions of Ukraine.
According to the standards of the Office for
Democratic Institutions and Human Rights, the
resumption of control of the border should be a
prerequisite for holding local elections in Donbas.
Otherwise, it would be impossible to create the
necessary security environment for holding democratic
elections in line with OSCE standards.
It remains up to Russia to take decisions that would
lead to the full implementation of the commitments
it has undertaken under the Minsk agreements,
which were signed by President Putin’s Ambassador
to Ukraine, Mr. Mikhail Zurabov, in blue ink on
5 September 2014 — who also signing agreements on
19 September 2014 and 12 February 2015.
Drawing lessons from the past, we urge Russia to
abandon its long-standing strategy on Ukraine based
on threats and the use of force against the territorial
integrity of the country, and instead re-engage with the
fundamental principles of peaceful relations enshrined
in the Charter of the United Nations.
28/30

17/02/2022

(spoke in Russian)
Mass media recently disseminated a text that is
attributed to Mr. Vershinin’s colleague Ms. Maria
Zakharova. Please allow me to quote from it:
“From the viewpoint of international law, the
geopolitical transformations of 1991 did not result
in the disappearance of the Soviet Union as a subject
of international law. The State that was called the
Union of Soviet Socialist Republics [USSR] did not
come to an end, but rather continued its existence
under international law.”
Therefore, I wonder how Mr. Vershinin feels sitting
in the Security Council as the representative of the
USSR? That would seem to be what is implied. When
I hear such statements and after listening to comrade
Montian, I want to repeat the same words I said at
the exact same meeting on the implementation Minsk
agreements on 18 February 2020 (see S/PV.8726).
Those words were written by a famous Russian poet
Yevgeny Yevtushenko in 1962:
“Let some repeat over and over again:
‘Compose yourself!’
I shall never find rest.
As long as Stalin’s heirs exist on earth,
It will seem to me
That Stalin is still in the mausoleum.”
I would remind Mr. Vershinin that we are in the
twenty-first century. Let us return to the Charter of
the United Nations and go about implementing its
provisions. Let us change Article 23 and implement
Articles 22, 24 and 108.
The President (spoke in Russian): I now give the
floor to the representative of Germany.
Ms. Leendertse (Germany): Germany is grateful
for the opportunity to speak at today’s meeting. We
would like to thank the Under-Secretary-General
for Political and Peacebuilding Affairs, the Special
Representative of the Organization for Security and
Cooperation in Europe (OSCE) Chairperson-in-Office
in Ukraine and in the Trilateral Contact Group and the
Head of the OSCE Special Monitoring Mission (SMM)
in Ukraine.
Together with France, Germany remains committed
to achieving progress in the Normandy format, which
plays a central role in advancing the implementation
of the Minsk agreements. Many obstacles remain.
22-26033

17/02/2022

Ukraine

S/PV. 8968

However, the reaffirmed ceasefire of July 2020 proved
that progress can be made if political will exists.
With regard to recent reports on increased shelling
in eastern Ukraine, we call for the agreement to
be observed. Attacks on civilian infrastructure are
utterly unacceptable.

coordination with our French partners. We have taken
note of Russia’s recent announcement to downsize
its troop presence along the Ukrainian border, but
we call on Russia to follow up on that announcement
immediately and withdraw its troops from Ukraine’s
border in a substantial and verifiable manner.

Talks were held on 26 January in Paris and on
10 February in Berlin. All participants committed
themselves to the full implementation of the Minsk
agreements and to continuing talks in the Normandy
Four and the Trilateral Contact Group formats.

Russia should be aware that any military aggression
against Ukraine would entail severe political, economic
and geostrategic consequences. Moreover, we urge
Russia to provide full transparency regarding its
military activities. To that end, Russia should make full
use of the information and consultation mechanisms
provided for by the Vienna Document within the OSCE
framework. Together with its partners and allies,
Germany remains open to discussing security concerns
of mutual interest with Russia.

In that respect, we express our strong concern
about the resolution of the Russian State Duma calling
on the President of the Russian Federation to recognize
the self-declared People’s Republics of Luhansk and
Donetsk as independent States. That would run counter
to the Minsk agreements and constitute a further breach
of Ukraine’s sovereignty and territorial integrity.
In the current tense situation, it is very important
to establish facts and identify disinformation. We
commend the OSCE Special Monitoring Mission’s
indispensable role in establishing facts on the security
situation. We must ensure that it can carry out its full
mandate without interruption throughout Ukraine. That
is why Germany, as well as France and other partners,
has left its seconded staff on the ground. That is also
why we are deeply concerned about the restrictions on
SMM monitors’ freedom of movement and destruction
of their equipment.
These days, we cannot evaluate the state of the
Minsk agreements without factoring in military
developments in the region. In recent months, an
unprecedented military build-up of Russian forces
has taken place on the Russian and Belarusian side of
Ukraine’s border. It is near impossible not to perceive
that as a threat or as preparation for an attack. We
deplore that Russia has thus far failed to provide any
satisfactory explanation for that course of action. The
Charter of the United Nations is crystal-clear in that
respect, prohibiting not only the use of force but also
the mere threat of using force.
Germany fully supports the sovereignty, territorial
integrity, unity and independence of Ukraine within
its internationally recognized borders and in line with
the principles enshrined in the Charter of the United
Nations, the Helsinki Final Act, the Paris Charter and
all OSCE commitments. In order to defuse tensions,
we have stepped up our diplomatic efforts in close

If a sovereign State Member of this Organization
adopts an aggressive posture towards another sovereign
State Member of the Organization, that is not something
the United Nations and its Member States should be
casual about. It is good for United Nations bodies to
remain abreast of the situation around Ukraine, on
which we will hold a debate in the General Assembly on
23 February. Germany will remain strongly committed
to finding a diplomatic solution, and we hope others
will too.
The President (spoke in Russian): I shall now
make a further statement in my capacity as the Deputy
Minister for Foreign Affairs of the Russian Federation.
We heard here today words such as “war” and
“aggression”. But the most interesting thing was that
no one ever said those words on behalf of Russia here at
the United Nations — or will say those words. I regret
that the very powerful statements made by President
Putin in recent days with regard to the situation in
eastern Ukraine were not heard. I would like our
partners to at least hear what was said at the press
conferences in Moscow, where we received visits from
high-level officials such as the President of France and
the Chancellor of Germany. Negotiations were held and
detailed press conferences took place where our guests
and the President of the Russian Federation spoke.
We are holding a meeting today on the Minsk package
of measures. I am very satisfied with the fact that most
of the statements indicated that the Minks agreements
are a very clear — and the sole — international legal
framework to settle the intra-Ukrainian conflict.

22-2603329/30

S/PV.8968

Ukraine

By the way, I have a great deal of respect for our
interpreters and how they manage to keep up to speed
with what is said — and to do it correctly.
I have two requests.
First, Zelenskyy called the Minsk agreements
“totally without merit”. I would like to hear how it was
interpreted to English and French, I will not be able to
hear it in other languages. I am assuming the meaning
was conveyed.
Secondly, I listened very carefully to the statement
just made by Mr. Kyslytsya, including his remarks
on the legality of Russia’s membership of the United
Nations and the Security Council. Unfortunately, I
must note that it is not the first time that representatives
of other countries, including Ukraine, have sought to
self-aggrandize by using that argument. The calculus
here is very clear. It is intended for the benefit of those
who are not very well-versed in these issues and are
not familiar with international law. But professionals
know, and people in general know. If we are going to
discuss whether or not Russia went through the process
for becoming a Member of the United Nations, perhaps
we could then raise the issue of whether Ukraine did
so. Or are we still dealing with the Ukrainian Soviet
Republic? Russia is the State continuing the legal
personality of the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics.
Essentially, only the name of the State was changed,
while Ukraine is, in fact, the successor State — a new
State entity.
With regard to quoting poems, it is a very good thing
when a political message comes in poetic form. I myself
like poems — about beauty, for example — including
by Zabolotskiy, a Soviet poet. Remember those verses?

30/30

17/02/2022

And if it is so, then what is the beauty
And why do people worship it?
Is it a completely empty vessel
Or the fire flickering in it?
I myself would compare beauty with wisdom.
We need to have wisdom. We have to be sure to come
up with wise decisions, including when it comes to a
settlement in eastern Ukraine on the basis of the Minsk
package of measures.
I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.
There are no more names inscribed on the list
of speakers.
I would like to ask whether the briefers have any
additional comments.
I now again give the floor to Ms. Montian.
Ms. Montian (spoke in Russian): Many people
have written to me since my statement, asking me to
please tell the Security Council that no one is in fear of
an imminent Russian invasion, except for those people
who have been inflicting violence on Ukraine into
an eighth year now. They will leave Ukraine clinging
to American aircraft. The rest of them will take it in
stride — because that was precisely the reason behind
the actions of the collective West in the Maidan and
their coup d’état. That was the game: to throw in troops
of the current Kyiv regime into Donetsk and Luhansk,
get a response and then play a game with sanctions. But
we will see who has the most to lose from sanctions.
The meeting rose at 1.05 p.m.

22-26033
