S/2022/688

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
13 September 2022
Original: English

Letter dated 13 September 2022 from the Permanent Representative
of Armenia to the United Nations addressed to the President of the
Security Council
Upon instructions from my Government, I have the honour to transmit herewith
the letter from Ararat Mirzoyan, Minister for Foreign Affairs of the Republic of
Armenia, with a request to convene an emergency meeting of the Security Council,
on the basis of Article 35, paragraph 1, of the Charter of the United Nations, in relation
to the large-scale aggression of Azerbaijan against the Republic of Armenia launched
on 13 September 2022, which poses an imminent threat to international peace and
security (see annex).
I should be grateful if the present letter and its annex were brought to the
attention of the members of the Security Council and issued as a document of the
Council.
(Signed) Mher Margaryan
Ambassador
Permanent Representative

22-21775 (E)

150922

*2221775*

S/2022/688

Annex to the letter dated 13 September 2022 from the Permanent
Representative of Armenia to the United Nations addressed to the
President of the Security Council
I am writing to bring to the attention of the Security Council the situation on the
border between Armenia and Azerbaijan, which poses an imminent threat to
international peace and security.
At midnight on 13 September, Azerbaijan launched an open large -scale
aggression against the Republic of Armenia, using heavy artillery and unmanned
aircraft and targeting the Armenian military positions and civilian infrastructures in
the direction of Goris, Kapan, Vardenis, Sotk, Ardanish and Ishkhanasar in the
Gegharkunik, Vayots Dzor and Syunik regions of Armenia, respectively. As a result
of the Azerbaijani military attacks, there are numerous causalities.
Prior to that, from 2 September onwards, the Ministry of Defence of Azerbaijan,
on a daily basis, was disseminating false information claiming that “Azerbaijan army
positions were periodically subjected to fire by the use of various calibre weapons
from the Armenian armed forces positions”. The Ministry of Defence of Armenia
officially rejected all these allegations by Azerbaijan.
This was a distinct pattern of actions of Azerbaijan in preparation for launching
armed aggression. Considering that a similar series of actions has been played out
prior to the war of aggression against Armenia and Nagorno -Karabakh in 2020 and
before each and every escalation since then, including the latest one in early August,
it is becoming obvious that Azerbaijan was preparing grounds for new escalation and
aggression.
Armenia has been continuously alerting the international commu nity that
Azerbaijan's sustained aggressive actions and military posturing vis -à-vis NagornoKarabakh and Armenia will cause a new escalation of the conflict. While Armenia
has publicly declared its willingness to launch negotiations towards a peace
agreement between Armenia and Azerbaijan, the conflict-related narratives of
Azerbaijan were aimed at justifying further aggressive actions in the region.
The actions of Azerbaijan are in blatant violation of the Charter of the United
Nations, and specifically its Articles 2 and 33, which provide that all Members shall
refrain in their international relations from the threat or use of force against the
territorial integrity or political independence of any state, or in any other manner
inconsistent with the purposes of the United Nations, and that the parties to any
dispute should seek solutions exclusively by peaceful means.
The unilateral actions of Azerbaijan constitute a real threat to international
peace and security and deserve a strong and timely reaction from the international
community. With the present letter, I kindly request an emergency meeting of the
Security Council, on the basis of Article 35, paragraph 1, of the Charter. I also kindly
request the participation of the representative of Armenia in these deliberations,
pursuant to rule 37 of the provisional rules of procedure of the Security Council.
We also expect that the Security Council will condemn the aggressive actions
of Azerbaijan in the strongest terms and will directly call upon Azerbaija n to
unconditionally cease hostilities and respect the trilateral statement of 9 November
2020.
(Signed) Ararat Mirzoyan

2/2

22-21775
