UN/TED NA TIONS

SiCURITY
OFFICIAL

COUNCIL

RECORDS
‘.J)q~~,~&s,‘~

THIRTY-FIRST

YEAR

J\)L 16 13%

NEW YORK

CONTENTS
Page

Provisional

agenda (S/Agenda/l933)

. .. ... .. .. ... .. ... .. ... . ... ... .. .. ...

1

Adoption of the agenda . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

1

The question of the exercise by the Palestinian people of its inalienable rights:
Report of the Committee established under General Assembly resolution
3376(XXX)(S/12090)..............................................

1

S/PV. 1933

NOTE

Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined with figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United
Nations document.
Documents of the Security Council (symbol S/ . . .) are normally published in
quarterly Supplements of the Officiul Records of the Security Council. The date
of the document indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which information about it is given.
The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a
system adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Resolutions and
Decisions of the Security Council. The new system, which has been applied
retroactively to resolutions adopted before 1 January 1965, became fully operative
on that date.

1933rd MEETING
Held in New York, on Thursday, 24 June 1976, at 10.30 aim.
President:

Mr. Rashleigh

E. JACKSON

(Guyana).

Present:
The representatives
of the following
States: Benin, China, France, Guyana, Italy, Japan,
Libyan Arab Republic, Pakistan, Panama, Romania,
Sweden, Union of Soviet Socialist Kepublics;United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United
Republic of Tanzania, United States of America.
Provisional
1. Adoption
2.

agenda (S/Agenda/l933)

of the agenda

The question of the exercise by *the Palestinian
people of its inalienable rights:
Report of the Committee established under General Assembly resolution 3376 (XXX) (S/12090)
The meeting

was called

Adoption
The. agenda

to order

at 11.10 a.m.

of the agenda

was adopted.

The question of the exercise by the Palestinian people
of its inalienable rights:
Report of the Committee established under General
Assembly resolution 3376 (XXX) (S/12090)’
1. The PRESIDENT:
In accordance with the decisions taken at the 1924th and 1928th meetings, I shall
now invite the Chairman and the other members of the
Committee on the Exercise of the Inalienable Rights
of the Palestinian People, the representative
of the
Palestine Liberation
Organization
and the representatives of Cuba, Egypt;. the German Democratic
Republic, Hungary, India, Jdrdan, Saudi Arabia, the
Syrian Arab Repubiic, Turkey, the United Arab Emirates and Yugoslavia to participate in the discussion
without the right to vote.
At the invitation
qf the Presideat,
the delegation
of
the Committee
on the Exercise
of the Irrtrlienrrhle
Rights qfthe Palestimkrt
People utrtl Mr. Terzi. (Palcstirie Liberation
Orga~iization)
took places at the Corrrtcil table:
M. Alarccirt
(C~rhcr), Mr. Ahdel
Meguid
(Egypt),
Mr. Florill
(Germarr
Democratic
Republic).
Mr. Hollai
(Hrmgary),
Mr. Jaipal (Irulia).
Mr. Sltrrrqf
(Jordan).
Mr. Baroodv
(Satrdi
Arabia),
Mr. Allqf
(Syriart
Arab
Reprrhlk).
Mr.
Tiirkmeu
(Tarkey),
Mr. Hamaidart
(Umkl
Arab Emirates)
cmd Mr. Petri&

(Yugoslavia)
took the places
side of the Cormcil chamber.

reserved

for

them

at the

2. The PRESIDENT:
I should like to inform the
members of the Council that I have received letters
from the representatives
of Afghanistan,
Bahrain,
Democratic Yemen and the Lao People’s Democratic
Republic, containing requests to be invited to participate without the right to vote in the Council’s current
discussion, in accordance with the provisions of Article 31 of the Charter and rule 37 of the provisional
rules of procedure. In accordance with the usual practice, I therefore propose, with the consent of the
Council, to invite those representatives
to participate in the discussion without the right to vote.
3. In view of the limited number of seats available
at the Council table, I invite those representatives to
take the places’ reserved for them at the side of t.he
Council chamber on the understanding
that they
will be invited to take a place at the Council table
when it is their turn to speak.
At the iavitcrtiott of the President.
Mr. Siddiq (A.[qhanisiart).
Mr. Al-Saff2r
(Bahrairl).
Mr. Ashtal (Democratic
YUIKJJI) UJ& Mr. Borrlom (Liro People’s
D~JJWcratic Reprrblic)
took the seats reserWtl.for
them at the
side qf the Corrncil chamber.

4. The PRESIDENT:
The first speaker is the representative of Jordan. Accordingly.
I now invite him
to take a place at the Council table and to make his
statement.
S. Mr. SHARAF
(Jordan): Mr. President, it is a
source of deep satisfaction to my delegation that the
present discussion of the Palestinian question is held
under your leadership. Your country, Guyana, has
emerged as an activC and dedicated participant in the
struggle of the large majority of nations for a new
world political and economic order based on more
equity and justice. It has struggled internally and on
the international level for the cause of freedom, independence and equality.
Mr. President,
you have
personally reflected the spirit and qualities of your
country. Your eventful presidency has shown how
the President, with a combination of vigour, tact’and
firmness, can steer the work of the Council in a positive and purposeful direction.
6. On the many occasions during the last two decades on which the Security Council has discussed

Palestinian rights, it has been a partial discussion
dealing with Palestinian rights by implication
or as a
subsidiary topic. This time it is not so. The Council
‘is, for -the first time in many years, discussing the
Palestine question. It is not discussing the 1967 war
and the resulting occupation. It is not discussing the
violations of the human rights of the people under
occupation. It is discussing the root of the conflict in
the Middle East, focusing on the starting point and on
the essence of the problem.

ancestral, homeland only to find itself expelled overnight from that homeland,
massively and through
violence, by a violent and superior force of invaders?
How can anyone fail to understand and support the
legitimate claim of that people for repatriation to its
homeland, for the reacquisition
of its property and
.for national restoration in its own homeland? This is
elementary justice. It is also the logic of an ultimately
inevitable corrective process of history.
12. Yet the successful achievement
of justice for
the Palestinian people has been a most elusive goal
during the last three decades. Year after year passed
as hundreds of thousands of Palestinians continued
to subsist in exile outside their homeland, struggling
to survive and to continue to maintain faith and hppe,
while Israel stood arrogantly and ‘defiantly on the
Palestinian
land, suppressing under its occupation
many other Palestinians, deaf to their rights and their
claims, poised for another violent thrust against its
neighbours.

7. The task of the Council is at once very simple and
very complex. That is so because this is the nature of
the Palestine question; it is at .once very simple and
very complex. It is simple because Palestinian rights
are clear and distinct and Palestinian claims just and
achievable.
It is complex because of the circumstances surrounding those rights and the layers of
suppression and misunderstanding
imposed on them
over the years.
8. The task of the Security Council is lekewise
simple because this task is defined and the direction
is clear. The Council is considering the report of the
Committee on the Exercise of the Inalienable Rights
of the Palestinian People, which contains simple and
concrete proposals. The mandate of the Committee,
as defined in General Assembly resolution 3376 (XXX)
is:

13. The case is simple but the road to a just conclusion has been agonizing and tortuous. So too is the
present task of the Council likely to be. The Council
has the facts before it. ,It has the report of the Corn-.
mittee in its hands. The moral considerations
and
political imperatives are clear. The framework of a
just settlement for the Palestinian question and the
Middle East problem does not raise any intellectual
difficulty.. But the Council has to come to grips with
the practical requirements of a successful implementation of such a settlement,
of which the primary
requirement
is collective will and readinesss to act
rather than escape of postpone.

“to consider and recommend to the General Assembly a programme of implementation,
designed to
enable the Palestinian people to exercise the rights
recognized in paragraphs 1 and 2 of Assembly resolution 3236 (XXIX).”

14. My country’s relationship
with the Palestinian
question has always been at the centre of the events
in the Middle East and has been widely regarded as
crucial to future developments.
We in Jordan have
always felt a special relationship with the people of
Palestine and believed in their just cause. The imperatives of history and of geography have dictated this
relationship and attitude. While the Arab peoples of
the Middle East are as ancient as their civilization,
their modem States are the products of the developments which took place during the earlier part of this
century. Like their closer neighbours, the Jordanian
people acquired their modem State in the early 1920s.
This year Jordan celebrated the fifty-fifth anniversary
.of the establishment of the Jordanian State. While.the
Arab peoples of Jordan, Syria, Iraq, Lebanon, and the
Arabian Peninsula were acquiring their independence
and freedom, the Palestinian
people were facing a
reversed historical process in the 192Os, the 1930s and
the 1940s. Colonialism
was receding in the Arab
world, particularly
in the east, but in Palestine the
settled and prosperous Arab people were confronted
by a. peculiar and unique situation, where invading
forces were moving decisively not only to colonize
them but to expel them violently from their homeland.
As the Palestinian people were struggling against this

9. Resolution 3236 (XXIX) defined these inalienable
rights of the Palestinian people as: first, self-determination; secondly, national independence
and sovereignty; and thirdly, the right to return to the homes
and property from which the Palestinians had been
displaced and uprooted. The Committee carried out its
mandate and drew up its plan for the implementation
of these rights in the light of the realities in the area
and its view of the requirements
of natural justice.
The plan is now before the Council.
10. Yet the task of the Security Council is hard and
complex because of the objective circumstances in
the region and the world. For the Palestinian people
are prevented from exercising their inalienable rights
by a stubborn force which stands violently against
these rights and has strong and extended roots in some
of the most poweful nations of the world, through
which it derives strength and continuous capability
for intransigence.
11. No reasonable individual
or nation can argue
against Palestinian rights or justify the gross injustice
which was inflicted upon the people. How can anyone
deny the justice of the claim for redress by a people
that had lived peacefully and prosperously
in its
2

and for return, self-determination
and freedom. We
have not stopped nor will we stop our various forms
of assistance to those under occupation who need
every kind of support to maintain their national existence in their homeland under the most difficultcircumstances.

overwhelming
invading force, the Jordanian people
and the rest of the Arabs stood by them in feeling and
emotion and in every other way which expressed
solidarity. But colonialism in the ‘1930s and 1940s had
not yet been reduced to its present state of relative
impotence, and its resources were ample and superior.
So the Zionist programme of colonizing Palestine and
displacing its people, backed as that programme was
by the enormous resources at the Zionists* disposal,
succeeded, despite the resistance of the Palestinian
people and the support of an agonized and not yet free
Arab world. The massive Palestinian exodus took
place in 1947 and 1948 and the first phase of the Zionist
programme was achieved.
_

17. One important point must be made in this context. The eagerness of the Arabs to stress their basic
unity and their identification
and partnership with the
Palestinian people does not mean that the Palestinian
rights in the land of Palestine no longer exist; nor does
it change the nature or the geographical definition of
those rights. It is necessary to emphasize this in view
of the escalating attempt by Israel to argue that the
‘solution of the Palestinian question must take place
in the Arab world beyond the boundaries of Palestine. Israel cannot escape its responsibility
for displacing so. many Palestinians and occupying Palestinian territory by trying to force the Palestinians to
seek an alternative
homeland.
Any just settlement
which aims at enabling the Palestinian people to exercise its right to self-determination
must proceed on the
basis of this fact.

15. When the climax of the 1948 tragedy came, the
Kingdom of Jordan joined the. Arab countries that
hastened to assist the Palestinian people in defending
itself against the attempt to uproot it from its land by
force. The Arab efforts were not successful, however,
in rescuing the Palestinians and preventing their displacement.
As the armistice was imposed by the
United Nations, Jordan continued to feel a national
duty to strive to protect the remainder of Palestine in
the West Bank and Jerusalem from occupation and
from the Israeli attempts to empty it of its inhabitants.
The fear of danger and the unity of hopes and brotherhood culminated in a consensus between the Jordanian leadership and the leaders in the West Bank on
establishing a political and constitutional
unity, which
was ‘achieved in 1950 by constitutional
means and
through general elections. The unity was -established
without prejudice to the final goals of the Palestinian
people and was based on Jordan’s commitment
to
self-determination
for the Palestinian
people when
circumstances permitted or whenever possible. The
Hashemite Kingdom of Jordan remained committed
to that principle for over a quarter of a century. While
tying its national life and policies to the Palestinian
hopes and interests, it remained keenly aware of the
fact that the Palestinian identity- was an established
historic reality that should not be obscured or denied.

18; Is it not remarkable that Israel has managed for
so long-ever
since the adoption on 29 November
1947 of the partition resolution [re.rolutic>n 181 (I/)]
by the General Assembly-to
avoid defining its own
borders? Between 29 November
1947 and the end of
1948, Israel occupied a substantial area beyond the
limits of the area defined in the resolution. Now, since
June 1967, Israel occupies the,whole of the West Bank.
and Gaza. Thus, all of Palestine is under Irael’sclefucto
jurisdiction.
19. The Palestinian right of self-determination
must
find its expression in Palestine in spite of Israel’s
unjust and indefensible
opposition.
The Security
Council must help in this regard. It must support the
principle, define its concrete requirements and mobilize the efforts of the United Nations to achieve that
goal.

16. When Israel unleashed its premeditated
attack
on its Arab neighbours in June 1967, Jordan, together
with Syria and Egypt, had to absorb the major burden
of the physical, human, emotional and political shock
of that agression and its aftermath. We struggled for
many years to contain the expansion, rebuild our
societies and economies and obtain an Israeli withdrawal. Jordan struggled with vigour and resilience to
achieve these goals while maintaining
its basic commitment to Palestinian rights. It was in that spirit and
in solidarity with the rest of the Arab world that, as
circumstances
evolved, Jordan concurred with the
unanimous decision of -the Arab Summit Conference
of Rabat in October 1974 and recognized the Palestine
Liberation
Organization
as the legitimate
representative of the Palestinian people, carrying the national
and international
responsibilities
entailed
in that
capacity. We continue to support the brotherly Palestinian people in its efforts against occupation and exile

20. The achievement of Palestinian rights and the
establishment
of a just peace in the Middle East are
inseparable goals. As the history of this question has
prov.ed time and again, peace cannot be achieved in the
tortured and explosive Middle East until the injustice
inflicted upon the Palestinian people is redressed and
until they are enabled to exercise their right to repatriation and self-determination.
Likewise, Palestinian
rights cannot be achieved outside a comprehensive
just settlement, which would include Israel’s withdrawal from the Arab territories it occupied in June
1967 and the establishment of a just and.durable peace.
The components of a just peace in the Middle East
are organically linked and inseparable.
21. The Committee
on the Exercise of the Inalienable Rights of the Palestinian People has shown understanding of this essential reality. While its report
3

I

focused on Palestinian rights, it made it clear that such
rights can be achieved only in the context of a comprehensive just settlement in the Middle East. For no
one ,can’ overlook the fact that the Arab involvement
with the suffering and aspirations of the Palestinian
people has altered the course of the history of our
region and has decisively influenced the relationship
of the Arab world with the world at large. The report
of the Committee
manifests an understanding of the
basic issues in the Palestine question and makes an
attempt to give positive answers to the main questions.
22. I wish on this occasion to pay a tribute to the
vigorous and imaginative Chairman of the Comm.ittee,
Ambassddor Medoune Fall, and his colleagues on the
Committee
for their .dedicated work and sense of
commitment.
We hope that the Council will consider
the ‘general question .with seriousness and urgency.
If an early,‘just and fundamental solution to the Palestinian question is not found, the area of the Middle
East will continue to be a source of deep turmoil and
serious potential threat to international
security.
23. The United Nations,
representing
the international community,
must throw its weight behind
the requirements
of a just settlement. The United
Nations is not an observer. The international
community is not unconcerned in the problem in the Middle
East. The United Nations must be ready to mobilize
its resources behind the implementation
of a plan of
justice in the Middle East. It must be ready to bear
its responsibility,
enforce its vision of peace and
guarantee a future just settlement.
24. The PRESIDENT:
The next speaker is the representative of Turkey. I invite him to take a place at
the Council table and to make his statement.
25. Mr. TURKMEN
(Turkey):,Turkey
is a member
of the Committee on the Exercise of the Inalienable
Rights of the Palestinian People, and it is for this
reason that my delegation has asked to participate in
this discussion.
26. Turkey’s
position
regarding . the question of
Palestine and the rights of the Palestinian people is
deeply rooted in history. In the last part of the nineteenth century, the leader of the Zionist movement,
Theodor Herzl, approached the Ottoman Govemment with the aim of securing permission to establish
a Jewish State in Palestine, which was then under the
sovereignty of the Ottoman Empire, That demand
was unequivocally
rejected. At that time the ,overwhelming majority of the population of Palestine was
Arab, and Palestine enjoyed self-government
and
local autonomy.
27. After the disintegration
of the Ottoman. Empire
and the establishment
of the Republic, the Turkish
position remained unchanged. In 1947, we voted
against resolution 181 (II) calling for the partition of
Palestine. It has always been our view that the adop-

tion of that resolution and the circumstances
surrounding the creation of the State of Israel constitute
one of the greatest injustices of our times. As a result,
the Palestinian people have been ruthlessly displaced
and uprooted from, their homes, compelled
to live
either as refugees or under foreign domination
and
occupation, while the world has totally ignored for
more than a quarter of a century their right to selfdetermination
and independence.
28. As a country situated in the area and with many
links with the Arab peoples concerned, Turkey, from
the very beginning, has been closely associated with
the discussion of the question in the United Nations.
We have been and still are a member of the United
Nations Conciliation Commission far Palestine, which
was created by General Assembly resolution 194 (III)
in 1948. In recent years, we have supported the endeavours towards recognition of the political rights
of the Palestinians because of our conviction that this
question lies at the heart of the problem of the broader
question of achieving a just peace in the Middle East.
In that larger context, we have always maintained
that Israel should withdraw from all the territories it has occupied since 1967, and that a settlement should
make it possible for all the countries in the area to
safeguard their independence,
their sovereignty and
the security of their borders.
29. It has been pointed out by speakers, who preceded me that the report the Council is called upon ,r
to discuss represents a landmark in the approach of
the United Nations to the problem.of Palestine. This,
I believe, is true. Since it was founded, ‘the United
Nations has been dealing with the issue of Palestine
in a continuous manner, but the question was considered for ‘a very long time to be only one of refugees,
an exclusively
humanitarian
matter. Even in this
limited framework, the countless General Assembly
resolutions calling for the return of the refugees
remained unheeded. The war of I%7 added a new
dimension to the problem by increasing the number of
refugees and forcing the Palestinians
in the West
Bank, Jerusalem and Gaza to live under Israeli domination and occupation. Even if there were some commendable attempts to create a momentum
in the
settlement of problems arising from the wars of 1967
and 1973, the question of Palestine remained in the
background.
The Palestinians
were not even considered a party in any eventual negotiating process.
30. The valiant people of Palestine, however, did not
abandon its struggle to assert its rights. It put up a
fierce resistance to Israeli domination and occupation
and succeeded in rallying the support of world public
opinion to its rightful cause. Resolution 3236 (XXIX)
adopted by the General Assembly was a turning point
in this evolution.
In that resolution,
the General
Assembly reaffirmed the inalienable
rights of the
Palestinian people in Palestinei’its
right to self-determination,. to national independence and sovereignty,
and the right of the Palestinians to return to their

homes and property from which they had been displaced and uprooted, and recognized the Palestinian
people as a principal party in the establishment of a.
just, and lasting peace in the Middle : East. Subsequently, in resolution 3375 (XXX), the General Assembly called for the invitation of the Palestine Liberation ‘Organization, as the representative of the
Palestiniin people, to participate on an equal footing
with other parties in all efforts, deliberations and conferences on the Middle East held under the auspices
of the Uriited Natioqs. Finally, in resolution .3376
(XXX) the General Assembly decided to establish
a Committee on the Exercise of the Inalienable Rights
of the Palestinian People, requested the Committee
to consider and recommend to the Assembly a programme of implementation designed to enable the
Palestinian people to exercise the rights recognized
in resolution 3236 (XXIX), requested the Committee
to submit its report and recommendations to the
Secretary-Gene+ and requested the SecretaryGeneral. to transmit the report to the Security auncil.
The Council was requested to consider the question
of the exercise by the Palestinian people of its inalienable rights, and the Committee was authorized, taking
into consideration the action by the Council, to submit
to .the Assembly, at its thirty-first session,.a report
containing its observations and recommendations.
31. The report of the Committee, now before the
Council, is the product of intensive work and deliberations under the able chairmanship of Ambassador
Fall. During the deliberations, there were perhaps
some differences of emphasis, some varying perceptions as to the beit method to be followed, but the
report that emerged reflects, by and large, a consensus
and is in conformity with the mandate assigned to the
Committee. The Committee did not deviate from the
resolution on the basis of which it elaborated a programme of implementation.
32. The report has been analysed comprehensively
by the Chairman of the Committee and its Rapporteur
[192&h meeting]. It vriould be redundant to elaborate
once more on its content. However; there are some
points which I should like to underline.
33. Paragraph 55 of the report is important, as it
deals pertinently with the. question of negotiations.
It reads as follows:
“The opinion was shared that the prevailing
situation in the Middle East should not be allowed
to stagnate. There was a need to reconvene the
Geneva Peace Conference on the Middle East, with
the participation of all parties concerned, including
the Palestine Liberation Organization, on an equal
footing with the other participants, according to
General Assembly resolution 3375 (XXX), in order
to deal with the problem in all its aspects.”
34. Paragraph 56 concerns the role that the Security
Council can play, and reads, in part, as follows:

“The suggestion .wasmade that since the Security
Council remained the ohly forum in which all parti+
to ihe conflict had been able to meet; this unique
circumstance might be more actively utilized for
constructive moves towards a settlement.*’
In this paragraph the hope is also expressed that all
the parties concerned will show statesmanship and
a genuine willingness to negotiate.
35. The second part of the report contains the Committee’s recommendations.. These recommendations
formulate the basic considerations’ and guidelines,
urge the ietum of refugees in two phases and set out
the! prerequisites for the exercise of the rights of the
Palestinian people to self-determination, national
independence and sovereignty. It is qur view that
these recommendations are in conformity with United
Nations resolutions. They embody, among others, the
important principle, to which we fully subscribe, of
the inadmissibility of the acquisition of territory bjt
force.
36. It is our earnest hope that the debate in the Council on the question of the exerci?e of the inalienable
rights of the Palestinian peodle will- be a constructive
one. We cannot of course foresee the outcome of this
debate. However, it should be pointed out that the
report of the Committee, dealing with ihe core of the
problem of the Middle East, contains many elements
which can usefully be taken into consideration by the
Council in its endeavours towards .a just and lastihg
peace. The value ?f the .report .asa.$qntribution in this
respect should not be voided. On the other hand, as
the representative of India has underlined in his
statement [/9281/l rmvtirrg],
the report, in its present
form, is tentative and will be finalized in the light of
the views expressed in the Council. The Cjouncil will,
therefore, sui-ely find a.way which will not hampei,
but promote, renewed efforts within the ‘framework
of the United Nations for a settlement which has
eluded us -for so long and for putting an e.nd to an
explosive situation representing a constant threat to
peace.
_
37. The PRESIDENT: I should like to inform the
members of the Council that 1 have just received
letters from the representatives of .Mauritania and
Morocco in which they ask to be invited to participate
in the discussion, in accordance with the relevant
provisions of the Charter and rule 37 of the provisional
rules of procedure. Accordingly, I propose, in accordance with the usual practice and with, the consent of
the Council, to invite these representatives to participate in the discussion without the right to vote.
38. In view of the limited number of seats available
at the Council table, I invite the representatives of
Mauritania and Morocco to take the @aces reserved
for them at the side of the Council chamber, on the
understanding that they will be-invited to take places
at the Council table when it is their turn to speak.

At the invitation qf the Chairman, Mr. El Hassen
(Marrritania) and Mr. Zaimi (Morocco) took the places
reserved for them at the side of the Council chamber.

it a report dealing with the problem of the Middle East
from a comprehensive
point of view. .The objective
of this report is simple and clear, namely, that the
international
community
should act on the proposals
made by the Committee in its report, which lays the
foundation for a comprehensive solution of the entire
problem of the Middle East, particularly
the implementation of the inalienable rights of the Palestinian
people.

39. The PRESIDENT:
The ‘next speaker is the representative of Bahrain, whom I now invite to take
a place at the Council table and to make his statement.
40. Mr.
AL-SAFFAR
(Bahrain)
(interpretation
from French): Mr. President, first of all, I should like
to thank you and all the other members of the Council
for having- permitted my delegation to take part in
this debate on the ‘question of the exercise by the
Palestinian people of its inalienable rights. My delegation is very happy to see you presiding over the
Council. .Your experience and your political and
diplomatic
qualities eminently
qualify you for the
task of presiding over the Council in its deliberations
on such a difficult and complex question as the Palestine problem. Your assumption of the presidency of
this Council is a tribute to your country, Guyana,
which is playing a very important role in the United
Nations and in the non-aligned movement. We have
followed with a great ‘deal of admiration the way in
which the people,of Guyana have succeeded in protecting their independence and asserting their national
sovereignty.

43, In all international
bodies, the Israeli authorities
have so far maintained that they were seeking peace
and security in the region. Peace, for the Israeli authorities, is the recognition by the Arabs of the Israeli
fait accompli
in the occupied territories.
Indeed,
immediately
after the Israeli aggression against the
Arab countries in June 1967 and the occupation of
their territories, Israeli leaders took aseries of measures with the aim of annexing those territories once
and for all. Those measures, which ranged from the
annexation of Arab Jerusalem on 27 June and the
destruction and expropriation
of the property of the
people to the establishment
of ,Jewish settlements in
the occupied territories, were accompanied by acts
of brutal repression against the population
of the
occupied territories.
44. The General Assembly and the Security Council
have adopted many constructive and objective resolutions in order to thwart the Israeli plans for annexation. But the Israeli authorities have never done anything to put those resolutions into effect. They have
directed propaganda to world public opinion for the
purpose of demonstrating
that the Palestinian people
in the occupied territories were satisfied with their
lot and that they had never been so happy as under
Israeli occupation. The representative
of Israel has
never ceased repeating this whenever the question
of the occupation of Arab territories has come up for
discussion in the United Nations.

41. On this occasion, when the Security Council has
met to discuss this problem, my delegation would like
to express its gratitude to the Committee on the Exercise of the Inalienable Rights of the Palestinian People
for the report introduced by its Chairman, Ambassador Fall of Senegal. -In spite of all the difftculties
and obstacles encountered, the Committee
has succeeded in presenting us with the fruits of long and
difftcult work. I should also like to pay a tribute to all
the members of that Committee, who have given their
time to the preparation of a report which could serve
as a point of departure in the search for a just and
lasting peace in the Middle East. 1 must, of course,
welcome and express my great appreciation for the
participation
of the representative of the Palestinian
people, the chief victim of the Zionist invaders, in the
work of this Committee.
Throughout
our work,, his
attitude was one of helpful and sincere co-operation
with the Committee.
As the Chairman of the Committee mentioned, the Israeli authorities have refused
to co-operate with it in spite of the fact that they are
one of the parties which should be particularly interested in a solution to the problem. It is precisely this
persistent refusal of the Israeli authorities
to cooperate with our Organization when it was trying to
find a solution to the Middle East crisis which has
made the problem so complex.

45. The events which have occurred in recent months
in the West Bank and Galilee have revealed the time
situation. The popular explosion in Galilee at the end
of March destroyed the myth of the supposed-integratiori and loyalty of the Israeli Arabs. That event constituted an important turning point in the struggle of
the Palestinian people. After a long period of forced
silence, the population of Galilee rose up against the
Israeli plans and challenged the judaization
of the
region. This is significant because this is a struggle for
their survival and for the assertion of their Palestinian’
identity.
46. The demonstrations
in the West Bank were a
resounding denial of the argument about benevolent
colonization put forward in Zionist propaganda. They
were a response to the Israeli leaders, who often say
that the Israeli Arabs live much better than the Arabs
in the occupied West Bank and that the latter are living
better than those in other Arab countries. How can
we conceive that a people whose property has been

42. Nine years almost to the day after the occupation
of the West Bank, Gaza and other territories of neighbouring Arab countries by Israeli armed forces, the
Security Council has met to examine once again the
fundamentals of the Middle East crisis. This is, furthermore, the.tirst time that the Council has had before
6

c

I.
:t

account of the legitimate
rights of the Palestinian
people would be doomed to failure. We hope that the
Council will take this historic opportunityto
do everything in its power to restore peace to’the region.

confiscated or destroyed, whose lands have been
expropriated and which itself has been subjected to
constant persecution can be happy?
47. The popular uprising in the West Bank was a
collective expression of a people’s opposition to the
invasion and occupation of its territory. In spite of the
brutality of the invaders, the Palestinian people have
shown a will of iron in their determination
to achieve
their emancipation
from the racist authorities in Tel
Aviv and to assert their national identity.
Many
towns and villages flew the Palestinian flag during the
demonstrations.
Everywhere the demonstrators faced
Israeli forces, and against this popular mobilization
the army of occupation deployed troops, inflicted
police violence and sometimes imposed a total curfew.

53. The PRESIDENT:
The -next .speaker is the
representative of Hungary. I invite him to take a seat
at the Council table and to‘make his statement.
54. Mr. HOLLAI
(Hungary):
Mr. President, first
of all I should like to extend to you and to all members
of the Council sincere appreciation for the opportunity
we have been given to express our views on the issue
before the Council. It is a special pleasure for us, Sir,
to see you, a most prominent diplomat of a State with
which my country has friendly relations, presiding
over our deliberations
on this highly’ important
question.

48. The results of the municipal
elections in the
West Bank in April showed how attached the Palestinian population
was to its legitimate
representative, the Palestine Liberation Organization,
and to
its principles.

55. I also wish to convey our warm greetings and
best wishes to the delegation of the Palestine Liberation Organization, representing the Palestinian people.

49. The Security Council has the duty and responsibility to put an end to the policy of repression and
the racist methods employed by the Israeli aythorities
against the people, and above all, to put an .end to the
occupation of the Arab territories.

56. On behalf of my delegation, ‘I should like to
express tondolenties
to the delegation of the United
States on the senseless killing of the American diplomats in Beirut.
57. Hungary is a member of the Committee on the
Exercise of the Inalienable
Rights of the Palestinian
People and so, needless to say, the report of the Committee has our support and we fully endorse its recommendations.

50. In the light of the Committee’s
report, the Council is invited to adopt measures to ,give effect to the
principles of the return of the Palestinians to their
homes and of the right to self-determination.
These
principles are, in fact, recognized by the General
Assembly, as can be seen from the many resolutions
it has adopted in recent years. The Council should
reassert those two principles and prevail upon Israel
to accept and recognize them. They are fundamental
to any settlement of the Middle East crisis. Consequently, Israel should create a favourable situation
for the restoration of peace in the area. The report so
competently introduced by the Chairman of the Committee provides us with appropriate ways and means
of doing that.
51. In our view, the programme for the exercise of
the inalienable rights of the Palestinian people contained in the report is highly realistic because it takes
account of the prevailing situation in Palestine. Although we take a different position on certain points
in the report, we can say that it does contain positive
elementswhich
can bring us closer to a solution of the
problem. The report does in fact reflect the position
of the majority of States Members. It traces in outline
the path to be followed to arrive at a solution based
on the debates. and discussions that have been held’
in the General Assembly and in the Security Council.

58. As several speakers who spoke before me have
stressed, bmong them the Chairman of the Committee,
Ambassador Fall of Senegal, the work of the Committee was ‘not and is not directed against anybody.
All those who participated in the deliberations of the
Committee proceeded from the basic conviction that
the question of Palestine-the
implementation
of the
legitimate
and inalienable
rights of the Palestinian
people to a sovereign national existence, and a homeland and to return to their homes-is
a corner-stone
of any just and lasting peaceful solution of the Middle
East conflict. To reach a just and lasting peace in the
area must be the common goal of all peace-loving
countries and of the United Nations. The Committee
repeatedly invited all Member States and all interested
parties to come and express ‘their views on the possible ways and means of ,solving the question of Palestine. And in the very frank and open discussions in the
Committee we felt the high level of integrity morality
and international
responsibility
of all those who participated in our work. In our opinion,, the report of
the Committee
is a reflection of that constructive
spirit.

52. We are happy to see that this document goes to
the very heart of the problem of the Middle East, which
is the question of Palestine. For any approach or effort
to find a solution to this problem which did not take

S?. In the last few months several tragic events and
old and new tensions have once again made us aware
of the fact that the Middle East continues to be a
dangerous hotbed of war. Peace will never be born
7

out of injustice. Unless an end is put to the foreign
occupation, to the flagrant injustices and untold sufferings that have afflicted the Arab people of Palestine for over a quarter of a century, there will be no
peace in the Middle East. Without the long overdue
implementation of the United Nations resolutions, we
shall again be exposed to imperialist manoeuvres, and
shall have to face increasingly dangerous crises.
60. In the opinion of the Hungarian People’s Republic, the Committee’s report an extremely important, well-balanced and realistic document. We shall
highly appreciate the careful study of this document
by the members of the Council, since the-question of
Palestine is a matter which basically concerns international peace and security, and it lies therefore, just
and foremost, within the sphere of competence of the
Councif, We wish to express our sincere hope that
the Council will endorse all the recommendations
contained in the report. That would serve the interests
of the Palestinian people, the interests of the whole
Middle Eastern area and the interests of peace and
security as a whole. And, may I add, it would even
serve the interests of those countries and peoples that
are- not able or willing to realize it yet. There is no
other way of living in security for any country but
the way of good neighbourly co-operation.

64. The PRESIDENT: I now invite the representative of Afghanistan to take a place at the Council
,’
_
table and to make his statement.
65.. Mr. SIDDiQ (Afghanistan): It is with a sad heart
that I mention the recent tragic event in which the
United States Ambassador in Lebanon, Francis
Meloy, and his distinguished colleagues lost their
lives. I wish to extend the condolences and sympathy
of my delegation to the United States delegation and
also to the families of the bereaved.
66. Mr. President, I should like to exnress the
warmest congratulations of my delegation on your
accession to the presidency of this important organ
of the United Nations. My delegation is convinced
that because of your distinguished qualities as a skilful diplomat of a non-aligned country, qualities of
which we are all well aware, the heavy and important
work of the Council during this month will be carried
out in a successful manner. I should also wish to thank
.you and; through you, all the members of the Council
for having made it possible for my delegation to participate in this important debate.
67. As a Vice-Chairman of the Committee on the
Exercise of the Inalienable Rights of the Paldtinian
People, I do not have much to add to the lucid and
comprehensive statement made by the Chairman of
the Committee, Ambassador Fall of Senegal, or to the
important statement made by the Rappotieur of the
Committee,‘Mr. Gauci of Malta. Therefore, ,I should
like to confine my statement to some brief remarks
summarizing my delegation’s position concerning the
Committee’s study and’work on this issue.

61. My country has always whole-heartedly supported the just struggle of the Palestinian Arab people
and its genuine liberation movement, the Palestine
Liberation Organization, under the leadership of
Yasser Arafat. We continue to support all anti-imperialist forces fighting for the final liquidation of the
consequences‘of foreign aggression. We are ready to
help the Palestinian people in building up their own
independent State. It is our firm conviction that the
participation of the Palestine Liberation Organization, the true representatives of the. Palestinian people, on an equal footing with other parties; is really
indispensable in all efforts, deliberations and conferences on the Middle East, as the report of the
Committee also stresses.

68. When resolution 3376 (XXX) was adopted by
the General Assembly, it reflected the determination
of the majority of the Member States, on the basis
of resolution 3236 (XXIX), to give a new thrust to the
efforts of the United Nations to resolve. the question
of Palestine by the establishment of a Committee on
the Exercise of the Inalienable Rights of the Palestinian People. The formation of that Committee; on the
basis of that resolution, has now led to, the consideration of its report by the Security Council. In the
resolution, it was envisaged that the Security Council
should meet’at the present time to consider measures
that this important organ of the United Nations could
take so that the people of Palestine could be enabled
to exercise their inalienable rights.

62. We feel that there must be no further delay in
achieving a final solution of the Palestinian issue. By
endorsing ‘the recommendations in the report of the
Committee, the Council will lay the foundations for a
new and peaceful era in the Middle East.
63. The PRESIDENT: I should like to inform members of the Council that I have received a letter dated
24 June from the representative of the Libyan -Arab
Republic [S//21/3] in which he requests that Mr. Amin
Hilmy II, Permanent Observer of the League of Arab
States to the United Nations, be invited to participate
in the Council’s current discussion. Accordingly, if
there is no objection, I propose, in accordance with
the established practice, to extend an invitation to
Ambassador Hilmy under rule 39 of the provisional
rules of procedure.

‘

.I

69. We all know what those rights are. They were
reaffirmed by the General Assembly in its resolution
3236 (XXIX) and, particularly, in paragraphs 1 and 2.
In the consideration of this item, thecouncil has the
benefit of having at its disposal the report of the Committee. This report is the result of the comprehensive
work undertaken by the members of the Committee
with the effective participation of the representative
of the Palestine Liberation Organization as the legitimate representative of the Palestinian people, as
8

: .‘,,

.,

.

,..

.

-;’

t.:

. - .,.

well as the participation
involved.

of the Arab countries directly

determination
could be implemented
only if Israel
withdrew from the land of Palestine. The occupation
of Palestine has lasted for too long; in our view, the
idea of a time-table for the withdrawal of Israel from
the occupied territories is indeed essential. The Committee recommends
that Israel withdraw from the
territories occupied in June 1967 as a matter of urgency, and in any case no later than 1 June 1977.

70. The Committee’s
aim was to present to the
international
community
concrete and realistic measures for an effective solution of the Palestinian
problem. Those measures have been strictly drawn
up on the basis of the mandate of the Committee laid
down in resolution 3376 (XXX). In fact, the measures
outlined in the report are for the elaboration of the
guidelines envisaged by the General Assembly into a
practical programme of action.

74. The policy and position of the Goveinment
and
the people of Afghanistan as far as the exercise of the
inalienable
right of the people of Palestine is concerned are well known. The policy of the Government of Afghanistan has been reiterated on numerous
occasions, both at the United Nations and in other
international
forums when this question has been
debated. As a member of the Committee,
we have
had occasion to express our views in detail. The recommendations
outlined in the report of the Committee meet with the full approval of tiy delegation.
Whether they receive the Council’s support in the
form of a decision depends on the outcome of the
debate in the Council. However, my delegation would
like to emphasize that in view of the prim6 responsibility of the Council for the maintenance of international peace and security in the region, it is of the
utmost importance that a decision based on the recommendations-of
the Committee be adopted and that
effective action be taken to serve the cause of the
Palestinian people and the fulfilment of their inalietiable rights.

71. After a long time, the question of Palestine,
which forms the core of the problem of the Middle
East, has been thoroughly discussed in the Committee
in a substantial manner. The Committee’s
consideration of the issues has been guided by previous decisions on this matter. Its report and, in particular, its
recommendations
now before the Council, are the
product of serious work. The report was adopted by
consensus in the Committee.
72. The report is based on the principles of justice
and humanity, of the inalienable rights .of a people
and of a nation long denied the exercise of their undeniable rights of self-determination,
national independence and sovereignty. It is in these respects that the
report is biased. While the report fully takes into
consideration the difficult situation in the Middle East
as a whole, it provides for a comprehensive
and
constructive
basis for the implementation
of the
inalienable rights of the people of Palestine, a fact
which is crucial to the resolution of the Middle East
crisis and of the Middle East problem as a whole.

75. In conclusion, I wish to state on behalf of my
delegation that no long-lasting peace can be achieved
in the Middle East unless and until the inalienable
rights of the Palestinian people to self-determination,
national independence and sovereignty are restored,
and until Israel withdraws from all- the occupied territories without any preconditions.

73. These inalienable rights cannot be restored without granting the people the right to return to their
homeland. Thus an individual Palestinian’s
exercise
of his right to return to his fatherland is a prerequisite for the exercise of his people’s right to selfdetermination,
national
independence
and sovereignty. In that respect it should be stated that Israel,
is under a binding obligation to provide for the return
of all the people of Palestine displaced as a result of
the hostilities of 1948 and 1967. This obligation
is
based on the commitments
of Israel under the United
Nations Charter and General Assembly resolutions
181 (II) and 194 (III). This understanding
is also reflected in General Assembly resolution 273 (III) and
the Universal
Declaration
of Human Rights. It is
obvious that the right of the Palestinian people to self-

76. Mr. SHERER
(United
States of America):
I should like to extend my delegation’s sincere appreciation to the representatives of Hungary and Afghanistan for their expressions of sympathy and condolences in connexion with the death of Ambassador
Meloy and his colleagues.

9

HOW

TO OBTAIN

UNITED

NATIONS

PUBLICATIONS

United Nations publications
may be obtained from bookstores
and distributors
throughout
the
world. Consult your bookstore
or write to: United Nations, Sales Section. New York or Geneva.
COMMENT

SE PROCURER

LES PUBLICATIONS

DES NATIONS

UNIES

Les publications
des Nations Unies sont en vente dans les librairies et lesagences depositairesdu
monde entier. Informez-vous
aupres de votre libraire ou adressez-vous
a : Nations Unies, Section
des ventes. New York ou Geneve.
KAK

COMO

IIOIIFIWTI.

CONSEGUIR

H3&~HHfl

OPrAHH3AItZIH

PUBLICACIONES

O~~%E,L~~UHEHH~I?~

DE LAS NACIONES

HAIUUi

UNIDAS

Las publicaciones
de las Naciones Unidas esdn en venta en librerlas y casas distribuidoras
en
todas partes del mundo. Consulte a su librero o dirijase a: Naciones Unidas. Section de Ventas.
Nueva York o Ginebra.

Litho

in United

Nations,

New

York

00300

83-60801-February

198%2,200
