S/2001/1164

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
18 December 2001
English
Original: French

Letter dated 7 December 2001 from the Secretary-General
addressed to the President of the Security Council
I have the honour to transmit herewith, for your attention, the text of a letter
dated 7 December 2001 from the Director General of the International Atomic
Energy Agency (see annex).
(Signed) Kofi A. Annan

01-70413 (E) 201201 211201

*0170413*

S/2001/1164

Annex
[Original: English]

Letter dated 7 December 2001 from the Director General of the
International Atomic Energy Agency to the Secretary-General
I would be grateful if you could arrange to transmit the enclosed letter and its
attachment to the President of the Security Council.
(Signed) Mohamed ElBaradei

2

S/2001/1164

Enclosure
Letter dated 7 December 2001 from the Director General of the
International Atomic Energy Agency to the President of the
Security Council
I refer to Security Council resolution 1373 (2001) of 28 September 2001, in
which the Council noted with concern the close connection between international
terrorism and illegal movement of nuclear materials and, in that regard, emphasized
the need to enhance coordination of efforts at the national, subregional, regional and
international levels in order to strengthen a global response to this serious challenge
and threat to international security. The Council also called upon all States, inter
alia, to find ways of intensifying and accelerating the exchange of operational
information, especially regarding the threat posed by the possession of weapons of
mass destruction by terrorist groups, and to become Parties as soon as possible to
the relevant international conventions and protocols relating to terrorism.
In that context, I wish to inform you that the General Conference of the
International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA), in resolution GC(45)/RES/14 B of
21 September 2001, requested me to review thoroughly the activities and
programmes of the Agency with a view to strengthening the Agency work relevant
to preventing acts of terrorism involving nuclear material and other radioactive
materials. In response to that request, I submitted a report on protection against
nuclear terrorism to the IAEA Board of Governors, summarizing Agency work
currently in progress in areas relevant to the prevention and mitigation of the
consequences of terrorist acts and outlining proposals for enhanced and additional
activities. Excerpts from that report are contained in the attachment to the present
letter.
The Board acknowledged that all member States had an obligation to support
the Agency’s response to this global problem, and directed me to proceed urgently
with approved activities, as and when resources become available. The Agency has
already received some extrabudgetary contributions for that purpose, and hopes that
the necessary additional pledges will be made in the near future. Those funds will be
used, inter alia, for the immediate implementation of priority activities, including
expert missions to assess States’ physical security arrangements and recommend
upgrades, and the provision of nuclear security-related training.
The Board of Governors also requested me to continue, in consultation with
member States, the review of our proposed response to the threat of nuclear
terrorism, and to submit the outcome for the Board’s consideration at its March 2002
session.
I would appreciate your bringing the present letter to the attention of the
members of the Security Council.
(Signed) Mohamed ElBaradei

3
