UNITED NATIONS

SECURITY

COUNCIL

OFFICIAL

RECORDS

THIRTY-FIRST

YEAR

1909th

MEETING:

14 APRIL

1976

NEWYORK

Pr I.

CONTENTS
Provisional

1

agenda (S/Agenda/ 1909) .....................................
................................................

1

The situation in Timor:
Report of the’secretary-General
in pursuance of Security Council resolution384(1975)(S/12011)
.. ... .. ... ... . ... ... .. ... .. .. .. ... ... .. .. ..

1

Adoptionoftheagenda

S/PV. 1909

NOTE
Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined with figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United
Nations document.
Documents of the Security Council (symbol S/ . . .) are normally published in
quarterly Supplements of the Official Records of the Security Council. The date
of the document indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which information about it is given.
The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a
system adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Resolutions and
Decisions of the Security Council. The new system, which has been applied
retroactively to resolutions adopted before 1 January 1965, became fully operative
on that date.

1909th MEETING
Held in New York on Wednesday,
Mr. HUANG

President:

Hua (China).

Present:
The representatives of the following States:
Benin, China, Fi-ance, Guyana, Italy, Japan, Libyan
Arab Republic, Pakistan, Panama, Romania, Sweden,
Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, United Kingdom
of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United Republic
of Tanzania, United States of America.

Provisional

agenda (S/Agenda/l909)

1.

Adoption

2.

The situation in Timor:
Report of the Secretary-General
in, pursuance of
Security Council resolution 384 (1975) (S/1201 1)
The meeting

of the agenda

MWS culled

Adoption
The ugendu

to order

ut 4.25 p.m.

of the agenda

MVIS adopted.

The situation in Timor:
Report of the Secretary-General
in pursuance of
Security Council resolution 384 (1975) (S/12011)
1. The PRESIDENT
(trunskution
fiorn
Chinese):
In accordance with the decisions taken at the 1908th
meeting, I shall now invite the representatives
of
Australia, Indonesia, the Philippines and Portugal to
participate in the discussion without the right to vote.
At the invitution
of the President,
Mr. Anwur
Suni
(Indonesiu)
und Mr. Gulvlio
Teles (Portugul)
took
pluces ut the Council
tuhle and Mr. Hurry (Austruliu)
cd Mr. Yungo (Philippines)
took the pluces reserved
for- them ut the side of the Council
chamber.

2. The PRESIDENT
(trun~lution
from
Chinese):
I should like also to draw attention to document
S/12049, which reproduces the text of a letter addressed
to me by the representative
of Indonesia in which
he requests that the Council extend an invitation under
rule 39 of its provisional rules of procedure. In the light
of the similar requests on which the Council took
action at its last meeting, I assume the Council
wishes to follow the same procedure. Accordingly,
I propose, if I hear no objection,
that the Council
decide to extend this additional invitation as requested.

14 April

1976, at 3.30 p.m.

.3. The PRESIDENT
(trunslation
from Chinese):
The
first speaker is the representative
of Indonesia, on
whom I now call.
4. Mr. ANWAR SAN1 (Indonesia): Mr. President,
permit me on behalf of my delegation to thank you
and the other members of the Council for allowing
us to participate in the deliberations
on the item on
the agenda. Having had the honour to work with
you for two years in the Council during Indonesia’s
term as a non-permanent
member, may I also be
permitted to express my conviction that under your
guidance the Council will be able to contribute
constructively
to the solution of the question of East
Timor.
5. The Council has before it the report of the
Secretary-General
[S/12011], to which the report of the
Special Representative,
Mr. Winspeare Guicciardi, on
his mission to East Timor has been annexed. My
delegation would like to express its high appreciation
to the Secretary-General
for the continued interest
he has shown in the East Timor question and the
contribution
he has made and continues to make
towards its solution, and to Mr. Winspeare Guicciardi
for the manner in which he endeavoured to execute
the task entrusted to him by the Secretary-General
pursuant to paragraph 5 of resolution
384 (1975).
Mr. Winspeare Guicciardi visited East Timor under
difficult conditions, including the weather. He arrived
during the rainy season, one of the heaviest in recent
years, which made communications
a nightmare.
6. My delegation agrees with the view that a report
on the kind of inission which Mr. Winspeare Guicciardi
undertook on behalf of the Council cannot be expected
to satisfy everybody. Mr. Winspeare Guicciardi has
tried to be as factual as possible, in reporting about
his meetings and activities, on what he has heard and
seen. The report should be seen as reflecting the
prevailing situation in East Timor at that time. The
situation ifi the Territory has evolved during the two
months-in
fact, nearly three months-since
his visit
to East Timor.
7. My delegation can support the suggestion made by
the Secretary-General
in paragraph 8 of his report,
in which he says:
“as the parties concerned have expressed their
readiness to continue consultations with my Special
Representative,
I suggest that these consultations

should be continued for the time being on the
understanding
that any developments
will be
reported to the Council”.

returned to their original communities
and have
declared themselves in support of the Provisional
Government,
which stands for complete integration
with Indonesia.
In fact, two former prominent
FRETILIN
members are now representing the Provisional Government
in the present Council debate.
It is also our conviction that the process of reconciliation in Timor which has already begun will be
accelerated in the atmosphere
of normality
now
prevailing in East Timor. Administrative
services have
started
to function,
economic
reconstruction
has
begun, ,schools have reopened, roads are being rebuilt,
and communications
re-established.
In short, the
Territory is returning to normal. In view of the lack
of sufficient cadres, Indonesian volunteers are now
assisting the Provisional Government in their various
efforts to restore normal life in the Territory,
in
rehabilitation
and reconstruction.

Of course, Indonesia has its own views with regard to
the manner in which the suggestion should be implemented. It remains my delegation’s
view that the
solution to the question of East Timor must be found
on the basis of the wishes of the people in the Territory.
Therefore, if the suggestion of the Secretary-General
is adopted by the Council, consultations
with the
people in East Timor should be the most important
part of the efforts of the Special Representative,
as only their views are decisive as to how the remaining
stage of the process of decolonization
in East Timor
should be implemented.
Indonesia is certainly available
for consultations with Mr. Winspeare Guicciardi any
time he considers it useful, but I should like to
emphasize
that, whereas Indonesia’s
views are
relevant only in the context of the principle of the
exercise of the right to self-determination,
which
Indonesia would like to see exercised in a peaceful
and orderly manner, in the first and last instance the
views of the people in East Timor remain the decisive
factor.

10. With regard to .the call for “withdrawal”,
it
would be useful to keep in mind its psychological
impact as felt by the people of East Timor. One should
not forget that the people consider themselves already
Indonesians and their territory an integral part of
Indonesia. In their view, the call for withdrawal is
unjust, ,for why should Indonesians be requested to
leave what they already consider Indonesian territory,
especially if the people of the Territory .themselves
wish them to remain? Nevertheless;,
the armed
volunteers started to leave the Territory in February
1976.

8. It is the intention of my delegation in this statement
to restrict itself to the report of the Secretary-General.
Indonesia’s position with regard to the return of Indonesian volunteers to their respective places of origin
and with regard to the exercise of the right. to selfdetermination
by the people of East Timor is already
reflected in the report. My delegation would also like
to refer to the statem,ent made by the representative
of the Provisional
Government
of East Timor,
Mr. Guilherme Maria Goncalvis, on those important
matters [/90&h meeting];
I should like to stress,
however, that meanwhile the Provisional
Govemment had agreed to allow the armed volunteers to
return to their places of origin. I do not want again
t’o elaborate on the ‘justification
for the Indonesian
presence in East Timor. I explained it at length, during
the Council’s debates in December. For the fesi, the
statement of the representative
of the Provisional
Government
has also clarified that position as seen
from the point of view of the people and the developments in East Timor itself. I would like only to draw
the members’ attention to the fact that the Indonesian
presence in East Timor was upon the specific request
of the large majority of the people, to prevent ‘their
liquidation
by FRETILIN
[Frcnte Revolucicinbri~~
Timqr Leste Independente]
armed elements only
because they wanted to be inlegrated with Indonesia.
Overwhelming
proof of mass murder and atrocities
committed
by those elements have b&en provided
to the Council by the representative of the Provisional
Government.

11. Though organized fighting has stopped, there are
still small groups-remnants
of FRETILIN
armed
,elements-who
had fled to the hills. Their effective
number is insignificant. Some of the groups have taken
hostages with them, whom they threaten’to kill if they
are attacked. Their ruthlessness and the fact they are
capable of committing
atrocious killings have been
proved by the hundreds of people they’have liquidated
in a beastly manner. These.vicious criminals are now
afraid ,of the revenge of the people. But ‘as this threat
is gradually being neutralized, the Provisional Govemment and the people of East Timor have decided to
allow the armed volunteers to return to their places
of origin. As stated by the representative of the Provisional Government,
they are already’ leaving the
Territory, and it is expected that the process will be
completed within a short time.
‘. 12. With regard to the exercise of the right to selfdetermination,
the Indonesian position is clear. It is
-reflected in paragraph 43 of the Special Representative’s report. What is much more important, however,
is the position of the Provisional Gove’mment of East
Timor as communicated
by its repitsentative
and
reported by the Special Representative in paragraph 42
of his report and elaborated by the representative of
the Provisional Government
in his statement to the
Council. As far as the people of East Timor are conce’med, in their view they have already formally
decided to become independent
through complete

9. Organized fighting in East Timor has stopped. The
‘Provisidnal
Government
is now in control of the
Territory,
and life is gradually returning to normal.
The majority of the former FRETILIN
supporters have
2

absurd accusations against Indonesia and the Provisional Government
of East Timor-familiar
tactics
of those who want to hide the facts. I have too much
respect for the Council to go into them. Members of
the Council have all listened to the statement of the
representative of the Provisional Government.
In its
telegram of 17 March 1976 the Provisional
Government invited the Secretary-General,
if it is the wish of
the Council,
to send his Special Representative,
Mr. Winspeare Guicciardi, for a second visit to East
Timor. I should like the Council to take particular note
that an invitation to visit the Territory has also been
extended to the Council and the Committee of 24 by the
representative of the Provisional
Government
in his
statement, when he said:

integration with the Republic of Indonesia. They now
consider themselves as much Indonesian as any Indonesian from any other part of Indonesia and their
territory as much part of Indonesia as any other
province of Indonesia.
13. I need not remind the Council of Indonesia’s
contribution
to the decolonization
process, of its role
in the fight to uphold the principle of self-determination, of its support for the fight.for independence waged
by authentic liberation movements everywhere in the
world. The Asian-African Conference held at Bandung
in 1955 was an important milestone in the decolonization process; it has been a decisive factor in stimulating
and accelerating the struggle for independence everywhere. Indonesia’s
actions and role, in close cooperation with other non-aligned
members of the
United Nations,
in the adoption by the General
Assembly of resolution 1514 (XV), and afterwards in
the efforts of the Committee of 24’ for its implementation, are too well known for us to be suspected-even
remotely-of
denying the exercise of the right to selfdetermination
to the people of East Timor. Indonesia
defended its right to self-determination
in a bloody
revolutionary war waged by its people ,over the entire
length and breadth of the Indonesian
archipelago.
Indonesia has no intention of denying the same right
to self-determination
to others. I might remind the
Council that Indonesia has repeatedly stated that it
has no claims on Timor. In this context it can be
said that it is the people of East Timor themselves
who claim Indonesia as their country.

“If the United Nations, this Council or the Committee of 24 desires to send a mission to the Teriitory to witness the real situation in East Timor,
it is welcome to do so. The Provisional Government
will do its utmost to facilitate such a visit.” [190&h
meeting,

pm-a.

154.1

17. To accept that invitation,
either by -requesting
the Secretary-General
to have his Special Representative visit East Timor again or by sending a United
Nations mission-whichever
the Council may preferwould be the easiest way to find out whether the
claims and accusations made by FRETILIN
are based
upon facts or whether they are all lies fabricated by
a handful of self-styled leaders who left East Timor
after they had unleashed .the tragic fighting in the
Territory and who have since lost contact, with the
people and developments
in East Timor. A visit by
the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General
or by a United Nations mission would provide the
opportunity to obtain first-hand knowledge of the real
situation in the Territory
and of the wishes of its
people.

14. It is because of its respect for the right to selfdetermination
that Indonesia has stated time and again
that, though the Indonesian
people welcome the
decision for integration with Indonesia made by the
people of East Timor, we should none the less like to
see whether that decision, proclaimed on 30 November 1975, will subsequently
be confirmed
by the
people in the exercise of their right to self-determination. The ,Indonesian Government
will also have
to consult the Indonesian Parliament as to whether
it accepts the decision for integration of the people of
East Timor..

18. Before I conclude, allow me to reply briefly to the
statement made by the representative of Portugal at
the previous meeting.
19. I shall not reply in detail to his statement, as
the various accusations have been answered by. the
representative of the Provisional Government of East
Timor in his statement at the same meeting and in
the earlier part of my own statement. We have stated
our views with regard to the return of Indonesian
volunteers to their places of origin; we have explained
our position with regard to the exercise of the, right
of self-determination
by the people of East Timor.
Also, the matter of the 23 Portuguese detainees has
been explained by the representative of the Provisional
Government in his statement.

15. It is also the view of the Indonesian Government
that the United Nations should be involved during the
remaining stage of the decolonization
process of East
Timor. My delegation is happy to note that the Provisional Government
of East Timor has decided to
involve the United Nations in the process. My delegation would suggest that the appropriate organ of the
United Nations should consult with the representatives
of the Provisional Government as to the kind of role
the Organization
would play during the remaining
stage of the decolonization
process in East Timor.
>
16. Meanwhile the few FRETILIN
supporters who
are now living outside Timor and who have no contact
with the people of East Timor have made the most
fantastic claims and launched the wildest and most

20. I should like to inform the Council that, upon
instructions
of my Government,
I have been the
intermediary
for an informal
meeting between an
emissary of the Portuguese
Government
and the
delegation of the Provisional
Government
and for
3

meetings between relatives of the detainees and the
delegation. These meetings took place recently in New
York.

in the Portuguese change of heart. But whatever the
reasons, we are glad,that Portugal has decided to break
with its colonial past. That is why Indonesia was
prepared to co-operate with Portugal in facing the
Timor question. However, our efforts did not seem to
be acceptable to Portugal. In the early stages we
were ready to send ships with food to Dili, but Portugal
would not co-operate. We had also offered to evacuate
the Governor, Colonel Lemos Pires. This offer was
politely put aside by the Portuguese. We continued,
however, to maintain contact with the Portuguese and
tried to co-operate with them until they decided to
break diplomatic
relations and to accuse us before
this Council. In any case, we wish that Portugal had
done a better job in East Timor.

2 1. It had originally been my intention to restrict my
statement to the report of the Secretary-General
and
not to engage in any kind of acrimonious
contest
with the representative of Portugal or, for that matter,
with any other delegation. I thought that in that way
my delegation would be able to contribute positively
to the Council’s deliberations.
However, the representative of Portugal left me no alternative but to oblige
him, however reluctantly and with the maximum of
restraint.
22. I am not surprised that the representative
of
Portugal tried to the best of his ability to whitewash
the ignominious role that his Government played in the
tragedy that befell the people of East Timor-in
fact,
I can appreciate his efforts. But I could not fail to be
dismayed when in this Council he ad0pte.d a holierthan-thou attitude as he tried to present Portugal as
the perfect innocent, as a paragon of colonial decency
and uprightness, while blaming others for the tragic
developments that Portugal itself has kindled in Timor.

25. Portugal has reminded the Council that it is still
the administering
Power in East Timor. At the same
time, the people of East Timor, both those supporting
the Provisional
Government
and the remaining
adherents of FRETILIN,
as we have also heard here,
categorically
refused to recognize Portugal as such.
It is this reality which, in our view, will have to
be taken into account by the Council as it tries to
contribute constructively
to the solution of the East
Timorese question.

23. The representative of Portugal seems to forget
that Portugal absconded from Timor and from its
responsibilities
as the administering
Power, a status
which he continues to claim for his country. But if
Portugal claims that it is still the administering
Power
it will also have to accept the responsibilities
inherent
in that status. It surely cannot be excused from those
responsibilities
just by running away from them, by
allowing hell to break loose in the Territory under
its administration.
If Portugal insists upon its status
as the administering
Power, as it does, then by the
same token it should accept the blame for being so
blatantly negligent in its responsibilities
towards the
people of East Timor. By running away it cannot wash
its hands in innocence. It would not have been necessary now for Portugal to condemn all the crimes and
atrocities of which the people of Timor have been
victim if it had lived up to its responsibilities
as
administering
Power and acted to prevent them rather
than running away. Portugal, in my view, remains
responsible for what has happened in Timor.

26. I should like to reiterate the assurance of my
Government
that it will continue to do its best to
co-operate as far as possible with the United Nations,
always taking into account the wishes of the people of
East Timor and the existing realities in the Territory.
In conclusion, allow me, Mr. President, to express
once again the earnest hope of my delegation that the
Council under your wise and able guidance will indeed
be able to contribute contructively
to the remaining
stage of the decolonization
process in East Timor in
accordance with the wishes of the people of the
Territory.
27. The PRESIDENT
(frtrnslnfic~n from Chinese):
The next speaker is the representative of Australia.
I therefore invite him to take his place at the Council
table and to make his statement.
28. Mr. HARRY
(Australia):
Mr. President,
I
appreciate this opportunity
to address the Council
once again on the subject of East Timor, and I wish
to assure you, Sir, of my delegation’s
desire to
co-operate fully with you in the Council’s efforts to
find a solution to this question.

24. The representative
of Portugal reminded the
Council that his country has already given the intemational community
sufficient proof of its impartiality,
sincerity and determination
in the difftcult task of
decolonization,
which it has endeavoured to complete
successfully. Indonesia sincerely welcomed the Portuguese change of heart, though in justice to the liberation movements in the former Portuguese colonies we
believe that the gallant fight and the successes of those
movements
in Mozambique,
Angola and GuineaBissau against the Portuguese colonial troops are not
entirely irrelevant to that change of heart. In fact, the
successes of the liberation movements were one of the
most important
factors, if not the decisive factor,

29. We likewise welcome the reports of the Secretary-General and of Mr. Winspeare Guicciardi,
and
I wish on behalf of my Government to congratulate
the latter on the task he performed under the terms
of resolution 384 (1975). His report is a significant
addition to our knowledge of the situation in East
Timor.
30. The Secretary-General
and his Special Representative were both in Australia at the beginning of
4

February. As a result, they each have gained an
appreciation of the intense Australian public interest in
the Timor question. Indeed, the events as they have
unfolded in East Timor since the middle of last year
have caused deep public distress in my country. My
Government
feels keenly the need for peace in the
Territory
and for progress and prosperity for its
people.

East Timor, and we welcome their assurances that he
would be able to visit areas to which he had not been
able to travel on his earlier visit to the Territory.
36. The Australian position on the Timorconflict
has
been clearly stated. It accords with the resolutions
adopted in December by the General Assembly
[3485 (XXX)] and by the Security Council [384 (I 975)].
We support the main thrust of both resolutions, notably
their call for a withdrawal of outside forces and a
process by which the people of East Timor can determine their own future.

3 1. The Special Representative expended much effort
in his endeavours over a period of some weeks to
determine the views of the parties and to promote the
conditions necessary for the parties to discuss differences among themselves. His task was not always
easy, but he clearly went to great lengths, in the’
face of considerable
difficulties,
to establish comprehensive contacts with the various parties and
Governments
as required under the terms of his
mandate.

37. We were glad to read in the ofticial statement
issued by the Indonesian.Government
in Djakarta on
20 March that the “Provisional
Government”
had
notified Indonesia that it would shortly be repatriating
some of the Indonesian forces from the Territory. It
appears, moreover,
that some may already have
returned to Indonesia-and
we have just heard a
statement in this connexion by the representative of
Indonesia. Australia welcomes these developments,
and we look forward to further moves in this direction
in line with our policy of seeking the withdrawal of all
outside forces.

32. The Indonesian
Government
assisted with the
Special Representative’s
visit to Dili, whence he
travelled to areas of Timor administered by the “Provisional Government
of East Timor”.
While in Dili,
Mr. Winspeare Guicciardi was able to have discussions with members of all parties which have decided
to join the “Provisional
Government”.

38. In my last statement to the Council on East
Timor
[/865th
meeting]
I emphasized
that the
Australian
Government
and people were most
conscious that a stable settlement in East Timor could
rest only on the free choice by the people concerned.
It remains the firm policy of the Australian Government that the people of the Territory should exercise
freely and effectively their right to self-determination,
and, if their decision is to have any validity, it must be
made in the full knowledge of the alternatives from
which they are to make their choice. My Government
does not, however, presume to lay down any precise
formula or modalities
for self-determination.
We
should prefer to respond to the wishes of the Timorese
people themselves as to the best means by which they
might genuinely exercise their right of self-determination.

33. In response to his request, the Australian Govemment was pleased to welcome
Mr. Winspeare
Guicciardi in Darwin, where he attempted to arrange
a visit to FRETILIN-held
areas. But while he was
able to meet FRETILIN
representatives
at several
places in the course of his mission, including Darwin,
he was unable to reach FRETILIN-held
areas in
Timor. This was a matter of regret to my Government,
which, contrary to some suggestions which have been
made, agreed to provide the Special Representative
with facilities to assist him to establish contact with
the FRETILIN
forces in Timor.
34. We do not regard his mission as being necessarily finished. The Special Representative
has been
able to clarify the positions of the parties on the spot
with respect to the future of East Timor. Clearly there
remain great differences between them as to how the
situation in the Territory should develop and as to
how the people should express their views. The Special Representative, however, senses that despite these
differences there is some common desire for further
consultations, and the Secretary-General
has proposed
that time should be allowed for the Special Representative to continue these consultations.

39. We note from the Special Representative’s
report
that the parties principally concerned are also agreed
on the need for United Nations involvement
in selfdetermination
in the Territory.
While we recognize
that the question of United Nations assistance in this
area would need to be subject to separate consideration and examination,
we nevertheless believe that
some form of United Nations participation
would be
appropriate, desirable and in the best interests of the
parties concerned.

35. The Special Representative has also spoken of the
situation in the Territory
as continuing
to evolve.
This would suggest that there is still a requirement
for information on developments there. A further visit
to Timor by the Special Representative could help in
this regard. We note from Mr. Winspeare Guicciardi’s
report that the “Provisional
Government.
of East
Timor”
has invited him to make a further visit to

40. We have noted the remarks of the representatives
of the “Provisional
Government”
and their proposals
for self-determination
in the Territory. At first glance
these proposals would appear to bear some relation
to an earlier programme of decolonization
announced
by the Government of Portugal. While we believe they
are interesting and deserve further study, there would
5

be a need to ensure that the election of a people’s
assembly or parliament
was conducted in- such a
manner as would allow the people of East Timor
freely to express their views.

resolutions 1514 (XV) and 1541 (XV) since the adoption of these historic decisions by the General
Assembly more than 15 years ago. It is in the context
of this firm commitment
to the principles of decolonization, and in the hope of making a contribution,
however modest, to the .peaceful resolution of the
question of Timor, that my delegation has asked to
be allowed to participate in this debate.

41. The Australian Government continues to regard
as important
an early resumption
of international
humanitarian
aid to the Territory.
The conflict has
brought hardship and suffering to much of the population. We appreciate the work of the Indonesian Red
Cross, but this is a task in which others, including,
of course, the International
Red Cross, would be glad
to participate. Australia has already provided humanitarian assistance not only within East Timor itself
but also to the Timorese who last year took refuge
in Indonesian Timor. Australia remains ready to contribute again to humanitarian aid for East Timor.

46. I should like to take this opportunity to reiterate
the position of the Government
of the Philippines
with regard to that question. As my delegation stated
during the debate on agenda item 88, “Question of
Territories under Portuguese administration”,
in the
Fourth Committee of the General Assembly on 11 December last year,* the Philippines unalterably supports
the exercise of the sacred right to self-determination
by the people of East Timor. My Government also supports the idea of a United Nations presence in the
Territory in order to determine that the people does
in fact exercise that right. Finally, the Philippines
strongly believes that the process of self-determination
in the Territory must take place in a manner consonant
with the wishes expressed by the people of East Timor.
My delegation believes also that the solution to the
question of.Timor should not only contribute to the
enhancement of stability, peace and security in the
region in the interests of the peoples of Timor and
South East Asia but should also uphold the fundamental principles of the Charter.

Our wish is to see an end to the suffering in
Timor and to encourage all moves designed to resolve
the conflict. It appears that, although the situation
in the Territory has evolved since the Council last
considered the question, some fighting may be continuing there. We believe that the Council’s best course
at this stage would be to extend the mandate of the
Special Representative to allow him to make a second
visit to the Territory to assess the situation afresh
and to ascertain the prospects for consultations among
the parties. Out of his renewed efforts, we would also
hope to get a clearer picture of the means by which the
people of the Territory
may freely and effectively
express their choice about their future.

42.

47. In that light, my delegation
has noted with
appreciation the stand taken by the Indonesian Government on the question of East Timor, as enunciated
by Ambassador Anwar Sani and other members of
his delegation on various occasions, that Indonesia
supports the exercise of self-determination
by the
people of East Timor, that it has no intention of
attempting to impose any solution on them, and that it
hopes that the United Nations will participate in the
process of decolonization
in the Territory. That is in
keeping with its record of support for decolonization
during its many years of membership in the United
Nations, as attested .by its active membership in the
Committee of 24,’ in the United Nations Council for
Namibia, and, together with my country, in the Special
Committee against Apartheid.

43. The PRESIDENT
(trunslntion fro/n Chinese):
The next speaker is the representative of the Philippines, whom I invite to take a place at the Council
table and to address the Council.
44. Mr. YANG0 (Philippines):
Mr. President, allow
me to begin by expressing my delegation’s congratulations to you on your assumption of the Presidency of
the Council for the month of April and to thank you
and the other members for allowing my delegation to
participate in this important debate. In view of the
w.arm relations between our two countries, marked by
our recent initiation of diplomatic relations, it gives my
delegatien particular pleasure to see you presiding over
the Council’s deliberations.
I am confident that under
the skilled leadership of so distinguished a statesman
as you, the Council will be able to deal successfully
with the questions which confront it. I should also like
to take this opportunity
to express my delegation’s
gratitude to your predecessor, Ambassador Boya of
Benin, for his leadership of the Council during the
eventful month of March.

48. It is relevant to recall that Indonesia entered
East Timor at the request of those parties representing
the majority of the East Timorese and did so only
after efforts to find a peaceful solution to the strife
in the Territory had failed. The Council must recognize
that Indonesia, no less than other countries in other
regions, has an interest in and concern for the security
and stability of South East Asia. Be that as it may, my
Government welcomes the fact that peace and order
have been largely restored in the Territory and that
Indonesian volunteer forces have begun the process
of withdrawal from East Timor with the consent of its
Provisional Government.
My delegation cannot fail
to note that the people of East Timor have expressed

45. As a founding Member of the United Nations,
the Philippines
has from the beginning consistently
supported the sacred right of colonial countries and
peoples to self-determination.
My Government
has
steadfastly
supported the implementation
of this
process throughout
the world as it is embodied in
6

demonstrated
that many of the fears expressed by
those who voted in favour of the resolution in December were in fact unfounded and that the process of
decolonization
is proceeding in a manner eminently
suited to the needs and desires of the people of East
Timor.

the wish through the four parties-APODETI
[Associag60 Popular
Democrdtica
Timorense],
UDT
[UniZo Democrdtica
de Timor], KOTA [Klibur Oan
Timor Aswain] and Trabalhista-to
be integrated with
Indonesia and that Indonesia has refused to accede
to their request except in so far as the people of East
Timor themselves shall have expressed their wishes
in a formal act of self-determination.
To our mind, that
action on the part of Indonesia attests to its goodwill
and desire to co-operate with the United Nations. The
establishment of the Provisional Government of East
Timor should facilitate that expression of the popular
will.

53. The concern of the Philippines over the question
of East Timor has been brought about by considerations of a common geography and history of colonial
rule and above all by reason of goodwill for a neighbouring people for whose future development
and
progress the people and Government of the Philippines
entertain the most cordial good wishes. It is our earnest
hope that the people of Timor will be enabled to
embark upon a political future which they themselves
have chosen and that they will decide what is best
for themselves without undesirable
outside interference or pressure or influence. Such a course of
development will be in full accord with the provisions
of the historic Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples.

49. The report of the Secretary-General’s
Special
Representative, Mr. Winspeare Guicciardi, annexed to
document S/1201 1, testifies to the effectiveness of the
Provisional Government
in restoring services to the
people and to the substantial amount of aid given by
Indonesia to promote this vital task.
50. My delegation appreciates the objectivity
with
which Mr. Winspeare Guicciardi approached his task
and the problems that he faced as a result of weather
conditions and communications
difficulties.
We note
that all the parties concerned are agreed on the need to
consult the people of East Timor on their future
political status. The differences apparently ,stem from
the means of determining
the wishes of the people.
Mr. Winspeare Guicciardi himself said, in paragraph 44
of his report, that there is a “common
assumption
that the people of East Timor should be consulted
on the future-status of the Territory”.
My delegation
believes, in this connexion, that the modalities of the
act of self-determination
should also take into account
the wishes of the people, paying particular attention
to the existing socio-cultural
institutions
in the Territory. Statesmanship and patient negotiations could
1
do much towards reaching an agreed solution. ,

54. My Government
strongly reaffirms its support
for the principles of the historic Asian-African Con-,
ference held at Bandurg in 1955, hosted by Indonesia.
At that Conference, it will be recalled, the emerging
newly independent
countries
of the third world
enunciated a number of precepts which were to form,
the foundation of the non-aligned movement. Among
those precepts was the declaration of non-interference
in the affairs of others and, implicitly,
the acceptance
of the idea that consideration
should be given to
regional interests in the solution of questions which
are primarily regional in nature. The acceptance of that
principle by the international
community
as a whole
has promoted peace and security throughout the world
and has greatly facilitated
the work of the United
Nations itself.

51. My delegation has noted with appreciation
the
action taken by the Provisional Government in inviting
a mission from the Security Council or the Committee.
of 24 to examine conditions in the island. The invitation was reiterated by the chairman of the delegation
of the Provisional
Government
of East Timor,
Mr. Guilherme Maria GonGalves, in his statement to
the Council [/90&h meeting]. This is yet another proof
that the Provisional Government
desires to have its
actions and decisions scrutinized by the international
community.

55. It is in the light of those considerations that the
Philippines has carefully observed Indonesia’s conduct
during the developments
in the Timor situation., My
Government has no doubt that throughout this process
Indonesia’s actions have been motivated by a scru- ’
pulous regard for the wishes of the people of East
Timor and for the opinions of the international
cornmunity. Indonesia has exercised its responsibility with
objectivity
and, in doing so, has contributed
to the
solution of the problem of East Timor and to the promotion of the peace and security of the region, in which
the Philippines ‘has a vital interest.

52. My delegation believes that the members of the
Council should note that the international
community
itself recognized the unusual nature of the East Timor
situation during the General Assembly’s debate and
vote on the draft resolution
that became resolution 3485 (XXX). In consequence, the vote itself, 72
to 10, with 43 abstentions, revealed that many nations
felt the provisions of the resolution were not entirely
appropriate to the conditions existing in the Territory.
My delegation submits that subsequent events have

56. In conclusion, my delegation expresses the hope
that-the Council will take into account the goodwill
expressed by the chairman of the delegation of the
Provisional Government
of East Timor in extending
an invitation to the Council or the Special Committee
on decolonization’
to visit East Timor for a factual
assessment of the conditions there. My delegation,
cognizant of the inalienable right to self-determination
,
of the people of East Timor, whole-heartedly supports
that proposal.
7

There was also a misperception
of the determination
of the people to resist aggression and to fight for their
independence. The bad judgement I refer to was the
decision of UDT to stage a show of force following
what I believe to be ill-advised encouragement from
the Indonesian
Government,
whilst the irrational
ideological bias, I believe, was that shown by Indonesia in its persistent efforts to create a communist
bogey out of FRETILIN.

57. The PRESIDENT
(translation
from Chinese):
It will be recalled that the Council agreed at its
1908th meeting to extend an invitation, under rule 39
of the provisional rules of procedure, to Mr. Ken Fry,
as requested in document S/12047. As Mr. Fry is the
next speaker on my list, I now invite him to take
a place at the Council table and to address the
Council.
58. Mr: FRY: Mr. President, members of the Security
Council: I thank you for your courtesy in allowing
me to address the Security Council on the difficult
problems confronting the people of East Timor. I came
to New York from Australia at the request of the
Democratic Republic of East Timor, but I present my
views to the Council as an independent
observer
who has followed the events in Timor with a great deal
of interest and, I must say, with a great deal of sadness
at what has taken place.

63. It is not possible to get a clear picture of the
number of casualties in East Timor, but they are
undoubtedly
quite extensive as a proportion of the
total population, and the conflict in East Timor must be
regarded as one of the most sordid, most tragic and
most unjustified episodes in the history of modem
decolonization.
64. When I first visited East Timor in March 1975
the Portuguese Administration
was still in firm control,
with offtcers of the armed forces movement carefully
nurturing the orderly development of political parties
as a stage in the move towards independence. When
we arrived we invited all parties to meet with us
publicly and separately to discuss their aims and their
aspirations. We had responses from three parties only,
and I believe that they were then, and are now, the
only three parties with any real measure of support in
the Timorese community.

59. In my search for the truth of what was happening
in Timor-and
I must emphasize how elusive the
truth can be from a distance-I
and some of my
colleagues from the Australian
Parliament
visited
East Timor twice during 1975: the first time in March,
during the period of the coalition between FRETILIN
and UDT; and then, on the second occasion, in midSeptember, when FRETILIN
was firmly in control,
following the abortive UDT show of force in August.

65. At the first meeting we met APODETI,
and there
were about 50 people present. At the second meeting
we met with UDT offtcials in a hall in Dili, and we had
about 150 people present; and our final meeting was
with FRETILIN,
when there were 4,000 people
estimated to be present. These figures for the meetings
in Dili gave us an indication of the extent of support
for each group, and this was broadly verified by other
gatherings at regional centres which various members
of our party visited by helicopter.

60. Whilst my views are those of an independent
observer, I would assure members of the Council that
they generally coincide with the views of those of my
parliamentary
colleagues-over
50 of them-who
last
week signed a petition to the United Nations calling
for the early withdrawal of Indonesian forces from East
Timor. The majority of those signing the petition are
members of the Australian Labour Party, at present
in opposition, but it was also signed by several members of both of the coalition parties of the Government.

66. At the conclusion of the meetings the consensus
of opinion of our members was that, at .a generous
estimate, APODETI
would have a maximum support
of about 5 per cent, UDT would have a support of 10
or 15 per cent, with the overwhelming
mass support
of at least 80 per cent for FRETILIN.
This is as we
saw it in East Timor.
We agreed, too, that the
APODETI
and UDT support, although relatively
small,
represented
powerful
minorities-property
owners, commercial interests and top administratorswho, naturally, had a vested interest in maintaining
a relatively privileged status in the community.

61. I would claim, too, that my views would generally
coincide with the views of the many private citizens
and organizations in Australia that support the cause of
the independence of East Timor. These include organizations which have been set up in every state in the
Commonwealth
for this specific purpose, as well as
church and overseas aid organizations. It includes the
Australian Council of Churches and the Australian
Council of Trade Unions, both of which have expressed
support for Timorese independence
to the United
Nations, and I can assure members that there is a
growing body of support for the Timorese independence movement amongst the public of Australia.

67. At that stage FRETILIN
and UDT were working
in coalition, as they were both advocates of independence, and they differed only on the question oftiming
and on the nature of the future relationship
with
Portugal. It was the breakdown of this coalition which
. .
ultimately led to civil war.
..
,..
68. In view of Indonesia’s well articulated hostility
to FRETILIN
and the fact that the breaking of the

62. I believe that the Timorese people have been,
and in fact continue to be, the victims of a cruel and
blatant miscarriage of justice based on a series of misperceptions, bad judgements and misguided, irrational
ideological bias. The misperception
has been that of
Indonesia and other nations of the relative strengths of
the political parties which had emerged in East Timor.
8

coalition and the abortive UDT show offorce followed
soon after a visit of UDT leaders to Djakarta, it was
generally assumed that Indonesia was largely responsible for this ill-advised decision to stage the coup.
This was later confirmed when we interviewed UDT
leaders who were heid prisoner in hospital in Dili
during our second visit.

known to International
Red Cross and other aid
personnel in East Timor. They were believed to
contain the bodies of victims from both sides of the
conflict. With the Indonesian reports of more recent
mass graves, there is no evidence whatever to show
whether they in fact died by Indonesian or FRETILIN
bullets. With regard to the Provisional. Government’s
brochure, which many members may have seen, it
should be noted that some of the victims listed as
being killed or missing are reported to be still alive,
and it should be noted also that many names are said
to be misspelt, which, I suggest, casts serious doubt on
the credibility of that publication.

69. During our first visit to East Timor we particularly
sought evidence to support Indonesia’s
claim that
FRETILIN
was, in fact, a communist
or Marxist
Party. No such evidence was forthcoming, and the lack
of support on the ground for FRETILIN
from any
other country in the subsequent fighting, apart from
limited humanitarian
aid through normal channels,
gives the lie to these allegations.

74. Lopes da Cruz told a news conference on 12 February 1976 that 50,000 to 60,000 people had been
victims of the. fighting and added, “Excesses often
occur now as revenge for FRETILIN
cruelty”. Indonesian sources later claimed that the figure of 50,000
to 60,000 included 40,000 refugees, but soon after
that statement Lopes da Cruz again repeated the
original figures, claiming that 50,000 to 60,000 people
had been murdered by FRETILIN,
without making any
reference to refugees. There have also been a number
of press reports from Djakarta that some particular
units of the Indonesian army have been withdrawn
from East Timor because of excesses in the field of
battle.

70. I again visited Timor with two parliamentary
colleagues in mid-September
of 1975, soon after
FRETILIN
had taken control following the abortive
show of force by UDT. I understand that the report
on that visit may have been seen by members of this
Council, and I would merely reiterate briefly that we
visited four widely separated centres of our own
choice by chartered aircraft and inspected prisoners at
Dili, Baucau, and Viqueque.
Wherever we went
FRETILIN
was in full control and there was not the
slightest evidence of continued conflict. We were
completely
satisfied that there was not, in fact, any
civil war taking place in East Timor in mid-September
1975. The only conflict was in minor border clashes
with forces operating from West Timor, near Batugade.

75. I should like briefly to refer to statements made
by Mr. Sydde!!. I never met Mr. Syddell when I went
to East Timor, but some of my colleagues did. At
that stage he was bitterly opposed to Indonesian
interest and concern with East Timor. My colleagues
say that he never impressed them as a reliable or
satisfactory witness. He was certainly not in a position
to follow or to judge events from his isolated situation
under house arrest. He appears to be a person with a
vested interest in the attainment of Indonesia’s objectives, and I believe he is merely repeating information fed to him from Indonesian sources.

71. We found the FRETILIN
administration
to be
responsible and moderate, and it obviously enjoyed
strong support from the East Timorese people. The
prisoners were being we!! cared for, and it is worth
noting that the prisoners included some FRETILIN
supporters who had been apprehended for breaches
of discipline. The FRETILIN
member with whom we
travelled always impressed on the gatherings and on
his troops the need for discipline, claiming that independence was more’ important than revenge.

76. In the limited
war there were undoubtedly
excesses on both sides, but in considering
the
casualties it should not be forgotten that UDT started
the bloodletting,
not FRETILIN.
In this situation
there were bound to be reprisals before FRETILIN
established full control and enforced a strict discipline.
After the Indonesian invasion, there would have been
no point in indiscriminate
killing by FRETILIN,
when
they needed the good will and support of the ordinary
people to survive against vastly superior Indonesian
forces.

72. Although the FRETILIN
administration
faced
serious supply and economic problems, order had
been restored and the people were going back to the
villages to tend their crops. The civil war had ended,
and there was no need or justification
for Indonesian
intervention to restore order. Like a!! other Australians
who visited Portuguese Timor during this period,
I came away full of admiration for the Central Committee of FRETILIN.
I was tremendously
impressed
by their moderation,
by their integrity and by their
intelligence in dealing with a very difficult situation.
_^.
73. I wish to comment briefly on the elusive question
of- casualties. From my inquiries and observations
during the September visit I was satisfied that about
400 people had died in Dili and possibly up to 1,500 in
other areas during the two phases of the civil war.
Even at that stage the presence of mass graves was

77. I should like to mention that I was able to bring
to New York a film of the conflict around Balibo. This ”
film was taken by an Australian television news crew,
a!! of whom were killed shortly after it was made. The
film is available to the Council to use at it sees fit.
78. From my observations during my two visits, five
most important points emerged. First, I am convinced
9

there has been a serious and persistent misperception
of the strength of the mass support for FRETILIN.
There has also been misperception of the strong desire
for independence by the large majority of the East
Timorese people. Secondly, I believe that this misperception led to grave errors of judgement by Indonesia, by UDT and by APODETI,
and possibly by
other nations, in assessing their attitudes towards the
conflict. Thirdly, the civil war was started by UDT
and some APODETI
supporters and encouraged by
Indonesia. It was not started by FRETILIN.
Fourthly,
there was no civil war in progress after mid-September
1975, when Indonesian forces began their aggression in
the border areas. Fifthly, the Provisional Government
of East Timor does not represent the will of the
majority of people in East Timor. It represents majority
groups that are concerned with protecting their own
vested interests rather than the long-term interests of
the Timorese people as a whole.

85. The PRESIDENT
ftrunslution
from Cfzinesek
The next speaker is Mr. Guilherme Maria Gonc;alves,
to whom the Council has extended an invitation under
rule 39 of its provisional rules of procedure. I invite
Mr. Gonsalves to take a place at the Council table and
to make an additional statement.
86. Mr. GONCALVES:
in reply.

I have asked to speak again

87. In his statement to the Council [1908th meeting]
Mr. Hot-ta made a number of wild and extravagant
charges concerning developments in East Timor. While
for the most part they are so absurd that they do not
require refutation, my delegation would not wish its
silence on these matters to be taken as agreement with
Mr. Horta’s contentions. Accordingly, I wish to reply
to certain of his allegations.
88. To begin with, Mr. Horta has accused the volunteers of having resorted to chemical and biological
warfare, including the dropping of napalm on villages
and of biological bombs in the region of Los Palos.
It is well known that only big Powers can afford the
great investment necessary to produce chemical and
biological weapons. It is therefore absurd to accuse
Indonesia, with its very limited resources, of having
employed such weapons.

79. So much for the past, but today we are more
concerned for the future of East Timor. If the Indonesians withdraw and leave the present Provisional
Government in charge, I have no doubt that further
bloodshed will take place, because that Government
does not represent the people.
80. I would hope that the Council might consider
setting up an alternative
administration
assited by
representatives
of the three main parties for the
purpose of carrying out a genuine act of self-determination, to be followed in due course by democratic
elections.

89. As for the situation in East Timor, I should like
to state .here that the Provisional
Government
will
fully co-operate should the Council deem it necessary
to send an expert to determine the truth of Mr. Horta’s
accusations, on the understanding that Mr. Horta-will
provide more details concerning where these weapons
are supposed to have been used. I understand that an
expert should be able to detect the traces left by the
use of napalm and chemical and biological weapons.

81. I believe very strongly that without Indonesian
interference there is room for reconciliation
between
the various groups under the auspices of the United
Nations. I am not able to speak on behalf of the
Australian Government,
but I am confident that if a
stable situation were established by the United Nations
there would be very prompt and very substantial support from Australia to help our near neighbours on the
road back to recovery and to the orderly development
of their country.

90. Mr. Horta has also alleged that “the Indonesian
blockade has prevented any medical help, food-stuffs
or other humanitarian
assistance from reaching our
people” [ibid., pm-u. 271. In so far as Indonesia’s
actions are concerned, we can only say that the people
of East Timor are very grateful for what the Indonesian
people gave us when they were requested to help.
The world knows that the Indonesian Government was
the only foreign Power to send humanitarian aid in the
form of medical personnel and supplies, food and other
necessities to the refugees and victims of FRETILIN
terrorism. At this very moment, thousands of Indonesian volunteers are active in East Timor. Doctors,
nurses and teachers, and technicians to repair bridges,
roads, irrigation systems, communications
and airports and to assist in the promotion of urban and rural
development,
the construction of low-cost homes and
school buildings and so on-all have been sent. Their
presence has become necessary because of the
characteristic
legacy of colonialism-the
total lack
of education and the absence of .skilled personnel.
Under the Portuguese regime, men had to’ be brought
from Portugal even to keep the water running. When

82. I come to the Council as an individual citizen in
the hope that even at this late stage the members
will see the gross injustice of the East Timorese
episode and that they will not stand by and see a
virtually defenceless and small nation brutally crushed
by an irrational and misguided aggressive neighbour
without any real justification.
83. I appeal to Indonesia to pull back its troops and
to recall its own early struggle for Indonesian independence and national liberation.
84. If there is to be any hope for the virtues of right
against might, I appeal to you with all the sincerity
at my disposal to have the courage to see that justice
is done for the people of East Timor who, even now as
we speak, are fighting and dying for their independence and national liberation.
10

society is a highly respected one, and we are proud
of that. Therefore there is no need for me to burden
the Council by responding to the many absurd insinuations of Mr. Horta on that score.

FRETILIN
was in power they once or twice received
medical supplies from Australia. What did they do with
this aid? They sold part of the supplies, worth at
least $2,000, to a Chinese merchant in Baucau named
Vong Vun Fi for a mere $200.

95. In his effort to mislead the Council, Mr. Horta
has once again cited a toll of 60,000 dead in East
Timor as a result of the civil war. The Provisional
Government,
in its telegram of 25 March 1976, gave
the following clarification:

91. Concerning the mass graves discovered in East
Timor, Mr. Horta stated, “After killing hundreds of
people and throwing them in common graves, they
made a film of it and presented it as a FRETILIN
atrocity.”
[Ibid.,
para.
30.1 My delegation
has
delivered to the Secretariat the film in question and
photographs of the mass graves as documentation
for
the Council. I hope that, the members of the Council
would take the brief time necessarydnly
6 minutesto view the film so that they can ascertain for themselves the truth of Mr. Horta’s charges.

“The 60,000 victims of the civil war during the
last six months since the outbreak of hostilities in
the former Portuguese colony, .as mentioned
by
Mr. Lopes da Cruz, was the total number of victims,
including the more than 40,000 refugees who had fled
from FRETILIN’s..
. high-handed rule of Dili and
other places in East Timor.”
[S/12041, awwx,
para.

92. It is unfortunate that Mr. Horta found it necessary in his statement to slander Mr. Arnaldo Araujo,
the head of our Provisional
Government.
Everyone
in Timor knows that Mr. Araujo did not collaborate
with the Allies against the Japanese during the Second
World War, as did many other leaders of the people
elsewhere in Asia. The colonial peoples of that time
looked upon Japan as their liberator and ally against
their European oppressors. Mr. Horta’s record itself
does not stand comparison with Mr. Araujo’s, for
Mr. Horta himself was a paid informer of the Portuguese secret police. Many Timorese seeking freedom
from colonial rule were thrown into prison because of
his activities. As for Mr. Araujo’s escape from death
at the hands of FRETILIN,
it occurred during the
attack on Dili as his captors were attempting
to
transfer him secretly from Dili to join other hostages
held elsewhere. In the confusion caused by the attack
of the joint forces on the capital, he managed to
escape. If he had not, he would have received the same
treatment as did his son and the rest of his unfortunate
countrymen’massacred
by FRETILIN.

I.]

In the early part of the civil war, during which
FRETILIN
held the upper hand and’ruthlessly pursued
its opponents, outside observers estimated that 3,000
deaths occurred in addition to the tens of thousands
of victims who suffered injuries that were not fatal.
96. In his statement two daysago, Mr. Horta claimed
that his party still controls more than 80 per cent of the
territory and 95 per cent of the population
of East
Timor. Mr. Horta evidently likes large figures, but he
should not insult the intelligence of Council members.
Assuming that the Provisional Government controlled
only the towns of Dili, Baucau, Los Palos, Viqueque,
Bobonaro, Atabai, Maliana, Liquisa, Ermera, Same,
Betano, Ainaro and Aileu, it would control at least
200,000 people-about
30 per cent of the population.
How can Mr. Hot-ta claim that 80 per cent of the
territory is under his control when he could not point
to even one spot where the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General
could land safely in his effort to
contact the FRETILIN
leadership?

93. Among those still listed as ‘missing is indeed
Mr. Arsenio Horta, the brother of Jose Ramos Horta.
I can easily understand Mr. Horta’s concern for his
brother, but there is no need for him to’ tell lies and
to cover up his brother’s activities. Arsenio Hot-ta
was an active member of the joint forces and fought
bravely in many engagements
with them against
FRETILIN.
He was captured by FRETILIN
in September 1975 at’Maubara and put into prison in Dili. He
was among the many prisoners of FRETILIN
who were
secretly transfered from Dili to the countryside before
the capital was liberated by the joint forces. Unfortunately, the Provisional Government has been unable
to determine the fate of this young man. We are deeply
concerned that he may be one of the many patriots
who have fallen victim to the FRETILIN
massacres.

97. Mr. Horta, who left Dili on 5 December 1975,
evidently is suffering from a lack of current information about East Timor. At the present time only a few
pockets of desperate FRETILIN
remnants remain in
remote corners of my country. Mr. Horta should wake
up. It is because of these positive developments
and
the gradual return to normality
that the Indonesian
volunteers
began returning
to their homes last
February,
with more following
in March. It is
expected that the return of the armed volunteers will
be completed within a short time.
98. While I am speaking, I should like to comment on
the statement of the representative of Portugal. He
mentioned, among other points, that neither our four
political parties-UDT,
APODETI,
KOTA and Trabalhista-who
represent the majority of the people
of East Timor nor the Provisional Government
have
the right to ask for assistance from Indonesia. Again,
the representative appointed himself to the bench and
decided who has rights and who has not.

94. FRETILIN
certainly has a permanent
firing
squad, or death squad, in their structure. The Provisional Government has never had one. The traditional
position of the elderly and of women in our tribal
11

99. It really hurt my feelings and insulted my dignity
as a Timorese when the representative from Portugal
stated:

to the suggestion of a second visit of the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General,
if the Council
wishes him to make such a visit. In addition, let me
repeat that if,the United Nations, the Security Council,
or the Committee
of 24’ desires to send a
mission to the Territory to witness the real situation,
they are welcome to do so. The Provisional Government will do its utmost to facilitate the success of such
a mission.

“Portugal has no political, strategic or economic
interest as regards Timor, a Territory
of which
we continue to be the administering Power. Portugal,
furthermore,
has already given the international
community
sufficient proof of its impartiality,
sincerity and determination
in the difficult task of
decolonization,
which we have endeavoured
to
complete successfully.” 11908th meering, pat-a. 105.1

103.

Let the sun shine in East Timor

again!

104. The PRESIDENT
(trunslation
from Chinese):
The next speaker is Mr. Rex Syddell, to whom the
Council agreed, at the outset of this meeting, to extend
an invitation under rule 39 of the provisional rules of
procedure, as requested in document S/12049. I therefore now invite him to take a place at the Council
table in order to address the Council.

That statement obviously shows how treacherous and
nai’ve is the attitude of the present Government
in
Portugal. If it is true that Portugal does not have any
political, strategic or economic interests in East Timor,
how was it possible for the Portuguese to remain in
East Timor for 500 years, exploiting the people to
the utmost? And if the Portuguese
were really
impartial,
why should they support FRETILIN,
a
party which represented only a small number of the
people of East Timor, with arms and munitions?
Because of the so-called impartiality
of Portugal,
thousands of innocent people were slaughtered by the
FRETILIN
terrorists.

105. Mr. SYDDELL:
I should like to thank you,
Mr. President, for the courtesy extended to me by this
body in providing me with an opportunity under rule 39
to supply you with additional current relevant information on the situation in East Timor. In addition to my
earlier association of more than 30 years with East
Timor, I spent the last three years as a resident of the
Territory with formal Portuguese title of residence,
until being evacuated for urgent medical treatment on
5 March 1976. Thus, the information I will present to
you is only six weeks old.

100. What right does he have to speak about the
destiny and future of the East Timorese people except
in so far as they are his former slaves?
101. Let me tell the representative from Lisbon this:
we East Timorese love the Portuguese people and we
respect their culture, but please stop trying to teach
us what is right and what is wrong. The East Timorese
people of today is the product of the Portuguese
colonial system. Had the Portuguese taught us differently in the past, East Timor would certainly not be
in this chamber today.

106. Before reading my statement, I should like to
make clear to you that I am here of my own volition
as an independent witness to recent developments in
the Territory. My expenses and those of my wife, who
has accompanied me and is sitting opposite me, are
being covered by our respective families. I have come
out of retirement
resolved to clarify developments
in the Territory and to help to obtain international
aid for its unfortunate people. Despite most tempting
offers from a section of the international
press and
television for exclusive rights to the account. of our
experiences, we are determined not to capitalize on
human suffering and instead have elected to provide
simultaneously
an account to the United Nations, the
Government
of Indonesia and the Government
of
Australia.
My erstwhile compatriot,
Mr. Fry, has
obviously been speaking from presumption or assumption, since he has not been in Timor since last September. The conclusions he has drawn from such
speculation are not consistent with my own observations of conditions in the Territory.

102. In my first statement [/90&h nwrtirtg]
I tried to
present to the Council the facts, developments
and
prevailing conditions in East Timor. I explained the
relations between the Provisional
Government
and
the Indonesian people. I also communicated
the sacred
wishes of the majority of the people of East Timor to
the Council members. I touched upon the positive
developments in the maintenance of peace and security
and law and order in East Timor while rehabilitation
and reconstruction efforts are progressing. I drew the
Council’s attention to the return of the armed volunteers to their places of origin. This should be seen as
a follow-up of the aforementioned
developments and
as a symbol of our respect for the United Nations.
I even mentioned the preparations undertaken by the
Provisional Government to facilitate the determination
of the future political status of East Timor. I also
suggested that the traditional value systems of East
Timor be seriously considered by the Council as a
modality.in
the implementation
of the exercise of the
right of self-determination.
Last but not least, I stated
the positive response of the Provisional Government

107. I should now like to read my sworn statement
without prejudice, duly subscribed to before the competent Australian legal authorities, as is my birthright
as an Australian citizen.
108. My initial contact with Timor took place more
than 30 years ago. In 1968, at the invitation of the
Portuguese Government,
I began to make monthly
12

visits, each of which lasted approximately
one week,
in connexion with various business interests in the
colony. Finally, in 1973 I settled on a lo-hectare
plantation at Tutuala, in the Los Palos district at the
eastern end of the island, with other holdings totalling
200 hectares spread throughout
the whole colony.
I lived there for three years with my wife, Jane,
spending the period from mid-September
to 7 December 1975 under conditions of increasing restriction and
living under close house arrest imposed by FRETILIN
forces from 7 December until rescued by Indonesian
volunteer forces on 23 February 1976. Our house
arrest was enforced by a 24-hour armed guard
surrounding the property. Our only visitors for two
and a half months were FRETILIN
officials, who came
to hear the morning, afternoon and evening news transmissions by Radio Australia,
which I truthfully
translated for them in a mixture of Portuguese and the
local dialect, they understanding
no English. My
experiences throughout the Territory have given me
a broad familiarity with the social and economic conditions in which the Timorese people live.

with totally different dialects spoken in each separate
administrative
region, with few schools, no compulsory
education requirement,
and teachers speaking pidjin
Portuguese whose own instructional
training in “the
three R’s” consisted of a 40-days’ course instituted
less than a decade ago in the provincial regions, it.
is not surprising that only a handful of people could
do more than count to ten or sign their own names.
112. This miserable state of affairs was reflected in
the educational attainments of the East Timorese. The
Territory has never produced a single professional,
in sharp contrast to the situation in Indonesian West
Timor, which has produced doctors, lawyers and
members of the diplomatic service. In East Timor the
highest educational level attained by any native was a
vocational school diploma awarded after two years
of study at the secondary level.
113. All of this has had predictably serious effects
upon Timor and the Timorese. The Territory and its
people have remained in a very primitive,
isolated
state. For example, most do not even know what the
United Nations is. Local functionaries,
lacking the
necessary training, were often incompetent,
and the
administrative
system can only be described as rudimentary and also thoroughly corrupt. This corruption
was aggravated by the total failure of the colonial
administration
to pay its functionaries’
salaries for
the past two years, though they continued to collect
a poll tax on each male between the ages of 18 and
60, amounting
to 230 escudos-approximately
$7 Australian-annually.
As an example of the widespread administrative
incompetence,
our local police
chief, who had held office for over 20 years, was
incapable even of taking a direct census of his district.

109. For those unfamiliar with the Territory, it should
be stressed that the Portuguese took no steps at all to
develop their colony politically,
socially or economically. Although supplies of a major export product,
sandalwood, for instance, were exhausted, the Govemment took no steps to develop further industries,
though the high-grade
Timorese
coffee had the
potential for great development
as an export product,
as did the hardwood industry, copra and conch shells.
The Territory’s
sole useful function from its rulers’
point of view has been to serve over the centuries as
a penal colony. It thus became a dumping ground for
many of Portugal’s own civilian and military undesirables. Under these circumstances,
the Portuguese
naturally felt no compulsion to improve the lot of the
people of East Timor.

114. The traditional
hibal system remains the predominant influence in the people’s lives. They are very
much dependent upon authority figures, ordinarily
the tribal chiefs or subchiefs, to make basic decisions
for them. Even these men find it difficult to make
decisions on unusual or important
matters. Such
questions
often require lengthy discussions
and
negotiations, tiith their peers. The election of five
chiefs from among their number to the legislativeadministrative
council, for example, required a year’s
discussion and negotiation.

110. This policy of studied neglect had various serious
consequences for the Timorese. Under the colonial
rigime medical care for the people was virtually nonexistent. There were only two private doctors and
one dentist in the entire Territory to provide care for
a population
of 650,000. Other medical staff were
available only to the military. Infant mortality ran at a
rate of approximately
45 per cent. Nutrition
was
gravely inadequate for most of the people, who particularly
suffered from prot’ein deficiency and its
attendant lethargy, and this rendered them susceptible
to a number of serious endemic diseases which were
allowed to rage uncontrolled.
A programme of malaria
control was never instituted, for example. Malaria,
typhoid fever, and tuberculosis carried off thousands
annually. During our last six months at Tutuala, my
wife and I helped to bury over 400 people who had
died of disease, malnutrition
and other natural causes.

115. This dependence upon others was also illustrated
by the attitude displayed by our workers, who would
frequently ask for our advice and constantly required
repeated directions, even in dealing with very ordinary
matters. They were incapable of following anything
but very elementary instructions. Complex operations
had to be broken down into the simplest pos!ible
steps, and successive steps required
successive
instructions.

111. The educational situation was as poor as the
medical one. Functional illiteracy runs in excess of
95 per cent of the population. With no !inguu frmcu,

116. In order to realize the rich potential of the
Territory it is essential that prompt measures be taken
to instil self-reliance and a sense of responsibility
in

_

13

the people. This alone can repair the damage done by
generations of a deliberate colonial policy of suppression, when “a little learning was a dangerous thing”
so far as the authorities were concerned and the
encouragement of dependence as well as of ignorance
was a tool of colonial repression. Even the leaders
of FRETILIN
summoned us to their district headquarters on two occasions to ask us for help, assistance
or advice.

Reports of these executions were made to us both by
the relatives of the victims living in Tutuala and by the
local FRETILIN
officials, who boasted of them on their
visits. An example of the type of offence considered
serious enough to be dealt with by execution was that
of listening to any radio programme not disseminated
by FRETILIN
through Radio Dili.
120. My wife’s and my own experiences when called
before the FRETILIN
offtcials also illustrate their
methods. On 25 September 1975 we were summoned
to Los Palos by an armed guard and brought before the
combined committee of the political and military units
in the district. The entire garrison, then in excess of
1,000 men, was paraded before us, and attempts were
made to convert us to FRETILIN’s
support. As
inducements to join their cause I was offered as’ much
additional land as I wanted gratis throughout the island,
financial support, a prominent place in the government
of an independent East Timor and other extravagant
gifts. As Australian citizens with official Portuguese
residency, we replied that we must remain neutral and
that we did not recognize the authority of any of the
three parties-FRETILIN,
UDT or APODETIthen contending for power.

117. It is most important
to grasp that the vast
majority of these people are virtually incapable of
dealing with new situations effectively
or understanding matters that are presented to them on an
abstract level. They are only used to dealing with the
concrete realities of their daily lives. Terms like
“democracy”
have no meaning for them because those
terms are unrelated to their ordinary concerns and
activities.
118. The
isolated,
conservative
character
of
Timorese society has been strongly reinforced by the
difficulty of communication
between various parts of
the Territory.
Roads, where they exist at all, are
often impassable during the six months of the two
wet seasons. From our house at Tutuala to the district
seat at Los Palos was a distance of only 30 kilometres,
but even in the best weather it took nearly five hours
to make the trip. These conditions led to fragmentation
of the population,
and intense localism as well as
suspicion of strangers and new ideas are common
characteristics of the Timor&e.
Many years will be
required to change the physical conditions alone, to
say nothing of the psychological ones.

121. It was during that visit to Los Pales that 1 noticed
open cases of small arms and ammunition
which we
had previously seen unloaded one day at dusk from
a fishing vessel in our landing cove in’the early part
of September. After, our rescue we’ ‘discovered in
Baucau that the wood used to manufacture the cases
and the stenciling used to mark them were indentical
to those of Australian aid crates of drugs and medicines
sold by FRETILIN
Vun Fi, ..a. merchant in
. to.Vong
.
that town.

119. During the last seven months of our residence
in East Timor, we had many opportunities
to observe
at first hand the way FRETILIN
members conducted
themselves.
In addition to those acts which we
personally witnessed, during our two and one half
months of close house arrest the FRETILIN
officials
who visited us daily often boasted of the atrocities
they had committed.
This was done at least partly to
intimidate
us and in an attempt to elicit our cooperation. I should add that even during my volunteer
service in the Spanish Civil War or my mission to
Kenya at the time of the Mau Mau uprising I never
witnessed such atrocities, brutalities or inhumanity
committed
by one group of people against another.
FRETILIN
groups constantly used the threat of arrest,
imprisonment
and execution by decapitation to keep
the people in line. Those who refused to give the
FRETILIN
comrade salute were shut up in the local
hotei without access to sanitary facilities or bedding,
and fed on a diet of maize and water for months at
a time. Carlos and Alexio da Fonseca, half brothers
of the acting chief, who were employed by us, suffered
two months’ imprisonment
‘under these conditions.
Others, charged with inore serious infractions of the
rules, were taken to Los Palos, where the Regional
Central Committee was empowered to impose more
severe sentences, including that of summary execution.

,122. A week later, the “Supreme Commander of the
Armed Forces”, Rogiero Lobato, expressed a wish to
interview me in Los -Pales. On the previously stated
grounds of neutrality, I’declined to meet him.
123. As FRETILIN,power
began to erode, however,
their methods grew harsher. On 10 December, three
days after we had been placed under. strict house
arrest and while I was. confined to ‘be,d, following a
heart apck, we were again taken, under heavily armed
escort, to Los Pales., That was done in ‘reaction to the
landing of Indonesian
volunteers in““Baucau.
The
villagers of Tutuala gathered around the vehicles crying
and wailing that they had been oflicially told by the
local FRETILIN
delegation that my ‘wife and I were
being brought to Los Palos “to have our heads cut
off ‘. That was not denied to the assembly by Commander Victor of FRETILIN.
1,:
124. We were taken to Los Palos through pouring
rain in an open truck without protective clothing and
went before the Central Committee. Some of those in
attendance were unknown to me, but I heard them
speaking amongst themselves in Kiswahili
and in
Spanish, both languages with which I am familiar. They
14

insisted that we advise them tactically, as their leaders
had abandoned them and fled the country the previous
week, leaving them without technical instructions,
medical supplies or other aid. Despite further threats
of reprisal, insults and attempts at intimidation,
I refused to co-operate, advising them only to fly
a white flag as I had done since 7 December or “to
put up the bloody hammer and sickle”.
125. On several recent previous occasions at public
meetings called in the villages and repeated during the
Sunday market days, “Regional
President”
Alfonso
Savio had threatened to execute a11prisoners then held
by throwing grenades into the area of their confinement
upon any advance by Indonesian volunteers toward
Los Paios. These prisoners consisted of members of the
other parties as well as persons who displayed an
unsympathetic,
neutral or negative attitude toward
FRETILIN
and its programme. They were held in the
Los Palos gaol, which was part of the military barracks.
To our knowledge, there were in excess of 600 people
incarcerated there. This count had been taken by the
villagers, who had submitted names to us of brothers,
father, sons and other relatives gaoled by FRETILIN,
in an effort to enlist our help in improving their food
and obtaining medical supplies for them from the
Red Cross. These persons, including one woman who
had walked 50 miles from Baucau to Dili in an effort
to obtain miIk ‘for her babies, were told that all aid
was reserved first for FRETILIN
officials and then for
their armed forces and supporters, and that none
whatsoever would be given to others, however great
their need. ..
126. In anger at the FRETILIN
threats and in
expectation of imminent execution I insisted that we
share the fate of these prisoners and be incarcerated
with the others about to die, adding that FRETILIN’s
treatment of ‘us as neutrals was contrary to intemational law and that while Australia had given refuge to
their leaders who had abandoned them the week before
the invasion of Dili, Australia would certainly take
re,prisals against them if they should harm its subjects.
Hearing this, the Committee
became divided and,
after hours.of discussion, decided to send us back to
Tutuala under strict house arrest. All fresh water
and food were cut off from that time and ail visitors
were forbidden, on threat of decapitation.
127. We had previously heard that, ‘as its position
grew more ,precarious in-other regions; FRETILIN
had begun seizing civilian hostages in an &tempt to
secure its own safety. On 3 February, the day Los
Palos itself fell to the volunteer forces, the entire
population
of Tutuala-approximately
3,000 men,
women and children-was
forcibly removed to the
mountains and remote plateaus by the FRETILIN
forces. Despite threats of execution on the spot, we
refused to join them, and in their haste and confusion
they retreated in panic, sparing. us but ‘wantonly
destroying all civic property in the village. Now,
most of those hostages still remain in the jungle,

without food, without clothing,
without medical
supplies or housing, in the middle of the wet season,
and the condition of those who have survived must
now be very, very desperate.
128. This type of behaviour, particularly the killings
and the seizure of hostages, aroused tremendous
opposition and hatred among the people. It is certain
that, left to themselves, the people who suffered under
FRETILIN
rule would seek revenge for their injuries.
The resulting vendettas could literally go on for generations if no outside power capable of restoring law and
order was present. Certainly, if Indonesia were to withdraw at this juncture, vicious fighting would break out
as the people seek revenge for their murdered brothers,
sisters, parents and cousins.
129. The Timorese themselves have shown great
fear that they will be abandoned by the Indonesians
as they were abandoned by the Portuguese. They
know that any such abandonment
would lead to a
resumption of great civil disorder and that in such an
event they would suffer even more greatly than they
have already. As we were leaving the Catholic Mission in Los Palos after our rescue, people there clung
to us weeping, insisting that we promise to come
back. Now, their experiences have left them completely demoralized, confused and broken in’mind and
in body and in spirit:
130. This demoralization
was further aggravated by
irresponsibJe and unfactual reporting by Radio Australia on the situation in Timor. The reporting was so
distorted, based as it was on false information fed by
FRETILIN
to Radio Australia, that people throughout
the region turned to the BBC and the German Radio
Service for accurate, though delayed, reports via
Antara and Reuters. While we will always be grateful
to Indonesia for our rescue, in which no lives were
lost or casualties incurred, we strongly feel that Indonesia should have taken steps to counteract that false
propaganda, thus averting much unnecessary misery
and despondency among the people, who would have
been helped so much by a little encouragement
and
the knowledge
that they had not been wholly
abandoned. They feared that our departure meant the
end of the protection that the newly arrived troops
provided and that they would be forced to join the
other hostages abducted by FRETILIN
in the hills.
131. Their feelings towards the Indonesian soldiery
were ones of gratitude for saving them .from further
degradation, depradations and death’at the hands of
FRETILIN.
They do not regard the Indonesians as
foreigners, which is not surprising, since there has been
considerable intercourse between the two halves of
Timor for years. In 1967 the Portuguese virtually
abandoned the border posts between the two sections,
and this speedily led to a free flow of traffic from one
side of the border to the other, which the Indonesians
did nothing to impede. There has even been intermarriage between families from East and West Timor,

and this has strengthened the already important bonds
of a common blood and culture which have existed
from pre-colonial times.

and in the spirit of the principles of humanity which
are enshrined in the Charter of the United Nations.
136. Having concluded the text of my sworn statement, I should like to take this opportunity to reiterate
most emphatically that at no time during our residence
in Tutuala or during our enforced visit to Los Pales
did either my wife, an internationally
trained health
professional, or I observe any evidence of the use of
chemical or biological methods of warfare. Our attention had been drawn to this question by the broadcasts of Radio Australia, which had reported widespread use of such inhumane weapons in Los Palos
and Tutuala on numerous occasions. These broadcasts
caused bewilderment
among the local FRETILIN
militia and Regional Central Committee,
as well as
widespread alarm, despondency and abject misery
amongst the population.

132. During my entire time in East Timor, I neither
saw nor learned of any atrocities, misdemeanours
or
indiscipline towards the Timorese attributable
to the
volunteer forces. Indeed, on at least one occasion,
I witnessed remarkable restraint on the part of an
Indonesian volunteer commander. As we were about
to leave Tutuala, some of the hostages who had been
driven into the hills attempted to join us. As they
descended from the hills, the president of the local
FRETILIN
delegation rode out of the jungle on his
horse, which was well known to us from his previous
visits, and waved his sten gun in a menacing fashion
at the women and children, forcing them back into the
jungle. The commander of the rescuing forces gave
orders to his troops to hold their fire, despite having
the FRETILIN
official in their sights, for fear of
injuring many innocent civilians.

137. With your indulgence, Mr. President,andfurther
to clarify conditions there, I should like to read a
brief report on the medical situation in East Timor
compiled by my wife at the end of our stay in the
Territory-again,
less than six weeks ago--on
15 March 1976:

133. After being released from house arrest in
Tutuala, I had the opportunity
to observe conditions
in nearly 80 per cent of East Timor, as, accompanied
by a doctor, I travelled by light plane and helicopter
and talked to people known to me throughout the
Territory.
I can only say that I have the highest
praise for the efforts of the Indonesian Red Cross and
the other teams of trained personnel sent in to provide
food, medical care, schooling and other vitally needed
social services.

“I am a triple certificated
nursing sister with
experience gained from working in many countries
around the world. For the past three years, I have
‘lived in Tutuala, Los Palos district,, having previously travelled over a large proportion of East
Timor. I thus had the opportunity to observe closely
the medical and health conditions prevailing amongst
the people. I feel the facilities available in Timor
were definitely inferior to any that I have observed
in other parts of the world, including those in underdeveloped areas of central Africa twenty years ago.
On the basis of this experience I feel that I am
qualified to express an unbiased opinion on the
medical services at present in operation in East
Timor.

134. As a Royal Engineers veteran of the last world
war, I am qualified to state that there was no evidence
of any large-scale bombardment or any use whatsoever
of any chemical or biological
methods of warfare
-despite
contrary
reports received
via Radio
Australia, the only news medium to which we had
access during our time in Timor. Instead, progress
is clearly being made towards restoring East Timorese
society, shattered by months of civil war, and towards
building a base from which further progress is now
being made. We were impressed with the modem
equipment introduced by Indonesia, as well as the
buoyancy to be seen at all ages and al1 levels of the
population,
from young children on their way to
school to their grandparents-and
in a country that
was too small for revolution and not large enough for
war.

“First of all you must appreciate that the population are truly primitive, slow to learn and exceedingly
suspicious of anything new. The Indonesian Red
Cross has made remarkable strides in a short space
of time in allyaing their fears, remedying their
inhumane lack of health facilities which has existed
for generations and establishing the foundation of
a modem health care system.

135. I feel that I cannot end this statement without
commending
the Special Representative
of the
Secretary-General,
Mr. Winspeare Guicciardi,
and
his party for the remarkable courage and initiative
which they displayed in attempting to discharge their
mission in East Timor, and particularly in their many
efforts to reach the FRETILIN
leaders in our area.
Their example also further induced me to lay these
facts concerning the plight of the Timorese people
before the international community,
in the hope that a
speedy end may be brought to their needless suffering,

“Already in the cities and provincial centres, the
hospitals have been refurbished
and treatment
brought up to the standard of any British or Australian hospital. There are general practitioners
and
expert physicians
and surgeons, with modem
X-ray and laboratory
equipment;
also services
equivalent
to that of the flying doctor service,
with evacuation by helicopter in jungle areas where
necessary. All this is available free to both the
Indonesian
volunteers
and the local popuIation
equally.
16

“I was most impressed by all we saw of the
Indonesian Red Cross-highly skilled and truly
dedicated, one and all. They are already teaching
elementary hygiene and first aid in the schools and
also providing milk for the schoolchildren. They are
taking voluntary workers of all ages to work with
them at all times-under constant guidance and
supervision. In this way it is hoped that eventually
some of the knowledge thus gained will be absorbed
back into the villages for the future improvement of
health and hygiene. The boy scout and girl guide
movement has also been inaugurated for the first
time in the history of Timor, with further upgrading
of standards in the villages as the ultimate aim.

over 1,000 skilled paramedic personnel, and this
number is increasing all the time.
“Who could do better than the Indonesians in
providing this service? They are ideally suited
ethnically, being blood brothers to the Timorese,
and also have past experience of overcoming similar
problems in their own country following their
occupation by the Portuguese and then the Dutch.
“All sections and grades of staff have had field
experience in other disaster areas, including the
floods in Bangladesh.
“The Indonesian organization is unique and
certainly superior to either the British, Australian
or even the International Red Cross, for they truly
understand the root of the problem and are relentless
in the pursuit of their aims. They are dedicated,
patient and compassionate and completely impartial
in their treatment of all parties.

“The Red Cross clinics are in effect a complete
medical service in themselves and really excellently
organized-giving
free treatment, medicines,
vitamins, etc., to all who need them. The staff
also have the patience and find the time to instruct
each patient in the rudiments of cleanliness, diet,
etc., providing soap, milk, food or clothing where
necessary, and believe me, I just can’t tell you what
soap meant to us, having had to wash ourselves, our
clothes and our dishes with either lemons or ashes
for so long.

“In conclusion, I should like to mention that all
aid administered
by the Indonesian Red Cross has
been paid for by voluntary subscriptions given by
the people of Indonesia.”
The meeting

“Already the people have medical facilities far in
excess of anything received during their many years
under Portuguese rule, when only two private
doctors and one dentist were available for a population of 650,000. Already the Indonesians”-this was
six weeks ago-“have

rose at 6.35 p.m.
Notes

* Special Committee on the Situation with regard to the Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to
Colonial Countries and Peoples.
2 OfJiiul Records of the General Assembly, Thirtieth Session,
Fourth Committee, 2188th meeting.

25 doctors, two dentists and

17

HOW

TO OBTAIN

UNITED

NATIONS

PUBLICATIONS

United Nations publications
may lx obtained from bookstores
and distributors
throughout
the
world. Consult your bookstore or write to: United Nations. Sales Section. New York or Geneva.
COMMENT

SE PROCURER

LES PUBLICATIONS

DES NATIONS

UNIES

Les publications
des Nations Unies sent en vente dans les librairies et les agences dCpositaires du
monde entier. Informez-vous
aup& de votre libraire ou adressez-vous
B : Nations Unies, Section
des ventes, New York ou Genhe.
KAIC

COMO

lIO.qYVIITh

CONSEGUIR

H3AAHEIR

OPI-AH&f

PUBLICACIONES

3A4NZi

OFbEnUHEHHhIX

DE LAS NACIONES

HAIWH

UNIDAS

Las publicaciones
de las Naciones Unidas e&n en venta en librerias y casas distribuidoras
en
todas partes del mundo. Consulte a su librero o dirijase a: Naciones Unidas, Seccibn de Ventas,
Nueva York o Ginebra.

Litho

in United

Nations,

New York
-

00400

83+X801-August

1984-2.200
