S/PV.9404

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-eighth year

9404

th meeting
Thursday, 24 August 2023, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mrs. Thomas-Greenfield. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(United States of America)

Members:

Albania . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Brazil. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ecuador. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Gabon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ghana . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Japan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Malta. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Mozambique . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Switzerland . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Arab Emirates . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 

Mr. Hoxha
Mr. França Danese
Mr. Zhang Jun
Mr. Pérez Loose
Mrs. Broadhurst Estival
Ms. Koumby Missambo
Mr. Boateng
Mr. Ishikane
Ms. Gatt
Mr. Fernandes
Mr. Nebenzia
Mrs. Chanda
Mr. Almazrouei
Mr. Kariuki

Agenda
Maintenance of peace and security of Ukraine

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of speeches delivered
in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records of the Security Council.
Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They should be incorporated in a copy
of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the
Verbatim Reporting Service, room AB-0601 (verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be
reissued electronically on the Official Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

23-24953 (E)
*2324953*

Accessible document

Please recycle

S/PV.9404

Maintenance of peace and security of Ukraine

infrastructure in Ukraine’s Black Sea and Danube
ports, imperilling the export of foodstuffs desperately
needed around the world.

The meeting was called to order at 10.05 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Maintenance of peace and security of Ukraine
The President: In accordance with rule 37 of the
Council’s provisional rules of procedure, I invite the
representatives of Germany, Italy, Lithuania, Poland
and Ukraine to participate in this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the following
briefers to participate in this meeting: Ms. Rosemary
DiCarlo, Under-Secretary-General for Political and
Peacebuilding Affairs; Ms. Kateryna Rashevska,
legal expert at the Regional Center for Human Rights;
and Mr. Mykola Kuleba, Chief Executive Officer of
Save Ukraine.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite His Excellency
Mr. Silvio Gonzato, Chargé d’Affaires ad interim of
the Delegation of the European Union to the United
Nations, to participate in this meeting.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I give the floor to Ms. DiCarlo.
Ms. DiCarlo: Today marks a year and a half since
the Russian Federation launched its full-scale invasion
of Ukraine — 18 months of death, destruction and
unimaginable suffering for the Ukrainian people. The
numbers alone tell a horrific story: the Office of the
United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights
(OHCHR) has confirmed at least 9,444 civilians killed,
including 545 children. Nearly 17,000 others, among
them 1,156 children, have been injured. The real figures
are likely much higher. Some estimates put the total
number of killed, civilians and military personnel of
both sides, at half a million.
And there is no end in sight to this war, which was
launched in violation of the principles of the Charter
of the United Nations and international law. Indeed,
since Russia’s withdrawal from the Black Sea Grain
Initiative, on 17 July, the fighting has only escalated.
We are witnessing growing tensions and threats to the
freedom of navigation in the Black Sea. Brutal and
relentless Russian attacks have damaged grain export
2/26

24/08/2023

On 27 July, Russian missiles struck port
infrastructure in the Odesa region, reportedly killing
a security guard and damaging a cargo terminal. On
28 July, Russian forces reportedly shelled a grain
terminal in the Beryslav district, in the Kherson
region. On 2 August, a drone attack hit the Danube
port of Izmail, damaging about 40,000 tons of grain
destined for countries in Africa, as well as China and
Israel, according to Ukrainian officials. On 14 August,
Russian drone and missile attacks reportedly injured
at least three people in the port city of Odesa. The
nearby port city of Mykolaiv was also targeted. On
16 August, Russian drones reportedly damaged grain
silos and warehouses at the Danube River port of Reni.
And just yesterday, as a result of another Russian
drone attack in the Odesa region, 13 thousand tons of
grain were destroyed. Those are only a few of the most
recent incidents.
As we warned during the Security Council meetings
on 21 and 26 July (see S/PV.9382 and S/PV.9386), attacks
targeting grain facilities may have far-reaching global
consequences. They threaten to reverse the progress
made in bolstering food security over the past year.
That could be catastrophic for the 345 million people
already acutely food insecure around the world. The
Secretary-General continues to stress the importance of
food and fertilizer exports from Russia and Ukraine to
global food security and to advocate for the resumption
of the Black Sea Grain Initiative.
On 19 August, a Russian missile attack on the
drama theatre in the heart of the city of Chernihiv
took the lives of seven people, including a 6-year-old
girl, and injured more than 100 others, among them at
least 15 children. Many of the victims were passers-by
enjoying a Saturday morning with their families, with
some on their way to church to celebrate an Orthodox
Christian holiday. In recent weeks, dozens of civilians
have also been killed in attacks on Kherson, Odesa,
Donetsk, Lviv, Kharkiv, Sumy, Zaporizhzhya and other
regions of Ukraine. In some instances, sequential, or
double-tap, strikes have killed and injured not only
civilian residents, but first responders who rushed to
help. We are also deeply disturbed by the destruction
of a hotel used by the United Nations and other
humanitarian staff in Zaporizhzhya on 10 August.
Those heinous attacks against civilians and civilian
23-24953

24/08/2023

Maintenance of peace and security of Ukraine

infrastructure are in flagrant violation of international
humanitarian law. They are unacceptable and must be
strongly condemned.
Attacks against Ukrainian culture and heritage
have also escalated. Since the beginning of the war,
UNESCO has verified damage to 284 cultural sites,
including 120 religious sites. Following the attacks
on 23 July that severely damaged the historic centre
of Odesa, an area protected under the World Heritage
Convention, UNESCO deployed an expert mission
to conduct a damage assessment and to prepare for
measures to stabilize and protect cultural assets from
further deterioration.
Another recent United Nations assessment on
the impact of the destruction of the Kakhovka dam
concluded that the breach caused a far-reaching
environmental disaster, the scale of which might not
be clear for decades to come. Hundreds of square
kilometres were inundated, and thousands of square
kilometres of reservoir and wetlands were desiccated,
severely impacting the livelihoods of already struggling
Ukrainian farmers.
The impact of the war on women has been
devastating. They represent the overwhelming majority
of the 6.2 million people forced to move to other
countries because of the violence. The United Nations
is ensuring gender mainstreaming in its humanitarian
response, including promoting women’s empowerment
and leadership, and prioritizing protection from
gender-based violence. Despite staggering challenges,
Ukrainian women have stood at the forefront of
humanitarian responses. Women-led civil society
organizations were among the first to respond to
the full-scale invasion. To support those efforts,
UN-Women has allocated, through its Peace and
Humanitarian Fund, over $14.6 million to finance over
120 civil society organizations that support women and
girls inside Ukraine and those displaced in Moldova.
To date, the United Nations has verified 173 cases
of conflict-related sexual violence against 112 men, 57
women and four girls. The Independent International
Commission of Inquiry on Ukraine has said that such
incidents of sexual violence may amount to war crimes.
The massive human rights violations have not
spared children. Their schools and hospitals are
destroyed, jeopardizing their right to education
and health. To date, OHCHR has verified 824 and
403 attacks on educational and medical facilities,

S/PV.9404

respectively. We welcome the signing, on 18 August,
of a plan by the United Nations and the Government of
Ukraine to prevent grave violations against children.
However, we regret that the United Nations still does
not have the necessary access to verify allegations of
violations against children in the territory of Ukraine
under Russian control, or in the Russian Federation
itself, including children allegedly transferred to the
Russian Federation.
We are also concerned about the possible impact on
civilians of the shelling of Russian border communities
and drone attacks deep inside Russia, including Moscow.
Attacks against civilians and civilian infrastructure,
wherever they may occur, are indefensible and strictly
prohibited under international law.
Regarding humanitarian assistance, the United
Nations and its partners continue to deliver aid to those
in need. Limited access to Russian-controlled areas
of the Donetsk, Luhansk, Kherson and Zaporizhzhya
regions of Ukraine hampers our aid operations. We
continue to seek potential avenues to expand access to
those areas. The Ukraine humanitarian response plan
has now received over $1.7 billion — 44 per cent — of
the $3.9 billion required through the end of 2023. While
we extend our gratitude to the generosity of donors,
continued contributions are needed to ensure timely
delivery of assistance, including through Ukraine’s
harsh winter season.
Today’s grim milestone of 18 months of war
coincides with the thirty-second anniversary of
Ukraine’s independence. I would like to congratulate
the Ukrainian people today and take this occasion to
stress, once again, that the United Nations commitment
to Ukraine’s sovereignty, independence and territorial
integrity within it internationally recognized
borders is unwavering. Similarly, and recognizing
the growing calls around the world for an end to the
war, I reiterate the United Nations commitment to
support all meaningful efforts to achieve a just and
sustainable peace in Ukraine, in line with the United
Nations Charter, international law and relevant General
Assembly resolutions.
The President: I thank Ms. DiCarlo for her briefing.
I now give the floor to Ms. Rashevska.
Ms. Rashevska: I would like to thank the United
States Permanent Mission for inviting me to address
the Security Council today on the issue of the unlawful

23-249533/26

S/PV.9404

Maintenance of peace and security of Ukraine

deportation and forcible transfer of Ukrainian children.
I am honoured to be included among such a distinguished
audience. My goal and objective is the pursuit of a solid
solution to the crisis affecting Ukrainian children. It is
based on the best interests of the child, and I ask the
Security Council for help.
According to the rapporteurs of the third Moscow
Mechanism of the Organization for Security and
Cooperation in Europe, before Russia’s full-scale
invasion, more than 1,000 children were displaced
from Crimea to the Russian Federation for adoption.
According to the Ukrainian National Information
Bureau, since 18 February 2022, Russian agents have
taken at least 19,546 children from Ukraine to 57 regions
of the Russian Federation. Among those children, 3,855
are orphans and children deprived of parental care. The
Russian authorities claim that that displacement is an
evacuation. However, it is a violation of Article 49 of
the Fourth Geneva Convention and a war crime. Russia
deliberately created the conditions for such a transfer
of children, publicly intending to keep those children
under Russian influence forever, and refuse to transfer a
list of evacuated children to the Central Tracing Agency
of the International Committee of the Red Cross. Those
considerations formed the basis of the decision of the
International Criminal Court’s Pre-Trial Chamber II to
issue arrest warrants against President Vladimir Putin
and Commissioner Maria Lvova-Belova.
Unlawful deportation and forcible transfer are
not the only serious violations suffered by Ukrainian
children. I would like to draw the Council’s attention
to the imposition of Russian citizenship on Ukrainian
children, because the right to preserve one’s identity is a
prerequisite for exercising all human rights for children.
Russian authorities claim that the imposition of
Russian citizenship on Ukrainian children is strictly a
humanitarian action. But legislative changes made by
the Russian authorities to facilitate that as well as the
treatment of Ukrainian children who have had Russian
citizenship imposed on them do not back up that claim.
Following a detailed analysis of Russian legislation
on citizenship, it is clear that, if high-ranking officials
of the Russian Federation intended to act solely for
humanitarian reasons, then, instead of amendments
to legislation for the simplified imposition of Russian
citizenship, laws would have been adopted to facilitate
obtaining medical care and removing obstacles to
education and social benefits. But that is not the case.
4/26

24/08/2023

It is worth emphasizing that, despite the
declarations, Ukrainian children are recognized
exclusively as Russian citizens in relations with Russia.
There is no dual citizenship agreement between Ukraine
and the Russian Federation. Russian citizenship is
needed only for the forced transfer. As Maria LvovaBelova, commissioner for the Russian Federation on
children’s rights, there are already 380 such children
who have been transferred to Russian Families.
However, the process is ongoing. In that context, while
agreeing that the known cases of transfer were indeed
for guardianship, I want to emphasize that raising
those children by Russian citizens, as well as political
indoctrination, Russification and militarization in the
education system, which the Ukrainian children are
obliged to receive, is a violation of several articles at
once of the United Nations Convention on the Rights of
the Child, and also include elements of discrimination
and crimes against humanity. As a Venezuelan diplomat
explained in the original Sixth Committee debates on
the Convention on the Prevention and Punishment of
the Crime of Genocide, the forcible transfer of children
to a group where they would be given an education
different from their own, as well as new customs, a
new religion and probably a new language, would in
practice be tantamount to the destruction of their own
group, whose future depended on that generation of
children. Moreover, a school education is mandatory
in most countries. Russia, as an occupying Power,
must provide Ukrainian children with access to a
Ukrainian education. Instead, they are forbidden
to speak or learn the Ukrainian language, to attend
Ukrainian schools even online and to preserve and
manifest their Ukrainian identity. I want to emphasize
that for six years Russia has not been implementing the
International Court of Justice’s order that it ensure the
right to education in the Ukrainian and Crimean Tatar
languages in Crimea. The decision’s weak enforcement
has resulted in that violation being repeated in the
newly occupied territories.
But the so-called re-education does not take place
in schools alone. Earlier this year, the Yale School of
Public Health showed how recreation camps are also
involved in the process. This year we have already
recorded the transfer of at least 7,116 children to 46
camps in the Russian Federation, seven in occupied
Crimea and four in Belarus. Some facilities are 9,000
kilometres from the children’s original homes. Others
are located not far from military facilities. Due to
the lack of access to those areas, it is impossible to
23-24953

24/08/2023

Maintenance of peace and security of Ukraine

confirm or deny whether Ukrainian children have
returned to their homes. However, we do know about
the difficulties that legal representatives have been
dealing with regarding the return of children who have
displaced since 2022. They include additional checks
at the border, long interrogations by representatives of
Russian law enforcement, requirements for obtaining
Russian citizenship and reissuing guardianship
documents that accord with Russian legislation, and
being forced to undress or take polygraph examinations.
A relative of 17-year-old Denys was deported
from Russia without explanation and without Denys.
Another 17-year-old, Bogdan, was detained at the
border and once again transferred to a Russian foster
family. I call on the Russian Federation to facilitate the
return of Bogdan and Denys to Ukraine. So far only
386 children have been returned. I am addressing the
Council today with a clear call to assist with the return
of Ukrainian children. The obligation of immediate and
unconditional repatriation is universally recognized.
The relevant article of Additional Protocol I to the
Geneva Conventions was adopted by consensus. We
need a General Assembly resolution that will define
the obligations of every member of the international
community regarding returning Ukrainian children.
We should establish a transparent process between
Ukraine and Russia through the appointment of
a third-party guarantor and the conclusion of an
internationally binding agreement. Leaving Ukrainian
children in Russia means that their rights will continue
to be violated.
Now is the Council’s moment. It is time that members
demonstrated their commitment to international law
and to children’s best interests by helping Ukrainian
children to return to their normal lives — something
they will never be able to do in Russia.
The President: I thank Ms. Rashevska for
her briefing.
I now give the floor to Mr. Kuleba.
Mr. Kuleba (spoke in a language other than an official
language of the Security Council, without providing
interpretation):
The President: Excuse me, Mr. Kuleba, but we do
not have interpretation.
Mr. Kuleba (spoke in a language other than an
official language of the Security Council, without
providing interpretation):

S/PV.9404

The President: Mr. Kuleba —
Mr. Kuleba: I am finishing.
(spoke in a language other than an official language of
the Security Council, without providing interpretation)
(spoke in English)
Let us reunite families. Let us reunite nations. Let
us all reunite around Ukrainian children.
The President: I thank Mr. Kuleba for his briefing.
We will circulate a translation in writing of his
briefing. He spoke Ukrainian, and we look forward to
seeing the translation of that.
I shall now make a statement in my capacity as the
representative of the United States of America.
I thank Under-Secretary-General DiCarlo for her
briefing. I also thank Kateryna Rashevska and Mykola
Kuleba for speaking out today.
On this day in 1991, Ukraine declared its
independence from the Soviet Union. That same week,
Ukraine notified the United Nations of its independence
based on the right of a nation to self-determination in
accordance with the Charter of the United Nations.
But 32 years later, today Ukraine’s very existence is
under attack. For a year and a half, Russian forces
have waged a full-scale war on the Ukrainian people.
President Putin thought that his war of choice would be
quick and easy, that the Ukrainian people would wave
a white flag in surrender and that somehow his forces
would be greeted as liberators. But he was in for a rude
awakening. Ukrainians have courageously fought back
to defend their country’s sovereignty and their freedom,
democracy and culture.
And Ukrainians are fighting valiantly to defend
and return Ukrainian children who have been forcibly
transferred or deported to Russia, Belarus and Russianoccupied territories. Children are literally being ripped
from their homes in the year 2023, by a country sitting
in this very Chamber, a permanent member of the
Security Council. This is straight out of a dystopian
novel, but this is not fiction. This is real life. While
estimates vary — and we heard lots of numbers from
our briefers — we know that since February 2022,
Russia has forcibly transferred or deported thousands
of Ukrainian children, including babies as young as
four months old. And we know that Russia has forcibly

23-249535/26

S/PV.9404

Maintenance of peace and security of Ukraine

transferred or deported Ukrainian children as far back
as 2014.
This week, I spoke with three victims of those
horrific abuses. One child told me he was at home in
Mariupol living under occupation, when he heard a
loud knock on the door. A gang of Russian soldiers
dressed in all black stood in his doorway. He was told to
immediately pack up his belongings. He was deported to
Russia and locked in a dark basement and interrogated.
Russian officials threatened to sentence him to 15 years
in prison if he ever supported Ukraine, and he was told
he would never go back to Ukraine.
Thankfully, that young man is now back in
Ukraine, but his story is the exception. We do not even
know the location of so many of the children who have
been forcibly transferred. This week, I also spoke to a
Ukrainian mother who was separated from her forcibly
deported son for eight long months. With the help of
non-governmental organization workers, she bravely
travelled to Russia to free him, but only after she was
polygraphed and interrogated by Russian authorities for
hours and hours.
Russia’s campaign of cruelty continues to this day.
Russia and its proxies have detained children fleeing
violence. They have forced children out of schools and
orphanages and local proxies have tricked or coerced
parents into sending their children to so-called summer
camps, only to be cut off from communication and not
have their children returned to them.
According to reports, children in those camps
are subjected to propaganda, brainwashing and even
given military training. Some are pressured to accept
Russian citizenship, and others have reportedly been
adopted by Russian families. Members will hear
Russian officials say that their transfers of children are
part of “humanitarian evacuations” but that is a gross
perversion of reality and a futile attempt to justify
the unjustifiable.
Let us be clear, those atrocities are being
orchestrated by all levels of the Russian Government,
up to the top. The International Criminal Court
has issued arrest warrants for President Vladimir
Putin and Maria Lvova-Belova, Russia’s Presidential
Commissioner for Children’s Rights, for allegedly
deporting and transferring children from occupied
areas of Ukraine. I want members to stop and think
about it. The International Criminal Court has alleged
that Vladimir Putin is responsible for war crimes — I
6/26

24/08/2023

repeat, war crimes. We are also aware of reports that
Belarusian leaders have supported moving Ukrainian
children to camps in Belarus. According to the National
Anti-Crisis Management group, at least 2,100 Ukrainian
children were taken to Belarus from occupied territories
between September 2022 and May of this year. We must
hold all of those responsible to account.
Today the United States is imposing sanctions on
two entities and 11 individuals, including individuals
who have reportedly facilitated the forcible transfer
and deportation of Ukraine’s children to camps. In
addition, we are taking steps to impose visa restrictions
on three Russia-installed purported authorities
for their involvement in human rights abuses of
Ukrainian minors.
The United States will not stand by as Russia carries
out war crimes and crimes against humanity or as it
arbitrarily detains political activists, journalists and
opposition leaders and wrongfully detains American
citizens. That includes the wrongful detention of
Paul Whelan and Evan Gershkovich, who languish in
Russian prisons. Paul was simply in the wrong place at
the wrong time, and Evan, a journalist, was just doing
his job. Today I want to share a message that comes
directly from Evan’s family members. They have asked
the international community “to join the United States
in doing everything possible to bring [their] son home
to his family”. Let us heed their call.
I ask members for just a moment to imagine what
they would do if this was their child or grandchild who
was taken from them. Of course, members would stop
at nothing to secure their freedom and to hold those
responsible for those evils to account. Members would
stop at nothing, and we must support the return of all
forcibly transferred and detained children with the
same doggedness and determination because those
children are the world’s children. We must fight on
their behalf as long as it takes until all are free and
justice is delivered. Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr. once
wrote, “he who passively accepts evil is as much
involved in it as he who helps to perpetrate it”. We must
not remain silent. We cannot remain neutral. This is a
moment of moral reckoning, and history will judge us
by how we respond. We must hold Russia to account.
We must lift up organizations doing the good work of
trying to return those children to their families. And we
must call on Russia to end the brutal war of aggression,
comply with its obligations under international law and
immediately return all of Ukraine’s children.
23-24953

24/08/2023

Maintenance of peace and security of Ukraine

I resume my functions as President of the Council.
I shall now give the floor to those Council members
who wish to make statements.
Mr. Hoxha (Albania): Let me thank UnderSecretary-General DiCarlo for her in-depth briefing.
We are also grateful to Ms. Rashevska for her valuable
information on developments in Ukraine and look
forward to the text of Mr. Kuleba’s remarks.
Today we join Ukrainians everywhere in celebrating
their independence day, and in that way, their fight
for freedom, their right to choose and the sanctity of
sovereignty and independence, which continue to be
under threat by its neighbour. Last week, in Chernihiv,
Sofia, a six-year-old child, was preparing for her first
day of school. Unfortunately, a Russian missile put an
end to her dream and to her life. She was taken away, just
as those hundreds of other children who will never see
the inside of a classroom or play in a sandbox because
of the shelling, missiles, drones and cruelty of the
Russian military aggression. Cynics and apologists will
always argue that this is war and anything, including
mistakes, and even terrible things can happen. The
same propaganda will cycle downwards, after every
such deadly strike, in a perpetuum mobile, trying to
justify the unjustifiable and excuse the inexcusable.
The protection of civilians is one of the most solemn
commitments made by all. It is task number one for all
parties in any conflict situation. But, unfortunately, the
reality is different. Because civilians are not fighting
and cannot defend themselves, they end up paying a
high price. Harming civilians violates the Charter of the
United Nations, contradicts international humanitarian
law and betrays the solemn commitment of the Security
Council to maintaining peace and security. When laws
are not implemented, commitments are not respected
and innocent people are hurt, we all have failed. There
is, however, no doubt who is the culprit, who are the
perpetrators and who is the aggressor in Ukraine.
Today, as Ukraine marks the thirty-second
anniversary of its independence, the country is faced
with a heart-wrenching panorama. More than 26,500
civilians have lost their lives — among them 1,700
children killed or injured. As stark as those figures are,
they likely obscure an even grimmer reality.
This is the unbearable everyday life for one third
of Ukraine’s total population, whose lives have been
shattered and who, since February 2022, have lost

S/PV.9404

everything. This is the deplorable situation for those
thousands whose houses have been deliberately
destroyed by attacks with explosive weapons thrown
in populated urban areas; whose cities have been
mercilessly flattened by shelling from heavy artillery,
multiple-launch rocket systems, missiles and air strikes;
whose schools, hospitals, shelters, water systems,
power plants and places of worship or culture have been
deliberately damaged or destroyed; whose jobs have
been lost; whose lands have been mined; and all those
who are left only with the hope that the nightmare will
soon end.
The assault on Ukraine’s present is nothing short of
an audacious bid to dismantle its future. Several credible
reports have confirmed a well-prepared plan for the
abduction and deportation of children from Ukraine to
various parts of Russia. In his annual report on children
and armed conflict (S/2023/363), the Secretary-General
included Russia’s military forces on the list of shame
of parties to armed conflict that have committed
grave violations against children. The Parliamentary
Assembly of the Council of Europe, the expert mission
established under the Moscow Mechanism of the
Organization for Security and Cooperation and the
Independent International Commission of Inquiry on
Ukraine established by the Human Rights Council
have all confirmed attacks on civilians, torture, rape
and forced transfers and deportations of children. It
was on the basis of such hard evidence of the unlawful
deportation of children that in March the International
Criminal Court issued an arrest warrant for the Russian
President and his Commissioner for Children’s Rights.
But while Russia continues to brainwash its domestic
public opinion, it has failed to convince the world that
its re-education camps and forced adoptions are the
humanitarian actions they are made out to be. They are
simply crimes in disguise that call for accountability in
the open.
Russia seems to be making preparations for
organizing local elections in some areas of eastern
Ukraine. We have said it before and we reiterate
it now — we will not recognize any elections or
referendums organized within the internationally
recognized borders of Ukraine, against the Ukrainian
Constitution and the country’s sovereignty and
territorial integrity. Let me conclude by recalling a
very simple, yet meaningful, fact. In the heat of an
insurrection and internal power struggle two months
ago, the Kremlin was quick to make arrangements

23-249537/26

S/PV.9404

Maintenance of peace and security of Ukraine

and end hostilities with someone whom it called a
criminal, and yet for 18 months it has refused to end its
criminal war on Ukrainians, whom the Kremlin calls
its brothers. That is why solidarity and help for Ukraine
must continue until Russians themselves step up and
refuse to be discarded as cannon fodder in an absurd
and unwinnable war.
Mr. Fernandes (Mozambique): I would like to thank
Ms. Rosemary DiCarlo, Under-Secretary-General for
Political and Peacebuilding Affairs, for her insightful
briefing, and Ms. Rashevska and Mr. Kuleba for their
presentations. I would like to acknowledge the presence
of the Permanent Representative of Ukraine at this
meeting, and through him we also congratulate Ukraine
on the thirty-second anniversary of its independence.
The echoes of pleas for peace, grounded in the
principles of international humanitarian law, continue
to reverberate across the international arena. Despite
those appeals, it is deeply lamentable that we still
find ourselves embroiled in this maelstrom of a
conflict. Drawing on Africa’s experience of conflict
mediation and resolution, as embodied in its Silencing
the Guns initiative, we have consistently underscored
the indispensable nature of dialogue and diplomacy.
Regrettably, however, those urgent appeals have not
found fertile ground in the ongoing conflict.
As the effects of this war stretch far beyond the
battleground, as evidenced by the unfortunate collapse
of such collaborative initiatives as the Black Sea Grain
Initiative, leading to reductions in the availability
of resources to mitigate humanitarian emergencies
in global hotspots, we are reminded of the global
ramifications of this conflict. That disruption not
only threatens individual nations but also erodes
the framework of peaceful coexistence, destabilizes
multilateral and collective security arrangements,
affects non-proliferation efforts and makes the
fulfilment of such multilateral commitments as the
Sustainable Development Goals more difficult and
the environment in which collective challenges can be
tackled increasingly adversarial.
We are now more than ever in dire need of a paradigm
shift that prioritizes dialogue in alignment with the
ideals set out in the Charter of the United Nations and
our shared values. Drawing inspiration from our own
path of resilience and diplomacy, Mozambique remains
steadfast in advocating for a political and negotiated
resolution of the ongoing armed conflict. We firmly
8/26

24/08/2023

believe that this path, rooted in the spirit of mutual
respect and understanding, is the sole route to a lasting
and sustained peace.
Mr. França Danese (Brazil): I thank the United
States delegation for scheduling this meeting. I also
thank Under-Secretary-General Rosemary DiCarlo
for her updates on the situation on the ground and
Ms. Rashevska for her briefing. I also hope to read
Mr. Kuleba’s testimony, which we were unable to
hear today.
Eighteen months after the beginning of the
hostilities in Ukraine, we deeply regret the tens of
thousands of civilian and military casualties that have
occurred over the course of the conflict and offer our
solidarity with the families of the deceased and with the
wounded and displaced. Armed conflicts always leave
deep psychological scars that last for decades. It is hard
even to imagine the extent of the trauma inflicted on
innocent people, especially children.
As a peaceful and lasting solution to the conflict
in Ukraine continues to be elusive, it is essential to
limit the impact of violence on the civilian population
as much as possible. We reiterate our call on all the
parties to respect and ensure respect for international
humanitarian law and the fundamental principles of
distinction between combatants and civilians. The
current dynamics of the conflict are depriving millions
of basic and dignified conditions for survival, a concern
that will only deepen as winter approaches. It will be
essential to intensify the call from the international
community for a cessation of the hostilities and for
negotiations that can bring the lasting solution we all
hope for.
Brazil reiterates its appeal in favour of de-escalating
hostilities and opening negotiations. A resumption of
dialogue does not prejudge the results of a future peace
agreement. It can rebuild confidence where confidence
and trust have been shattered. It can provide the
means to resolve urgent issues such as the situation of
prisoners of war, humanitarian access, the security of
nuclear facilities and the full resumption of transport
of grain and fertilizers across the Black Sea, which
the vast majority of countries, especially developing
countries, have called for. Since the suspension of
the Black Sea Grain Initiative, uncertainty about the
food security of millions, including vulnerable people
dependent on United Nations assistance programmes,
has increased. We strongly encourage the parties to
23-24953

24/08/2023

Maintenance of peace and security of Ukraine

return to the negotiating table and to hold talks on
resuming the agreement. While we see the reasons
behind the suspension of the Grain Initiative, we believe
that its merits justify renewed efforts to find a solution
acceptable and favourable to all involved.
Brazil reaffirms its commitment to a peaceful
resolution to the conflict under the terms of Article 33 of
the Charter of the United Nations. We hope that reason
will soon prevail and enable a political solution, taking
into account the purposes and principles of the Charter
and the legitimate security concerns of all parties. We
welcome the recent facilitation efforts and reiterate our
readiness to contribute to collective peace initiatives
that could lead to a lasting solution to the war.
Mr. Zhang Jun (China) (spoke in Chinese): China
has elaborated its position on the question of Ukraine
many times before in the Council. We have always
stressed that the sovereignty and territorial integrity of
all countries should be safeguarded, the purposes and
principles of Charter of the United Nations observed,
the legitimate security concerns of all parties taken
into account, and all efforts conducive to a peaceful
settlement to the crisis supported. We have therefore
been making efforts to achieve peace on the basis of
that position.
In view of the current situation, I would like to
stress the following four points.
First, every effort must be made towards the
cessation of hostilities. As President Xi Jinping said at
the fifteenth summit of the leaders of Brazil, Russia,
India, China and South Africa, the root causes of the
Ukraine are complex, and the most pressing tasks now
are to facilitate peace talks, promote de-escalation and
an end to the conflict, and achieve peace. We believe
that the international community should encourage the
parties to exercise calm and restraint, meet each other
halfway, seek consensus, strengthen the voice of reason
for peace and negotiation and explore ways to implement
various peace initiatives to create conditions conducive
to peace talks. Adding fuel to the fire, continuing to
supply weapons to the battlefield, escalating unilateral
sanctions and taking any action that could cause the
war to spiral out of control should be avoided.
The security of all States is indivisible. The Ukraine
crisis has once again shown that the practices of the
cold war mentality of provoking bloc confrontation
and seeking absolute security do not work. Such an
approach will not help to reach a final settlement of

S/PV.9404

the crisis. Rather, it will bring endless instability to the
region, ultimately hurting all States concerned.
Secondly, every effort must be made to manage
the spillover effects of the conflict. The Ukraine crisis,
compounded by other economic and security risks,
has triggered crises and shocks in the global food,
energy and financial sectors, making post-pandemic
recovery, especially growth in developing countries,
even more difficult. It remains an uphill task to realize
the Sustainable Development Goals. Major developed
countries should launch responsible economic and
trade initiatives to ensure the secure and smooth
operation of the global supply and industrial chains,
cease the abusive use of unilateral sanctions and longarm jurisdiction, and avoid the politicization and
weaponization of the economy. The Black Sea Grain
Initiative should not be so easily abandoned. We expect
all parties to strive for the early resumption of grain
and fertilizer exports from Russia and Ukraine through
dialogue and consultations. China stands ready to
continue its support for the Secretary-General’s efforts
to that end.
Thirdly, no effort should be spared in ensuring the
delivery of humanitarian assistance. The prolonged
fighting has led to the destruction of much large-scale
infrastructure, the displacement of millions of
people and rising humanitarian needs. Under such
circumstances, parties to the conflict must strictly
abide by international humanitarian law, observe the
principles of necessity, distinction and proportionality,
refrain from attacking civilians and civilian
infrastructure, and ensure that people’s basic needs
are provided for and the safety and security of life and
property. I would like to reiterate that the irresponsible
transfer and use of cluster munitions could easily give
rise to humanitarian disasters. The relevant parties
must be extremely cautious in that regard.
Fourthly, all efforts must be made to guard
against risks to nuclear safety and security. Since the
outbreak of the conflict, the safety and security of the
Zaporizhzhya nuclear power plant has been a major
concern. Lately, the sound of explosions and gunshots
has been heard repeatedly in the vicinity of the power
plant and its surrounding areas. We must always remain
vigilant against and attentive to nuclear safety and
security risks. There is no winner in a nuclear war.
On the nuclear issue, all parties must exercise
maximum restraint and reason and abide by nuclear

23-249539/26

S/PV.9404

Maintenance of peace and security of Ukraine

safety conventions under international law. With their
own future and the future of humankind in mind,
all parties should strictly observe the bottom line of
nuclear safety, steer clear of the red line of nuclear war
and work together to manage crises and avoid manmade nuclear accidents. China supports the continued
constructive role played by the International Atomic
Energy Agency in ensuring the safety and security of
nuclear facilities.
Mr. Boateng (Ghana): I begin by thanking UnderSecretary-General Rosemary DiCarlo for her briefing
to the Council. I also thank the two civil society
representatives for their perspectives and welcome the
participation in this meeting of the representatives of
Ukraine, Lithuania, Germany, Poland and Italy and the
observer of the European Union.
Ghana remains steadfast in its support for the
continuing efforts of the United Nations to mitigate the
humanitarian impact of the war against Ukraine and
hopes that those endeavours will have a positive effect
on facilitating the cessation of military hostilities and
the resolution of the conflict.
We continue to be deeply concerned by the presence
of the Russian Federation’s troops on the territory of
Ukraine and believe that ending its war on Ukraine and
embracing dialogue and diplomacy remains the Russian
Federation’s best option for resolving its stated security
concerns. To do so would accord with the interests of
many in the United Nations and demonstrate its capacity
to resolve inter-State conflicts by pacific means.
We have all observed the tremendous human cost
and the social and economic consequences that the
needless war, which seems to have no end in sight, has
caused over the past 18 months. The war has added
another layer of complications to an already polarized
international landscape, driving deep divisions among
States and diverting critical global attention from the
resolution of other crises. We risk incoherent, disjointed
and ineffective responses to the enduring challenges of
the global community if we do not accelerate efforts
to de-escalate the growing geopolitical tensions and
bridge the widening divisions.
The war has been damaging to our collective
security. We encourage all actors not to be driven by
short-term, parochial and self-serving interests, but
rather to keep broader common interests in their focus
and to act responsibly. We also encourage all countries
to support the most promising peace initiatives that
10/26

24/08/2023

can assist the conflicting parties to cease hostilities
and reach a peaceful settlement of the dispute in full
respect for the Charter of the United Nations and
international law.
As we consider all appropriate options to mitigate
the impact of the war on the Ukrainian population,
particularly on schoolchildren and teenagers, I would
like to stress the continued need for the relevant
United Nations agencies to provide mental health and
psychological support against the backdrop of the
harrowing post-traumatic stress disorders with which
approximately one quarter of the Ukrainian population
have been diagnosed. In that context, we commend
UNESCO for its initiative to train school psychologists
to support learners and teachers. We strongly advocate
the scaling-up of similar programmes and initiatives
to help the vulnerable sections of the Ukrainian
population to deal with the emotional agony occasioned
by the unjustified war.
We condemn the deliberate and indiscriminate
attacks on civilian infrastructure, notably on health
facilities, schools, residential areas and food systems,
and call for all such attacks to cease. It is our fundamental
belief that amid the ongoing military hostilities every
effort must be made to protect and ensure the safety and
security of all civilians, regardless of where they live. In
that regard, we would like to remind the Council of our
previous statements urging the warring parties to fully
comply with the requirements of international refugee
law, international human rights law, international
humanitarian law and the tenets of the rules of war by
exercising distinction, proportionality and precaution
in the conduct of their military operations.
Against the backdrop of the prevailing global
hardships, aggravated by the complex ramifications
of the war and the resulting unprecedented disruptions
to livelihoods, we urge for a resumption of the Black
Sea Grain Initiative. We encourage the parties to
cooperate with the efforts of the Secretary-General to
comprehensively address all bottlenecks relating to the
implementation of the Initiative and related agreements.
In conclusion, we stress that the purely military
logic that has underpinned the war for the past 18 months
cannot deliver a durable settlement or sustainable
peace. In the larger interests of international peace and
security, it is imperative that we assist the parties in
urgently opening channels for diplomacy and credible
23-24953

24/08/2023

Maintenance of peace and security of Ukraine

dialogue. Finally, I wish the Ukrainian people a happy
and purposeful Independence Day.
Mrs. Broadhurst Estival (France) (spoke
in French): I would like to thank Ms. DiCarlo,
Ms. Rashevska and Mr. Kuleba for their briefings.
On this day celebrating Ukrainian independence,
France pays tribute to the unshakeable courage of
the Ukrainian people, who, 32 years after gaining
independence, find themselves forced to continue
fighting tirelessly to defend their sovereignty,
territorial integrity and freedom in the face of Russia’s
unjustified and unlawful aggression. For 18 months
now, Russia has been violating not only the fundamental
principles of the Charter of the United Nations but
also international humanitarian law and human rights.
With its bombardments deliberately targeting civilian
populations and infrastructure, Russia is inflicting
untold suffering on Ukraine and its people.
The testimonies we heard today once again
confirm the exorbitant cost of this aggression for
civilians, especially children. Both the SecretaryGeneral’s annual report on children in armed conflict
(S/2023/363) and that of the Human Rights Council’s
Independent International Commission of Inquiry on
Ukraine (A/HRC/52/62) are unequivocal. Russia is
responsible for the murder and maiming of children,
their illegal transfer to Russia, sexual violence against
them and attacks on schools and hospitals. The
Secretary-General’s inclusion of Russia on his annual
list of perpetrators of those crimes affirms their gravity.
France urges Russia to respect international law and
put an immediate end to all those abuses.
We reiterate our firm condemnation of Russia’s
illegal deportations of Ukrainian children. Russia
must return all deported children to Ukraine without
delay. France would like to remind the Council that
the International Criminal Court has issued two arrest
warrants against the President of Russia and Russia’s
so-called Commissioner for Children’s Rights. The
Court, acting independently, found that there were
reasonable grounds to believe that Russian authorities
at the highest levels were responsible for deporting
Ukrainian children, which constitutes a war crime.
France will continue to give full support to the vital
work of international justice. Those responsible for the
crimes committed in Ukraine must be held to account.
It is our duty to fulfil that demand for justice, which
we owe to all the victims of those crimes. France also

S/PV.9404

reiterates its support to both the International Criminal
Court and the Ukrainian courts. There can be no lasting
peace without justice.
On 19 August, Russian strikes targeting a university
and a theatre in Chernihiv killed seven civilians and
wounded more than 150 people, including 15 children.
Yesterday strikes targeted a school in the Sumy region,
killing four civilians. Under international humanitarian
law, Russia must stop targeting the Ukrainian population
and civilian infrastructure. Russia alone decided to use
force illegally and violate the territorial integrity and
sovereignty of Ukraine. It alone has the power to put
an end to this war and the resulting suffering. It is also
Russia that is holding the world’s population hostage by
blocking Ukrainian grain exports, stealing grain from
the occupied territories of Ukraine and destroying the
country’s agricultural infrastructure.
Together with its partners, France will continue to
stand by Ukraine for as long as necessary and to provide
the assistance Ukraine needs to enable it to exercise its
right to self-defence. There can be only one outcome,
and that is a peace in accordance with the Charter that
respects Ukraine’s sovereignty and territorial integrity
within its internationally recognized borders. France
will continue to support Ukraine’s efforts to establish a
just and lasting peace.
Mr. Pérez Loose (Ecuador) (spoke in Spanish):
I thank you, Madam President, for convening this
meeting on Ukraine. I also thank Under-SecretaryGeneral Rosemary DiCarlo for her briefing and the
civil-society representatives for their testimonies.
Today not only marks a year and a half since the
invasion of Ukraine began but a year and a half since
the diplomatic efforts of the international community
and this very Security Council were torpedoed by the
first bombings, which began as delegations in this
Chamber echoed Secretary-General António Guterres’
call on the Russian Federation to give peace a chance
(see S/PV.8974). At each of the nearly 70 meetings
the Council has held on Ukraine, delegations have
reaffirmed the Secretary-General’s call, reiterating
to the Russian Federation that it must end its military
aggression against its neighbour. Eighteen months ago
we first heard denials of the intention and determination
to invade Ukraine, followed by denials that the invasion
was taking place. As I said in January, there was no
greater evidence for Ecuador of the military aggression
than the dramatic evacuation from Ukraine of hundreds

23-2495311/26

S/PV.9404

Maintenance of peace and security of Ukraine

of Ecuadorians, particularly students, who had to save
themselves by leaving behind their lives in Ukraine
(see S/PV.9243).
Millions of Ukrainians have had to flee, resulting
in more than 6 million refugees in Europe and more
than 5 million internally displaced persons. Nearly
18 million remain in need of humanitarian assistance.
The impact on people’s physical and mental health
has been dramatic. How do we justify ourselves to the
generation of Ukrainians who woke up one day under
the siege of bombs, missiles and gunpowder to find their
loved ones gone, some of them killed and others fled?
How many more refugees and how many more displaced
persons must there be? How many more people must
die? How many more orphans must continue to bury
their parents and how many more parents must continue
to bury their children for Russia to end this war? How
many more Security Council meetings will be required
to end to the military aggression against Ukraine? In
addition to its global impact on food security and the
increase in nuclear tensions and military expenditure,
in some cases the war in Ukraine continues to divert
the attention of the international community from
other crises — in Africa, Asia, Latin America and
the Caribbean — that we must also resolve and that
preceded the war in Ukraine.
We do not know whether the current authorities
of the Russian Federation have thought about the
consequences for their country’s position in the
international community once the conflict ends, and
when they do, it may be too late. What we do know
is what history has taught us time and again — that
nations that are unable to reconcile their past with their
present pay a high price. There are countries represented
here in the Chamber today that have been able to meet
that challenge — nations that have learned that their
greatness is not measured by their nuclear power, the
territory they snatch from neighbours or the fear they
instil but by their cosmopolitan culture, democratic
institutions, tolerance, artistic creativity, technological
advances and respect for the law, including, of course,
respect for human rights. Could we ever have imagined
that a private army of mercenaries would threaten the
security of the Russian Federation? What is true is
that much has changed, and the longer the conflict,
the greater the pain for Ukrainians and the Russian
people themselves.
In conclusion, we urge the Russian Federation to
cease its attacks on civilian infrastructure, including
12/26

24/08/2023

port facilities and those used for producing and
distributing food. We once again urge the occupying
troops to withdraw, without waiting another day, to the
borders that were recognized internationally before the
invasion, in order to enable a peaceful outcome, based
on respect for international law and for the territorial
integrity and political independence of Ukraine.
Ms. Koumby Missambo (Gabon) (spoke in
French): I thank Under-Secretary-General DiCarlo for
her briefing and Ms. Rashevska and Mr. Kuleba for
their remarks.
After 18 months of deadly war in Ukraine, the
fighting has intensified in recent weeks in the south
of the country, with increasing numbers of drone,
missile and other long-range-weapon attacks. Those
indiscriminate attacks continue to target civilians
and civilian infrastructure, as well as humanitarian
personnel, who are often forced to halt their distribution
of humanitarian aid vital to people in distress, as
occurred recently in Kherson. We are concerned
about the critical plight of millions of men, women
and children, left to themselves without the principal
mechanisms of international aid. Attacks and violations
of other kinds against children are reprehensible and
intolerable. Since the Kakhovka dam and its important
reservoir were destroyed, people in areas close to
it have found themselves in a particularly alarming
humanitarian situation, as they have lost not only their
homes and means of subsistence but their water supply
as well. That situation is untenable and must end.
We once again call on the parties to strictly respect
their obligations under international humanitarian
law, in particular regarding the protection of people
who are not involved in the fighting and of civilian
infrastructure. The warring parties have the obligation
to facilitate the movement of humanitarian workers and
to enable unhindered access, without discrimination,
to areas and people requiring humanitarian assistance.
We also call on them to refrain from using mines,
cluster munitions or other remotely controlled weapons
and to do everything in their power to reduce their
effects on civilians, especially women, children and the
most vulnerable.
The Black Sea Grain Initiative, signed six months
after the outbreak of the war, showed us that despite
the ongoing fighting, a window of hope remained
open for diplomacy. Today that hope appears to have
vanished, and the surge of hope has been swept away by
23-24953

24/08/2023

Maintenance of peace and security of Ukraine

the sombre prospect of a war of attrition, which leaves
room only for the logic of armaments on a massive
scale. We urge the parties to find common ground
through dialogue and consensus and to return to that
important agreement.
My country welcomes the extraordinary
international mobilization from which Ukraine
continues to benefit via the United Nations, in particular
the launch of an appropriate humanitarian response
capable of dealing with emergencies, including the
winter response plan, starting in October, developed
by the Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian
Affairs, which will enable a planned humanitarian
response to meet critical needs during that difficult
time of year. We commend the specialized agencies of
the United Nations and all the organizations working
on the ground to address the multifaceted humanitarian
needs, often in difficult conditions, and acknowledge
their efforts to provide urgent assistance to the displaced
or injured. Nonetheless, even the most well-thoughtout programmes for the reconstruction of Ukraine can
never evaluate, much less put a figure on, the cost of the
war for the victims — the children and adults who have
lost their dignity, dreams and hopes along with their
homes, and who may be affected by the scars of the
war for years to come. In that regard, we welcome the
UNESCO initiative to train 15,000 school psychologists
to support children and teachers who are victims of the
war. It is an important contribution to preventing or at
least lessening the invisible injuries of war.
That is why the ultimate goal on which all our
energies must focus is a return to peace. We will
continue to urge the parties to de-escalate and engage
in dialogue in order to put an end to the war, and to
believe in the possibility of an outcome that is not a
stalemate, in line with the mechanisms of the Charter
of the United Nations. My country supports the quest
for viable solutions that can enable a lasting settlement
to the conflict and allow the parties to engage in
negotiations for peace and peaceful coexistence.
Mr. Kariuki (United Kingdom): I thank UnderSecretary-General DiCarlo, Ms. Rashevska and
Mr. Kuleba for their briefings.
Let me begin by wishing a happy Independence
Day to all Ukrainians. In 1991 Ukraine declared
independence from the former Union of Soviet Socialist
Republics, with 92 per cent of the country voting in favour
of independence in a national referendum. Ukraine’s

S/PV.9404

existence as a sovereign country was recognized by the
United Nations, including the Russian Federation. If
Russia’s illegal invasion last year had succeeded, there
would be one less independent Member State of the
United Nations today. The Ukrainians’ heroic resistance
in the face of Russian aggression not only protects their
freedom but defends the Charter of the United Nations
and its basic principles of sovereignty and territorial
integrity. If Russia won the war, it would give a green
light to a new era of international aggression where
big countries can rewrite borders by force. None of us
wants that. We are deeply indebted to the Ukrainian
people for their immense sacrifice, and we are proud to
stand with them.
As we mark Ukraine’s independence, we reflect
on Russia’s deliberate efforts to target Ukraine’s
future — its children. The United Nations has reported
that Russia is committing grave violations against
children in its war of aggression — the first time a
permanent Council member has ever been listed for
doing so. The Ukrainian authorities report that, in
addition to killing children directly and destroying
their homes, schools and hospitals, Russia has, to date,
forcibly transferred or deported over 19,000 children
since 2022. President Putin and his Presidential
Commissioner for Children’s Rights are the subject of
arrest warrants issued by the International Criminal
Court for their alleged role.
For Ukrainian families, those forced transfers
and deportations have devastating and life-changing
consequences that will be felt for generations. Russia
uses fear of that tactic to suppress dissent among
Ukrainians living under temporary Russian control. It
is also a deliberate attempt to erase Ukrainian culture,
identity and statehood. Russia has not attempted to
preserve the identities of the children it has forcibly
deported, as required by international humanitarian
law. Rather, there is growing evidence that Russia
has seriously violated that right, forcing children to
assimilate with the culture of the State that is seeking
to destroy their own country.
Russia also has a clear legal obligation under the
Fourth Geneva Convention to facilitate communication
and reunification between children and their relatives
or legal guardian. Russia has failed to provide reliable
information about the children it has transferred to
its territory, particularly to those children placed
with Russian foster families. As the Office of the
United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights

23-2495313/26

S/PV.9404

Maintenance of peace and security of Ukraine

reported, children themselves have often been forced
to trace and find parents or family members. This is
an unacceptable burden to place on children, especially
those dealing with the trauma of Russia’s illegal
invasion. Just 386 children have so far been returned.
We thank the representatives from Save Ukraine for
their vital work on those returns. We call on Russia
to respect Ukrainian independence, return Ukrainian
children, withdraw its troops and end this war.
Mr. Nebenzia (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): To begin, I wish to briefly say something to
one of our briefers in the language in which he deigned
to address the Security Council.
(spoke in a language other than an official language of
the Security Council, without providing interpretation)
(spoke in Russian)
I wish to draw attention to the fact that we have
today borne witness to an egregious violation of the
provisional rules of procedure of the Security Council
by the United States presidency — specifically, rule 44,
which states that speeches may be made in a language
other than the languages of the United Nations, but
in that case the speaker shall him or herself provide
for interpretation into one of the official languages of
the United Nations. That was not done. Ultimately, the
Security Council members spent more than 15 minutes
listening to a speech that nobody, apart from those who
speak Ukrainian and Russian, understood, and yet, the
briefer speaks English perfectly well, as was made clear
at the very end of his statement. I have no doubt that
he speaks Russian perfectly as well. This was therefore
a political gesture made with egregious disregard for
the rules of procedure of the Security Council, and the
United States presidency was unable to stop it.
On 9 May 2010, a military parade was held in Kyiv
in honour of the sixty-fifth anniversary of the Great
Victory of the Soviet people in the Great Patriotic
War. It was attended by 2,500 military personnel
from Ukraine, Russia and Belarus. The celebrations
took place throughout the city. Only four years later,
on 9 May 2014 — just under three months after the
anti-constitutional coup in Kyiv, during a similar
parade on the streets of Mariupol — militants of the
neo-Nazi Azov and Dnipro-1 battalions opened fire on
vehicles and ambulances and openly killed those who
took to the streets to honour the memory of their fathers
and grandfathers. According to information from local
14/26

24/08/2023

law enforcement agencies, 99 people were killed, and
119 were wounded.
Let us also recall that, shortly before that holiday,
on 2 May 2014, approximately 50 peaceful protesters
who stood up in defence of the Russian language were
burned alive in the trade union building in Odesa. What
happened in those four years? How were Ukrainians
able, overnight, to replace the heroes who liberated
the country from fascism with fascist collaborators
complicit in the deaths of hundreds of thousands of
Jews, Poles, Russians and Ukrainians? How was an
essentially Russian-speaking country, in fact, able
to stoop so low as to persecute Russian speakers and
bomb peaceful cities in Donbass, whose inhabitants
stood up for their values? And why is it that there was
no response to this from Western countries, which
outwardly advance the values of tolerance?
The answers to those questions lie at the root of
the tragedy that Ukraine is experiencing now, being
governed by the criminal Kyiv regime that is serving
exclusively the geopolitical interests of the United
States and its allies, which are waging a hybrid war
against Russia in Ukraine to the last Ukrainian. That
regime is grabbing young Ukrainian men off the
streets, shoving them into cars and, even without basic
military training, sending them to take part in “human
wave attacks” against Russian military fortifications
and minefields, without any concern for the casualties
beyond the pale of imagination. And our former Western
partners are only encouraging Zelenskyy and his clique,
providing them with weapons and demanding that the
bloodbath continue. Recently, experts from the German
newspaper Die Welt efficiently calculated that the
Kyiv regime would need to mobilize another 3 million
people in order to defeat Russia, and that is in spite of
the fact that the population of Ukraine, according to
United Nations data, declined from 48.2 million people
in 2001 to 36.6 million at the beginning of 2022. Today
there are no more than 29 million people living in the
country. However, Ukraine’s Western sponsors care not
one bit about those people. As Polish President Duda
said, Russia can now be defeated cheaply, given that
“American soldiers are not dying”.
When faced with those unpalatable facts, our
Western colleagues usually respond that we would not
find ourselves in this position had Russia not launched
a special military operation against Ukraine. However,
the tragedy of that country began long before that,
when the West chose Ukraine as a pawn to fight against
23-24953

24/08/2023

Maintenance of peace and security of Ukraine

and weaken Russia. We would not find ourselves in
this situation if the Kyiv regime had not launched a war
in 2014 against its own Russian-speaking citizens in
the east of the country. We were compelled to come
to the defence of the women, children and elderly who
were being destroyed by Kyiv after Ukraine and its
Western sponsors refused once and for all to comply
with the Minsk agreements, which were endorsed by
the Security Council. Moreover, as we know very well
today, for all those years, the document was used as
a mere smokescreen for preparing Ukraine for war
with Russia.
Until the last moment, our country leveraged
diplomacy to address the situation. For many
years, we called, including in this Chamber, for the
implementation of the Minsk agreements. In late 2021,
we went as far as to make unprecedented proposals
for security guarantees with Western States. All of
them were rejected, and Ukraine openly prepared for
the forceful seizure of the Donetsk People’s Republic
and the Luhansk People’s Republic. Russia could not
allow that, nor could we tolerate the entrenchment on
our borders of the Russophobic neo-Nazi regime, which
posed a direct threat to Russia.
As we know, today’s meeting was timed by the
United States and its allies to coincide with Ukrainian
independence day. On such days, it is customary to
take stock and highlight successes and achievements.
So what can today’s Ukraine boast of? Let us try to list
only what we can see on the surface. Needless to say, the
main so-called achievement is the genuine totalitarian
dictatorship that is gaining strength every day, where
any dissent or opposition is prohibited, history is
being rewritten and the glorification of Nazism and
Hitler’s henchmen has become part of State policy. We
know that tens of thousands of Ukrainians have been
arrested merely for browsing Russian websites on the
Internet, listening to Russian music on their phones or
reading Russian books. Everything linked to Russia
was declared hostile in Ukraine long before the start of
our special operation. We have borne and continue to
bear witness to a multitude of political assassinations
and cases of the intimidation and blackmail of political
opponents. Are there any other countries in which
such incidents happen openly? Are there any other
countries where there is open religious persecution,
the canonical church is banned, churches, parishes and
monasteries are seized, holy sites desecrated and the
clergy persecuted for their faith and beliefs?

S/PV.9404

To that must be added the rampant corruption that
nothing has been done about since the country gained
independence and that today has reached unprecedented
proportions, thanks to the billions of dollars in
Western aid that are dished out to the Kyiv regime
and immediately stolen. Ukrainian media constantly
publishes news about the issue but apparently it is
only our former Western partners who fail to notice it,
despite the fact that indignation about the situation is
growing in Western countries while their authorities
try to ignore it.
What other State, besides the notorious Islamic
State, openly promotes terrorist methods as State
policy? Are there many States that take pride in
assaulting and attacking civilians, using them as
unwitting suicide bombers, blackmailing them through
fraudulent cyberschemes and making them commit
crimes in their own country? Are there many States that
attempt to falsify their own history by brainwashing
their own citizens, indoctrinating them with lies about
their own country and its role in global civilization
and culture? We have previously shown here in this
Chamber Ukrainian school textbooks asserting that
the Jews, the French, the Portuguese and many other
peoples are descended from ancient Ukrainians. What
good can come of such historical fantasy and nonsense,
with echoes of Nazi theories of a master race superior
to its neighbours?
The saddest part of all is not even that Ukraine
has sunk to such claims of so-called achievements,
but that it has done so under the direct tutelage of
the United States and its allies, which even now are
selectively entirely blind and deaf as soon as what is
at issue is the crimes of the Kyiv regime both at home
and abroad. Moreover, Western capitals today are
essentially its accomplices, not just because they are
supplying the Zelenskyy regime with the weapons used
to kill civilians and with surveillance intelligence,
mercenaries and the technical specialists it needs, but
above all because they are concealing the monstrous lies
that the regime spreads about itself and about Russia. It
lies about the true goals of our military operation and
the reasons for it, about those who are truly to blame
for the deaths of civilian thanks to the Ukraine’s air
defence activities, deployed in residential areas in
violation of international humanitarian law. It lies about
staged situations and provocations such as in Bucha,
Kramatorsk and the Mariupol theatre. It lies about our
alleged abductions of Ukrainian children — children

23-2495315/26

S/PV.9404

Maintenance of peace and security of Ukraine

whom we have in fact saved. Finally, it lies about the
criminals whom present-day Ukraine reveres as heroes.
We have heard enough of such lies in our Western
colleagues’ statements today, and of course we will
hear more. It is no coincidence that the United States
presidency has followed its usual pattern of bringing
in a bunch of its Western allies to participate in today’s
meeting. It has long acted according to the well-known
principle that the more horrible the lie, the easier it is to
believe it. But it has forgotten one thing, which is that
the more they lie and try to denigrate Russia and distort
what we do and why we are doing it, the more those
lies eat away at the foundations of their own societies,
values and principles. The consequences of that
situation are already becoming clear. We can see that
more and more people all over the world are beginning
to realize the truth about what is really happening, and
they are horrified by its scale.
The truth is that this proxy war on Russia was
programmed by the United States and its allies at least
as long ago as 2014, and Washington, London and
Brussels, which are using other people to fight it, have
no interest whatever in ending it. After all, they are
seeing a new military operations manual being written
before their eyes and gaining experience in modern
methods of warfare while risking nothing more than
the weapons they have supplied to Kyiv. Otherwise they
would have allowed Zelenskyy and his crew to conclude
the peace agreement that was almost reached in March
of last year with very favourable terms for Ukraine. But
the collective West has no need of that scenario.
We therefore have nothing special about which
to congratulate Ukraine on its Independence Day. An
unenviable fate awaits it as a blind weapon wielded by
the West, and the contours of that fate are becoming
increasingly clear. The only positive in that regard
may be that the example of Ukraine has shown many
people what results from blind obedience to the West
and a willingness to sacrifice one’s own interests for
the sake of its geopolitical agenda. May it be a lesson
to others, and may the tragedy of Ukraine never again
be repeated.
Mr. Ishikane (Japan): I thank Under-SecretaryGeneral DiCarlo for her briefing. I also thank
Ms. Rashevska for her detailed statement and
look forward to receiving a written translation of
Mr. Kuleba’s remarks.
16/26

24/08/2023

We join everyone else around the world in
congratulating all Ukrainians on the thirty-second
anniversary of their independence. Ukraine has been
exercising its right to self-defence against Russia’s
armed attack for a year and a half, a right that is
enshrined in international law, including the Charter of
the United Nations, and that is being exercised for the
sake of Ukraine’s independence, freedom, sovereignty
and territorial integrity. My Russian colleague
referred to Ukrainians’ recruitment of mercenaries
to defeat Russia, but I think it is rather being done to
defend Ukraine.
I would like to take a moment here to reflect on
what Russia’s aggression against Ukraine has brought
about. There are countless civilian casualties, including
children, and their families are deeply saddened. As we
heard from the briefers’ detailed information today,
families are being torn apart by the unlawful deportation
and transfer of Ukrainians, including children.
Countless critical objects of civilian infrastructure,
including power plants and dams, have been destroyed.
Europe’s largest nuclear power plant has been illegally
occupied, posing a risk of nuclear disaster. Many
UNESCO World Heritage Sites have been damaged.
Ukraine’s grain exports have been hampered, grain
prices have risen and vulnerable populations have lost
access to food. The world is being held hostage. The
damage is too great to list in full here.
The international community has achieved some
results. We have reaffirmed our commitment to the
international order based on the rule of law. We have
strengthened our solidarity based on common principles.
That solidarity exists not merely among so-called
Western countries but far beyond. No matter how Russia
tries to mislead the world, our voices have been united
in stating that Russia’s aggression against Ukraine is
nothing but a flagrant violation of the Charter of the
United Nations. Russia has all sorts of justifications,
but everyone understands that they are meaningless
in the face of the truth. As Ukrainians celebrate their
independence today, they need the assurance of peace.
A conference on peace for Ukraine was recently held
in Saudi Arabia with the participation of more than
40 countries, including Japan, and we will continue to
seek a just and lasting peace for Ukraine together.
We reiterate that Japan will continue to support
Ukraine and that our commitment is unwavering.
Russia should immediately withdraw all its troops and
military equipment from Ukraine and should respect
23-24953

24/08/2023

Maintenance of peace and security of Ukraine

Ukraine’s independence, sovereignty and territorial
integrity within its internationally recognized borders.
Ms. Gatt (Malta): I thank Under-SecretaryGeneral Rosemary DiCarlo for her briefing. I also
thank Ms. Rashevska and Mr. Kuleba for their remarks.
As Ukraine celebrates its Independence Day,
we continue to reiterate that Ukraine has the right
to determine its own future. Malta stands with
the Ukrainian people in defending their freedom
and independence.
Today’s meeting illustrates once again the farreaching consequences of this senseless, illegal and
unprovoked war. A month ago, a permanent member of
the Security Council opted to politicize humanitarian
needs by terminating the Black Sea Grain Initiative.
That decision has had severe global consequences by
exacerbating existing agricultural, energy and financial
crises, disproportionately affecting the affecting world’s
most vulnerable populations. According to the Food and
Agriculture Organization of the United Nations, global
food prices rose or the first time in months following
the collapse of the landmark agreement to ship grain
from Ukraine to the rest of the world.
We cannot stress enough that the weaponization of
food is completely unacceptable and unconscionable.
We regret that Russia disregarded a credible United
Nations proposal, ending a lifeline for millions facing
hunger and spiralling food costs. The threat of famine,
with people slowly starving to death, is a red line for
international peace and security. We believe it is crucial
to restore the Black Sea Grain Initiative as a means to
re-balance the global food market and contribute to
Ukraine’s export of grains to the countries that need it
the most.
Threats regarding the potential targeting of civilian
vessels navigating in the waters of the Black Sea are
unacceptable. Last week, a Russian warship fired
warning shots at a cargo ship in the south-western Black
Sea. Those actions exemplified Russia’s deliberate
policy of endangering the freedom of navigation and
safety of commercial shipping in the Black Sea. The
provocative actions carried out by the Russian navy are
a clear violation of the international law of the sea and
a crime against civilian vessels of a third country in the
waters of other States.
The recent attacks on the Kherson region, especially
in Mykolayiv, Zaporizhzhya, Donbas and Kharkiv, by

S/PV.9404

Russia are alarming. Missile and drone strikes have
destroyed vital infrastructure, health facilities, religious
and cultural sites and residential buildings, all resulting
in the deplorable loss of life. Russia’s brutal war on the
people of Ukraine is also having a multi-layered impact
on women, men and children and is affecting people’s
safety, physical and mental health and livelihoods and
compromising their access to health care and education.
Women and girls continue to face extremely high
risks of gender-based violence. There are widespread
reports of grave human rights violations, including
torture and conflict-related sexual violence. The
people remaining close to the front lines, especially
older persons and people with disabilities or specific
needs, experience barriers to access humanitarian
services. Malta strongly condemns those barbaric,
indiscriminate and illegal acts of terror and urges
Russia to immediately cease those attacks. Regardless
of the context, international humanitarian law and
international human rights law must be upheld.
Let us recall the facts: Ukraine did not want war,
and neither did it provoke it. Russia is the aggressor
and is committing war crimes in Ukraine. We remain
firmly committed to ensuring that Russia is held fully
accountable for all its crimes.
In conclusion, Malta reiterates in the strongest
possible terms the need for Russia to end its aggression
and to immediately and completely withdraw all its
forces and military equipment from the entire territory
of Ukraine within its internationally recognized borders.
Mr. Almazrouei (United Arab Emirates) (spoke
in Arabic): I thank Ms. Rosemary DiCarlo, UnderSecretary-General for Political and Peacebuilding
Affairs, for her valuable briefing. I listened to the
statements made by the civil society representatives. I
also join my colleagues in congratulating Ukraine on
its Independence Day.
Our meeting today comes a year and a half after
the outbreak of the war in Ukraine and the subsequent
deterioration of the humanitarian, security, economic
and political situations. Despite the attention brought
to this matter by the Security Council and the entire
international community and the numerous calls to end
the war, the hostilities continue in the absence of a just
and lasting solution.
As is the case in every war, it is civilians who
suffer the most from the fighting, which makes it

23-2495317/26

S/PV.9404

Maintenance of peace and security of Ukraine

incumbent upon us to address their needs, in particular
those of children who are subjected to grave violations
identified by the Security Council in dealing with their
special status during armed conflict.
United Nations institutions have monitored the
alarming increase in the number of children killed or
injured in the recent intensification of the war. Those
figures rose from 87 cases between February and
April to 140 cases in the subsequent three months. The
suffering of children is further compounded by the
destruction and damage to hospitals, schools and other
infrastructure that provide basic services. In addition,
children are subject to aggression, sexual exploitation
and human trafficking.
In that context, the United Arab Emirates
expresses its extreme concern about the reports of the
abduction and forcible transfer of children in Ukraine.
Accordingly, we stress the need for the parties to the
conflict to protect children and respect their rights
in accordance with the specific framework stipulated
in Protocol Additional I to the Geneva Conventions
concerning the evacuation of children in exceptional
circumstances. We also urge the parties to facilitate the
reunification of those children with their families.
Given that the responsibility in this context lies
primarily with States, we urge them to strengthen their
responses to the suffering of children. That includes
cooperation with the Central Tracing Agency of the
International Committee of the Red Cross and the
provision of information on children separated from
their families or legal guardians.
The United Arab Emirates stresses its total
commitment to protecting children in armed conflict
and alleviating their suffering. Just this week, we
announced an aid package for the education sector
as the new academic year commences. Since the
beginning of the war, our humanitarian programmes
have also responded to the needs of civilians in Ukraine
and refugees in neighbouring countries by providing
medical and relief aid. In addition, we have extended
our support to the Homes for Foster Families project
of the Olena Zelenska Foundation, which aims to
provide an integrated and embracing environment for
war orphans.
In conclusion, we affirm that the continuation and
escalation of the war make us trapped in a losing race
in responding to the suffering of civilians, especially
children. The United Arab Emirates therefore reiterates
18/26

24/08/2023

its call for a cessation of hostilities and a diplomatic
solution in accordance with international law and the
Charter of the United Nations.
Mrs. Chanda (Switzerland) (spoke in French):
I thank Under-Secretary-General Rosemary DiCarlo
for her briefing, as well as the two civil society
representatives for their testimonies.
On the occasion of its Independence Day, I would
like to express Switzerland’s support, solidarity
and friendship with Ukraine and its people. This is
supposed to be a festive day. And yet, it also marks a
year and a half of Russia’s military aggression. It has
been a year and a half of calls on Russia to de-escalate,
cease all combat operations and withdraw its troops
from Ukraine’s territory. And it has been a year and
a half of calls for respect for Ukraine’s sovereignty
and territorial integrity. I would like to reiterate that
Switzerland does not recognize the integration of
Ukraine’s territory into the Russian Federation — that
applies to Crimea and to the Donetsk, Kherson, Luhansk
and Zaporizhzhya regions.
In addition to the numerous images and testimonies,
we also have figures illustrating the disastrous
consequences of the war. I would like to highlight three
of them.
According to figures from the Office of the High
Commissioner for Human Rights, nearly 10,000
civilians have been killed in the past 18 months. We
condemn the fact that waves of attacks continue to hit
the country’s cities and areas where civilians gather. In
the past few days Russian strikes have again claimed
the lives of civilians, including children. And children
are particularly affected by the consequences of the
war. Their lives are marked by constant instability
and insecurity. Nearly two out of three children in
Ukraine have been forced to leave their homes. The
credible reports of deportations of children to Russia
and forced transfers of children within the occupied
territories are particularly worrisome. Added to that are
the immense humanitarian needs. Some 17.6 million
people, almost half of Ukraine’s current population,
require humanitarian assistance and protection. We are
grateful to the United Nations, Ukrainian institutions
and volunteers, the Red Cross Movement and other
humanitarian actors for mobilizing aid for them.
However, access to communities on the front lines
and to areas under Russian military control remains
particularly difficult.
23-24953

24/08/2023

Maintenance of peace and security of Ukraine

On this commemorative day, I want to say once
again that Russia’s military aggression must stop. We
welcome the diplomatic efforts being made to achieve
a comprehensive, just and lasting peace in Ukraine, in
accordance with the principles of the Charter of the
United Nations, which must remain the guiding principle
for our efforts. As long as the fighting continues,
we must work to mitigate the consequences for the
population, as required by international humanitarian
law and human rights. I will mention just a few of the
relevant obligations.
In view of the thousands of civilians killed or injured,
civilians and civilian objects must be protected. The
parties must respect international humanitarian law, in
particular the principles of distinction, proportionality
and precaution in the conduct of hostilities. Where
children in distress are concerned, the Convention on
the Rights of the Child must be respected, including
through respect for the best interests of children and
their right to remain with their parents. The same applies
to the relevant rules of international humanitarian
law, in particular the Fourth Geneva Convention and
its first Additional Protocol. Deportation and illegal
transfers are war crimes, and allegations of such acts
must therefore be fully investigated. Switzerland takes
note of the arrest warrants issued by the International
Criminal Court in that regard and reiterates its
support for the work of the Court as an independent
and impartial judicial institution. Lastly, with regard
to the humanitarian needs of millions in Ukraine,
humanitarian workers must have rapid, unimpeded and
sustainable access to civilians in need throughout the
country. Switzerland will continue to advocate for full
respect for international law and a stable and prosperous
future for Ukraine.
The President: I would like to draw the attention of
speakers to paragraph 22 of presidential note S/2017/507,
which encourages all participants in Council meetings
to deliver their statements in five minutes or less, in
line with the Security Council’s commitment to making
more effective use of open meetings.
I now give the floor to the representative of Ukraine.
Mr. Kyslytsya (Ukraine): I recognize the
representative of Putin’s regime in the permanent seat
of the Soviet Union.
We thank Under-Secretary-General DiCarlo for her
briefing, which once again highlighted the devastating
impact of the Russian aggression on global security,

S/PV.9404

on the United Nations and on Ukraine above all. We
are grateful to our civil-society briefers Ms. Kateryna
Rashevska and Mr. Mykola Kuleba for their insightful
briefings on crimes committed against children.
Today Ukraine marks the thirty-second anniversary
since the restoration of its independence. As President
Zelenskyy said in his address today, that is 32 years
of uninterrupted independence, which will endure,
which we will not allow to be torn apart and on which
Ukrainians will not lose their grip. As stated in the Act
of Declaration of Independence of Ukraine of 24 August
1991, that step was triggered by
“the mortal danger surrounding Ukraine in
connection with the State coup d’état in the [Union
of Soviet Socialist Republics] on 19 August 1991”.
The proclamation of independence also continued
“the thousand-year tradition of State development
in Ukraine”. It has always been a matter of national
pride that our independence was restored peacefully,
and Ukraine has eagerly taken a path of democratic
development as a peace-loving nation, reliable partner
and friendly neighbour. However, mortal danger is
again hanging over my country, and it comes from the
same place — the Kremlin. It denies us our right to
live as a sovereign nation. It denies us the right to live
as a nation, and finally, it denies us our right to live as
human beings.
The only role that Russia assigns to Ukraine, a
founding member of the United Nations, is that of a
lawless colony where the local population either bows to
forced Russification or faces deportation and repression.
We have opted to fight to defend our independence and
freedom and a future that we will choose ourselves.
In that fight, we are opposing a country that occupied
the territories of several other neighbours before
attacking Ukraine. But let us not forget that the first
case of Russia’s occupation after 1991 took place right
here, with its occupation of the permanent seat on the
Council of the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics.
Russia’s occupation of that permanent seat and of
neighbouring territories constituted violations of the
Charter of the United Nations. However, the reaction
of the international community encouraged Russia
to continue in that vein and served as carte blanche
for further violating all of the basic principles of the
Charter. We must put an end to that cycle of impunity.
It is our moral and legal duty to state that the actions of
the Moscow regime are not compatible with the status

23-2495319/26

S/PV.9404

Maintenance of peace and security of Ukraine

of a permanent member or with its presence in the
United Nations in general.
The first Nuremberg judgment referred to numerous
Nazi crimes against children. In particular, it includes
Himmler’s words about Nazi forced-adoption practices,
which sound terribly relevant today.
“What the nations can offer in the way of good
blood of our type, we will take, if necessary by
kidnapping their children and raising them here
with us”.
There are many similar statements made on Russian
State television every single day. Since 2014, Russia
has purposefully pursued a policy of mass abductions
of Ukrainian children and their forceful indoctrination.
We have seen that Russian policy in Crimea, Donetsk
and Luhansk since 2014. We welcomed the address
by the Secretary-General at the third Summit of the
International Crimea Platform, held yesterday, an event
that served as powerful proof that the de-occupation
of Crimea and the ensuring of accountability for
crimes committed since 2014 remain a focus for the
international community.
Since February 2022, the Russian authorities have
repeatedly stated that more than 700,000 children were
relocated from Ukraine to Russia. Ukraine has strong
grounds to believe that several hundred thousand
Ukrainian children were forcibly and unlawfully taken
by Russia, with many still being held against their
will. Children are abducted under various pretexts and
scenarios, which the Council heard about today from our
distinguished briefers. After deportation to Russia or
to the temporarily occupied territories of Ukraine, our
children are exposed to aggressive brainwashing aimed
at changing their consciousness, erasing their Ukrainian
identity and preparing obedient soldiers for the Russian
army in the future. I just quoted Himmler, who said
“we will take children, if necessary by kidnapping”.
That is what happens every day in Ukraine.
Russian crimes against children, like those of the
Nazis during the Second World War, are one of the
most horrible markers of this war. The genocidal nature
and brutality of these crimes are horrifying. Russia’s
war has affected all of Ukraine’s 7.5 million children.
Almost two thirds of them have been internally or
externally displaced. According to the United Nations,
owing to the full-scale Russian invasion, 75 per cent
of schoolchildren suffer from stress, and 26 per cent
have post-traumatic stress disorder. The Council has
20/26

24/08/2023

already heard from the briefers the terrible statistics
on child casualties, which grow every day. Russia’s
aggression is about Ukraine’s future, and there is no
future without children.
It is Ukraine’s top priority to further strengthen
children’s protection, particularly in the context of
Russia’s aggression. It is one of the priorities set by
President Zelenskyy’s peace formula plan to ensure
the release of all prisoners and deportees, including
war prisoners and children deported to Russia. To that
end, we have established constructive dialogue and
cooperation with the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for Children and Armed Conflict
and the local United Nations children and armed
conflict team. The joint prevention plan between the
Government of Ukraine and the United Nations country
task force on monitoring and reporting to end and
prevent grave violations against children in Ukraine
was signed last Friday, 19 August. We also appreciate
the Secretary-General’s unprecedented decision to add
the Russian armed forces and affiliated armed groups
to the annex of his annual report on children and armed
conflict (S/2023/363).
However, as I have already said in this Chamber,
Russia’s identification as one of the listed parties that
have put in place measures during the reporting period
aimed at improving the protection of children was made
in advance and has yet to be substantiated with concrete
actions from Russia. The Kremlin must halt its heinous
crimes against children in Ukraine and facilitate the
return of all Ukrainian children back to our country.
Instead, we keep seeing the opposite: Moscow continues
its daily shelling of the territory of Ukraine, resulting
in the killing and maiming of children. I therefore
repeat my call on the relevant United Nations agencies
and officials, in particular UNICEF and the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Children
and Armed Conflict, to engage with the issue of the
mass abduction of children from the occupied territories
of Ukraine to the Russian Federation and Belarus and
to properly monitor and report on this matter.
We are now approaching the Summit of the Future.
There is no future without children. Where are children’s
rights in our discussions in preparation for the Summit?
Where is the issue of children in many conflicts? What
kind of future do we hope for if children are being killed
and abducted? In four weeks, we will gather at the
Sustainable Development Goals (SDG) Summit. How
can we ensure sustainable development amid the daily
23-24953

24/08/2023

Maintenance of peace and security of Ukraine

loss of children’s lives? Where are children’s rights in
our discussions in preparation for the SDG Summit?
Today young Ukrainians born in an independent
Ukraine are at the vanguard of our existential fight
for the future and sustainable development. They are
people who have lived in a free and democratic country
and who share democratic and humanistic values. They
are not ready to give up because they realize quite
clearly what they are standing up for, unlike Russian
soldiers, who come to kill Ukrainians for money and
accept the role of cannon fodder and who Putin gladly
sacrifices in furthering his neocolonial and imperialist
practices. Every contract signed by a Russian soldier
is a contract signed with the devil. If they do not drop
their arms and withdraw, they will, like many have
already, descend into hell, while their unclaimed bodies
rot in Ukrainian soil.
I have already quoted from the Nuremberg verdict
referring to crimes against children, and I now want
to remind the Council that the first verdict of the
International Criminal Court was also related to such
crimes: the case of The Prosecutor v. Thomas Lubanga
Dyilo. It makes us believe that every Russian criminal
will eventually be brought to justice. Let me also remind
the representatives of Putin’s regime in this Chamber of
what happened to the Nazi diplomats after the defeat of
the criminal regime of another dictator — and of what
awaits them. In addition to the volumes of materials
from the Nuremberg Tribunal, there is a report about
Third Reich diplomats and their involvement in the
Holocaust and other Nazi crimes, released in Germany
in 2010. They testify that it was almost impossible for
high-ranking servants of the regime to keep themselves
separate from the crimes that the Nazi regime
committed. The representatives of Putin’s regime
should take time and read that report — maybe it will
help them terminate their contract with the devil. All
their lies and their complicity in the crime of aggression,
war crimes and crimes against humanity are on record
in this Chamber. One day, those records will be used as
materials for another trial, in which some of them will
join other representatives of Putin’s criminal regime in
the dock.
As my President said earlier today, we remember
what the Ukrainian people went through, and we know
what we are capable of. We are capable of winning, and
we will win. Ukrainian children in Ukrainian squares
and streets will celebrate Ukrainian independence in
the same way. Our grandchildren will celebrate, and

S/PV.9404

their grandchildren, together with the friends of our
State and with Ukraine’s allies and partners, and there
will never be any more pauses in Ukrainian history.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Lithuania.
Mr. Paulauskas (Lithuania): I thank you, Madam
President, for the opportunity to make this statement to
the Security Council on behalf of Estonia, Latvia and my
own country, Lithuania. I also thank Under-SecretaryGeneral Rosemary DiCarlo, Ms. Kateryna Rashevska
and Mr. Mykola Kuleba for their insightful briefings.
As we congratulate Ukraine on its independence
day today, we continue to witness Russia’s ongoing
aggression aimed at taking that independence away.
Deliberate attacks targeting civilians and civilian
infrastructure are a war crime. The destruction of
civilian and critical infrastructure deprives people of
access to water and food and heating, health and other
essential services, destroying the livelihoods of entire
families and in particular affecting children, women
and the elderly. Yet another heinous attack on civilians
in Chernihiv killed seven people, including a 6-year-old
girl, Sophia Holynska, and wounded 144 people, among
them people celebrating an Orthodox Christian holiday.
Children are particularly victims in this war.
According to the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Human Rights, 541 people had been
killed up to August, with 1,139 others injured. Many
more were forced to flee their homes, have lost their
families and friends and are unable to attend school
or receive proper medical care. Since the beginning
of Russia’s aggression, millions of children and their
caregivers have been exposed to hostilities along the
front lines and through missile strikes in cities. At
least 3,281 educational institutions have been impacted
by fighting, with 262 destroyed and 3,019 damaged,
54 per cent of them in the eastern front-line areas. The
psychological effects of the war trauma on children
will have far-reaching consequences on the future. For
those cruel acts, Russia was added to the list of parties
committing grave violence against children by the
Secretary-General.
The situation of Ukrainian children forcefully
deported to Russia and Belarus, subjected to proRussia re-education and military training, turned into
Russian citizens and illegally adopted deserves our
immediate attention. We must ensure the children’s
repatriation and accountability for perpetrators. The

23-2495321/26

S/PV.9404

Maintenance of peace and security of Ukraine

International Criminal Court arrest warrants issued
for Russian President Putin and Commissioner LvovaBelova is the first step in the right direction, and we
encourage continued international scrutiny to ensure
full accountability and the repatriation of the children.
We welcome the recent signing of the
Ukraine-United Nations joint preventive plan to prevent
and stop grave violations of children’s rights in Russia’s
armed aggression. I would also like to thank United
Nations agencies for their assistance efforts. According
to recent reports, there are over 17.6 million people in
urgent need of humanitarian assistance; 4.1 million of
those being children. Furthermore, according to the
International Organization for Migration, there are
an estimated 5.1 million internally displaced persons
within Ukraine, with many Ukrainian refugees abroad.
More than 4 million Ukrainians have sought shelter
in the European Union, including over 100,000 in
Lithuania, Estonia and Latvia. In Lithuania’s schools
alone there are over 8,000 pupils form Ukraine, to
whom our Government provides all the necessary
assistance for their schooling needs.
The financial needs for humanitarian assistance
are truly significant. We must therefore all contribute
to closing the existing financial gaps to allow United
Nations and international assistance to reach all those
in need.
Russia’s war of aggression, enabled by Belarus, is a
manifest violation of the Charter of the United Nations.
Moreover, by abusing its veto power as a permanent
member of the Security Council, Russia has rendered
the Council paralysed to act. The deliberate targeting of
civilians is a war crime. The international community
has a responsibility to ensure full accountability for the
perpetrators of atrocity crimes in order to bring about
sustainable peace and give justice to the victims and
prevent the recurrence of such crimes anywhere in the
world in the future. That is why we need to support
Ukraine in establishing a special international tribunal
for the crime of aggression.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Germany.
Mr. Zahneisen (Germany): I thank you, Madam
President, for giving us the opportunity to participate
in this important meeting of the Security Council today.
Like other delegations, I would like to start by
congratulating Ukraine on its Independence Day.
22/26

24/08/2023

On 24 August 1991, Ukraine finally became a free,
democratic and sovereign State. It is sad, however,
that we have to congratulate Ukraine today at a time
when Russia continues to relentlessly attack everything
that Ukrainian independence stands for — security,
freedom, peace, a prosperous future for all Ukrainians
and the sovereign right of Ukrainians to shape their own
destiny without external intimidation and interference.
Also like other delegations, we would like to thank
Under-Secretary-General DiCarlo, Ms. Rashevska and
Mr. Kuleba for their valuable insights.
The Council held its annual debate on children
and armed conflict (see S/PV.9366) last month. The
Secretary-General provided a bleak report on the topic
(S/2023/363). One trend was particularly disturbing: the
year 2022 was the first year since reporting started in
which Government forces were the main perpetrators
of grave violations of children’s rights, such as killing,
maiming and abducting children, deliberate attacks
on civilian infrastructure important to children, such
as schools and hospitals, and the blatant denial of
humanitarian access to children in need. The most
glaring and dramatic example of that development is
Russia’s aggression against the children of Ukraine.
Russian armed forces and their affiliates continue
daily to commit grave violations of children’s rights
on the territory of Ukraine. Ambassador Hoxha and
Ambassador Paulauskas already mentioned it, and I
will repeat it: just last Saturday, seven people, including
a 6-year-old girl, were killed, and 156 were wounded
after a Russian missile attack of central square of the
historic Ukrainian city of Chernihiv.
The United Nations has documented thousands of
cases in which Ukrainian children have been forcibly
transferred and deported to territories temporarily
controlled by Russia, or directly to the Russian
Federation, and Belarus. We regularly receive shocking
reports of attempts by Russian authorities to erase
the identity of Ukrainian children. Abducted children
are being forced to speak Russian, forced to change
their names and threatened with adoption by Russian
families. For us, there can be no doubt — those crimes
against Ukrainian children are war crimes, and they
must be treated as such.
Let me make three brief points in that regard.
First, we firmly believe that it is paramount
to ensure accountability. We owe it to the victims.
23-24953

24/08/2023

Maintenance of peace and security of Ukraine

We must provide justice to the victims. And do that
to deter future atrocities. The recent International
Criminal Court arrest warrants are an important step
in that regard.
Secondly, we reiterate the call of the SecretaryGeneral to give child protection officers unimpeded
access to abducted children in order to facilitate the
children’s speedy return to their families. Member
States can — and we believe they should — consider
increasing their support to international organizations,
Ukrainian
authorities
and
non-governmental
organizations working to that end.
Thirdly and finally, as the war in Ukraine
continues, we urge the Russian Federation to
immediately cease all atrocities against Ukrainian
children, to spare no effort to protect them from future
violence and to respect international humanitarian law
and international human rights law. We once again urge
Russia to cease all hostilities, withdraw its troops from
Ukraine’s internationally recognized borders and end
this senseless war.
Finally, during the high-level Security Council
meeting on 17 July (see S/PV.9380), several Council
Member States proposed the return of deported children
as a first confidence-building measure. We believe that
those proposals should be followed up — but they should
be done anyway for the sake of Ukrainian children and
as a matter of humanity.
The President: I now give the floor to Mr. Gonzato.
Mr. Gonzato: I have the honour to speak on behalf
of the European Union (EU) and its member States. The
candidate countries North Macedonia, Montenegro,
Albania, Ukraine, the Republic of Moldova and Bosnia
and Herzegovina; the potential candidate country
Georgia; as well as Andorra, Monaco and San Marino,
align themselves with this statement.
We thank you, Madam President, for the opportunity
to address the Security Council. We also thank the
briefers for highlighting the obligation of States to
protect civilians and the need to urgently address the
deportation and forcible transfer of children.
Today we celebrate Ukraine’s Independence
Day. Throughout the European Union, Ukrainians
have gathered together with EU citizens to mark the
country’s independence since 1991 — an independence
that its neighbour Russia continues to attempt to
destroy by force. That is why today we reiterate our

S/PV.9404

resolute condemnation of Russia’s war of aggression,
which constitutes a manifest violation of the Charter of
the United Nations and of international law.
Allow me to emphasise three points in my
intervention: first, the need for a comprehensive, just
and lasting peace in Ukraine; secondly, the need to
hold Russia and its political and military leadership
accountable; and thirdly, the importance of addressing
the global consequences of Russia’s aggression.
On the first point, the international community has
repeatedly expressed its desire for a comprehensive,
just and lasting peace in Ukraine in line with the
Charter of the United Nations, the resolutions of the
General Assembly and international law. We welcome
all efforts to that effect, including the recent meeting
of national security advisers in Jeddah at the initiative
of Ukraine. The EU will support Ukraine for as long as
it takes and will continue its work to ensure the widest
possible international support for the key principles and
objectives of Ukraine’s peace formula. The upcoming
high-level week of the General Assembly will constitute
an important opportunity to further advance discussions
with global partners. I underline that any initiative for
sustainable peace in Ukraine must be based on full
respect for its independence, sovereignty and territorial
integrity within its internationally recognized borders.
On the second point, the EU remains firmly
committed to ensuring that Russia be held fully
accountable for its illegal war of aggression against
Ukraine. The International Centre for the Prosecution of
the Crime of Aggression against Ukraine has started its
support operations in The Hague. The work to establish
a tribunal for the prosecution of the crime of aggression
against Ukraine continues. The EU welcomes the
establishment of the Council of Europe’s Register of
Damage and calls for work to continue, in line with the
relevant resolution of the General Assembly (resolution
ES-11/5). Activities towards the establishment of a
compensation mechanism in line with that resolution
will also continue.
Russia’s practice of forcibly transferring and
deporting Ukrainian children is a violation of
international humanitarian law, and the United Nations
Commission of Inquiry on Ukraine concluded that it
amounts to war crimes. The arrest warrants by the
International Criminal Court (ICC) against the Russian
President and the Commissioner of Children’s Rights
are a key development to holding the perpetrators

23-2495323/26

S/PV.9404

Maintenance of peace and security of Ukraine

accountable for their most serious crimes under
international law. The EU will continue to support the
ICC in pursuing its mandate in the investigation into
the situation in Ukraine.
On the third point, we condemn Russia’s unilateral
decision to terminate the Black Sea Grain Initiative.
The Initiative’s suspension immediately created
widespread uncertainty on global markets, increasing
food prices, exacerbating the dire situation of foodimporting countries and hurting the poorest and most
vulnerable the most. The Initiative enabled the export
of almost 33 million tons of grain and foodstuffs from
Ukraine to 45 different countries, which played an
instrumental role in reducing global food prices by
over 23 per cent since Russia’s full-scale invasion of
Ukraine. Public data demonstrate that over half of the
grain and two thirds of the wheat went to developing
countries. The Initiative also ensured access to grain
for the World Food Programme. Russia’s claims that
its own agricultural exports are being blocked are not
borne out by publicly available trade data, which show
that its exports are thriving.
Russia did not just pull out of the Black Sea Grain
Initiative. Just hours after withdrawing, it started
destroying Ukraine’s grain storage facilities and port
infrastructure, not only in the Black Sea itself but also
on the Danube. The deliberate destruction of civilian
infrastructure constitutes a violation of international
humanitarian law.
We call on Russia to stop using food as a weapon,
rejoin the Black Sea Grain Initiative and cease deliberate
attacks on Ukrainian grain facilities and ports. The
right to food is a human right, and hunger must never
be used as a political tool. The EU will continue to
support the tireless efforts of the United Nations and
Türkiye towards the resumption of the Black Sea Grain
Initiative. We remain open to exploring solutions
with the United Nations that would contribute to the
resumption of the grain deal. We will also continue
to strengthen our EU-Ukraine solidarity lanes as
alternative routes for Ukrainian agricultural exports.
The EU increased its financial support to countries and
people most in need, providing €18 billion to address
food insecurity until 2024.
I conclude by reiterating the EU’s unwavering
support for Ukraine’s independence, sovereignty and
territorial integrity, as well as its inherent right of
self-defence against Russia’s unprovoked, unjustified
24/26

24/08/2023

and illegal war of aggression. We demand that
Russia immediately, completely and unconditionally
withdraw all of its military forces, proxies and military
equipment from the entire territory of Ukraine within
its internationally recognized borders.
Thanks to the tremendous courage and resilience
of the Ukrainian people, we can look forward to
celebrating many more Ukrainian Independence Days
in the future.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Poland.
Mr. Szczerski (Poland): I would like to begin by
expressing my gratitude to Under-Secretary-General
Rosemary DiCarlo and to the other briefers for their
very informative input.
We already heard from several of the speakers how
timely today’s meeting is. In line with that observation,
let me point out three specific aspects justifying
that point.
First and foremost, today’s discussion is timely
because it is being held precisely on the day that we
celebrate the thirty-second anniversary of Ukraine’s
independence. Congratulations to the people and the
Government of Ukraine. Poland is proud that we were
the first country to recognize that fact, on 21 December
1991, the day after Ukrainians decided about it in
a referendum.
The dramatic developments since the Russia’s
aggression against Ukraine in February 2022 have
demonstrated that that independence needs to be
defended in the most literal sense of the word, namely,
on the battlefield. Ukrainians prove on a daily basis that
they cherish their independence more than anything
else, and that is why they accept the ultimate sacrifice
to heroically protect it. At the same time, Russia
keeps trying to undermine Ukraine’s statehood and
sovereignty by all means, including by the dissemination
of disinformation and manipulation in the Chamber on
many occasions, including today. Poland knows this
experience very well. We regained our independence in
1918, only to be invaded by Soviet Russia within a mere
two years. Repelling the Bolshevik invasion in 1920
became the very foundation of the then Polish State. We
should all respect Ukraine’s inalienable right to defend
its sovereignty while faced with unjustified aggression.
While Poland reiterates its support for just and
sustainable peace in Ukraine, we are convinced
23-24953

24/08/2023

Maintenance of peace and security of Ukraine

that it needs to be based on the sovereign consent of
the aggressed party. Therefore, we believe that the
key principles and objectives set out in President
Zelenskyy’s peace formula should constitute a basis for
ending the unlawful war of aggression waged by Russia
against Ukraine. Poland welcomes and actively takes
part in all developments concerning that initiative,
which involves a growing number of interested parties,
not only from Europe but also the Americas, Africa
and Asia.
Secondly, today’s discussion is very timely because
only yesterday we commemorated the European Day
of Remembrance for Victims of Stalinism and Nazism,
often referred to as the Day of Remembrance for the
victims of all totalitarian and authoritarian regimes. It is
an especially bitter occasion for Poland and our region,
as it is observed on the day in 1939 that Hitler and Stalin
decided to define and impose the spheres of influence of
Nazi Germany and Soviet Russia in Central and Eastern
Europe by having their Foreign Ministers sign a secret
treaty — the so-called Ribbentrop-Molotov Pact. That
notorious agreement between the two totalitarian States
paved the way for the joint aggression and occupation
of Poland, the Baltic States, parts of Romania and
today’s Ukraine starting in September 1939. That act
was a blatant violation of international law that resulted
in the horrible experience of the Second World War.
That is why today Poland is such a strong defender of
the Charter of the United Nations and international
law. We know that their breaches always bring violence
and suffering. And that is also why we are actively
engaged in all initiatives to hold Russia accountable
for its offences in Ukraine. All perpetrators should be
tried before appropriate courts and damage must be
compensated for, which we view as a prerequisite for
ensuring lasting peace in the future.
Poland is especially concerned about the fate of
children in this armed conflict. That is why, along with
Canada, we co-created in Kyiv a dedicated group of
friends of children victims of this war.
Finally, today’s discussion is timely and very
much needed because of another event that took place
yesterday. I am referring to the third summit of the
Crimean Platform. Speaking to the participants at the
summit, Polish President Andrzej Duda pointed out:
“Nobody should have any illusions that the
occupation of Crimea is a regional problem. It is
a global problem. Unless we solve it together, we

S/PV.9404

will de facto begin to agree to a new international
security architecture and a new global order based
on the law of force. Therefore, the de-occupation
of Crimea and the restoration of Ukraine`s full
territorial integrity are necessary preconditions not
just for the security of the Azov-Black Sea region,
but also for the stability of the whole global security
architecture”.
Not only has occupied Crimea served as a springboard
for Russian military attacks against Ukraine itself,
but it has also become a source of global negative
implications of the Russian aggression in the form of
threats to food and maritime transport security in the
Black Sea and beyond.
In conclusion, all three facts I referred to reinforce
our appeal for just peace in Ukraine based on the United
Nations Charter and a regional security architecture
that respects the territorial integrity and sovereignty of
all States.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Italy.
Mr. Greco (Italy): Italy aligns itself with the
statement delivered by the observer of the European
Union and would like to add some considerations in its
national capacity.
I thank Under-Secretary-General DiCarlo for her
insightful update, and the briefers for their worrisome
reports on the deliberate disregard for the protection
of civilians and the deportation of children by the
Russian Federation.
The celebration of the Ukrainian Independence
Day today marks 18 months since the beginning of
Russia’s full-scale, unprovoked, unjustifiable and
illegal invasion of Ukraine. And today we stand
together with the Ukrainian people, more united than
ever, to reaffirm our unwavering commitment to our
shared values based on the rules-based multilateral
order as recognized in the Charter of the United
Nations. We reaffirm our solidarity with the people of
Ukraine, pay tribute to all those who sacrificed their
lives for the independence of Ukraine and express our
deepest sympathy and condolences to the families of
the victims of the ongoing aggression.
On this day exactly 18 months ago, a permanent
member of the Security Council unilaterally violated
the basic principles and norms on which peaceful
coexistence among States and this very Organization

23-2495325/26

S/PV.9404

Maintenance of peace and security of Ukraine

are founded. In that regard, I firmly recall the General
Assembly’s repeatedly resounding conclusions that
the Russian Federation’s aggression against Ukraine is
a violation of the United Nations Charter that affects
not only the people of Ukraine but also millions
of people around the world, especially in the most
vulnerable countries.
Russia’s unjustified withdrawal from the Black
Sea Grain Initiative is therefore unacceptable, as is
the deliberate daily targeting by Russia of the export
of Ukrainian grain. As it clearly emerged at the Food
System Summit +2, held in Rome few weeks ago, global
concerns about systemic food security spiked after the
Russian decision. We call on Russia to swiftly reconsider
the resumption of the Black Sea Grain Initiative.
Italy condemns, in the strongest possible way,
Russia’s continuous inhumane and brutal attacks
targeting civilian infrastructure and cities across
Ukraine. We recall that indiscriminate attacks and
attacks on the civilian population or civilian objects
constitute a war crime.
Italy also unequivocally condemns the forced
deportation of Ukrainian children, as well as other
grave violations against children committed by Russian
forces in Ukraine. While joining the concerns expressed
by the Secretary-General in his report on the children
transferred to the Russian Federation from Ukraine,
we underline that no amount of disinformation spread
by the Russian Federation can deny the truth of the
matter, or shield individuals from accountability for
those crimes.
Italy fully supports the humanitarian actors
who are working tirelessly to ensure that children
in Ukraine are protected and that vital assistance is
within their reach. Rapid, safe and unhindered access
to humanitarian assistance for those in need in Ukraine
must be guaranteed. As current Chair of the Mine Action
Support Group, Italy is particularly proud of the broad

26/26

24/08/2023

engagement brought together in Kyiv with the United
Nations to support the swift demining of the territory in
order to prevent further humanitarian impact, especially
on children, and to sustain Ukrainian agriculture.
There can be no peace without justice and
no impunity for war crimes and other atrocities.
Collectively, the United Nations will hold those
responsible to account in accordance with international
law, while also taking into consideration those who are
facilitating Russia’s illegal war.
With a view to a viable post-war peace settlement,
Italy strongly supports President Zelenskyy’s peace plan
and welcomes the recent broad commitment displayed
at the meeting of national security advisers from all
regional constituencies held in Jeddah. Italy remains
ready to support arrangements on sustained security
and other commitments to help Ukraine defend itself,
secure its free and democratic future and deter future
Russian aggression, in line with its rights enshrined in
the United Nations Charter.
Russia’s war of aggression must end. Russia
can end it immediately by ceasing its attacks against
Ukraine and withdrawing its forces from the territory
of Ukraine. Italy is committed to the sovereignty,
independence, unity and territorial integrity of Ukraine
within its internationally recognized borders. Support
for Ukraine will be one of the key priorities of our Group
of Seven presidency next year. And we are determined
to continue doing so as long as necessary, with the aim
of reaching a just, comprehensive and lasting peace.
Soon we will all together concentrate on the
reconstruction of Ukraine, side by side, including
by organizing the Ukraine Recovery Conference
in Italy in 2025. We will lay the foundations for a
prosperous, independent Ukraine within our common
European family.
The meeting rose at 12.45 p.m.

23-24953
