S/2019/275

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
28 March 2019
English
Original: French

Letter dated 27 March 2019 from the Secretary-General addressed
to the President of the Security Council
I would like to inform the members of the Security Council that a gender parity
strategy for uniformed personnel in peace operations has been developed. This
responds to resolution 2242 (2015), by which the Council called upon the SecretaryGeneral to initiate a strategy to double the number of women in military and police
contingents of United Nations peacekeeping operations by 2020. In its resolutions
2436 (2018) and 2447 (2018), the Security Council reiterated its request and
requested that the strategy be presented to the Security Council, which is the purpose
of the present letter.
In my United Nations System-wide Strategy on Gender Parity, launched in
September 2017, I requested the Department of Peacekeeping Operations to develop
a specific strategy on gender parity for uniformed personnel. The strategy was shared
with all Permanent Missions to the United Nations on 17 January 2019 and was
presented to Member States by the Under-Secretary-General on 21 January 2019.
The gender parity strategy for uniformed personnel 2018–2028 applies to
military and police contingents, individual seconded military, police and corrections
personnel at the Secretariat and in field operations, as well as seconded justice
personnel in field operations. The strategy seeks to increase representation of women
in United Nations peace operations in a sustainable manner, taking into account the
turnover of uniformed personnel and the dependency of the United Nations on the
troop- and police-contributing countries to increase the number of women in their
national military, police, justice and corrections services.
The strategy sets targets in line with the instructions from the Security Council
and identifies a series of concrete actions to promote this agenda in the areas of
recruitment and training; communications and outreach; leadership and
accountability; and creating an enabling environment for gender parity. The strategy
is being implemented within the Secretariat and in field operations.
The actions related to the enabling environment for gender parity underpin and
enable all other efforts made to engage uniformed women in peacekeeping. A range
of actions are identified, including improved networks and access to senior leadership
for women; provision of advice through women officers’ focal points; development
of programmes to prevent sexual harassment and the provision of information on
mechanisms to address it; and an improvement in the standard of camp
accommodation to meet the needs of women.
On recruitment and training, actions include the prioritized recruitment of
women officers with equal or superior qualifications, increased training opportunities,

19-05239 (E)

020419

*1905239*

020419

S/2019/275

and increased requirements for troop- and police-contributing countries to include
women both as individual officers and in battalions and formed police units.
On communications and outreach, actions include the facilitation of dedicated
meetings and workshops during key meetings with Member States as a means of
raising awareness; increased engagement with Member State networks; and a targeted
global outreach campaign to female uniformed officers, aimed at increasing
knowledge about opportunities for international deployment.
In order to achieve our targets and in line with the strategy, all troop- and policecontributing countries are encouraged to review their criteria and procedures for
deployment to United Nations peace operations, and to ensure that potential female
candidates have access to information about deployment opportunities, in or der to
eliminate those practices that might unnecessarily reduce the number of women
applicants.
I am pleased to report that significant progress was already made in 2018
towards achieving the gender targets for military, police, justice and corrections
personnel. For example, the Office of Military Affairs exceeded the target for women
personnel in the Secretariat. In addition, the percentage of female military observers
and female staff officers increased from 8.5 to 13.4 per cent in the last year. Howe ver,
the target for military personnel in field missions has not yet been met. Consequently,
the Office began reallocating positions to Member States that guaranteed that they
would deploy women, resulting in the reallocation of more than 25 posts in Octob er
and November 2018. Progress has been made in the deployment of mixed units. In
addition, it should be noted that women have been appointed to command posts in
missions, such as force commanders in the United Nations Peacekeeping Force in
Cyprus and the United Nations Truce Supervision Organization.
The targets for police personnel were met for professional posts in the field and
were exceeded for individual police officers and formed police units. The objectives
set for police personnel in the Secretariat have not yet been achieved.
While the Justice and Corrections Section met its targets in 2018 for
Government-provided justice personnel, the main challenge in the recruitment of
women corrections officers continues to be in missions where Government -provided
personnel have a strong focus on prison security, an area of work that has traditionally
been male-dominated.
Building on these initial results, the Department of Peace Operations is firmly
committed to the goals set out in the strategy and is putting in place measures to attain
them.
I should be grateful if you would bring the present letter to the attention of the
members of the Security Council.
(Signed) António Guterres

2/2

19-05239
