A

UNITED
NATIONS

General Assembly
Distr.
GENERAL
A/RES/49/59
17 February 1995

Forty-ninth session
Agenda item 141
RESOLUTION ADOPTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY
[on the report of the Sixth Committee (A/49/742)]
49/59.

Convention on the Safety of United Nations
and Associated Personnel

The General Assembly,
Considering that the codification and progressive development of
international law contributes to the implementation of the purposes and
principles set forth in Articles 1 and 2 of the Charter of the United Nations,
Gravely concerned at the increasing number of attacks on United Nations
and associated personnel that have caused death or serious injury,
Bearing in mind that United Nations operations may be conducted in
situations that entail risk to the safety of United Nations and associated
personnel,
Recognizing the need to strengthen and to keep under review arrangements
for the protection of United Nations and associated personnel,
Recalling its resolution 48/37 of 9 December 1993, by which it
established the Ad Hoc Committee on the Elaboration of an International
Convention Dealing with the Safety and Security of United Nations and
Associated Personnel, with particular reference to responsibility for attacks
on such personnel,
Taking into account the report of the Ad Hoc Committee, 1/ in particular
the revised negotiating text resulting from the work of the Ad Hoc Committee,
___________
1/
Official Records of the General Assembly, Forty-ninth Session,
Supplement No. 22 (A/49/22).

95-76813

/...

A/RES/49/59
Page 2

Recalling its decision, in accordance with the recommendation of the
Ad Hoc Committee, to re-establish, at its current session, a working group
within the framework of the Sixth Committee to continue consideration of the
revised negotiating text and of proposals relating thereto,
Having considered the text of the draft convention prepared by the
working group 2/ and submitted to the Sixth Committee for consideration with a
view to its adoption,
1.
Adopts and opens for signature and ratification, acceptance or
approval, or for accession, the Convention on the Safety of United Nations and
Associated Personnel, the text of which is annexed to the present resolution;
2.
Urges States to take all appropriate measures to ensure the safety
and security of United Nations and associated personnel within their
territory;
3.
Recommends that the safety and security of United Nations and
associated personnel be kept under continuing review by all relevant bodies of
the Organization;
4.
Underlines the importance it attaches to the speedy conclusion of
a comprehensive review of arrangements for compensation for death, disability,
injury or illness attributable to peace-keeping service, with a view to
developing equitable and appropriate arrangements and to ensuring expeditious
reimbursement.
84th plenary meeting
9 December 1994
ANNEX
Convention on the Safety of United Nations and
Associated Personnel
The States Parties to this Convention,
Deeply concerned over the growing number of deaths and injuries
resulting from deliberate attacks against United Nations and associated
personnel,
Bearing in mind that attacks against, or other mistreatment of,
personnel who act on behalf of the United Nations are unjustifiable and
unacceptable, by whomsoever committed,
Recognizing that United Nations operations are conducted in the common
interest of the international community and in accordance with the principles
and purposes of the Charter of the United Nations,
_______________
2/

A/C.6/49/L.4, annex.

/...

A/RES/49/59
Page 3

Acknowledging the important contribution that United Nations and
associated personnel make in respect of United Nations efforts in the fields
of preventive diplomacy, peacemaking, peace-keeping, peace-building and
humanitarian and other operations,
Conscious of the existing arrangements for ensuring the safety of United
Nations and associated personnel, including the steps taken by the principal
organs of the United Nations, in this regard,
Recognizing none the less that existing measures of protection for
United Nations and associated personnel are inadequate,
Acknowledging that the effectiveness and safety of United Nations
operations are enhanced where such operations are conducted with the consent
and cooperation of the host State,
Appealing to all States in which United Nations and associated personnel
are deployed and to all others on whom such personnel may rely, to provide
comprehensive support aimed at facilitating the conduct and fulfilling the
mandate of United Nations operations,
Convinced that there is an urgent need to adopt appropriate and
effective measures for the prevention of attacks committed against United
Nations and associated personnel and for the punishment of those who have
committed such attacks,
Have agreed as follows:
Article 1
Definitions
For the purposes of this Convention:
(a)

"United Nations personnel" means:

(i)

Persons engaged or deployed by the Secretary-General
of the United Nations as members of the military,
police or civilian components of a United Nations
operation;

(ii)

Other officials and experts on mission of the United
Nations or its specialized agencies or the
International Atomic Energy Agency who are present in
an official capacity in the area where a United
Nations operation is being conducted;

(b)

"Associated personnel" means:

(i)

Persons assigned by a Government or an
intergovernmental organization with the agreement of
the competent organ of the United Nations;

/...

A/RES/49/59
Page 4

(ii)

Persons engaged by the Secretary-General of the United
Nations or by a specialized agency or by the
International Atomic Energy Agency;

(iii) Persons deployed by a humanitarian non-governmental
organization or agency under an agreement with the
Secretary-General of the United Nations or with a
specialized agency or with the International Atomic
Energy Agency,
to carry out activities in support of the fulfilment of the mandate of a
United Nations operation;
"United Nations operation" means an operation established by the
(c)
competent organ of the United Nations in accordance with the Charter of the
United Nations and conducted under United Nations authority and control:
(i)

Where the operation is for the purpose of maintaining
or restoring international peace and security; or

(ii)

Where the Security Council or the General Assembly has
declared, for the purposes of this Convention, that
there exists an exceptional risk to the safety of the
personnel participating in the operation;

(d)
"Host State" means a State in whose territory a United Nations
operation is conducted;
(e)
"Transit State" means a State, other than the host State, in whose
territory United Nations and associated personnel or their equipment are in
transit or temporarily present in connection with a United Nations operation.
Article 2
Scope of application
1.
This Convention applies in respect of United Nations and associated
personnel and United Nations operations, as defined in article 1.
2.
This Convention shall not apply to a United Nations operation authorized
by the Security Council as an enforcement action under Chapter VII of the
Charter of the United Nations in which any of the personnel are engaged as
combatants against organized armed forces and to which the law of
international armed conflict applies.
Article 3
Identification
1.
The military and police components of a United Nations operation and
their vehicles, vessels and aircraft shall bear distinctive identification.
Other personnel, vehicles, vessels and aircraft involved in the United Nations
operation shall be appropriately identified unless otherwise decided by the
Secretary-General of the United Nations.
/...

A/RES/49/59
Page 5

2.
All United Nations and associated personnel shall carry appropriate
identification documents.
Article 4
Agreements on the status of the operation
The host State and the United Nations shall conclude as soon as possible
an agreement on the status of the United Nations operation and all personnel
engaged in the operation including, inter alia, provisions on privileges and
immunities for military and police components of the operation.
Article 5
Transit
A transit State shall facilitate the unimpeded transit of United Nations
and associated personnel and their equipment to and from the host State.
Article 6
Respect for laws and regulations
1.
Without prejudice to such privileges and immunities as they may enjoy or
to the requirements of their duties, United Nations and associated personnel
shall:
(a)
State; and

Respect the laws and regulations of the host State and the transit

(b)
Refrain from any action or activity incompatible with the
impartial and international nature of their duties.
2.
The Secretary-General of the United Nations shall take all appropriate
measures to ensure the observance of these obligations.
Article 7
Duty to ensure the safety and security of United Nations
and associated personnel
1.
United Nations and associated personnel, their equipment and premises
shall not be made the object of attack or of any action that prevents them
from discharging their mandate.
2.
States Parties shall take all appropriate measures to ensure the safety
and security of United Nations and associated personnel. In particular,
States Parties shall take all appropriate steps to protect United Nations and
associated personnel who are deployed in their territory from the crimes set
out in article 9.

/...

A/RES/49/59
Page 6

3.
States Parties shall cooperate with the United Nations and other States
Parties, as appropriate, in the implementation of this Convention,
particularly in any case where the host State is unable itself to take the
required measures.
Article 8
Duty to release or return United Nations and associated
personnel captured or detained
Except as otherwise provided in an applicable status-of-forces
agreement, if United Nations or associated personnel are captured or detained
in the course of the performance of their duties and their identification has
been established, they shall not be subjected to interrogation and they shall
be promptly released and returned to United Nations or other appropriate
authorities. Pending their release such personnel shall be treated in
accordance with universally recognized standards of human rights and the
principles and spirit of the Geneva Conventions of 1949.
Article 9
Crimes against United Nations and associated personnel
1.

The intentional commission of:

(a)
A murder, kidnapping or other attack upon the person or liberty of
any United Nations or associated personnel;
(b)
A violent attack upon the official premises, the private
accommodation or the means of transportation of any United Nations or
associated personnel likely to endanger his or her person or liberty;
A threat to commit any such attack with the objective of
(c)
compelling a physical or juridical person to do or to refrain from doing any
act;
(d)

An attempt to commit any such attack; and

(e)
An act constituting participation as an accomplice in any such
attack, or in an attempt to commit such attack, or in organizing or ordering
others to commit such attack,
shall be made by each State Party a crime under its national law.
2.
Each State Party shall make the crimes set out in paragraph 1 punishable
by appropriate penalties which shall take into account their grave nature.

/...

A/RES/49/59
Page 7

Article 10
Establishment of jurisdiction
1.
Each State Party shall take such measures as may be necessary to
establish its jurisdiction over the crimes set out in article 9 in the
following cases:
(a)
When the crime is committed in the territory of that State or on
board a ship or aircraft registered in that State;
(b)

When the alleged offender is a national of that State.

2.
A State Party may also establish its jurisdiction over any such crime
when it is committed:
(a)

By a stateless person whose habitual residence is in that State;

(b)

With respect to a national of that State; or

or

(c)
any act.

In an attempt to compel that State to do or to abstain from doing

3.
Any State Party which has established jurisdiction as mentioned in
paragraph 2 shall notify the Secretary-General of the United Nations. If such
State Party subsequently rescinds that jurisdiction, it shall notify the
Secretary-General of the United Nations.
4.
Each State Party shall take such measures as may be necessary to
establish its jurisdiction over the crimes set out in article 9 in cases where
the alleged offender is present in its territory and it does not extradite
such person pursuant to article 15 to any of the States Parties which have
established their jurisdiction in accordance with paragraph 1 or 2.
5.
This Convention does not exclude any criminal jurisdiction exercised in
accordance with national law.
Article 11
Prevention of crimes against United Nations and
associated personnel
States Parties shall cooperate in the prevention of the crimes set out
in article 9, particularly by:
Taking all practicable measures to prevent preparations in their
(a)
respective territories for the commission of those crimes within or outside
their territories; and
(b)
Exchanging information in accordance with their national law and
coordinating the taking of administrative and other measures as appropriate to
prevent the commission of those crimes.

/...

A/RES/49/59
Page 8

Article 12
Communication of information
1.
Under the conditions provided for in its national law, the State Party
in whose territory a crime set out in article 9 has been committed shall, if
it has reason to believe that an alleged offender has fled from its territory,
communicate to the Secretary-General of the United Nations and, directly or
through the Secretary-General, to the State or States concerned all the
pertinent facts regarding the crime committed and all available information
regarding the identity of the alleged offender.
2.
Whenever a crime set out in article 9 has been committed, any State
Party which has information concerning the victim and circumstances of the
crime shall endeavour to transmit such information, under the conditions
provided for in its national law, fully and promptly to the Secretary-General
of the United Nations and the State or States concerned.
Article 13
Measures to ensure prosecution or extradition
1.
Where the circumstances so warrant, the State Party in whose territory
the alleged offender is present shall take the appropriate measures under its
national law to ensure that person’s presence for the purpose of prosecution
or extradition.
2.
Measures taken in accordance with paragraph 1 shall be notified, in
conformity with national law and without delay, to the Secretary-General of
the United Nations and, either directly or through the Secretary-General, to:
(a)

The State where the crime was committed;

The State or States of which the alleged offender is a national
(b)
or, if such person is a stateless person, in whose territory that person has
his or her habitual residence;
(c)

The State or States of which the victim is a national; and

(d)

Other interested States.
Article 14
Prosecution of alleged offenders

The State Party in whose territory the alleged offender is present
shall, if it does not extradite that person, submit, without exception
whatsoever and without undue delay, the case to its competent authorities for
the purpose of prosecution, through proceedings in accordance with the law of
that State. Those authorities shall take their decision in the same manner as
in the case of an ordinary offence of a grave nature under the law of that
State.

/...

A/RES/49/59
Page 9

Article 15
Extradition of alleged offenders
1.
To the extent that the crimes set out in article 9 are not extraditable
offences in any extradition treaty existing between States Parties, they shall
be deemed to be included as such therein. States Parties undertake to include
those crimes as extraditable offences in every extradition treaty to be
concluded between them.
2.
If a State Party which makes extradition conditional on the existence of
a treaty receives a request for extradition from another State Party with
which it has no extradition treaty, it may at its option consider this
Convention as the legal basis for extradition in respect of those crimes.
Extradition shall be subject to the conditions provided in the law of the
requested State.
3.
States Parties which do not make extradition conditional on the
existence of a treaty shall recognize those crimes as extraditable offences
between themselves subject to the conditions provided in the law of the
requested State.
4.
Each of those crimes shall be treated, for the purposes of extradition
between States Parties, as if it had been committed not only in the place in
which it occurred but also in the territories of the States Parties which have
established their jurisdiction in accordance with paragraph 1 or 2 of
article 10.
Article 16
Mutual assistance in criminal matters
1.
States Parties shall afford one another the greatest measure of
assistance in connection with criminal proceedings brought in respect of the
crimes set out in article 9, including assistance in obtaining evidence at
their disposal necessary for the proceedings. The law of the requested State
shall apply in all cases.
2.
The provisions of paragraph 1 shall not affect obligations concerning
mutual assistance embodied in any other treaty.
Article 17
Fair treatment
1.
Any person regarding whom investigations or proceedings are being
carried out in connection with any of the crimes set out in article 9 shall be
guaranteed fair treatment, a fair trial and full protection of his or her
rights at all stages of the investigations or proceedings.
2.

Any alleged offender shall be entitled:

(a)
To communicate without delay with the nearest appropriate
representative of the State or States of which such person is a national or
/...

A/RES/49/59
Page 10

which is otherwise entitled to protect that person’s rights or, if such person
is a stateless person, of the State which, at that person’s request, is
willing to protect that person’s rights; and
(b)

To be visited by a representative of that State or those States.
Article 18
Notification of outcome of proceedings

The State Party where an alleged offender is prosecuted shall
communicate the final outcome of the proceedings to the Secretary-General of
the United Nations, who shall transmit the information to other States
Parties.
Article 19
Dissemination
The States Parties undertake to disseminate this Convention as widely as
possible and, in particular, to include the study thereof, as well as relevant
provisions of international humanitarian law, in their programmes of military
instruction.
Article 20
Savings clauses
Nothing in this Convention shall affect:
The applicability of international humanitarian law and
(a)
universally recognized standards of human rights as contained in international
instruments in relation to the protection of United Nations operations and
United Nations and associated personnel or the responsibility of such
personnel to respect such law and standards;
(b)
The rights and obligations of States, consistent with the Charter
of the United Nations, regarding the consent to entry of persons into their
territories;
(c)
The obligation of United Nations and associated personnel to act
in accordance with the terms of the mandate of a United Nations operation;
(d)
The right of States which voluntarily contribute personnel to a
United Nations operation to withdraw their personnel from participation in
such operation; or
(e)
The entitlement to appropriate compensation payable in the event
of death, disability, injury or illness attributable to peace-keeping service
by persons voluntarily contributed by States to United Nations operations.

/...

A/RES/49/59
Page 11

Article 21
Right of self-defence

Nothing in this Convention shall be construed so as to derogate from the
right to act in self-defence.
Article 22
Dispute settlement
1.
Any dispute between two or more States Parties concerning the
interpretation or application of this Convention which is not settled by
negotiation shall, at the request of one of them, be submitted to arbitration.
If within six months from the date of the request for arbitration the parties
are unable to agree on the organization of the arbitration, any one of those
parties may refer the dispute to the International Court of Justice by
application in conformity with the Statute of the Court.
2.
Each State Party may at the time of signature, ratification, acceptance
or approval of this Convention or accession thereto declare that it does not
consider itself bound by all or part of paragraph 1. The other States Parties
shall not be bound by paragraph 1 or the relevant part thereof with respect to
any State Party which has made such a reservation.
3.
Any State Party which has made a reservation in accordance with
paragraph 2 may at any time withdraw that reservation by notification to the
Secretary-General of the United Nations.
Article 23
Review meetings
At the request of one or more States Parties, and if approved by a
majority of States Parties, the Secretary-General of the United Nations shall
convene a meeting of the States Parties to review the implementation of the
Convention, and any problems encountered with regard to its application.
Article 24
Signature
This Convention shall be open for signature by all States, until
31 December 1995, at United Nations Headquarters in New York.

/...

A/RES/49/59
Page 12

Article 25
Ratification, acceptance or approval
This Convention is subject to ratification, acceptance or approval.
Instruments of ratification, acceptance or approval shall be deposited with
the Secretary-General of the United Nations.

Article 26
Accession
This Convention shall be open for accession by any State. The
instruments of accession shall be deposited with the Secretary-General of the
United Nations.
Article 27
Entry into force
1.
This Convention shall enter into force thirty days after twenty-two
instruments of ratification, acceptance, approval or accession have been
deposited with the Secretary-General of the United Nations.
2.
For each State ratifying, accepting, approving or acceding to the
Convention after the deposit of the twenty-second instrument of ratification,
acceptance, approval or accession, the Convention shall enter into force on
the thirtieth day after the deposit by such State of its instrument of
ratification, acceptance, approval or accession.
Article 28
Denunciation
1.
A State Party may denounce this Convention by written notification to
the Secretary-General of the United Nations.
2.
Denunciation shall take effect one year following the date on which
notification is received by the Secretary-General of the United Nations.
Article 29
Authentic texts
The original of this Convention, of which the Arabic, Chinese, English,
French, Russian and Spanish texts are equally authentic, shall be deposited
with the Secretary-General of the United Nations, who shall send certified
copies thereof to all States.

A/RES/49/59
Page 13
