some weeks before the opening of the second
session of the General Assembly, an ad hoe Committee composed in equal numbers of representatives of the Members transmitting informat,ion
under Article 73e of the Charter and of representatives ol Members elected, by the General
Assembly at this session, on the basis of an equitable geographical distribution;
5. Invites the Secretary-General to request the
Food and Agriculture Organization, the lntl!rnational Labour Organization, the United Nations
Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization, and the World Health Organization and
the International Trade Organization, when constituted, to send representatives in an advisory
capacity to the meeting of the ad hoe committee;
6. Invites the ad hoe Committee to examine
the Secretary-General's summary and analysis of
the information transmitted under Article 73e
of the Charter with a view to aiding the General
Assembly in its consideration of this information,
and with a view to making recommendation~ to
the General Assembly regarding the procedures
to be followed in the future and the means of
ensuring that the advice, expert knowledge and
experience of the specialized agencies are used
to the best advantage.
Sixty-fourth plenary meeting,
r4 December 1946 .

•

•

semaines avant J'ouverture de la deuxieme session
de l'Assemblee generale un Comite ad ho,
compose d'un nombre egal de representants de,
Membres transmettant des renseignements en
application de l'Article 73e de la Chane et de
representants des Membres elus par l'Assemblee
generale a cetle session, sur la base d'une
repartition geographique equitable;
5. Invite le Secretaire general a demander a
!'Organisation pour l'alimentation et l'agriculture, !'Organisation internationale du Travail,
)'Organisation des Nations Unies pour )'education, Ja science et la culture, }'Organisation mondiale de Ja sante et l'Organisation internationale
du commerce, une fois constituces, d'envoyer a
titre consultatif des representants a la reunion du
Comitc ad hoe;
6. Invite le Comitc ad hoe a examiner les resumes et analyse~ faits par le Secretaire general
des renseignements transmis en application de
!'Article 73e de la Charte, en vue d'assister
J'Assemblce gencrale dans son examen de ces renseignemei:its et de faire des recommandations a
l'Assemblee gencrale concernant la procedure a
suivre a l'avenir et Jes moyens d'assurer que les
avis, les connaissances techniques et l'experience
des institutions specialisees soient utilises au
mieux.
Soixante-quatrieme seance plenihe,
le r4 decembre r946.

•

•

•

•

At its sixty-fifth and sixty-sixth plenary meetings, on r4 and 15 December 1946 respectively,
the General Assembly, in accordance with the
terms uf the above resolution, elected eight Members of the ad hoe Committee.
The composition of the Committee therefore
is as follows:
Members transmitting information under Article 73e of the Charter:
Australia, Belgium, Denmark, France, Netherlands, New Zealand, United Kingdom, United
States of America.
Members elected by the General Assembly:
Brazil, China, Cuba, Egypt, India, Philippine
Republic, Union of Soviet Socialist Republics,
Uruguay.

A ses soixante-ci11quieme et soixante-sixieme
seances, le 14 et le 15 dt!cembre 1946, l'Assemblee
gent!rale, conf urmement aux termes de la resolution ci-dessus, a t!lu huit membres du Comite
ad hoe.
La composition de re Cnmite est, en consequence, la suivante:
Membres transmettant des informations en application de l'Article 73e de la Charte:
Australie, Belgique, Danemark, France, PaysBas, Nouvellc-Zelande, Royaume-Uni, Etats-Unis
cl' Amerique.
Membres elus par l'Assemblee generale:
Bresil, Chine, Cuba, Egypte, Inde, Republique
des Philippines, Union des Republiques socialistes sovietiques, Uruguay.

67 (I). Regional Conferences of Representatives of Non-Self-Governing Territories

67 (I). Conferences regionales de
representants de territolre1
non autonomes

The General Assembly,
Cons.idering that the resolution on Non-SelfGoverning Peoples adopted during the first part
of the first session of the General Assembly draws
attention to the fact that the obligations accepted
by Members of the United Nations under Chapter XI of the Charter are already in full force;

L' Assemblee ginerale,
Considerant que la resolution prise relativement aux populations non autonomes et adoptee
!ors de Ja premiere partie de la premiere session
de I' Asscmblee gcncralc attire )'attention sur le
fait que les obligations recbnnues par Jes Membres des Nations Unies aux termes du Chapitre XI de la Charte sont deja pleinement en
vigueur;
Reconnaissant )'importance de la declaration
qui figure au Chapitre XI de la Charte, notamment en CP qui concerne la paix et la securit~

Recognizing the importance of the declaration
contained in Chapter XI of the Charter especially
as it concerns the peace and security of the world,

126

and the political, economic, social and educational advancement of the peoples of Non-SelfGoverning Territories as well as. their just treatment and protection against abuses;
Recommends all Memben having or assuming
responsibilities for the administration of NonSelf-Governing Territories to convene conferences of representatives of Non-Self-Governing
Peoples chosen or preferably elected in such a
way that the representation of the people will be
ensured to the extent that the particular conditions of the territory concerned permit, in order
that effect may be given to the letter and spirit
of Chapter XI of the Charter and that the wishes
and aspirations of the Non-Self-Governing
Peoples may be expressed.
Sixty-fourth plenary meeting,
r4 December r946.

mondiales, le progrb des populations non au~
nomes dans les domaines politique, economique.
social et educatif et !'application a ces populations d'un traitement '~uitable et d'une juste
protection contre les abus;
Recommande a tons les Membres qui ont ou
qui assument l'administratiCJD de territoires non
autonomes, de convoquer des conferences de
representants de populations non autonomes,
choisis OU preferablement elus, de fa~on a assurer
la representation de la population dans la mesure
oil le permettront Jes conditions particulieres
du territoire considere, afin de realiser l'esprit
et la lettre du Chapitre XI de la Charte et de
permettre ainsi aux sentiments et aux aspirations
des populations non autonomes de s'exprimer.
Soixante-quatrieme seance pleniere,
le r4 decembre r946.

127
