TWEiVTY-THIRD

YEAR
th

MEETING: 14 MARCH 1968
NEW

YORK

CONTENTS
Page

Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/ 1397) . . . , . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . , . . . . , .
Adoption of the agenda , . . , . . . . . . . . . , . .I. . . , . , . . . . . , , , . . . . , . , ,
The question of South West Africa:
Letter dated 12 February 1968 addressed to the President of the Security
Council by the representatives of Chile, Colombia, Guyana, India, Indonesia,
Nigeria, Pakistan, Turkey, United Arab Republic, Yugoslavia and Zambia
(S/8397);
Letter dated 12 February 1968 addressed to the President of the Security
Council by the representatives of Afghanistan, Algeria, Cambodia, Cameroon,
Central African Republic, Ceylon, Chad, Congo (Brazzaville), Congo
(Democratic Republic of), Cyprus, Dahomey, Ethiopia, Ghana, Guinea, Iran,
Iraq, Ivory Coast, Jamaica, Japan, Jordan, Kenya, Kuwait, Lebanon, Libya,
Madagascar, Malaysia, Mali, Mauritania, Morocco, Nepal, Niger, Philippines,
Rwanda, Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Sierra Leone, Singapore, Somalia, Sudan,
Syria, Thailand, Togo, Tunisia, Uganda, United Republic of Tanzania, Upper
. ... .. .. ... ...
Volta
--- and Yemen (S/8398 and Add.l/Rev.I and Add.2)

S/PV.1397

THIRTEEN

HUNDRED

AND NINETY-SEVENTH

Held in New York on Thursday,
President: Mr, Ousmane Sock DROP (Senegal),

Present: The representatives of the following States:
Algeria, Brazil, Canada, China, Denmark, Ethiopia, France,
Hungary, India, Pakistan, Paraguay, Senegal, Union of
Soviet Socialist Republics, United Kingdom of Great
Britain and Northern Ireland and United States of America.
Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/l 397)

1. Adoption of the agenda
2. The question of South West Africa:
Letter dated 12 February 1968 addressed to the
President of the Security Council by the representatives
of Chile, Colombia, Guyana, India, Indonesia, Nigeria,
Pakistan, Turkey, United Arab Republic, Yugoslavia
and Zambia (S/8397);
Letter dated 12 February 1968 addressed to the
President of the Security Council by the representatives
of Afghanistan, Algeria, Cambodia, Cameroon, Central
African Republic, Ceylon, Chad, Congo (Brazzaville),
Congo (Democratic Republic of), Cyprus, Dahomey,
Ethiopia, Ghana, Guinea, Iran, Iraq, Ivory Coast,
Jamaica, Japan, Jordan, Kenya, Kuwait, Lebanon,
Libya,
Madagascar,
Malaysia, Mali, _ Mauritania,
Morocco, Nepal, Niger, Philippines, Rwanda, Saudi
Arabia, Senegal, Sierra Leone, Singapore, Somalia,
Sudan, Syria, Thailand, Togo, Tunisia, Uganda, United
Republic of Tanzania, Upper Volta and Yemen (S/8398
and Add.llRev.1 and Add.2).
Adoption’of

the agenda

The agenda was adopted.
The question of South West Africa:
Letter dated 12 February 1968 addressed to the President
of the Security Council by the representatives of Chile,
Colombia, Guyana, India, Indonesia, Nigeria, Pakistan,
Turkey, United Arab Republic, Yugoslavia and Zambia
(S/8397);
Letter dated 12 February 1968 addressed to the President
of the Security Council by the representatives of
Afghanistan, Algeria, Cambodia, Cameroon, Central
African Republic, Ceylon, Chad, Congo (3razzaville),
Congo (Democratic Republic of), Cyprus, Dahomey,
Ethiopia, Ghana, Guinea, Iran, Iraq, Ivory Coast,
Jamaica, Japan, Jordan, Kenya, Kuwait, Lebanon,
Libya,
Madagascar,
Malaysia, Mali, Mauritania,
Morocco, Nepal, Niger, Philippines, Rwanda, Saudi
Arabia, Senegal, Sierra Leone, Singapore, Somalia,

MEETING

14 March 1968, at 3 pm.
Sudan, Syria, Thailand, Togo, Tunisia, Uganda, United
Republic of Tanzania, Upper Volta and Yemen (S/8398
and Add.lIRev.1 and Add.2)

1. The PRESIDENT (translated from French): In accordance with the Security Council’s previous decision, if
there is no objection, I shall ipvite the representatives of
Guyana, Turkey, Chile, Indonesia, Yugoslavia, Nigeria, the
United Arab Republic, Zambia and Colombia to take the
places reserved for them at the sides of the Council
chamber, on the understanding that when one of these
representatives wishes to speak he will be invited to take a
piace at the Council table.
At the invitation of the President, Mr. E. A. Braithwaite
(Guyana), Mr. N. Eren (Turkey), Mr. J. Hunecus (Chile),
Mr. If. R. Abdulgani (Indonesia), Mr. 0. Pejid (Yugoslavia),
Mr. 0. Alo (Nigeria), Mr. M. R. Abdel-Wahab (United Arab
Republic), Mr. I, R. B. Manda (Zambia), and Mr. A. Herr&
Medina (Colombia) took the places reserved for them.

2. The PRESIDENT
(translated from French):
The
Council will now proceed to the consideration of the item
on the agenda, the problem of South West Africa, which is
the subject of the draft resolution contained in document
S/8429.
3. After the numerous meetings which I have had with the
members of the Council, I shall now submit to the Council
for its consideration a text which I believe it can adopt
I shall therefore ask the Underunanimously.
SecretaryGeneral if he will bc good enough to read the text
to the Council.
4. Mr. NESTORENKO (Under-Secretary-General, Department of Political and Security Council Affairs): The text
reads as follows:
“The Security Council,
“Recalling its resolution 245 (1968) of 25 January
1968, by which it unanimously condemned the refusal of
the Government of South Africa to comply with the
provisions of General Assembly resolution 2324 (XXI)
of 16 December 1967 and further called upon the
Government of South Africa to discontinue forthwith the
illegal trial and to release and repatriate the South West
Africans concerned,
“Taking into account General Assembly resolution
2145 (XXI) of 27 October 1966 by which the General
Assembly of the United Nations terminated the Mandate

Of South Africa -over South West Africa and assumed
direct responsibility for the Territory until its independence,

report thereon to the Security Council not later than 3’1
March 1968;
“7. Decides

the inalienable right of the people and
Territory of South West Africa to freedom and independence in accordance with the Charter of the United
Nations and with the provisions of General Assembly
resolution 1S14 (XV) of 14 December 1960,

to remain

actively seized of the matter.”

“Reaffirming

“Mindfzll that Member States shall fulfil
obligations as set forth in the Charter,

5. The PRESIDENT (translated from French): 1 have no
further speakers on my list who wish to address the Council
before the vote takes place, If I hear no objection, 1 shall
put
to the vote the draft resolution
which has just been
read out.

all their

A vote wastaken by show of hands.
The draft resolution wasadopted unanimously. ’

.by the fact that the Government of South
Africa has failed to comply with Security Council
resolution 245 (1968),
“Distressed

6. The PRESIDENT (translated from French): 1 sllall now
call upon those representatives who wish to explain their
votes. The first speaker is the representative of the United
Kingdom.

“Taking into account the memorandum of the United
Nations Council for South West Africa of 25 January
1968 on the illegal detention and trial of the South West
Africans concerned and the letter of 10 February 1968
from the President of the United Nations Council for
South West Africa,

7. Lord CARADON (United Kingdom): In explanation of
my vote, I wish to say that the position and policy of my
Government in regard to South West Africa and the
Pretoria trial have been made very clear in previous
speeches in the Assembly and in this Council, and I
confirmed our position when I spoke in the Council last
month, 1 have no reason to vary or detract from what we
have said.

‘Heaffirming that the continued detention and trial and
subsequent sentencing of the South West Africans con-

stitute an illegal act and a flagrant violation of the rights
of the South West Africans concerned, the Universal
Declaration of Human Rights and of the international
status of the Territory now under direct United Nations
responsibility,
“Cognizant of its special responsibility
people and Territory of South West Africa,

8. On the whole future of South West Africa I stated

before the aim my Government

set and the method we

proposed.

towards the

9. The aim is to enable all the people of South West Africa
to proceed to free and full self-determination
and indepen dence .

“1. Censures the Government of South Africa for its
flagrant
defiance of Security Council resolution
245 (1968) as well as of the authority of the United
Nations of which South Africa is a Member;

10. As to method, our contention throughout has been
that we should act together by considered and dcliberatc
action within our clear capacity.

“2. Demands that the Government of South Africa
release and repatriate forthwith the South West Africans
concerned;

11, We are not now dealing with the whole question of the
status and future of South West Africa, We are conccrncd
with the prisoners in the Pretoria trial.

“3. calls upon States Members of the United Nations
to co-operate with the Security Council, in pursuance of
their obligations under the Charter, in order to obtain
compliance by the Government of South Africa with the
provisions of the present resolution;

12. We supported both Assembly resolution 2324 (XXII)
and Security Council resolution 245 (1968). WC also
recalled that we had reservations on General Assembly
resolution 2145 (XXI) and wording based on it, and WC
maintain these reservations. But General Assembly resolution 2324 (XXII)
and Security Council resolution
245 (1968), for both of which we voted, condemned the
trial and called upon the Government of South Africa to
stop it.

“4. Urges Member States who are in a position to
contribute to the implementation of the present resolution to assist the Security Council in order to obtain
compliance by the Government of South Africa with the
provisions of the present resolution;

13. We have also condemned the so-called Terrorism Act’
in the clearest terms.

“5. Decides that in the event of failure on the part of
the Government of South Africa to comply with the

14. We joined with the great majority of the Assembly and
all members of this Council in the urgent pica to the Sout]l
African authorities.

provisions of the present resolution, the Security Council
will meet immediately to determine effective steps or
measures in conformity with the relevant provisions of
the Charter of the United Nations;

i Seeresolution 246 (1968).
2 Act NO. 83 of 1967 to Prohibit Terroristic Activities and to

“6. Requests the Secretary-General to follow closely
the implementation
of the present resolution and to

Amend the Law Relating to Criminal Procedure; and to I’rovidc for
Other Incidental Matters.

2

1.5. We acted on the call of the Council in making
representations to the South African Government both
about the trial and the legislation under which the prisoners
were charged.

own initiative, to send a special representative to South
Africa to bring about compliance with the Security
Council’s demand for the release and repatriation of the
South West Africans.” /Ibid., para. 27J.
24. And then he gave an all-important
main question before us:

16. As to the action in this Council, as you know, Sir, I
strongly urged from the beginning that there should be
consultation between us. There is, I trust, no need to
preach the gospel of consultation here. That is our
obligation, and that is our tradition.

assurance on the

“ . . . in deference to the views of our other colleagues,
the seven-Power draft resolution has been couched in
terms which we believe do not necessarily bind any
member of the Security Council in advance to action
under Chapter VII of the Charter of the United Nations.”
(Ibid., para. 32.1

17, It is our tradition that our consultations should be
conducted in confidence, and I shall not go back over the
detailed discussions which have taken place under your
patient authority. I would only say that we entered into the
consultations in good faith and with a genuine desire to
find common ground of agreement.

25. It was on the basis of that assurance that we entered
into consultations which have today led to agreed and
concerted action, and the consultations have succeeded on
that basis.

18. All along I have urged that we should act together
within our capacity. I have argued that to do otherwise
would give comfort and encouragement not to those whom
we wish to help but only to those whose policies we reject.

26. I do not wish to say more now, since our primary
concern must be not to pursue legal or theoretical
arguments but together to serve the interests of the
prisoners who have been sentenced under a law so widely
and rightly condemned, We are all agreed on that purpose.

19. All along I have plainly said what my Government
could do and equally plainly I have said what we couId,not.
20. We were concerned lest we should be asked to set out
on a journey without knowing our destination, and on the
question of action under Chapter VII my delegation has for
long past made its position absolutely clear.

27. We have succeeded today in joining together, basing
our common action on the abhorrence of the Terrorism Act
and our deep concern about the trials and the sentences,
and our desire above all to help the prisoners. In those
purposes it has been our aim not to divide and fail but to
unite and succeed. Our concern and our appeal remain as
strong and as urgent as ever.

21. 1 greatly hoped that having acted unanimously in
resolution 245 (1968) and since we are all wholeheartedly
agreed on the purpose, we should not divide and so weaken
our capacity to act effectively and weaken the influence of
our decision and weaken the authority of the Council.

28. Mr. MOROZOV (Union of Soviet Socialist Republics)
(translated fvom Russian): The debate in the Security
Council, which has once again considered the fate of the
group of South West African patriots fighting to free their
home land from colonial and racist oppression, and against
whom the Pretoria authorities have taken reprisals which
have aroused the just indignation of all progressive mankind, has clearly shown that we are not merely concerned
with the fate of these victims of the colonialists’ reprisals or
with some isolated case of an illegal act by the Pretoria
authorities against the inhabitants of South West Africa. It
has once again been clearly demonstrated that the racjst
rBgime in Pretoria is seeking, unlawfully and in violation of
well-known decisions of the General Assembly and the
Security Council, to extend its jurisdiction into the
territory of South West Africa, and to establish and enforce
its cruel system of colonial oppression known asapartheid.

22, When we appealed for consultation we were greatly
encouraged by the response of the sponsors of the draft
resolution and especially by what the sponsors said here at
our last public meetings together. In particular we were
impressed by what was said on behalf of the sponsors in the
speech of Ambassador Shahi of Pakistan. It was that speech
which opened the door to agreement, He said:
“It is not the intention behind operative paragraph 4 of
the seven-Power draft resolution to bind the Secufity
Council in advance to a specific course of action.”
(1395th meeting, para. 23.1
23. With regard to the proposal that a special representative of the Secretary-General might go to South Africa
he said:

29. In this way the South African racists are attempting to
prolong colonial rule in that country. As was revealed in the
course of the Security Council debates on this question, the
Pretoria regime has no wish to heed the United Nations
decisions, including the resolution unanimously adopted by
the Security Council on 25 January 1968 calling for an
immediate end to the reprisals against the South West
African patriots and for their release and repatriation. Once
again the racists have shown they fully intend to disregard
the decisions of the United Nations, the demands of the
African peoples and the demands of world-wide progressive
public opinion.

“The seven sponsors are conscious that constructive
suggestions have been made by some representatives in
the course’ of the present debate. The idea has been put
forward that the Secretary-General should be requested
to send a special representative to South Africa to secure
the release and repatriation of the South West Africans.
The seven-Power draft resolution does not in any way
preclude such action by the Secretary-General. It would
be consistent with operative paragraph 5 of the sevenPower draft resolution for the Secretary-General, on his
3

30. Thus the Pretoria regime has once again openly defied
the United Nations, those Member States which, not in
words but in deeds, are struggling within the Organization
to put an end to the shameful system of colonialism.

the illegal treatment and repression carried out by the
so-called South African Republic against the representatives
of the South West African people who are struggling for
their country’s freedom and national independence; once
again we confirm the Soviet Union’s readiness to continue
its support of the just struggIe of the South West African
people to free itself from the colonial and racist yoke and
to achieve freedom and independence.

31. It is generally known, as the statements made by many
members of the Council and by those States Members of
the United Nations that have taken part in the discussion of
this question without being members of the Council, have
clearly shown, that nothing like this could have happened,
and that the Pretoria racists would never have dared to act
so defiantly, if they had not continued to receive wide
support from certain imperialist Powers, principally the
United States of America, the United Kingdom and the
Federal Republic of Germany, the so-called South African
Republic’s political and military allies and main economic
and trading partners. These countries have given, and
continue to give, assistance and support in various ways to
the racist regime in Pretoria, at the bidding of the
international monopolies which are behind them and which
are interested in exploiting the extremely rich natural
resources of South West Africa. The racist regime of
Pretoria is watching over the interests of these monopolies
in southern Africa where, as is now quite clear, steps are
being taken to reinforce more and more one of the last
colonial bastions in southern Africa.

36. Mr. IGNATIEFF (Canada): Mr. President, in explanation of vote, I should first of all like to thank you for the
unfailing courtesy, consideration and patience with which
you conducted the consultations which led to the unanimous decision taken tonight. I should also like to recall the
statement made by the representative of Palcistan when he
explained the original seven-Power draft resolution at the
meeting of the Council on 4 March on behalf of its
sponsors, on which the text now adopted unanimously was
based. It was helpful to have the assurance of the
representative of Pakistan who, as my colleague from the
United Kingdom has noted, made a notable contribution to
reaching agreement in the Council that:
“It is not the intention behind operative paragraph 4 of
the seven-Power draft resolution to bind the Security
Council in advance to a specific course of action.
Naturally the Council would wish to decide for itself,
should South Africa again defy the Council, what
particular course of action under the Charter it should
take.” (1395th meeting, para. 23.)
..

32. It is because of these political, military and economic
considerations that a number of Western Powers continues
to have close economic, military and political ties with the
regime in Pretoria and has tried hard in this Council to
hamper the efforts of the African and Asian countries to
have the Security Council call vigorously for the release of
the imprisoned South West African patriots and for an end
to oppression against the people of that country.

37. On that same understanding, therefore, that the
approval of the text does not bind us in advance to a
specific course of action, I have associated myself with the
text which has been voted unanimously.

33. It had always been our view that it would be much
more forceful and effective for the Council to declare
outright that those responsible for the illegal treatment of
the South West African patriots and the continued disregard of the Security Council decisions, are not only the
racist Powers in Pretoria but their aforementioned allies.
Despite this, the Soviet delegation has found it possible to
vote in favour of the decision just taken at this meeting of
the Council. We took into account the fact that the main
features of the draft resolution are the demand for the
immediate release of the South West African patriots and
the censure of the racists’ activities. We also considered the
opinion of our Afro-Asian colleagues in the Council who
thought that such a step on the part of the Security
Council, despite the obvious shortcomings of the resolution, could nevertheless facilitate the release of the South
West African patriots and the ending of the inhuman
treatment meted out to them.

38. Mr. BERARD (France) (translated from French): My
delegation is glad that all members of the Council have been
able to reach agreement on the resolution we have just
adopted. This text reflects the unanimity of the feelings
which the Pretoria verdict has aroused in the world and the
unanimous refusal of the international community to bow
to injustice.
39. My delegation cannot accept the extension to South
West Africa of an apartheid policy condemned by my
country as in total contradiction to the principles of
equality and fraternity which have for centuries inspired its
actions, France cannot but censure the action taken by the
South African authorities against nationals of a territory
with international status. We warn the Government of
Pretoria against making the great mistake of remaining deaf
to this second appeal for the liberation of these prisoners
and against pursuing a policy of repression against other
South West African nationals.

34. We voted for that resolution on the understanding that
operative paragraph 4 is, in effect, to be interpreted as a
demand addressed to the United States and the United
Kingdom to take all necessary steps in order to put an end
to the oppression of the South West African patriots as well
as to halt support for the racist regime in Pretoria.

40. These were my delegation’s sentiments in voting for
the present resolution, after the adoption of a certain
number of amendments. As the spokesman for the sponsors
of the draft has said, this resolution must not be regarded as
prejudicing the kind of actions which remain open to our
Council. We also had this in mind when we accepted a text
with a preamble containing references which give rise to
some well-known reservations on the part of my delegation.

35. To conclude our explanation of vote, we declare once
again that the Soviet people energetically protests against
4

We maintain these reservations, of course, and I think it is
unnecessaryto reiterate them.

been illegally tried and imprisoned. We have already made
our views forcibly known to the Government of South
Africa on the law and justice of this case, and we shall
persist in using our influence towards the achievement of
the objectives set by the Council.

41. Mr. GOLDBERG (United States of America): When
the Security Council first becarile seized of the problem of
the thirty-three South West Africans illegally arrested and
tried in Pretoria, the United States delegation clearly stated
its position, and we adhere to that position. The defendants
weretried and convicted in a foreign court, under an invalid
law, on charges other than those for which they had been
prosecuted, and without essential safeguards which are
normally available to the defence by any conception of due
process of law. This action was contrary to the international obligation of the Government of South Africa with
respect to South West Africa, a Territory enjoying international status. That action warrants the censure which the
Souncil has imposed on South Africa, and the other actions
taken in the resolution we have just unanimously adopted.

47. It is by taking actions together, as we have done
today, in pursuance of our common objective, and not by
unwarranted invective directed at fellow members of the
Council, that we can best achieve our common goal.
48. Lij Endalkachew MAKONNEN
(Ethiopia): I do not
wish to prolong the Council’s deliberations by making a
lengthy statement at this lath stage, However, in explaining
my delegation’s vote in favour of the draft resolution that
the Council has just adopt:ed unanimously, I wish to make
it clear that the position of my Government which I had
the honour to present to the Council on Monday, 19
February 1968 (1392nd meetingj, remains unchanged. It
has been in a spirit of co-operation and common accord,
and without prejudice to the position taken on that
occasion, that my delegation tonight has cast its vote in
favour of the draft resolution.

42. My delegation, throughout the public and private
discussions which have taken place, has stressed the need, if
we are to be effective, for maintaining the unity of purpose
and intent that existed when resolution 2324 (XXII) was
adopted by the General Assembly and again when resolution 245 (1968) was adopted by this Council. That
unanimity has been achieved and maintained in this
resolution which WCfully support.

49. Mr. CSATORDAY (Hungary): In voting in favour of
the draft resolution before the Security Council, the
Hungarian delegation took into consideration the suffering
of the people of South West Africa under the oppression of
the colonial yoke, It took into consideration the fight for
independence in which the heroic leaders of South West
Africa are engaged. It took into consideration the fact that
these leaders are being imprisoned, persecuted, tortured and
killed.

43. My delegation wishes to express its appreciation to the
sponsors for the spirit ‘of conciliation which they have
manifested in the intensive consultations that have taken
place in the interest of maintaining the unity of the
Council; and my delegation particularly wishes to thank
YOU, Mr. President, for your patience, courtesy and skill in
conducting the consultations. Your actions and leadership
have largely been responsible for the unanimous action we
have taken.

50. The Hungarian delegation believes that urgent action
dn this matter is required in order lo bring human suffering
to an end more quickly, in order to correct as quickly as
possible the injustice committed against these heroes of the
South West African people. The Hungarian delegation is of
the opinion that the resolution must be effective. It must
not be mere words shouted in the empty desert. It must be
strong. It must generate international co-operation and
solidarity. It must help to achieve the objectives set by this
CounciI.

44. In the spirit of compromise, the sponsors have agreed
to changes in the text of their draft resolution to which
they had been strongly committed, in order to ensure
unanimous agreement. Among those changes is the omission of the reference to Article 25 of the Charter contained
in their draft, which we would have regarded as inappropriate for a resolution which was to be adopted under
Chapter VI.

51. The crimes committed by the South African Government are intolerable. They are a blatant violation of the
Charter of our Organization. They cynically ignore basic
human rights. They constitute a reckless suppression of the
fight for national independence. The regime in Pretoria has
assumed a great responsibility in the eyes of the entire
world and to history by committing these crimes. But some
other Member States of our Organization, as well as other
States, share the responsibility for these bloody crimes.
Countries like the United Kingdom, the United States and
the Federal Republic of Germany bear their share of
responsibility because they grant political, economic and
military assistance to the Pretoria regime, which is committing one crime after another. The Hungarian delegation
wishes to point out that the alliance between these
countries and South Africa exerts at the same time vitaI
influence on South Africa. The existence and survival of the
Pretoria r&me depend on the assistance given it by these
countries. They are a source of vital materials and are a
market for the products of South Africa.

45. Particularly helpful to our common agreement was the
assurance of the sponsors given through the very fine
statement made by Mr. Shahi on their behalf at the very
outset, that their prior resolution, and, a fohv+i. this draft,
falls within the provisions of Chapter VI and that there is
neither commitment to nor exclusion of any particular
Charter approach in any necessary future consideration by
this Council of this matter. This resolution enjoys the
unanimous support of the Security Council, and this is a
fact which should be borne in mind by the Government of
South Africa. It is an expression of the firm will and intent
of the international community on an issue of international
responsibility. It should and must be heeded.
46. We, on our part-the United States-shall continue
vigorously to press the South African Government to
release and repatriate the South West Africans who have
5

:

African Government. We shall also cIosely follow the action
taken by the allies of that Government, to see whether they
fulfil the obligations they undertook when they signed the
Charter or whether they continue to share with the South
African Government responsibility for these bloody crimes.

52. Those Powers now have an opportunity to use their
influence for the benefit of mankind, for the benefit of a
heroic people fighting for its independence. They can use
their influence to force the Pretoria rlSgime to respect the
Charter of our Organization, to ensure that the Security
Council resolutions are implemented.

58. The Hungarian delegation urges the South African
Government and the Governments of its allies to take a
stand on this matter, to support the cause of justice and
freedom, to support the principles of the Charter, LO
support the basic human rights, to support freedom for
South West Africa and to support the cause of liberating
the heroes of the South West African people.

53. Those States which tonight have voted in favour of the
draft resolution are bound to demand and to ensure by
virtue of operative paragraphs 3 and 4 of the draft that
South Africa complies with it. The implementation
of
resolutions and the observance of and respect for the
principles of the Charter are the corner-stones of our
Organization. That includes, if necessary, the application of
Chapter VII of the Charter. It is my delegation’s understanding that operative paragraph 5 of the resolution shows
this very clearly.

59. Mr. BORCH (Denmark):
hour I shall be very brief.

Mr. President, at this late

60. I just want to recall that all along in our public
statements in this Council and in private consultations
among the members of the Council my delegation has
emphasized that if we were to achieve maximum effectiveness it was paramount that the broadest agreement, and if
possible, unanimity in the Council be established and
maintained in this grave matter. We therefore welcomed the
opportunity for continued private consultations which was
offered to the Council in the constructive speech by the
representative of Pakistan and the setting he gave to those
consultations. It is indeed a source of great satisfaction to
US that we have now, after long and arduous negotiations,
achieved the aim, that is to agree on a resolution in this
matter,

54. The Government of South Africa refused to carry out
resolution 245 (1968) of the Security Council. By taking
that attitude, it has already violated Article 25 of the
Charter.
55. In operative paragraph 1 of the resolution just
adopted, the Council reiterates its condemnation of the
South African Government, and in operative paragraph 2 it
repeats its demand for the release of the condemned
prisoners.
56. In the opinion of the Hungarian delegation, the full
implementation of this resolution is very important for the
whole world. But we wish to stress that it treats only a
symptom of the disease in the southern part of Africa. We
must never forget our obligation to ensure the freedom of
South West Africa. That is the basic problem. If our
Organization lived up to the principles of the Charter and
to its own resolutions and liberated South West Africa, we
not only could solve immediately the problem which our
present resolution is designed to solve, but could prevent
any recurrence in the future of similar criminal acts.

61. I want to use this opportunity to pay my respect to all
those who have contributed to bringing about this achicvement, and to pay my respect to the spirit of conciliation
that has governed all our discussions. In particular,
Mr. President, I want to pay my respect to you for your
patient and skilful guidance, without which our aim would
not have been achieved.
62. The PRESIDENT (translated from French): I have no
further speakers on my list. If there is no objection I shall
adjourn this meeting.

57. We have voted in favour of the draft resolution
because we regard it as a step in the right direction towards
obtaining freedom for the people of South West Africa. We
shall follow with great attention the actions of the South

The meeting rose at 9.25 p.nz

6
Litho

in U.N.

Price:

%U.S. 0.50 (or equivalent

in other

currencies)

35195-March

1971--2,100
