United Nations

S/PV.6062

Security Council

Provisional

Sixty-fourth year

6062nd meeting
Thursday, 8 January 2009, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Lacroix . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(France)

Members:

Austria . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Burkina Faso . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Costa Rica . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Croatia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Japan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Libyan Arab Jamahiriya . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Mexico . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Turkey . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Uganda . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . .
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Viet Nam . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Mr. Mayr-Harting
Mr. Tiendrébéogo
Ms. Zhang Dan
Mr. Urbina
Mr. Vilović
Mr. Takasu
Mr. Dabbashi
Mr. Heller
Mr. Rogachev
Mr. İlkin
Mr. Butagira
Ms. Pierce
Mr. McMahan
Mr. Bui The Giang

Agenda
Briefing by the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room C-154A.

09-20310 (E)

*0920310*

S/PV.6062

The meeting was called to order at 10.10 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Briefing by the United Nations High Commissioner
for Refugees
The President (spoke in French): In accordance
with the understanding reached in the Council’s prior
consultations, and in the absence of objection, I shall
take it that the Security Council agrees to extend an
invitation under rule 39 of its provisional rules of
procedure to Mr. António Guterres, United Nations
High Commissioner for Refugees.
It is so decided.
I invite Mr. Guterres to take a seat at the Council
table.
The Security Council will now begin its
consideration of the item on its agenda. The Council is
meeting in accordance with the understanding reached
in its prior consultations.
At this meeting, the Security Council will hear a
briefing by Mr. António Guterres, United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees, whom I welcome on
behalf of the members of the Council and to whom I
now give the floor.
Mr. Guterres (spoke in French): At the outset, I
would like to express my gratitude for this opportunity
to address the Security Council.
On a personal note, Sir, allow me to congratulate
you on France’s assuming the presidency of the
Council at the beginning of the year. The excellent
cooperation between France and the United Nations
High Commissioner for Refugees is robust and proved
to be particularly fruitful during the recent French
presidency of the European Union.
(spoke in English)
Allow me to switch into English.
Allow me also to salute the presence of the five
newly elected Security Council members — Austria,
Japan, Mexico, Turkey and Uganda. The Office of the
United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees
(UNHCR) enjoys a long-standing and positive
relationship with all of those countries, but I would
particularly like to express my appreciation to Uganda
2

for agreeing to host a special summit on forced
displacement in Africa. At that summit next April,
African heads of State will consider a new African
Union Convention on Protection and Assistance for
Internally Displaced Persons. If adopted, as we all
hope, the Convention will be the first legally binding
international instrument specifically related to internal
displacement. It will also signify African leadership on
a matter of truly global concern.
In January 2006, I informed the Council that the
number of refugees was at its lowest level for almost a
quarter of a century. Unfortunately, despite large-scale
repatriation movements, the following two years saw a
significant increase in refugee numbers, primarily due
to the situations in Iraq and Somalia. While we are still
compiling the latest statistics, our current estimate is
that the total number of refugees under the mandate of
my Office currently exceeds 11 million. That does not
include the 4.6 million Palestinians for whom the
United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine
Refugees in the Near East (UNRWA) has
responsibility.
The number of conflict-induced internally
displaced persons has also grown and is now more than
26 million worldwide. While States have primary
responsibility for the protection and welfare of
displaced citizens, some lack the capacity, or even the
will, to exercise it. Wherever possible, UNHCR
therefore works in collaboration with the broader
humanitarian community in the context of the so-called
cluster approach to support States in providing the
internally displaced with protection, assistance and
solutions.
Another issue high on the UNHCR agenda is
statelessness. In countries with reliable data, at least 3
million women, children and men are known to be
stateless. However, the global number may be as high
as 12 million.
In my briefing today, I will first comment on
recent trends in forced displacement. I will then outline
three important challenges encountered by my Office
for which the role of the Security Council is highly
relevant. And in conclusion, I will make a few
comments on the issue of resolving situations of forced
displacement.
Inasmuch as forced displacement arises from
persecution and serious human rights violations, it is
also often the result of threats to or breaches of
09-20310

S/PV.6062

international peace and security. At the same time,
neglected displacement scenarios can represent a threat
to peace and security. As such, situations of which the
Security Council is seized are often those where
UNHCR is deeply engaged.
In today’s world, I can perceive two groups of
conflicts. The first extends from South and South-West
Asia, through the Middle East to Sudan and Chad and
into the Horn of Africa. From Peshawar to Kandahar,
from Mosul to Gaza and from El Geneina to
Mogadishu, we are confronted with a series of distinct
crises, each with its own historical roots. But even so,
those conflicts are now increasingly interrelated and
together have major implications for global peace and
security, drawing the serious attention of the
international community.
Those conflicts are at the centre of many of
today’s humanitarian disasters and have generated
around two thirds of the total number of refugees
worldwide. They require a strong humanitarian
response. While it is absolutely vital that the victims of
armed conflict be provided with essential protection
and assistance, we must also acknowledge the
limitations of humanitarian action and its inability to
resolve deep-rooted conflicts within and between
States. The solution, as always, can only be political,
and the contribution of the United Nations to resolving
those conflicts in an effective and equitable manner is
crucial to the credibility of the Organization, in
particular among certain segments of international
public opinion.
Let me now go into a little more detail. In
Afghanistan, intensified conflict, coupled with the
deliberate targeting of humanitarian workers, has
limited humanitarian access to around half of the
country’s territory. Even so, in 2008, 278,000 Afghans
returned to their homeland, mainly from Pakistan, with
our support.
In reality, that significant number of returns was
in not due to a meaningful improvement of the
situation in Afghanistan. On the contrary, most of those
who repatriated did so because of growing insecurity in
the neighbouring areas of Pakistan and declining living
standards for refugees in urban centres as a result of
the economic crisis. In fact, violence, weak governance
and development gaps in Afghanistan contribute to a
situation in which 3 million of the country’s citizens
remain in exile in Pakistan and Iran.

09-20310

We are now witnessing a new dimension to the
crisis in the region, namely, the displacement of some
300,000 people in Pakistan’s North-West Frontier
Province and Federally Administered Tribal Areas. As
in Afghanistan, UNHCR has very limited access, with
serious constraints on the delivery of humanitarian
assistance.
These developments have confirmed that the
Afghan situation cannot be understood or addressed in
isolation. Accordingly, just two months ago, the
Government of Afghanistan and UNHCR organized an
international conference in Kabul to consolidate a
comprehensive strategy for the sustainable return and
reintegration of the country’s refugees and displaced
persons. This was cited as a positive expression of
regional cooperation in the recent Security Council
report on its mission to Afghanistan. However, the
success of the conference will depend on a resolute
follow-up process by all stakeholders, based on a
strengthened national and international commitment to
security, governance and economic and social
development.
In Iraq, with the improved security situation,
UNHCR is working hard to help the Government
create appropriate conditions for the voluntary return
and sustainable reintegration of refugees and internally
displaced persons. However, there is a long way to go.
Voluntary return must take place in safety and dignity.
It is therefore imperative that States preserve the
asylum space that they have made available to Iraqi
refugees throughout the past five years in the region
and beyond. More than 2 million Iraqis are still hosted
mainly by Jordan and Syria in a very generous way and
a similar number remains displaced inside Iraq.
I call on the world’s more prosperous States to
offer full support to those countries and organizations
that are bearing the brunt of the Iraqi exodus, both by
means of material assistance and through the expanded
provision of resettlement opportunities to those
vulnerable Iraqis for whom voluntary repatriation will
not be a viable option.
To prepare for returns, we redeployed the
UNHCR representative in Iraq from Amman to
Baghdad in March 2008, and we have also established
an international presence in Erbil, Mosul and Basra.
We have national staff in 11 of the country’s
governorates and plan to further expand our presence
and activities in Iraq as the evolving security

3

S/PV.6062

environment permits. Beyond security, sustainable
return to Iraq will require effective action in the areas
of property restitution, or property compensation for
those unable to go back to their places of origin, and
full and equitable access to welfare services and public
distribution systems.
In Darfur, an appalling humanitarian and human
rights disaster persists. More than 2 million persons
remain displaced internally and, just in Chad, nearly a
quarter of a million Sudanese have sought refuge.
Without a political agreement that involves both the
Government of Khartoum and the different rebel
movements, there is a risk that the African UnionUnited Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur will be
unable to meet the security expectations of the affected
populations. This would represent a terrible blow to the
people, first of all, but also to the credibility of those
organizations and the international community as a
whole. Even if a comprehensive peace agreement can
be established, the international force strengthened and
impunity ended, a massive investment will be needed
to re-establish the social, economic and environmental
equilibrium of the area, ensuring harmony between
different ethnic groups and between farmers and
herders, and overcoming the tensions created by
dwindling water resources and high population growth
rates.
In Somalia, the hardships endured by the people
are well known to the Council. With more than a
million Somalis already dependent on food aid, any
further limitations on humanitarian access could lead to
additional population displacements of a daunting
magnitude. Preserving the capacity of the World Food
Programme to continue its food distribution
programme in southern and central Somalia is
absolutely essential with the complex political situation
that currently prevails. The burden placed on
neighbouring States, including Kenya, Yemen and
Djibouti, is already enormous. Any further
deterioration would stretch regional capacities beyond
the breaking point and could generate a catastrophe of
unprecedented proportions.
UNHCR is not present in Gaza. A sister agency,
UNRWA, was created before UNHCR existed to
address the needs of Palestinian refugees in the area.
While we may not be directly involved, it is impossible
for me not to make reference to the current political
and humanitarian crisis. In Gaza, the civilian
population is not even allowed to flee to safety

4

elsewhere. I want to express UNHCR’s firm solidarity
with UNRWA’s action and to call for a strict adherence
to humanitarian principles in and around Gaza,
including respect for the universal right to seek and
enjoy asylum.
Beyond this first group of interrelated conflicts,
others have been multiplying and deepening around the
world. But contrary to the situations I have just
examined, they generally lack international attention,
largely because their impact is local or at best regional.
They are normally not perceived as having
implications for global security. The Central African
Republic is a typical example. Although it is on the
agenda of the Security Council, few in the world are
aware that some 100,000 refugees have been forced to
flee to Chad and Cameroon and that more than 200,000
of its citizens are internally displaced, in conditions of
grave deprivation.
We might discuss many other crises around the
world, but I will focus on one particular situation
because of its importance to the work of both the
Security Council and my Office: the Democratic
Republic of the Congo. The attention of the
international
community
has
recently
been
concentrated on North Kivu. To echo my earlier
remarks, there is no humanitarian solution to that
conflict. The solution must be political and involve the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, Rwanda, other
regional actors and the international community as a
whole. The current tragedy in North Kivu has a
complex historical heritage arising from colonial rule
and exacerbated more recently by the Rwanda
genocide and two Congolese civil wars. The solution
must also address the Forces démocratiques de
libération du Rwanda presence in the area, the
persistence of which threatens to undermine any peace
agreement. And peace will be short-lived if the
underlying problems of access to land, property,
citizenship, inter-ethnic relations and the representation
of minorities are not resolved.
But the Democratic Republic of the Congo is not
just North Kivu. We have recently witnessed some
significant population displacements in Ituri and
Orientale province. Serious human rights violations
persist in South Kivu, targeted predominantly at
women and girls, and every six months the number of
people who die unnecessarily in the country as a result
of armed conflict and material deprivation is equivalent
to the number of people killed by the 2004 Asian

09-20310

S/PV.6062

tsunami. Only the Security Council has the legitimacy
to lead the efforts of the international community to
bring this wholly unacceptable situation to an end.
UNHCR is prepared to play its part, but our role and
capacities are obviously limited.
Just as patterns of conflict are becoming more
complex, so too are contemporary forms of
displacement. While the relationship between forced
displacement and armed conflict is long-standing and
well understood, the links with other phenomena, such
as climate change, extreme poverty and poor
governance, are not. As a result of climate change,
natural disasters are on the increase. They have become
more frequent, intense and devastating in their human
impact, reinforcing the potential for displacement. The
same applies to drought and the rising level of oceans.
The full impact of the current financial meltdown and
economic recession, following the recent food and
energy crises, will have a strong impact on the
developing world and it seems inevitable that more and
more people will be on the move. Conflict, climate
change and extreme deprivation will interact and
strengthen each other as causes of displacement.
UNHCR is striving to analyse and respond to these
developments — an objective that I believe we share
with the Security Council.
Refugees are people who have left their country
because of persecution or armed conflict, and they
benefit from the specific protection regime established
by international law. No such legal framework exists
for other people who have been forcibly displaced,
other than the general human rights instruments that
are applicable to all. In drawing attention to this issue,
UNHCR is not seeking any expansion of its mandate or
to broaden the established definition of a refugee. But I
believe we have a duty to promote a serious discussion
on new forms of forced displacement, the protection
gaps that are emerging and the possible forms of
collective response.
I would now like to turn to three particular
challenges for the international community in
responding to humanitarian crises. All three centre on
the work of the Security Council but also have
important implications for my Office. And all three
exemplify the complex relationship that exists today
between the imperative of maintaining peace and
security and that of ensuring the effective delivery of
protection and humanitarian assistance.

09-20310

First is the challenge of peacekeeping in
situations where there is no peace to keep, and its
relation to the protection of civilians. Security Council
resolutions 1296 (2000) and 1674 (2006) reiterate that
the deliberate targeting of civilians in situations of
armed conflict remains a flagrant violation of
international humanitarian law. While the protection of
civilians is primarily a responsibility of States, the
Security Council is increasingly called upon to pursue
that goal when States are unable or unwilling to
discharge their responsibilities.
As a humanitarian agency, UNHCR has limited
capacity to provide physical security for its
beneficiaries. In some situations, ensuring the security
of camps and maintaining their civilian and
humanitarian character are possible only with the
support of peacekeepers. In eastern Chad, for example,
we anticipate that the United Nations Mission in the
Central African Republic and Chad will play a crucial
role in discouraging attacks on camps, preventing the
recruitment of children and reducing the threats of
banditry and sexual violence. UNHCR welcomes the
recent Council resolutions reinforcing the capacity and
the role of the United Nations Organization Mission in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo in protecting
civilians in the Democratic Republic of the Congo, and
the opportunity they provide to give effect to resolution
1820 (2008), on combating sexual violence against
civilians, particularly women and girls.
However, in situations in which there is no peace
to keep, mandates for the protection of civilians must
be sufficiently clear and strong and must be supported
by appropriate levels of political and material support.
Many peacekeeping operations start in a situation of
relative tranquillity, only to be affected later by a
deteriorating security environment. It is not my
intention to opine on peacekeeping doctrines, but I am
glad to know that those issues will be at the centre of
the Security Council’s forthcoming debates.
A second challenge in today’s environment is that
posed by the concurrent needs to ensure staff security
and to deliver humanitarian protection and assistance.
Humanitarian personnel are deployed in the most
dangerous places in the world. Many risk their own
lives in the effort to help vulnerable populations to
preserve theirs. Ensuring staff safety must be a top
priority of every humanitarian organization and of the
United Nations as a whole. That is non-negotiable.

5

S/PV.6062

And yet, with the evolving nature of armed
conflict, the deliberate targeting of humanitarian
workers has increased, creating a tension between the
imperatives of staff safety and effective humanitarian
action. That issue continues to give rise to acute
dilemmas. In Somalia last year, UNHCR staff members
were bombed in Bossaso, shot at in Garowe and taken
hostage in Mogadishu. The security risks could hardly
be greater, and yet the nature of UNHCR’s work
requires us to be close to those whom we seek to help.
And the way in which we are perceived by local
populations and the relevant actors is, to be frank,
usually more important to our security than the
armoured cars at our disposal or the barbed-wire fences
we may erect. We will never be able to eliminate risk
entirely, but I believe that we can collectively do better
in managing it.
The third challenge I wish to address is that of
preserving humanitarian space in the context of an
integrated United Nations presence. In UNHCR’s
experience, once a peace consolidation process is under
way, an integrated presence can provide an effective
framework for collaboration between humanitarian
agencies and the political and security components of
the United Nations system. For UNHCR, such
partnerships are particularly valuable in pursuing
solutions to displacement in transitional contexts. We
currently enjoy constructive partnerships with the
United Nations Mission in Liberia, with the United
Nations Integrated Office in Burundi and, in southern
Sudan, with the United Nations Mission in the Sudan,
to cite just three examples.
However, where conflict is still ongoing, there
must be a balance between ensuring a coherent
approach across the United Nations system and
preserving the autonomy of humanitarian action,
rooted in the fundamental principles of neutrality,
impartiality and independence. That is particularly
crucial in situations in which humanitarian agencies are
operating in highly politicized and militarized
environments. That will not always be easy. We rely on
the wisdom of the Security Council to support the
establishment of arrangements that are pragmatic and
flexible, based on solid common sense and tailored to
the specifics of each situation.
As I have already observed, solutions to armed
conflicts must of necessity be political in nature.
However, once peace is achieved, it needs to be
supported in a variety of ways. That is a shared

6

responsibility, and the peacebuilding architecture
established by the United Nations provides a vital
resource in that effort, as do the peacebuilding
missions mandated by the Security Council. Those
efforts complement and facilitate the work of my
Office, most notably by supporting the voluntary return
and sustainable reintegration of refugees and displaced
persons. Indeed, the scale of return and the success of
reintegration are two of the most tangible indicators of
progress in any peacebuilding process.
Such processes have in many instances been
obstructed by a failure to resolve outstanding land and
property issues in an effective and equitable manner,
especially in situations in which refugees, displaced
persons and ex-combatants return simultaneously to
communities where land tenure has never been
formalized or where the land registration system has
broken down. A collaborative approach to addressing
those challenges is crucial. The experience of the
Peacebuilding Commission in Burundi is particularly
relevant in that regard.
The involvement of refugees and internally
displaced persons in peace processes can provide
critical perspectives on the causes of conflict and can
contribute to a sense of shared ownership in
peacemaking and peacebuilding. The engagement of
women, as envisaged in resolution 1325 (2000), is of
particular importance. UNHCR recently facilitated the
participation of Sudanese refugees in Chad in peace
discussions, and a similar approach is being explored
in the Central African Republic.
I value the impetus provided to such efforts by
the Security Council in its presidential statement of
May
2008
on
post-conflict
peacebuilding
(S/PRST/2008/16), as well as by the reference in
resolution 1830 (2008) to the need to create conditions
conducive to the voluntary, safe, dignified and
sustainable return of refugees and internally displaced
persons in Iraq.
The international community has struggled for
many years to ensure that conflict is followed by
lasting peace and effective governance and that the
destruction of livelihoods and the provision of
emergency relief are succeeded by a process of
sustainable development. There is still a long way to
go. Nonetheless, I am encouraged by the recent
attention to that issue and am confident that it will

09-20310

S/PV.6062

remain among the permanent concerns of the Security
Council.
It goes without saying that the search for
solutions to which I have just referred is essentially
reactive in nature, dealing with the effects rather than
the causes of crisis. The most effective means of
addressing the issue of forced displacement is through
preventive activities that anticipate and avert the
conflicts that oblige people to abandon their homes and
seek safety elsewhere.
Prevention is, in my view, the most important
element of the responsibility to protect. While some
aspects of the concept of the responsibility to protect
remain controversial, I do not believe that prevention is
among them. Indeed, the notion of preventing and
removing threats to peace is to be found at the
beginning of the very first Article of the United
Nations Charter.
Effective prevention will require a carefully
balanced, coordinated and targeted combination of
measures in the political, diplomatic, developmental,
environmental and humanitarian domains. Effective
prevention will require that action be taken by a wide
range of stakeholders, including States, United Nations
entities, regional bodies, international financial
organizations and non-State actors. And, in our
increasingly interconnected and interdependent world,
effective prevention will require new networks and
coalitions to be formed, linking those who are working
to promote human security at the level of the local
community with those who are striving to attain the
same objective — human security — on a national,
regional and global basis.
The President (spoke in French): I thank
Mr. Guterres for his briefing.
I shall now give the floor to members of the
Security Council.
Mr. Urbina (Costa Rica) (spoke in Spanish): We
welcome the convening of this meeting and the
detailed briefing just given by Mr. António Guterres,
United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees. The
information he conveyed today is of essential
importance in our opinion, and we believe that such
briefings should become common practice as they
enable the Council and the members of the
Organization to keep abreast of the situation of
refugees in general and in the field. Our attention to

09-20310

specific circumstances should not distract us from the
need to periodically analyse the situation in general,
which would allow us to evaluate our own actions in
the medium and the long terms and to take corrective
measures when necessary.
When the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR) was set up more
than 50 years ago, it was believed that a temporary
mandate would be enough to address the situation of
people displaced by the war in Europe. Today, we
know that we were mistaken. Forced displacement has
not only been a constant and insidiously perpetuated
phenomenon, but has also become increasingly
complex and global, requiring the permanent attention
of this Organization.
The situation in Gaza, which still has us on
tenterhooks, testifies to the magnitude of the
challenges facing the international community. Those
who seek refuge or who are displaced by a conflict
become double victims every time the international
community in general and the Council in particular fail
to solve the conflicts that force them to abandon their
homes. Those hundreds of thousands of people, about
whom Mr. Guterres has spoken to us today, are first the
victims of the actions of some and then victims of the
inaction of others.
Just as Gaza cries out for concrete action,
effective responses and sustainable and rapid solutions,
the displaced and the refugees in the Sudan, the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, Chad, the Central
African Republic, Somalia, Georgia, Afghanistan, Iraq
and, unfortunately, many other regions in the world
demand from us comprehensive, serious, responsible
and courageous treatment. We have said this before,
but will never tire of repeating it. While there remain
on the Council outright defenders of those whose
actions cause the forced displacement of whole
populations, we shall continue to be part of the
problem and not of the solution.
We are all partly responsible for this. Those who
raise their voices to criticize actions today remained
silent on other actions of the past. For that reason,
Mr. Guterres’s briefing should serve as a wake-up call
for us to review our actions in depth.
Despite its small geographic size, Costa Rica was
a refuge for many thousands of people who fled from
wars in Central America throughout the 1980s, and we
continue to receive significant inflows of people today

7

S/PV.6062

who have been forced to flee their countries of origin.
These painful circumstances have enabled us to clearly
understand the links between forced displacement and
peacekeeping, especially in situations where mass
displacements threaten the stability of the places of
origin, transit and destination and which represent a
huge challenge for the effective protection of people
throughout the displacement cycle.
For that reason, my delegation understands that
the evolution and complexity of this issue require it to
be placed in the wider context of the protection of
civilians, where respect for international law,
international cooperation and timely and decisive
action by the United Nations are essential. When we
speak of the protection of civilians, we are essentially
speaking about respect for legality and international
law. For that reason, the protection of civilians should
always be the highest focus of political strategy in any
effort to settle conflicts and a key element in postconflict actions and in peacebuilding processes. It is
necessary at all times to ensure the cooperation of all
parties to a conflict in order to create areas of security,
neutral zones or humanitarian corridors that will permit
either evacuation or the distribution of aid to the
affected populations.
While we emphasize the importance of permitting
access to those who require refuge and the
responsibility of complying with international
obligations, especially with the principle of
non-expulsion or non-refoulement, we acknowledge
the need for greater international cooperation in those
countries that have received huge flows of refugees.
It is clear that both the old and the new
challenges that we face today are essentially of a
practical nature. In this context, there is an obvious
need to make greater efforts in early warning and rapid
and decisive responses to crises. This work should
involve the United Nations and its agencies, in close
cooperation with the Security Council.
We are seriously concerned by current trends
whereby displacement is no longer a phenomenon
linked only to conflict but has become a military
strategy and a terrorist tactic. It is alarming to note the
persistence of military and bandit attacks on refugee
camps and the increase in sexual violence, arms
trafficking and the recruitment of children that
frequently take place within the camps themselves.
Those occur in conjunction with the typical problems

8

and needs in the spheres of health and education that
perpetuate and exacerbate the vulnerabilities already
exposed by forced displacement.
Today, we stress the importance of strong
mandates to protect civilians as a key aspect in the
design and composition of peacekeeping missions, as
well as the need for clear guidelines that enable
effective protection throughout the whole displacement
cycle, from evacuation to the provisional establishment
of camps for refugees and internally displaced persons.
We need greater resources to expand surveillance,
information collection and patrols in areas of conflict
where there is considerable risk of attacks against
civilians. It is absolutely indispensable that
peacekeeping missions in situations, such as those in
Darfur or the Democratic Republic of the Congo, be
suitably structured and provided with the equipment
and technology necessary to duly comply with their
mandate to protect civilians.
In
conclusion,
strengthening
coordination
between the political, humanitarian and military
dimensions is critical not just to guarantee the security
of aid personnel and the humanitarian space necessary
to care for refugees and displaced persons, but also to
adequately transition from the early stages, where
priorities lie in the realm of safety, protection and
covering basic needs, towards recovery and the
re-establishment of order and the rule of law in order to
guarantee the respect and promotion of human rights.
Finally, I would like to thank UNHCR and its
staff all over the world for their work. We recognize
that in many cases they must care for years for those
who have nowhere else to go to assure their continued
existence. I stress the need for our support to be
extended to efforts to prevent and effectively resolve
the conflicts that are the cause of the displacement and
suffering witnessed by the High Commission and other
United Nations agencies on a daily basis.
Mr. İlkin (Turkey): I wish to join previous
speakers in welcoming and thanking High
Commissioner António Guterres for his comprehensive
and thought-provoking briefing.
I would first like to take this opportunity to
express our deep appreciation to the High
Commissioner and the entire staff of the Office of the
United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees
(UNHCR) for their hard work. Their dedication to

09-20310

S/PV.6062

improving the lives of millions of refugees is most
commendable.
It is our firm opinion that the work of UNHCR is
an essential element of our collective efforts to
maintain international peace and security. Thus, we
very much welcome the opportunity to engage with the
High Commissioner. In this regard, I listened very
carefully to his briefing.
Unfortunately, the current security environment
and the evolving security challenges of our time are not
helping us to bring down the number of refugees. On
the contrary, the overall number of refugees, together
with other populations of interest to UNHCR, has risen
dramatically in recent years. That development, which
is an outcome of worsening security conditions in
many parts of the world, has now become a security
problem in itself. Indeed, there are now around 67
million forcibly displaced people in the world, giving
rise to much bigger challenges for the countries
involved, as well as for UNHCR.
That said, it is obvious that no single
international organization or individual country can
cope with a problem of this magnitude. International
cooperation and solidarity are imperative. Yes,
UNHCR is playing a leading role in this field, but it
deserves the support of everyone concerned, including
that of the Security Council. And, on this point, the
question that needs to be answered is how the Security
Council can further support the work of UNHCR.
This is indeed very important to us, as Turkey is
deeply committed to supporting the efforts and
activities of the Organization. And I have to underline
that this is not merely a humanitarian consideration for
Turkey; far more than that, it represents a hard-core
reality for us, given our close proximity to areas of
conflict in the Middle East, the Balkans and the
Caucasus, producing high number of refugees in and
around our country.
Throughout history, the Turkish people have
always welcomed, extended a helping hand and
provided safe haven to people who have fled
oppression and violence. For instance, in the not-toodistant past, Turkey hosted vast numbers of refugees
fleeing from either the wars in the Balkans or the
repression of the former Iraqi regime. I am sure that
many here will recall the time when we provided
shelter and protection to more than 500,000 Iraqis
during the first Gulf War. It was a daunting

09-20310

responsibility which we had to shoulder without
sufficient international support at that time. But, in the
end, we managed to perform a successful operation.
Unfortunately, Iraq today is again faced with a serious
displacement crisis. Although this time it is mainly
Syria and Jordan that have taken the brunt of the
refugee flow, Turkey also hosts a considerable number
of Iraqi refugees.
Despite recent improvements in the security
conditions prevailing in Iraq, the refugee problem is
still a serious one and requires continued international
support. In this regard, we would like to commend the
work done by UNHCR from the very early stages of
the crisis and reiterate our pledge to continue to
support UNHCR’s Iraq programme.
Likewise, we also highly appreciate UNHCR’s
latest efforts with respect to the situation in Gaza and
in support of its sister organization, the United Nations
Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the
Near East (UNRWA). In this regard, we join in the
High Commissioner’s strong appeal to the international
community and all humanitarian actors to support
UNRWA. The situation in Gaza is indeed tragic and
totally unacceptable, and requires immediate action on
the part of the United Nations and the Security
Council.
That brings me to my final point, which is the
importance of providing the necessary resources to
UNHCR. Indeed, reliability and continuity in donor
contributions constitute a major element of our efforts
to address the refugee problem. Without such
commitment on the part of the international
community, we cannot expect organizations like
UNHCR to deliver what is expected of them. And
without an effective UNHCR, we cannot expect to
fulfil our responsibilities in maintaining global peace
and security.
That is why Turkey is a regular contributor to
UNHCR’s main budget and its various programmes,
ranging from the Middle East to Africa. Here, I would
like to assure the High Commissioner once again of
Turkey’s continued support to the activities of
UNHCR, as well as our firm determination to support
all international efforts aimed at improving the lives of
displaced people worldwide.
Mr. Takasu (Japan): I thank the United Nations
High Commissioner for Refugees, Mr. António
Guterres, for his briefing. It is timely and useful, as the

9

S/PV.6062

plight of over 40 million people displaced from their
homes remains precarious and serious in many parts of
the world, including Afghanistan, Iraq, Palestine,
Darfur, the Democratic Republic of the Congo and
elsewhere. In addition, there are 26 million people
displaced by natural disasters.
This morning, I should like to comment on three
issues. The first is the root causes of displacement.
As the High Commissioner has pointed out, the
tragic phenomenon of displacement is growing
increasingly complex. More and more people are being
forced to move not only because of conflicts and
persecution, but also as a result of extreme poverty,
natural disasters and environmental degradation. As he
noted, we are also all too aware of the negative impact
that climate change and the global food crises are
having on those refugees and internally displaced
persons (IDPs). We need to address these root causes
so that the number of displaced persons does not
continue to swell. As the root causes are different in
each case, there is no single policy measure which can
resolve the issue worldwide.
However, particularly in the context of the
Security Council’s responsibility, I am convinced that
conflict prevention is one of the most effective
measures to reduce displacement. Peacebuilding efforts
to prevent the recurrence of conflict are indispensable
to addressing protracted refugee situations. The
reintegration of displaced persons should be accorded a
higher priority as we develop and implement integrated
peacebuilding strategies, which has begun very well in
the context of the Peacebuilding Commission.
The second issue is finding durable solutions. The
protection of those who are forced from their homes is
naturally the most urgently needed first step. However,
to achieve a durable solution, it is necessary not only to
protect but also to empower refugees and IDPs. We
believe that assistance for return and reintegration,
such as vocational training and education for returnee
children, is essential in seeking a durable solution.
Japan has placed emphasis on the empowerment of
vulnerable people, particularly refugees and IDPs and
the women and children among them, and on an
integrated approach by promoting the human security
perspective. I am very grateful to the High
Commissioner for mentioning that in his closing
remarks. We very much look forward to the Office of
the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees

10

(UNHCR) continuing to strengthen a people-centred
approach in implementing its programme. People must
always be at the centre of our attention.
The third point is the safety and security of
humanitarian personnel. The staff members of UNHCR
and partners, implementers and other humanitarian
personnel on the ground are selflessly devoting
themselves to helping those most in need, very often in
difficult and dangerous situations. It is a source of deep
concern that casualties among humanitarian personnel
are on the rise and that humanitarian workers are
increasingly becoming a target of attack, which is
totally unacceptable.
We call upon all parties concerned to take
appropriate action to secure humanitarian space, fully
respecting the neutrality and impartiality of
humanitarian assistance. As a matter of great urgency,
we must find a way to meet the challenge of securing
humanitarian space and the safety and security of all
who operate within it.
A number of peacekeeping operations authorized
by this Council have a mandate to protect humanitarian
workers. Many Security Council resolutions contain
calls to the relevant parties concerned to secure the
safety and security of humanitarian workers.
However, we are very often disappointed with the
reality. We wonder if this relates to the problems
emanating from the mandate of the mission itself or the
structure and capacity of the mission or support
mission to implement these mandates. These are the
questions we must answer in detail. We in the Council
need to consider actively any improvement we have to
make to protect the workers more effectively. We hope
that the study jointly commissioned by the Department
of Peacekeeping Operations and Office for the
Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs on the
implementation of Security Council mandates on the
protection of civilian lives will analyse this issue in
depth and come up with recommendations for action.
We also welcome the recent adoption by the
General Assembly of resolution 63/139, designating
19 August as World Humanitarian Day in order to raise
public awareness about humanitarian activities
worldwide.
In conclusion, Japan has consistently been a
strong supporter of and one of the top donors to
UNHCR, and we are very pleased with this. During a

09-20310

S/PV.6062

recent visit by the High Commissioner, my
Government conveyed to him its continued support and
its recent decision to become the first Asian country to
accept refugees from Myanmar for resettlement.
I wish to commend the High Commissioner for
his strong leadership in addressing the issue of
displacement effectively by making UNHCR a more
decentralized and field-oriented organization. We hope
to see UNHCR engaging even more effectively in its
vitally important activities to assist people.
Ms. Pierce (United Kingdom): I thank you,
Mr. President, for giving us the opportunity to meet
today and to hear from the High Commissioner for
Refugees. We are very grateful to him not only for his
comprehensive and thoughtful statement, but also for
the work he does in leading what is obviously a very
dedicated team of people for the United Nations around
the world. We signal our appreciation today for the
leadership of the High Commissioner, both in driving
his Office through an ambitious programme of
structural reform and in forging stronger relationships
with other key actors from within and without the
United Nations system. It was salutary to hear what he
said about the kidnappings and the deaths that his
workers and other United Nations workers are subject
to around the world. I would like to use this occasion,
through him, to pay tribute to them and their families.
I was also very pleased that we were able to hear
a little bit from Ambassador İlkin about countries that
support the refugees by taking them in and providing
them with shelter and protection. As the High
Commissioner and the Ambassador said, that too is a
very important part of the equation.
It is clear from the briefing that we have received
today that the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR) is active across
the range of the Council’s business in Afghanistan,
Darfur and Iraq. Of course, as the High Commissioner
said, they are not the agency that is active in Gaza, but
Gaza is obviously very much on our minds today as
debate continues in New York and as we all watch the
developing situation on the ground.
I would like to start by echoing the
Commissioner’s admiration for the work of the United
Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine
Refugees in the Near East in acutely challenging
circumstances, and in particular for the bravery of
United Nations workers trying to relieve suffering in

09-20310

Gaza. The escalation of violence in Gaza and southern
Israel has caused immense suffering and shortages of
humanitarian supplies. We join others in calling for
immediate humanitarian access and the provision and
distribution of supplies in accordance with
international humanitarian law. We welcome any
initiatives that bring about a pause in hostilities to
allow the provision of humanitarian help. I think it is
clear to all of us that more is needed, before any
resolution to this conflict, and most immediately
through a ceasefire. We also condemn acts of violence
and terror directed against civilians in the region. My
Foreign Minister, along with the French Foreign
Minister and others both inside and outside the
Council, are still in New York, searching for a way
forward as a contribution to resolving the conflict.
I would like to take this occasion, more generally,
to recall the commitment of my Government to
upholding the 1951 Convention relating to the Status of
Refugees and its 1967 Protocol and to support the
mandate of UNHCR to protect refugees and find
durable solutions to their plight. We know that the
majority of people uprooted by conflict and violence
do not cross international borders, but nevertheless can
find themselves in situations of extreme vulnerability.
We strongly support the responsibilities of UNHCR for
internally displaced persons and other populations
affected by conflict, as part of the inter-agency cluster
approach.
I would like to take this opportunity to encourage
the High Commissioner to see what can be done to
deepen the involvement of UNHCR with the cluster
approach and to further develop its relationships with
other stakeholders. We expect good things to come out
of the UNCHR/Office for the Coordination of
Humanitarian Affairs retreat, and look forward to
hearing more about that.
That leads me to another point the High
Commissioner made about the potential distinction
between the work of UNCHR when a conflict is
ongoing and its work alongside other agencies in the
aftermath of that conflict, when the immediate
situation has been eased. I know from personal
experience that in the latter situation, it is important to
have an integrated approach if we actually want to get
success on the ground. But what he said about the
distinction was something that might offer fruitful
grounds for work in the future.

11

S/PV.6062

We talked a little bit today about the changing
causes
of
forced
displacement.
The
High
Commissioner raised some very interesting questions
on that. It seems to my Government that the current
protection framework is adequate, if it is implemented.
I think that is another important point. In terms of
prevention and response, the increasing complexity
described by the High Commissioner raises again the
issue of the need for effective partnerships.
The protection of civilians in conflict is also a
theme that many people will be interested in today. I
was also pleased to hear the responsibility to protect
and the need for effective prevention mentioned. It is
clear that members of the Council do not yet have a
unified view about how to take the responsibility to
protect forward. It is in its early stages. It is a new
concept that we all need to work hard to elaborate and
operationalize in an effective manner in order to get
help to where it is most needed and help Governments
discharge their primary responsibility to protect their
populations.
We would welcome, in connection with
responding to and preventing protection crises, more
regular and ad hoc briefings to this Council by the
High Commissioner. In turn, we believe we should
make better use of UNHCR expertise when we
formulate mandates for peacekeeping operations. I
would be grateful if the High Commissioner, in his
response, would say something about the evolving
thinking of UNHCR on voluntary return. I know that in
certain circumstances there has been a debate within
the Organization and elsewhere in the international
community about whether refugees should be
encouraged to return only to their places of origin —
that is, their original homes — or whether they should
be allowed to resettle in majority communities in their
own country. It would be interesting to hear if there is
any update on that debate.
I would like to turn, as my last point, to
peacebuilding. We welcome UNCHR support for and
involvement in the upcoming report of the SecretaryGeneral on post-conflict peacebuilding and early
recovery. That report is an opportunity to put in place a
more effective international response to assisting
countries in the immediate aftermath of conflicts. That
is a response that can provide coordinated, prioritized
and adequately resourced support to national efforts.

12

Mr. Bui The Giang (Viet Nam): I, too, thank the
French presidency for convening this meeting, which,
we believe, serves as a good preparatory step to
contribute to the open debate of the Security Council
planned for next week on the protection of civilians in
armed conflicts. I welcome High Commissioner
Guterres to the Council and thank him for his timely,
comprehensive and informative briefing.
We recognize the efforts made to date and the
resulting progress in initiatives on repatriating refugees
and reintegrating them into their own communities. My
delegation, however, is deeply concerned about
increasing displacement in many parts of the world and
the expanding number of stateless persons, as High
Commissioner Guterres has warned about, as well as
challenges in protecting refugees in conflict areas and
ensuring humanitarian access to them. We are
dismayed at the fact that refugees in conflict areas —
first of all, women and children — continue to fall
victim to killing, maiming and all sorts of gender-based
violence.
The current situations in Afghanistan, Pakistan,
some South Asian countries, vast areas of Africa and,
most notably, in Gaza are clear and typical testimony
to that. With 1.5 million inhabitants of the Gaza Strip
being victimized in a terrible manner, this humanitarian
crisis has been an appalling example of the magnitude
of the suffering that human beings can be driven into,
and it has provided living evidence of the imperative
need for greater and better humanitarian efforts.
Given the gravity of the situation, and while
again confirming the primary responsibility of States in
meeting the humanitarian needs of their respective
civilian populations, we wish to emphasize that it is
critical to enhance the role of the Office of the United
Nations High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR)
and its coordination with other relevant United Nations
entities, such as the Office for the Coordination of
Humanitarian Affairs in conducting humanitarian
operations,
the
Department
of
Peacekeeping
Operations in addressing displacement and violence
against civilians and the Office of the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General on Children
and Armed Conflict in tackling child-related issues, et
cetera. In that regard, United Nations field missions
also have an important role to play.
It is our view that, in order for humanitarian
activities to be effective and efficient, humanitarian

09-20310

S/PV.6062

access must not be politicized, but must instead strictly
adhere to the principles of neutrality, impartiality and
independence and must be in conformity with national
and international law. While underlining our consistent
position that the resolution and prevention of conflict,
the reduction of poverty and the improvement of living
conditions for populations in conflict areas are true
remedies for the root causes of humanitarian issues, we
also believe that greater focus should be placed on
repatriation and reintegration. This should, inter alia,
pool the efforts of multiple stakeholders, including the
United Nations Development Programme, the United
Nations Development Fund for Women, the World
Food Programme, the World Bank and, of no less
importance, local, regional and international nongovernmental organizations and civil society groups,
which can help ensure effective repatriation and
sustainable integration, thus contributing to the process
of post-conflict reconstruction.
Mr. Tiendrébéogo (Burkina Faso) (spoke in
French): I wish at the outset to thank Mr. António
Guterres for his very instructive briefing. We are
grateful to him and to the staff of the Office of the
United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees
(UNHCR) for their dedication and their leadership in
protecting and assisting refugees.
The ongoing scourge of refugees and internally
displaced persons resulting from conflict and from
natural disaster is a matter of grave concern today.
Worldwide, tens of millions of refugees and displaced
persons live in extremely difficult conditions, because
of overcrowding in camps, volatile security and
humanitarian conditions, extreme poverty and disease,
not to mention numerous and repeated violations of
their most basic rights, in some cases by the very
people responsible for protecting them.
Attacks against camps for refugees and displaced
persons, the militarization of such camps, the forcible
recruitment of children in the camps and increasing
sexual violence are simply unacceptable and demand
vigorous action on the part of the entire international
community.
The tragedy of refugees is closely related to the
question of international peace and security and
therefore requires special attention by the Security
Council, in particular with respect to the mandates of
peacekeeping operations. These should be continually
adapted on the ground in order to ensure better

09-20310

protection for refugees and displaced persons. Here, it
would be appropriate to strengthen the capacity of
peacekeeping operations, and indeed to review their
configuration, as is currently being done with the
United Nations Organization Mission in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo. It is also necessary
to ensure that their personnel are given appropriate
training in human rights and ethics, in order to protect
against abuses of the rights of refugees and internally
displaced persons.
States first and foremost, and also parties to
conflict, bear the responsibility to protect civilians,
including refugees and internally displaced persons —
particularly the most vulnerable among them: women
and children. They must create conditions conducive to
protecting the rights of refugees, in accordance with
international instruments in force. This process also
entails strengthening the existing legal foundations and
establishing favourable conditions for stability,
sustainable peace, building the rule of law and good
governance and promoting preventive diplomacy.
Unfortunately, most host countries are themselves
facing difficulties. They do not always have the
resources they need to shoulder their responsibilities.
That is why the international community should
provide them with all necessary support. In that regard,
we wish once again to commend the commitment and
leadership of UNHCR. Such collective action must be
complemented by regional organizations and bodies in
order to ensure an integrated, inclusive and
participatory approach.
Africa, in which the largest number of refugees
and displaced persons are located, views this issue as a
true problem of development. It is thus a challenge that
must be met as quickly as possible. That is why the
forthcoming adoption of a convention on protection of
and assistance to displaced persons will be a milestone
in mobilizing African countries. We are certain that our
continent will always be able to rely on UNHCR.
In conclusion, my delegation wishes to endorse
the views expressed by many other speakers, in support
of refugees and displaced persons in Gaza.
Mr. McMahan (United States of America): On
behalf of the United States, I would like to thank the
High Commissioner for his excellent briefing this
morning and for his work, and that of his able staff, to
protect and assist refugees throughout the world.

13

S/PV.6062

As he noted, the work of the Office of the United
Nations High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR)
has become increasingly complex and dangerous. The
number of refugees is rising, as is the number of people
who are internally displaced by armed conflict. These
developments have important implications for the
international community as a whole and for UNHCR in
particular. Today, I would like to make five points.
First, the United States remains deeply concerned
about the number, complexity and severity of conflicts
and violence that lead to forced displacement, as well
as attacks on refugees and internally displaced persons
(IDPs) where they have sought refuge, and increasing
attacks on humanitarian workers and peacekeepers.
Refugees and IDPs are too often the victims of such
conflict and frequently lack protection from physical
attack, gender-based violence, abduction, forcible
recruitment and other serious abuses. We must work to
ensure the safety of these vulnerable populations, as
well as of UNHCR staff and their implementing
partners. Deliberate attacks on humanitarian workers,
especially local staff and their families, remain a
significant impediment to life-saving aid in many
crises, and we must all work together to guarantee their
safety and security.
Secondly, protracted civil conflicts continue to
create some of the largest situations of forced
displacement and are a tragic reminder that civilians
are at times deliberately targeted. The number of
people fleeing conflict and violence and becoming
internally displaced far exceeds the number who are
crossing international borders to become refugees. The
United States calls on Member States to protect those
whose lives or freedom are threatened by civil conflict
and to support coordinated efforts by humanitarian
organizations with protection mandates and expertise.
The scope of UNHCR’s work has been expanded
to include internally displaced persons affected by
conflict, and we have seen that much of its advocacy,
policies and funding are expanding to meet the
growing humanitarian demands around the world,
particularly in addressing the many cases of forced
displacement. While we welcome that expansion, it is
imperative that UNHCR’s leadership and comparative
advantage on refugee protection issues are not
weakened as it finds the proper balance between its
various objectives. UNHCR’s core mandate to protect
refugees must remain at the centre of its mission and
activities.

14

Thirdly, the United States remains gravely
concerned about the ongoing and widespread use of
sexual and gender-based violence in conflict situations
throughout the world. That is one of the most
significant
protection
challenges
facing
the
international community and is too often ignored.
Sexual and gender-based violence must be more
effectively addressed, including both in refugee and
IDP situations, and we call on all Member States to end
that gross injustice.
We believe that prevention of and response to
gender-based violence should begin at the onset of
every emergency. The United States strongly
encourages UNHCR and all humanitarian assistance
actors to integrate programming to counter genderbased violence into their efforts. Those approaches
should be multisectoral and aim to combine protection
activities, community services, health care and referral
services into humanitarian assistance operations.
The United States strongly supports the efforts of
the United Nations and the international community,
such as Security Council resolutions 1325 (2000) and
1820 (2008), to secure a dramatic increase in women’s
participation in all aspects of peacebuilding and
security. While progress has been made in that regard,
we look forward to working with UNHCR and other
United Nations agencies to ensure that the
empowerment of women in substantive and
institutionalized leadership roles continues to improve.
Fourthly, the United States agrees on the
importance of maintaining humanitarian space in the
context of integrated United Nations missions. Due
consideration must be given to allowing the
Organization’s humanitarian agencies to carry out their
mandates to deliver humanitarian assistance in a
neutral and impartial manner. Some situations may call
for United Nations humanitarian agencies to integrate
strategically with United Nations missions, while
maintaining a degree of operational separation in order
to preserve their ability to assist populations in need in
environments where conflict exists.
Fifthly, the humanitarian and protection needs of
refugees and others of concern are met most effectively
when United Nations Member States demonstrate the
will, including politically and financially, to make the
international system work. As donors we must do a
better job, coordinating aid programmes and avoiding

09-20310

S/PV.6062

duplication, while ensuring flexibility in our funding
through UNHCR so that it can carry out its mandate.
Finally, I would like to say a few words about the
current situation in Gaza. We must remain focused on
the urgency of the humanitarian situation. We are very
concerned about the humanitarian situation in Gaza.
Israel has taken steps to ensure the delivery of
humanitarian assistance to the people of Gaza, but, as
Secretary Rice said yesterday, the people of Gaza need
to be in a position to be able to get a lifeline to goods,
supplies, sanitation and medical help.
The United States remains a steadfast and
committed partner of UNHCR. We are fully invested in
its policies, programmes and performance. We know
UNHCR’s work is never easy, and we salute its staff
for what they do in environments that are often
difficult. The United States will continue to work
cooperatively and generously with other Member
States, UNHCR and our own non-governmental
organization implementing partners to find durable
solutions for refugees around the world.
Mr. Mayr-Harting (Austria): At the outset, Sir,
let me thank you for this possibility of an exchange
with the High Commissioner for Refugees, Mr. António
Guterres. We would like to welcome High
Commissioner Guterres and thank him for his
informative and thought-provoking briefing. Let me
also add that we believe that more frequent and regular
briefings by the High Commissioner to the Council,
including country-specific briefings, would be
extremely useful.
The displacement of people across and within
borders is an important element in most of the
situations on the Council’s agenda. That shows that
there is a strong nexus between peace and security, on
the one hand, and refugees and internally displaced
persons (IDPs) on the other. In light of the rising
number of uprooted persons, Austria attaches great
importance to the work of the Office of the United
Nations High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR)
and would like to commend the High Commissioner
for his leadership and for the organization’s tireless
efforts in recent years.
In his analysis, the High Commissioner referred
to an accumulation of adverse trends and causes of
displacement, such as competition for scarce resources,
poverty, conflict and climate change. Austria shares his
concerns about those trends, which are leading to a

09-20310

growing number of people on the move. We have to
ask ourselves how the Security Council can enhance its
responses to those challenges.
I wish to highlight particularly the impact of
climate change and its implications for human security,
and even for the security of States. Incidentally, that is
also a matter on which the European Union (EU) has
invested quite some thought. The potential of climate
change to aggravate the situation of vulnerable groups,
notably women and children, and its nature as a major
cause of migration and displacement make it an urgent
concern. In that context, Austria wishes to draw
attention to the activities of the Human Security
Network in identifying the implications of climate
change on human security.
Austria welcomed the initiative to organize an
open debate in the Security Council in April 2007 to
examine the relationship among energy, security and
climate change. That debate (see S/PV.5663 and
S/PV.5663 (Resumption 1)) highlighted the extent to
which those issues are interrelated. The Council should
therefore continue to keep the issue under review.
As regards the interplay between peacekeeping
operations and humanitarian activities, Austria believes
that it is worth highlighting the role of the United
Nations Mission in the Central African Republic and
Chad and the United Nations-mandated EU military
operation in eastern Chad and the north-west Central
African Republic. Their primary focus on increasing
the security of Darfur refugees and internally displaced
persons (IDPs) is, in our view, a good example of how
the work of the Council can contribute to the
improvement of humanitarian situations. In today’s
very critical situation, it is also evident that the
humanitarian aspect must be at the core of the
deliberations of the Council on the situation in Gaza.
On the issue of post-conflict peacebuilding, we
fully share UNHCR’s view that the safe and voluntary
return of displaced populations plays a crucial role in
peacebuilding efforts and is a key component of
durable peace. Peacebuilding activities should,
therefore, take into consideration the specific needs of
displaced populations and of their receiving
communities. The advancement of regional protection
programmes is particularly important, and capacitybuilding in the region of origin needs to be advanced.
Austria highly appreciates and supports the intensive
efforts of UNHCR to facilitate the voluntary return and

15

S/PV.6062

reintegration of displaced persons. I would like to use
this opportunity to ask the High Commissioner whether
there are lessons to be learned from UNHCR’s
experiences in ensuring the sustainability of refugee
returns.
Finally, we agree with the High Commissioner on
the importance of improving the participation of
refugees and internally displaced persons in peace
processes and negotiations. That is a particular
challenge as far as IDPs are concerned. In that context,
Austria also welcomes the initiative of the
Representative of the Secretary-General on internally
displaced persons, Professor Walter Kälin, to develop,
together with the Department of Political Affairs, a
draft guide for mediators on integrating issues of
internal displacement into peace processes and peace
agreements.
Given the important, but in many cases
underestimated, role of women in peacebuilding efforts
for their communities, we also would be interested to
hear what lessons UNHCR can share from the
implementation of its gender policy and efforts to
actively involve women in all aspects of its work.
I wish to conclude by wishing the High
Commissioner all success for his highly important
work for the international community.
Mr. Heller (Mexico) (spoke in Spanish): Thank
you very much, Sir, for organizing this meeting, which
I believe to be particularly useful. We welcome the
High Commissioner for Refugees, António Guterres,
and would like to start by congratulating him on his
briefing to us today, above all on the integrated vision
he gave us of the work of the Office that he is heading
in such a complex world and his leadership in fulfilling
its mandate.
We believe it is of fundamental importance for
this sort of meeting to take place periodically, as my
colleague from Austria has already stated, because that
would enable us to pay more attention to the aspect of
refugees and internally displaced persons in our
consideration of many conflict situations.
As the High Commissioner stated, there is a need
not only to react to situations that arise around the
world, but also to take a preventative approach in a
timely manner. It is alarming that the decreasing trend
in the number of refugees has not continued but that it
has been reversed, with the number of refugees now

16

reaching more than 15 million. I believe that the vision
of a future preventative approach that has been
suggested is very interesting, in particular in response
to the impact of climate change, natural disasters and,
of course, the effects of conflicts. I also believe that it
will be very important to bear in mind that we are in
the midst of a global crisis, in which food, energy and
economic crises have combined to have a very severe
impact on the internal political stability of vulnerable
countries. Accompanied by the effects of climate
change, I believe that these conditions may trigger
growing flows of economic refugees or migrants. I
believe it is very important to bear that in mind. In this
context, I should also like to recall that Mexico and
Japan have been working jointly within the United
Nations to promote the consideration of human
security from a preventative perspective, emphasizing
a global approach.
Mexico is deeply concerned by the continuation
of forced displacement, a phenomenon of many
nuances, in which affected populations, in particular
vulnerable populations, continue to come under attack.
I think that, of all the conflicts mentioned, there is not
one in which this is not the case. In this regard, I agree
on the need for robust mandates and clear guidelines
for the protection of refugees. I believe that it is very
important to contribute to this integrated vision and to
remain focused on the attacks suffered by humanitarian
workers and local staff, in particular in their own
countries, as several previous speakers have said.
Mexico has developed a very constructive
collaborative relationship with the Office of the United
Nations High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR),
which goes back to the time of the Central American
crisis in the 1980s, when thousands of Guatemalan
refugees sought refuge in our country. Given these
more than 25 years of experience, we believe it very
important to strike a balance between efforts to
accommodate displaced persons and peacekeeping
activities.
The High Commissioner spoke of three
significant challenges. I think the three challenges he
mentioned require an increasingly integrated response
from the United Nations system. UNHCR does not
exist in a world of its own, isolated from the activities
of other United Nations entities. We believe that the
vision of UNHCR has to be present in the Council’s
analysis and consideration of specific problems.
Addressing the problem of Gaza without talking about

09-20310

S/PV.6062

political issues makes no sense. This question should
not provoke an existential crisis, as we know that these
are very complicated crises in which many different
elements must be addressed. In this regard, I would
like to reassure the Council that, in considering the
conflicts on the Council’s agenda, Mexico will bear in
mind the question of refugees and the necessity of
cooperation with UNHCR.
Finally, I would like to reiterate that we believe
that exchanges between the Security Council and
UNHCR should be more frequent, taking place at least
twice a year.
Mr. Rogachev (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): I thank Mr. Guterres for his interesting
briefing on the topic of refugees and their impact on
situations in the area of peace and security. Russia
welcomes the constructive involvement of the Office of
the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees
(UNHCR) in addressing existing humanitarian
problems in relevant situations, including those on the
agenda of the Security Council.
We share the view that the issues of ensuring
security and complying with the core norms and
standards of international law in the area of refugees
are interdependent and complementary. At the same
time, we note once again that any projects in the area
of protecting the rights of refugees and addressing
problems of forced displacement in general in postconflict countries should complement overall efforts in
the area of peacebuilding and subsequently reaching
settlements and also contribute to these processes.
Furthermore, we would like to underscore the
importance of coordinating UNHCR activities with the
Governments of relevant States.
Conflicts continue to be the primary reason that
there are many refugees and internally displaced
persons worldwide. The grim prize of first place
continues to be held by Iraq, with more than 2.5 million
refugees and about 2 million internally displaced
persons, most of whom have been deprived of their
ability to meet their own basic vital needs. Their
problems need to be addressed immediately. Beyond
the specifically humanitarian aspect, these challenges
put a heavy burden on the host countries, especially
Syria. The developments of recent weeks once again
demonstrate the need to seek long-term solutions in the
area of the Middle East settlement, in particular as it
relates to the problems of Palestinian refugees. We urge

09-20310

UNHCR to be prepared to cooperate more closely with
the United Nations Relief and Works Agency for
Palestine Refugees in the Near East, including in
coping with possible new flows of refugees.
We welcome the readiness of UNHCR to seek
ways to address the situation of Afghan refugees. This
problem also puts a heavy burden on host countries,
above all Pakistan and Iran. We are gravely alarmed by
the problems of displaced persons with regard to the
situation in the Sudanese province of Darfur. Our
hopes for an improvement in the situation there are
related above all to the establishment of a process for
political negotiations and the deployment of the
African Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in
Darfur.
We share the view expressed by Mr. Guterres
with respect to the UNHCR mandate and believe that it
is necessary to continue to draw a clear distinction
between UNHCR’s activities in providing assistance to
refugees and assistance to internally displaced persons.
Whereas the former fall under the mandated functions
of UNHCR, for the latter, UNHCR interventions are
warranted only when a number of core conditions are
met, the primary condition being that the relevant
country has made a request in advance. We believe that
the core responsibility for providing assistance to
internally displaced persons lies specifically with the
Government of the country where such displacement is
occurring.
A critical function of UNHCR in the context of
post-conflict settlement is, in our view, to provide
assistance in facilitating the sustainable voluntary
return of refugees, which is the preferable means of
addressing the issue of forced displacement. Failure to
address that issue could well result in the emergence of
new conflict situations, which in turn could threaten
international peace and security. At the same time,
UNHCR should also have a plan prepared for cases in
which, for various reasons, it is impossible to
implement the scenario of voluntary returns; here, the
integration of displaced persons in host States or third
countries would be required.
In many States with situations on the agenda of
the Security Council, ensuring the security of refugee
camps is an urgent problem. That is particularly the
case in conflict zones in Africa: Darfur, Chad, the
Central African Republic and the Democratic Republic
of the Congo. In that regard, we call on UNHCR to

17

S/PV.6062

continue to give priority attention to the
demilitarization of camps for displaced persons and to
separating combatants from persons who are entitled,
under the 1951 Convention and the 1967 Protocol, to
claim refugee status.
Once again, the Russian Federation thanks the
High Commissioner for his briefing and the French
presidency of the Council for convening this meeting.
We hope that there will be continued constructive
cooperation between the Security Council and
UNHCR.
Mr. Vilović (Croatia): We, too, welcome today’s
briefing and would like to thank High Commissioner
António Guterres for providing us with a
comprehensive overview of the current global trend
regarding refugees and internally displaced persons
(IDPs) as it pertains to the role of the Security Council
and the challenges that such situations pose to regional
and international peace and security.
Given the fundamental interlinkages among
peacekeeping,
peacebuilding
and
humanitarian
activities to achieve durable peace, Croatia is
concerned to learn that there has been an upward trend
in terms of the number and the complexity of refugee
and IDP situations worldwide since the High
Commissioner’s previous briefing, in 2006 (see
S/PV.5353). In addition to old crisis areas, there are
relatively new ones. There can be no solution to the
refugee and IDP crisis without political commitment.
At the same time, we commend the UNHCR staff for
its tireless work in the conditions described in the High
Commissioner’s briefing. Those members of the
Security Council who visited a number of crisisaffected areas in Africa in June can attest to that.
Croatia believes that, in addressing contemporary
forms of threats to peace and security in a world of
increasingly interconnected threats, new and emerging
causes of forced displacement are intrinsic factors that
cannot be overlooked by the Council in its future work.
In the light of the Council’s forthcoming debate
on the protection of civilians in armed conflict, the
High Commissioner’s briefing is particularly timely in
underscoring the importance of protecting the physical
security of refugees and IDPs as well as of
humanitarian workers, which is called for in a number
of Security Council resolutions. Croatia is especially
concerned by the increased use of sexual violence as a
tool of war and in post-conflict refugee situations.

18

While recognizing the need to protect all vulnerable
members of refugee populations, including women and
children, Croatia is committed to safeguarding
women’s rights in conflict situations and continually
seeks the strengthening of the role of women in all
aspects of post-conflict peacebuilding.
With regard to the situation in Gaza, Croatia
hopes that the agreement on opening up a humanitarian
corridor will be adhered to by all sides for the benefit
of the civilian population there. It is our hope that
today’s briefing will serve as a catalyst for resuming
the practice of regular briefings by the High
Commissioner to the Council. Croatia believes that
such briefings would prove to be a value-added asset
for the Council’s comprehensive approach in
establishing or renewing increasingly complex,
multidimensional peacekeeping and peacebuilding
mandates.
We hope that, in addition to the existing global
and universal international legal instruments, an
African Union convention for the protection of and
assistance to internally displaced persons will soon be
adopted and enter into force, and that its
implementation will involve coordinated activities that
will lead to the alleviation of the refugee and IDP crisis
in Africa, which is the part of the world most affected
by that crisis.
Finally, drawing on Croatia’s first-hand
experience working with UNHCR and on lessons
learned in dealing with our own refugee and IDP
situation during an armed conflict and in the ensuing
post-conflict years, we would like to reaffirm Croatia’s
full support for the High Commissioner’s mandate.
Ms. Zhang Dan (China) (spoke in Chinese): I
would like to thank the French presidency of the
Security Council for convening this meeting and
Mr. António
Guterres,
United
Nations
High
Commissioner for Refugees, for his briefing, which
was highly beneficial to the work of the Council.
Over the past year, the Office of the United
Nations High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR)
has made progress in the three areas of voluntary
returns, local integration and resettlement, and China
expresses its appreciation for that progress. At the
same time, we have noted that the total number of
refugees throughout the world has grown to 11.4
million and that the number of internally displaced

09-20310

S/PV.6062

persons (IDPs) is also steadily increasing as a result of
armed conflicts and natural disasters.
Armed conflict, political turmoil, economic
stagnation, poverty and underdevelopment remain the
main causes of the intractability and aggravation of the
refugee problem. In addition, factors such as the
security environment, mixed flows and environmental
degradation have made it more difficult to protect
refugees. In the current circumstances, the international
community should continue to follow the principle of
international solidarity and shared responsibility and
should strengthen international cooperation on the
basis of mutual respect, equality and mutual benefit in
order to fulfil our common responsibility for
addressing the refugee issue.
Ending regional conflicts and maintaining an
environment of safety and security remain the
fundamental ways to resolve the refugee problem. The
majority of the national and regional conflicts on the
agenda of the Security Council are accompanied by
serious refugee problems, and the majority of United
Nations peacekeeping missions are mandated with the
tasks of protecting civilians and safeguarding
humanitarian assistance. The Council must further
enhance its coordination and collaboration between the
areas of conflict mediation and peacekeeping, on the
one hand, and refugee protection and humanitarian
assistance, on the other, to ensure that peacekeeping
operations create an environment conducive to the
repatriation and social reintegration of refugees with a
view to facilitating a lasting solution to the problem of
refugees and IDPs.
Mr. Butagira (Uganda): I thank you,
Mr. President, for organizing this important meeting. I
would like to commend Mr. António Guterres for his
exemplary leadership and his entire organization for
protecting and looking after the unfortunate people
who, through no fault of their own, have found
themselves to be refugees or internally displaced
persons.
He touched upon a number of very important
issues. However, before I make a brief comment on
that, let me reaffirm the commitment of Uganda to host
a special African Union summit on internal
displacement. We assure Mr. Guterres and the Council
that Uganda will do everything possible to make the
meeting a success.

09-20310

Mr. Guterres touched on the issue of internal
displacement. As the Council knows very well, the
issue of internal displacement is the responsibility of
the sovereign State and not a matter within the mandate
of the High Commissioner for Refugees. Recently, we
have witnessed displacement, especially in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, which is the result
of the brutal activities of the so-called Lord’s
Resistance Army. Many people have been displaced.
This is just one example of internal displacement.
In circumstances where internal structures or
State institutions have collapsed and therefore the State
cannot shoulder its responsibility to protect its citizens,
the question arises: What will the international
community do? Mr. Guterres was quite right in
referring to the issue of the responsibility to protect. As
the Council knows, that issue was touched on by the
2005 World Summit, and it was endorsed.
Unfortunately, nothing has moved to make it a reality,
and there are many issues concerning sovereignty
which no one wants to touch. Yet, in my opinion,
perhaps it is high time that the Council took the lead in
reactivating this issue and in finding out how we can
put into practice that principle endorsed by the World
Summit. Obviously, one cannot simply watch
helplessly as no one else cares for the internally
displaced people. I think if we address that, it could go
a long way towards helping the internally displaced.
Mr. Guterres also touched on prevention.
Obviously, it is far cheaper to concentrate on
prevention than to address the results of a catastrophe.
Quite rightly, Mr. Guterres emphasized prevention.
This is a broad concept that applies not only to
programmes that you can put in place, but also to
issues of governance. It is important to note that some
internal displacement is the result of poor governance
and poor democratic institutions in a country. This
must be addressed.
I do not believe that, in matters concerning the
responsibility of the Council in maintaining
international peace and security, we should avoid very
watertight compartments. When does a matter fall
under the ambit of the maintenance of international
peace and security? Obviously the lines are very
difficult to define, but it is equally unacceptable that
the issue not be addressed. Roles have been defined
very narrowly and therefore issues are left out that
should have been addressed, such as that I touched on
earlier regarding democratization.

19

S/PV.6062

I want to be brief. In my concluding remarks, I
would like, once again, to commend Mr. Guterres for
his exemplary leadership which he has shown, as usual,
in addressing these issues.
Mr. Dabbashi (Libya) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I would like to echo those who have thanked
Mr. António Guterres, High Commissioner for
Refugees, for his thorough briefing on the issues of
refugees and displaced persons. We commend the
efforts of the High Commissioner to meet the
humanitarian needs of refugees worldwide. We are
grateful to him and his staff for their sacrifices.
No one can doubt that issues relating to refugees
and displaced persons, particularly in Africa and the
Middle East, are among the major problems drawing
the attention of the international community. Over the
past several decades, those two regions have seen
major conflicts and natural disasters. Consequently,
millions of people have been displaced from their
homes to regions that they considered to be safer,
either within or outside the borders of their country.
These movements of people have sparked numerous
problems, specifically due to tensions between the
refugees and the local populations. Hence, the
important humanitarian role played by the United
Nations High Commissioner for Refugees in terms of
assisting and protecting refugees and displaced
persons.
When we consider the global geographic
breakdown of refugees, we see that there are more than
15 million refugees, 6.6 million of whom are
Palestinians; and more than 65 million displaced
persons worldwide. The largest number of refugees and
displaced persons is in Africa and the Middle East, and
specifically in the occupied Palestinian territories and
neighbouring countries. There are also refugees from
Iraq, the Democratic Republic of the Congo, Somalia
and the Sudan.
As the Council is aware, the countries hosting
refugees are responsible for assisting and protecting
them. National Governments, with the help of the
international community, are also responsible for
addressing the humanitarian and security problems of
refugees. At the same time, we believe that the ideal
solution for addressing the problems of refugees and
displaced persons lies in setting conflicts, returning
refugees to their homes and reintegrating them by
providing them with jobs and development in their

20

countries of origin. This should be undertaken through
national efforts and effective partnerships with the
international community.
Libya
endured
colonization
and
fascist
persecution for three decades, during which thousands
of Libyans fled the country. It therefore understands all
too well the current suffering of Palestinians. No one
can doubt their suffering, and specifically the suffering
of two thirds of the population of Gaza, under the
Israeli occupation. Approximately 1 million refugees
live in Gaza and have been subjected to bombing and
artillery fire over the past two weeks. The total
embargo does not allow them to escape this holocaust,
which, unfortunately, imitates Nazi methods, but with
modern means of destruction and killing. As of
yesterday, those methods had caused the death of more
than 700 Palestinians, including 219 children and 89
women. By this morning, the number of those killed
had risen to 763.
I must mention here that many refugees from
Gaza had to leave their homes as long ago as 1948.
They were again forcibly displaced in 1967, this time
towards Gaza. They currently have no other option
than to die in this holocaust from which they cannot
flee. There is no other outcome for them but death, and
only death.
That is the goal of the Israeli authorities, who are
in flagrant violation of international law, in the context
of total silence by the Security Council. This silence
can only be interpreted as support for the aggression
and as indifference to the souls of innocent victims on
the part of those who are preventing the Security
Council from shouldering its responsibilities.
In this context, I take this opportunity to
commend the work done by the United Nations Relief
and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near
East (UNRWA), led by Ms. Karen AbuZayd. I welcome
the courage shown by UNRWA staff in Gaza and
throughout the occupied Palestinian territories despite
the grave dangers that they face and their being
repeatedly targeted by the Israeli occupying forces.
The international community must be generous
and respond to the urgent appeals made by UNRWA
eight days ago from Gaza. Our hope is that we will
soon hear a briefing from Ms. Karen AbuZayd,
Commissioner-General of UNRWA, and that
arrangements will be made for her to make this
briefing to complement the briefing that we heard

09-20310

S/PV.6062

today, so that we can get a thorough picture of the
situation.
We in the Security Council need to take practical
steps to ensure the protection of civilians in time of
war and to protect them from any threat by any party.
We need to remove all obstacles to humanitarian
assistance. We also need to require the parties
concerned to meet their international obligations and
the other obligations they have already undertaken so
that we in the Council will be able to meet our
responsibilities.
The President (spoke in French): I shall now
make a statement in my capacity as representative of
France.
First of all, I would like to thank the United
Nations High Commissioner for Refugees for having
accepted the Security Council’s invitation to give us a
briefing today. The previous meeting that the Council
had with the High Commissioner was in 2006, and
France would like to express the hope that such
meetings will occur more frequently in the future, since
we find them to be particularly useful for both bodies. I
would also like to thank the High Commissioner for his
very useful and informative briefing and for his tireless
work and that of his Office in circumstances that are
often difficult.
France is deeply concerned by the increasing
number of refugees and of displaced persons as a result
not only of conflict but also, as indicated by the High
Commissioner, of a number of other factors that give
rise to political tensions, including extreme poverty,
lack of access to natural resources, the food and fuel
crises and the consequences of climate change. The
international community must ensure that these
populations are protected, as is their right.
We are also, along with the Office of the United
Nations High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR),
very concerned about the situation of long-term
refugees. More than 5 million refugees around the
world have been living in exile for longer than five
years. The international community must commit to
lightening the burden of the host countries, including
by undertaking efforts for the return of refugees who
are particularly vulnerable. In this regard, France
welcomes the choice of the issue of long-term refugees
as the theme of the upcoming 2009 session of the
UNHCR Executive Committee.

09-20310

France also welcomes the progress achieved in
finding lasting solutions to the plight of refugees,
whether through voluntary return when the security
situation allows it, as for example in Angola, Liberia
and southern Sudan, or through local integration, as in
Tanzania, Nigeria, Serbia and Central Asia.
France further welcomes the large-scale return of
Afghan refugees that has been taking place since 2001.
But the question of refugees represents a huge
humanitarian, political and security challenge for
Afghanistan and its neighbours. We encourage the
strengthening of regional cooperation in order to create
conditions for the dignified, lasting and voluntary
return of refugees, with the support of the international
community.
We are concerned about the serious obstacles to
the return to Abkhazia and South Ossetia of those
displaced by the conflict in Georgia. We would like to
recall here that the International Court of Justice has
ordered the parties to refrain from any acts that would
impede their freedom of movement and from taking
any discriminatory measures.
In this regard, and more generally, the link
between emergency humanitarian responses and shortand long-term development and integration strategies
is too often lacking. In order to ensure what is
commonly called transition, France supports the
establishment of comprehensive strategies to ensure
sustainable returns. We also support the adoption by
UNHCR and the lead agencies of a sectoral approach
to protecting internally displaced persons, and we
recall in this regard the importance of the Guiding
Principles on Internal Displacement.
The primary responsibility for the protection of
and assistance to displaced refugees falls, of course,
first and foremost on States, and the international
community must, within the United Nations
framework, assist States in protecting such
populations. When national authorities are clearly not
guaranteeing the protection of their populations, the
international community must intervene. We therefore
attach the highest importance to the effective
implementation of the responsibility to protect. We
have undertaken that commitment and we owe it to
those populations, who are suffering.
In this regard, the Security Council has a specific
role to play, since the displacement of populations is
often the direct result of threats to international peace

21

S/PV.6062

and security and could contribute to destabilizing
entire regions, and since displaced people are
vulnerable and could be subjected to grave violations
of international law and of international human rights
and humanitarian law, including in the camps that take
them in. The Security Council has the responsibility to
prevent and put an end to such violations. Who could
forget the acts of sexual violence used as weapons of
war that victimize so many in the Kivus, Darfur and
many other situations?
In this context, the Council has decided to
include in the mandates of peacekeeping operations the
responsibility to protect civilians, in particular refugees
and persons displaced by armed conflict. That is seen
in mandates such as those of the United Nations
Mission in the Central African Republic and Chad
(MINURCAT), the European Union military operation
in the Republic of Chad and in the Central African
Republic and the United Nations Organization Mission
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUC).
While
cooperation
between
peacekeeping
operations and humanitarian actors is essential, we
cannot confuse humanitarian action and peacekeeping.
Like UNHCR, France attaches great importance to
respect for humanitarian space, which is necessary to
ensure access to populations in need and the safety and
security of humanitarian personnel.
With regard to the issue of humanitarian access,
the adoption of resolution 1844 (2008) on Somalia has
allowed us to sanction those who hinder the delivery of
humanitarian assistance. We welcome the partial
reiteration of the text of that resolution with respect to
the sanctions regime for the Democratic Republic of
the Congo defined by the recently adopted resolution
1857 (2008).
The issue of humanitarian access in general is, of
course, critical in helping us better to address the
problems of refugees and displaced persons. We cannot
fail to consider, for instance, the hundreds of thousands
of internally displaced persons fleeing the fighting in
Mogadishu; we cannot fail to consider Darfur, Kivu,
Iraq or Afghanistan; nor, of course, can we fail to
consider the current situation in Gaza.
I wish in general to recall the importance which
the Security Council must attach to the protection of
civilians. That dimension, too, is naturally at the heart
of France’s actions, alongside its close partners, with
respect to the situation in Gaza, as demonstrated by the

22

presence, today and in recent days, of its Minister for
Foreign Affairs, Bernard Kouchner, and several of his
counterparts in New York, and by its ongoing efforts.
Finally, and above all, I would recall that longstanding population displacements are usually linked to
the fact that the armed conflicts and human rights
violations that have led people to flee remain
unresolved. The Israeli-Palestinian conflict and the
situation of Palestinian refugees and displaced persons
are particularly striking examples of that and testify to
the importance of working for the political settlement
of conflicts, peacebuilding and the implementation of
national reconciliation processes that guarantee human
rights in order to resolve the problem of refugees and
displaced persons. I assure the High Commissioner that
we are highly sensitive to that fact and to the essential
role of the Security Council in that regard.
I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.
I call on Mr. Guterres to respond to the questions
and comments raised.
Mr. Guterres (spoke in French): I thank you, Sir,
and the representatives of member States for their
extremely useful and profound contributions to this
debate. Many of them mentioned their interest in our
meeting more often. I am entirely at the Council’s
disposal. I am convinced that there is no humanitarian
solution to humanitarian tragedies; the solution is
always a political one. Dialogue with the Security
Council is, for us, an absolute priority in the
framework of our inter-institutional cooperation. As I
said, I am always available to the Council.
(spoke in Spanish)
To the Ambassador of Costa Rica, I should like
first to express my admiration for his country and Latin
America in general as traditional hosts to refugees.
Mexico, with its borders of solidarity, cities of
solidarity
and
solidarity-based
resettlement
programme, has one of the world’s best action plans
for the protection of refugees. I believe that the
example set by Costa Rica is of great importance to the
world today, where tolerance is critical to ensuring the
protection of refugees.
The Ambassador of Costa Rica spoke of the need
for stronger international solidarity. It is true that most
refugees are in countries of the South, and that most
wish to return to their homes. They do not want to

09-20310

S/PV.6062

emigrate to wealthier countries; they want to go home.
If that is to be possible and they are to be protected
upon their return, institutional solidarity, especially
between the developed and developing worlds, is
absolutely essential.
He also discussed the range of problems in
protecting civilians and the absolute need to guarantee
the humanitarian and civilian nature of refugee camps.
That issue has been raised in many statements. It is
tragic to note all the victims of massive human rights
violations and violence, the terrible suffering of
women and the forcible recruitment of children that
take place in refugee camps, and that we are powerless
to stop it. The intervention of peacekeeping forces is
often absolutely critical in that regard.
(spoke in English)
I would like to express my gratitude to the
representative of Turkey and to underline one aspect in
which Turkey is at the very centre of our action.
Turkey is not only an asylum country; it is also a
country of transit. We are in a situation today in which
we are witnessing increasingly mixed flows of
population, the majority being economic migrants, but
also including refugees, asylum seekers and women
and child victims of trafficking, who are in need of
international protection.
With the role of smugglers and traffickers and the
way such movements of populations take place, it is
sometimes very difficult to detect those people and to
grant them physical access to the territory to present
their claims and receive fair treatment for those claims.
The experience of our cooperation in Turkey in this
regard is extremely important to us. I should also like
to express my gratitude for the appeal made by the
representative of Turkey for financial support for the
activities of my Office.
This is indeed a difficult moment for
humanitarian organizations. On the one hand, we have
needs that are increasing everywhere; on the other, we,
too, are the victims of the global financial crisis. I have
been in Government myself; I am sure it is impossible
for a Government not to do everything that is required
to make sure that there is no meltdown of its financial
system, so I fully understand the need to use hundreds
of billions of dollars and other currencies in support of
the financial systems, but I strongly hope that the same
commitment will exist in support of human life and
humanitarian action.

09-20310

I should also like to express my deep gratitude to
the Ambassador of Japan for his reference to the root
causes of displacement and the needs of prevention. I
think it is very important to underline that prevention is
no longer only a political and diplomatic endeavour. To
prevent conflict, it is necessary in many circumstances,
for instance, to be much more effective in relation to
support for adaptation to climate change, support for
rural communities and the need to be able to allow
people to live in their rural environments if they so
wish. Migration should be an option; it should not be
an obligation or a necessity.
Thus, to a certain extent, prevention has become
a complex issue requiring a combined group of actions
in which, of course, the political and the diplomatic
will always be paramount but in which effective
cooperation among the economic, social and
environmental dimensions is also extremely important.
Again, I would like to underline the importance of the
concept of human security as a unifying concept for
protection, assistance and solutions for refugees and
other displaced persons.
The Ambassador made a meaningful number of
references to the interrelated questions of safety and
security in humanitarian action and the protection and
preservation of the humanitarian space. I would like
once again to emphasize that these are key questions
for the success of humanitarian action in today’s world.
Finally, I would like to congratulate Japan on the
establishment of its pilot project on resettlement, which
I hope will be successful and lead to a meaningful
resettlement programme in the near future.
I would also like to express my gratitude for the
statement made by the representative of the United
Kingdom. First of all, I wish to say that we are deeply
committed to fully supporting the United Nations
Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the
Near East (UNRWA) in its activities. We appeal for
UNRWA to be effectively supported, financially and by
other means, by the international community, and we
hope that developments will move towards the
achievement of full respect for humanitarian law in
relation to the Gaza conflict.
The United Kingdom representative mentioned
internal displacement and the commitment of the
Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for
Refugees. I want to be very clear in saying that we are
totally committed to playing our role.

23

S/PV.6062

As underlined by the United States delegation
and the Russian delegation, our role is different in
relation to refugees and in relation to internally
displaced persons. In relation to refugees, we have a
mandate, which is a very strong mandate, by the way,
enshrined in international law. In relation to internal
displacement, we are a member of a team, working
together with other members of the team — never
forgetting that the primary responsibility is the State’s,
but that, of course, the international community has a
contribution to make.
We are totally committed to the cluster approach
and to the development of its potential. Partnership is
important not only in relation to internal displacement;
as members said, it is important in peacebuilding and
in early recovery. We are also fully committed to
peacebuilding; from the very outset, we provided a
member of our Office to the Peacebuilding Support
Office. And, if I can be absolutely frank on this, we are
extremely anxious to see early recovery work. I know
that the United Kingdom Government is also very
committed to this.
I would say that we might not need new
international laws in relation to forced displacement
when it does not relate to typical refugee situations as
foreseen in the 1951 Convention relating to the Status
of Refugees. But obviously, there are protection gaps,
and we need to make sure that, through adequate forms
of partnership and cooperation, those protection gaps
are filled. States have a key role to play on that. But it
would also be interesting to discuss whether some
improvement in international law could be useful, for
instance in relation to temporary protection, just to
give one example. There, I believe, there are some
areas in which some clarification might be useful with
respect to international legislation.
I thank the representative of Viet Nam. First of
all, he made a reference to statelessness. Statelessness
is a forgotten plight. It is dramatic for many people not
to have nationality, not to have citizenship. They tend
to be forgotten people, and their rights tend to be
forgotten. My Office is doing its best to improve our
capacity and our action in that regard. But I would like
to draw the attention of the Council, and the
international community as a whole, to the need to be
much more effective — especially at country level —
in addressing the problem of statelessness and in
providing solutions for it. And I can only agree fully
with what the representative of Viet Nam said in

24

relation to the need to strengthen cooperation within
the United Nations system and to ensure full respect
for humanitarian principles: the very principles I
underlined in my briefing.
(spoke in French)
I would like to thank the representative of
Burkina Faso for his statement and to say that his
region is one where, fortunately, we are seeing greater
progress in addressing refugee problems. There have
been massive returns to Liberia and to Sierra Leone,
and there is hope for a solution bringing lasting peace
to Côte d’Ivoire. There is reason for optimism
regarding his region. I believe that the regional
cooperation mechanisms that have been put in place
are to a great extent responsible for success, with
respect not only to conflict but also to humanitarian
protection programmes and to the resolution of refugee
issues.
I fully agree with what the representative of
Burkina Faso said about the need to train personnel of
peacekeeping operations. I think there is much to be
done and much room for improvement in that regard.
As I said with respect to the statement made by the
representative of Costa Rica, there is a need to support
host countries and communities that often share their
meagre resources with refugees. I would also stress the
need for rehabilitation — including environmental
rehabilitation — in regions affected by refugee issues,
once displacement has come to an end.
(spoke in English)
I would also like to express my deep appreciation
for the statement made by the representative of the
United States. First, he commented on protection
challenges for refugees, for displaced persons and for
the security of humanitarian staff, and he expressed
concerns about internal displacement and the need to
make sure that our work on internal displacement does
not undermine our mandate regarding refugees. I must
say that I do not see any contradiction between what
we do with refugees and what we do on internal
displacement. There has been no crowding-out effect;
there has been no movement of resources from refugee
programmes into internal displacement programmes. I
think there has been a great deal of positive synergy: in
many circumstances, we address problems that are
similar within groups of population that stay together,
even if their displacements are of differing natures.

09-20310

S/PV.6062

I would also like to underline the importance of
his comments on sexual and gender-based violence. In
UNHCR’s internal reform, one of our main concerns
was to make sure that we would shrink our
headquarters and spend less and less money on the
organization and more and more money on our
beneficiaries. We had 1,050 people in Geneva; we are
now about 750, and in 2009 we will be reducing that to
less than 700. What we are trying to do is to use the
savings we make through our internal reform to
address gaps in our action for beneficiaries. One of the
gaps we tried to address with these savings was exactly
the question related to sexual and gender-based
violence in many of our programmes where, let us be
honest, we are far from being successful, mainly
because we do not have the capacity to deliver in such
complex environments. There, the key security
questions require the action of other actors, namely
those with respect to which the Security Council has
the authority to take decisions.
I would also like to thank the representative of
the United States for his comments on how to maintain
the humanitarian space. I think that the distinction
made between the strategic dimension and the
operational dimension can probably be a very
important one. Clearly, there must be strategic
coherence within the United Nations when it acts
together in a given setting. But in some circumstances
it is absolutely essential to preserve operational
autonomy to make sure that the humanitarian space and
humanitarian principles are fully preserved.
I would also like to thank the representative of
Austria and to tell him how much I appreciated the
clear linkage he established between peace, security
and forced displacement, and the importance that he
gave to climate change as a key factor in its influence
on all global trends for the near future, in particular on
trends related to displacement. Climate change
generates displacement, and climate change is a factor
that exacerbates conflict, which in turn generates
displacement. Because of that, when we look at peace
and security and when we look at displacement, I do
not think we can forget the present and future impact
of climate change on the mega-trends we will be
witnessing in the twenty-first century. I am very happy
that, as was noted, the Council will be debating energy
security and climate change in April.
I am also very hopeful with respect to the work of
the Council in guaranteeing a smooth transition

09-20310

between the European Union military operation in the
Republic of Chad and in the Central African Republic
and the United Nations Mission in the Central African
Republic and Chad in relation to the protection
requirements we have in eastern Chad and the northern
Central African Republic.
With respect to the lessons learned about
sustainability, I think that it is important to underline
that we are far from happy with the present
sustainability of returns. In many circumstances,
people return from a refugee situation to become
irregular migrants in the next few months or in the next
few years. The reason for that is not always linked to
security. I would say that it is predominantly linked to
the fact that economic development, job opportunities
and access to education and health care are far from
being guaranteed in post-conflict situations. Even
though there has been enormous progress in the United
Nations mechanisms to address these situations — with
peacebuilding, with very important concepts such as
that of human security — I think that we still see a
combination of poor local government and dysfunction
in the actions of the international community, which
undermines the sustainability of returns and of
solutions in general.
(spoke in Spanish)
I would like to thank the representative of
Mexico for his comments. It is true that there is a
global crisis, whose elements include conflict, the
environment, the economy, energy and food. In that
context, the response too must be global. In that global
response, the whole issue of people in movement must,
in my opinion, be at the centre of the concerns of the
international community. I am in complete agreement
on that matter. It is not just a matter of the problems of
refugees or of forcibly displaced persons; what about
the rights of economic migrants? That also requires
attention.
I am speaking of a matter completely outside my
mandate, but as a citizen of the world. I would say that
in the near future the mobility of labour will make a
greater contribution to world development, to the
reduction of poverty than will other types of mobility. I
think the international community should have a
rational attitude toward migration in general.
Unfortunately, many leaders have irrational attitudes
that do not allow them to consider the positive aspects
of migration. To deal with the positive aspects of

25

S/PV.6062

migration, to guarantee movement of regular
migrations — much more important today in the
context of irregular migration — is a very important
contribution to the protection of refugees, who, in
mixed movements of people, are often victims of
situations in which human rights in general are difficult
to apply.
We have discussed mandates. I think the issue of
mandates is very clear, very important, the robustness
of mandates, their clarity. But I would say that just as
important as mandates are the practical material
conditions in which mandates can be effectively
carried out. Many times, it must be said, we are still far
from having the full capacity to implement the
mandates established by this Council in many of the
operations.
(spoke in English)
I am extremely sorry I cannot speak in Russian,
but I will try to address the intervention of the
representative of the Russian Federation in English.
I wish to say how much we cherish our
cooperation with the Government in relation to refugee
protection. Indeed, the responsibility attributed by the
1951 Convention is attributed to the Governments
themselves, and UNHCR has just a monitoring and
supplementary role when Governments have not the
capacity — namely, the economic capacity, in many
parts of the world — to provide protection and
assistance to the refugees. So indeed, cooperation with
Governments is very high on our agenda.
I would also underline what the representative
said about the need to support countries in the
developing world that have been receiving huge
numbers of refugees. He mentioned Syria; I would add
Jordan in the same context, and Iran and Pakistan. We
could go on — Uganda, Tanzania; many others around
the world share their meagre resources. Many of them
are not even signatories of the Convention but show a
meaningful solidarity in relation to refugees.
The need to cooperate with UNRWA was
mentioned. I can assure the representative that we are
actively cooperating now, supporting UNRWA’s
activities in full respect for UNRWA’s mandate. I think
it is also very important from the point of view of
UNHCR not to create confusion, which would not help
solve the problem. With full respect for UNRWA’s
mandate, I strongly appeal to the international

26

community to give UNRWA all it requires in the
extremely difficult circumstances in which it currently
operates, with enormous courage on the part of its
staff.
Again, I wish to underline what I said about the
clear distinction we make in relation to our refugee
mandate and our actions with regard to internal
displacement and the civilian character of asylum, and
the need to preserve the integrity of asylum by
preserving its civilian nature.
I would also like to thank the ambassador of
Croatia. In this year’s edition of our protection
challenges dialogues, we had an extremely constructive
contribution by the high-level Croatian delegation —
two Vice Prime Ministers and the Minister of Justice,
very strongly committed to engage in dialogue in order
to find a durable solution to end situations that, we
believe, no longer have a justification. Sometimes
history goes ahead and some people are left behind,
and it is time to bring the people back into history. I
can only underline the importance of Croatia’s
contributions for that purpose.
I wish to express my deep gratitude also to the
representative of China — and apologize also for not
being able to speak in Mandarin — and to say how
much we noticed his two comments, first on solutions
and the importance of different groups of solutions in
our action — I thank him for the recognition of our
role on that — and then on the very strong linkage
between conflict mediation and peacekeeping and
refugee protection and humanitarian action, and the
importance of dialogue between the Security Council
and humanitarian agencies in order for that to be fully
effective.
Once again I express my deep appreciation to the
ambassador of Uganda for his country’s decision to
host the African Union summit on forced displacement.
That summit will, hopefully, approve — I think all the
conditions are now met for that — an AU convention
on internal displacement. I think that will be an
extremely important step. As I said in my intervention,
it will be the first legally binding international
instrument on internal displacement. As a matter of
fact, as the ambassador said, it represents an effective
translation of the responsibility to protect, at the
African level.
I believe that the debate on the responsibility to
protect has been a victim of the lack of trust in the

09-20310

S/PV.6062

international
community. There
are
different
understandings about how the responsibility to protect
can be implemented. One thing is clear. In the African
Union there is now an agenda, a clear commitment to a
strongly human-rights-minded approach to internal
displacement. I really hope that that will be an example
that will bear fruit in the international community and
will allow for a more effective approach by the
international community as a whole to the questions of
internal displacement. I also wish to underline the very
important comments on prevention.
Again, apologizing for not speaking Arabic, I
thank the ambassador of Libya for his intervention. We
have established very important cooperation with the
League of Arab States. In the very near future —
hopefully next month — the result will be the
publication of a common book on the roots of modern
refugee law in Arab tradition and Islamic law. As a
matter of fact, when one looks at the 1951 Convention
and its various aspects — non-refoulement, the civilian
character of asylum, the need to protect not only
refugees but families and to respect property —
everything can be found in the Holy Koran and the
Sunna and the Hadith of the Prophet. I think that
publication will be a very important instrument, not
only to strengthen refugee protection but also to pay
tribute to what is a very important tradition in regard to
recognition of refugee rights.
The ambassador mentioned the need to support
local populations and to avoid tension between local
and refugee populations. I think that is a key question.
The majority of refugees are in the South, in the
developing world, and local populations in many cases
share very scarce resources. Just look at eastern Chad.
Water resources are being shared by the Chadian
population with a number of refugees from Darfur,
who in many areas outnumber the Chadians
themselves. So very strong solidarity with local
populations is a key instrument to preserve asylum
space.
The ambassador also mentioned the need to
guarantee the sustainability of voluntary repatriation. I
can only repeat what I said in that regard. I would like
to mention again his appeal for full support for
UNRWA. I also want to say that when one looks at the
Gaza situation from the point of view of the United
Nations High Commissioner for Refugees — there are
many other perspectives that are beyond my mandate,
but, from my perspective, what is more shocking is that

09-20310

that population does not even have the right to flee. We
give protection and support to refugees who have fled
conflict in many areas, and we try to help them endure
their plight, and, one day, find a solution to their plight.
But in this conflict people do not even have the right to
flee, which, of course, makes the humanitarian
dimension of the situation even more tragic.
(spoke in French)
I would like once again to thank the President for
the invitation and also say that we have extensive
cooperation with France as a country of asylum. Last
year, France received the highest number of requests
for asylum in Europe, and France also provides great
supports to us in many of our activities throughout the
world in various areas.
The President mentioned the issue of long-term
refugees. In 2008, UNHCR’s priority policy was
precisely the situation of long-term refugees, and we
hope that the next session of the Executive Committee
will be able to adopt the outcomes of the thinking and
dialogue that we had with the Member States,
non-governmental organizations and other actors in
December. But, certainly, the key issue is to find both
political and humanitarian solutions. Last year, we
helped 735,000 refugees return home — 735,000
helped by UNHCR worldwide. That is quite an
impressive number. We presented 100,000 requests for
resettlement prepared by UNHCR.
We note that in some States, and sometimes
States that have huge development challenges, local
integration is becoming acceptable. The most
remarkable example is Tanzania, which accepted the
naturalization of 170,000 Burundians from groups that
had fled Burundi in 1972. Of course, this means the
naturalization of their children and grandchildren, but
it shows that there is generosity from host countries,
which the international community must support,
because integrating such a high number of refugees
poses extremely complex development challenges.
I would also underscore what the President said
about the responsibility to protect. I hope that the
African example can be very significant in establishing
a climate of trust that will facilitate a useful debate on
that subject. I would like to underscore, too, all that the
President said about humanitarian access, the
humanitarian space, security for humanitarian action
and the protection of civilians in general.

27

S/PV.6062

I would also like to say sincerely that when I look
at the Security Council, I am a little envious of it.
Recently, I had a minor infection and tried to solve the
problem with aspirin, but aspirin did not clear it up. I
needed an antibiotic. The tragedy is that at UNHCR we
have only aspirin. The Council has the antibiotic.
The President (spoke in French): I thank the
High Commissioner for the clarifications he has
provided. Unfortunately, in certain cases antibiotics are
less effective and not as quick as one would hope.
I would like to thank Mr. Guterres for his
presence and for the extremely useful information he

28

gave us. I think that the statements made by the
members of the Council attest to their full support for
the High Commissioner himself and the work of his
Office and its staff. I believe that these statements also
attest to our interest in having regular exchanges with
the High Commissioner on the numerous challenges
facing both his Office and the Security Council.
There are no further speakers inscribed on my
list. The Security Council has thus concluded the
present stage of its consideration of the item on its
agenda.
The meeting rose at 12.45 p.m.

09-20310
