B.

C.

Application of the Republic of Armenia

Application of the Republic of Kyrgyzstan

Decisions

Decisions

At its 3035th meeting, on 23 J anuary 1992, the Council,
following the adoption of its agenda, decided to refer the
application of the Republic of Armeniam for membership in
the United Nations to the Committee on the Admission of New
Members for examination and report, as provided in rule 59 of
the provisional rules of procedure.

At its 3036th meeting, also on 23 January 1992, the
Council, following the adoption of its agenda, decided to refer
the application of the Republic ofKyrgyzstan 374 formembership
in the United Nations to the Committee on the Admission of
New Members for examination and report, as provided in rule
59 of the provisional rules of procedure.

At its 3041st meeting, on 29 January 1992, the Council
discussed the report of the Committee on the Admission of
New Members373 conceming the application of the Republic of
Armenia for admission to membership in the United Nations.

At its 3042nd meeting, on 29 January 1992, the Council
discussed the report of the Committee on the Admission of
New Members375 conceming the application of the Republic of
Kyrgyzstan for admission to membership in the United Nations.

Resolution 735 (1992)

Resolutlon 736 (1992)

or 2!1 January 1!1!12

or 2!1 January 1m

The Security Council,

The Security Council,
Having examined the application of the Republic of
Armenia for admission to the United Nations, 372

Having examined the application of the Republic of
Kyrgyz.stan for admission to the United Nations, 374

Recommends to the General Assembly that the Republic
of Armenia be admitted to membership in the United Nations.

Recommends to the General Assembly that the Republic
of Kyrgyz.stan be admitted to membership in the United
Nations.

Adopted witlwul a I/Ole al the 3041st

m«tin&

Adopted withouJ a IIOle at the 3042nd

m«ting.

Decision
Decision

At the same meeting, following the adoption of Security
Council resolution 735 (1992), the President of the Council
made the following statement on behalf of the members:331

At the same meeting, following the adoption of Security
Council resolution 736 (1992), the President made the following
statement on behalf of the members of the Council:37(1

"lt is a privilege for me, on behalf of the members of
the Council, to congratulate the Republic of Armenia on
the decision which the Council bas just taken. By resolution 735 (1992) the Council bas recommended to the
General Assembly the admission of Armenia to membership in the United Nations.

"The Council bas just recommended that the Republic
ofKyrgyz.stan be admitted to membership in our Organization. lt is with great pleasure that, on behalf of the
members of the Council, I congratulate Kyrgyzstan on this
happy and historie occasion. We look forward to this
further strengthening of the principle of universality.

"This is a significant moment for our Organization,
and for Armenia. Armenia's solemn commitment to
uphold the Purposes and Principles of the Charter of the
United Nations, which include the principles relating to the
peaceful settlement of disputes and the non-use of force,
is noted with great satisfaction by the members of the
Council.

"Kyrgyzstan bas much to contribute to the work of the
United Nations. lts commitment to uphold the Purposes
and Principles of the Charter of the United Nations is
noted with great satisfaction.
"Ali the members of the Council look forward to the
day, in the near future, when Kyrgyz.stan will join us as a
member of our Organization. We look forward to meeting
the representatives of Kyrgyzstan here at United Nations
Headquarters, and to working closely with them."

"The members of the Council are confident that
Armenia will contribute fully and effectively in ail areas of
the Organization's activities. We look forward to welcoming its representatives and to working closely with them."

111
