A /72/PV.95

United Nations

General Assembly

Official Records

Seventy-second session

95th plenary meeting

Tuesday, 12 June 2018, 3 p.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Lajčák . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (Slovakia)

The meeting was called to order at 3.10 p.m.
Agenda item 35
Protracted conflicts in the GUAM area and their
implications for international peace, security and
development
Report of the Secretary-General (A/72/847)
Draft resolution (A/72/L.55)
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Georgia to introduce draft resolution
A/72/L.55.
Mr. Imnadze (Georgia): As we mark the twentieth
anniversary of the Guiding Principles on Internal
Displacement, forced displacement around the world
has reached a record level — 65.6 million persons
displaced by conflict, violence, persecution and natural
calamities. While the causes of the displacement may
differ, human suffering does not.
Among those 65 million people, as many as 400,000
are displaced from my own country, Georgia. It is in
their name that I take the floor today to introduce and
solicit the support of the General Assembly for draft
resolution A/72/L.55, entitled “Status of internally
displaced persons and refugees from Abkhazia, Georgia
and Tskhinvali region/South Ossetia, Georgia” under
agenda item 35, “Protracted conflicts in the GUAM
area and their implications for international peace,
security and development”.

The draft resolution before the Assembly, which
we have been adopting for the past 10 years, is not
only derived from the Guiding Principles on Internal
Displacement, but in a certain way has become the
embodiment of the Principles as well. The Guiding
Principles consist of three fundamental concepts:
securing the rights of the displaced, including the right
to safe and dignified return and property rights; the
unacceptability of forced demographic changes; and
the need for unimpeded humanitarian access.
By virtue of the draft resolution, we emphasize
the importance of the Guiding Principles and
strongly support the work of the Geneva International
Discussions, which is the forum mandated by the
12 August 2008 ceasefire agreement and co-chaired
by the United Nations, the European Union and the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe.
Regrettably, Georgia’s unwavering commitment
to the Geneva International Discussions and the
constructive actions it has taken within them, where all
stakeholders are represented, has yet to be reciprocated.
We are confronted with a policy of concerted disrespect
for the issue of return by relevant participants, despite
the fact that the Secretary-General urges participants to
refrain from so-called walkouts during the discussion
of the respective agenda items and to address all
their concerns within the framework of the Geneva
International Discussions.
Recent developments in the security and human
rights situation in the occupied Georgian territories are
also extremely alarming. In the twenty-first century,

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of speeches
delivered in other languages. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only.
They should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

18-17995 (E)

*1817995*

A/72/PV.95

we continue to witness the installation of razor-wire
fences and so-called border signs along stretches that
have reached a shocking 49 kilometres in the Abkhazia
region and 52 kilometres in the Tskhinvali region. The
Secretary-General condemns this situation in his latest
report on Georgia (A/72/847).
Human rights violations in the occupied regions
have become a daily occurrence. People endure
kidnappings, arbitrary detentions, property seizures,
restrictions on access to education in their native
language, restrictions on free movement and residence
and continued discrimination on the grounds of
ethnic origin.
I have spoken previously from this rostrum of
the blatant murder of Giga Otkhozoria, an internally
displaced person (IDP) from Georgia, by a so-called
border guard, who chased and gunned him down in
broad daylight, all of it recorded by closed-circuit
television cameras (see A/70/PV.96). This year, Archil
Tatunashvili, an IDP from the Tskhinvali region, was
detained by the occupying Power and tortured to death
while in detention. His mutilated body, missing all
internal organs, was released to his family three weeks
later. The perpetrators are still at large, because these
are not accidental tragedies; they are a testimony to
systematic violations of fundamental human rights
in the occupied territories, which, as the former High
Commissioner for Human Rights has put it, remain a
“black hole” and “one of the most inaccessible places
on Earth”.
To address the issue, for the second consecutive year
the Human Rights Council has expressed its serious
concerns about the human rights and humanitarian
situation within the occupied regions of Georgia by
adopting resolution 37/40 at its March 2018 session,
calling for the Office of the High Commissioner
and other international and regional human rights
mechanisms to be granted immediate access to the
occupied territories. Opening these regions to the
international community for monitoring and reporting
of all human rights abuses would be a major step
forward in ending impunity and lawlessness.
Against that backdrop, and despite all the
impediments on the ground, the Government of Georgia
has come out with a new peace initiative, “A Step to
a Better Future”, which is aimed at enhancing the
interaction between communities and proposes moving
forward on three aspects: facilitating and expanding
2/19

12/06/2018

trade across the dividing lines; creating additional
opportunities and simplifying access to all levels of
education; and easing access to various services and
benefits. Georgia continues to steadfastly support its
policy of reconciliation and reintegration in the firm
belief that a commitment to a rules-based order and a
surge in diplomacy are the only means for achieving
sustainable peace.
Secretary-General António Guterres, speaking
on the Organization’s priorities for 2018, has urged
the international community to “pave the way for the
safe, voluntary, dignified and sustainable return of
refugees to their places of origin, in accordance with
international standards”. While the draft resolution
introduced by Georgia today refers to the situation in
a single country, the issue at stake is an integral part
of a global challenge — forced displacement. In this
Hall, we all recognize the utterly humanitarian nature
of the principle of return. Therefore, we appeal to the
Assembly to apply the very same principle to the IDPs
of Georgia. They too are part of our global endeavour
to leave no one behind.
In his latest report on Georgia, the SecretaryGeneral explicitly underlined that
“[i]t is essential to recognize that return is both a
human right and a humanitarian issue and therefore
cannot be directly linked to political questions
or the conclusion of peace agreements. It must
be addressed irrespective of any solution to the
underlying conflict” (A/72/847, para. 43).
It is now time for us, the General Assembly, to
show firm adherence to the aforementioned principles
and demonstrate our joint commitment to sustainable
peace. We need to continue sending a message of
hope to the hundreds of thousands of victims of
forced displacement. Accordingly, I once again urge
the Assembly to vote in favour of draft resolution
A/72/L.55 and recognize once again that internally
displaced people do have the right to return.
Mr. Moraru (Republic of Moldova): I have the
honour to speak on behalf of the Organization for
Democracy and Economic Development-GUAM and its
member States: Azerbaijan, Georgia, Ukraine and my
own country, the Republic of Moldova.
Millions of people in the GUAM countries have
been forced to leave their homes as a result of armed
conflicts. Forced displacement has led to a range
18-17995

12/06/2018

of humanitarian challenges in the GUAM area. We
believe that the humanitarian concerns of the affected
populations should be a priority. Ensuring the safe and
dignified return of internally displaced persons (IDPs)
and refugees in the GUAM area as the principal way
of achieving durable solutions for forcibly displaced
persons is an overarching goal.
This year once again, the GUAM member States are
presenting a joint position in support of the annual draft
resolution, this year contained in document A/72/L.55,
entitled “Status of internally displaced persons and
refugees from Abkhazia, Georgia, and the Tskhinvali
region/South Ossetia, Georgia”. The draft resolution
addresses the plight of hundreds of thousands of IDPs
and refugees forcibly displaced from the Abkhazia and
Tskhinvali regions of Georgia as a result of the conflict
there as well as several waves of ethnic cleansing.
Ten years after the adoption of the first resolution
on Georgia’s IDPs and refugees (resolution 62/249), no
progress has been achieved. We regret that despite the
calls of the international community, the conditions for
organized return in safety and dignity have not yet been
fulfilled, and hundreds of thousands of people continue
to be deprived of their right to return and their property
rights. As highlighted in the Secretary-General’s report
(A/72/847), no major changes with regard to internally
displaced persons and refugees exercising their right to
return were observed during the reporting period.
We reiterate our support for the Geneva International
Discussions process, which is a unique platform
for participants to discuss security, stability and
humanitarian issues, including in relation to the return
of refugees and IDPs. We regret that the discussions
on the most essential humanitarian matters within the
Geneva International Discussions are constantly being
undermined by the concerted disrespect of certain
relevant participants.
We view the current draft resolution as an
important tool for further encouraging the participants
in the Geneva International Discussions to redouble
their efforts to address the issues within the mandate
of the Geneva International Discussions, including the
creation of conditions conducive to a voluntary return
in safety and dignity. We remain seriously concerned
about the human rights situation in the Georgian regions
of Abkhazia and Tskhinvali region/South Ossetia.
Against the backdrop of the ongoing installation of
razor-wire fences, illegal detentions, deprivations of

A/72/PV.95

property, restrictions on free movement and access to
education and other ethnically based violations, the
local population is deprived of minimal safeguards
for their lives. The situation is particularly alarming
given that no international monitoring mechanisms are
allowed to oversee the situation on the ground.
In that context, we welcome the Human Rights
Council’s adoption of resolutions 34/37 and 37/40,
on cooperation with Georgia. They express serious
concerns about the human rights and humanitarian
situation within the Abkhazia and Tskhinvali/South
Ossetia regions of Georgia and call for the Office of
the High Commissioner and other international and
regional human rights mechanisms to be granted
immediate access to those territories. We also welcome
the peace initiative entitled “A Step to a Better Future”
recently proposed by the Government of Georgia, and
hope that it will lead to increased interaction between
the peoples on the ground.
The GUAM member States reiterate their firm
support for the sovereignty and territorial integrity of
Georgia within its internationally recognized borders.
Today’s draft resolution is an opportunity for the
States Members of the United Nations to reaffirm
their commitment to the fundamental right of a safe
and dignified return of IDPs and refugees and express
solidarity with forcibly displaced persons around the
world. We will therefore vote in favour of the draft
resolution and call on others to join us in supporting
this noble cause.
Ms. Plepytė (Lithuania): I have the honour to speak
on behalf of the Baltic and Nordic States: Denmark,
Estonia, Finland, Iceland, Latvia, Norway, Sweden
and my own country, Lithuania. Bulgaria, the Czech
Republic, Ireland, Malta, the Netherlands, Poland and
Slovakia align themselves with this statement.
The number of displaced persons and refugees
around the world has reached an unprecedented level
and is still growing as a result of armed conflicts,
violence, persecution and human rights violations. We
must not forget that the fate of every affected person lies
at the heart of this negative phenomenon. Regrettably,
Georgia is among the countries most affected by the
problem of forced displacement. Ten years after the
first adoption of the resolution on internally displaced
persons (IDPs) and refugees from Abkhazia and
Tskhinvali region/South Ossetia in Georgia (resolution
62/249), no progress has been seen. Hundreds of

18-179953/19

A/72/PV.95

thousands of those IDPs continue to be deprived of
their right to a safe, dignified and voluntary return to
their places of origin and their property rights.
The Secretary-General identified the prevention
of forced displacement and the pursuit of durable
solutions for refugees and internally displaced persons
as one of the priorities in his report on the protection
of civilians in armed conflict (S/2018/462). In this
context, we fully support the Secretary-General’s call
for renewed efforts not only to prevent displacement but
also to address its root causes and support the affected
communities. Draft resolution A/72/L.55, which we are
adopting today, clearly echoes the Secretary-General’s
goals and commits us all to continuing to work for
the protection and assistance of those who have been
forcibly displaced from the Abkhazia and Tskhinvali/
South Ossetia regions of Georgia and to ensuring that
they are able to exercise their fundamental right to a
safe and dignified return.
The human rights situation in those occupied regions
of Georgia remains a cause for our continued concern.
Russia continues to violate the commitments made in
the 12 August and 8 September 2008 agreements by
maintaining a military presence in both the Abkhazia
and Tskhinvali/South Ossetia regions of Georgia.
Kidnappings, arbitrary detentions as a consequence of
the ongoing borderization, new restrictions on freedom
of movement and a lack of access to health care and
to education in their native language have a direct
and negative impact on the daily life of hundreds of
thousands of people affected by this protracted conflict.
The adoption by the Human Rights Council of
resolution 37/40, on cooperation with Georgia, clearly
demonstrated that the international community remains
seized of the matter, as it emphasized the need to address
human rights and humanitarian issues faced by those
forcibly displaced from Abkhazia and the Tskhinvali
region/South Ossetia in Georgia. In this context,
we remain concerned about the fact that in the past
several years no international human rights monitoring
mechanism has been granted unrestricted access to the
regions of Abkhazia and the Tskhinvali region/South
Ossetia, and we call for immediate access to be granted
to the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner
for Human Rights and other international and regional
human rights mechanisms.
We reiterate our support for the Geneva
International Discussions process and join the
4/19

12/06/2018

Secretary-General’s call to all relevant stakeholders to
step up efforts to make tangible progress on key security
and humanitarian issues with a view to improving
the security and human rights situation and meeting
the pressing humanitarian concerns of the affected
population, including internally displaced persons. We
take this opportunity to reaffirm our strong support
for the sovereignty and territorial integrity of Georgia
within its internationally recognized borders.
In conclusion, given the lack of progress on the
ground, we call for the continued engagement of the
United Nations. Today’s draft resolution is a clear signal
of our commitment to the people forcefully driven out
of their homes. As in previous years, we will vote in
favour of the draft resolution and call on the entire
Assembly to do the same.
Mr. Yelchenko (Ukraine): Ukraine aligns itself
with the statement delivered by the representative
of the Republic of Moldova on behalf of the GUAM
member States, and would like to add some remarks in
its national capacity.
This year marks a sad anniversary. Ten years ago,
Russia started its aggression against Georgia. Since the
beginning of the Russian Federation’s occupation of the
Georgian territories of Abkhazia and the Tskhinvali
region/South Ossetia, the situation on the ground has
deteriorated dramatically. This, of course, is nothing
unusual; it happens every time Russia intervenes, as
our own bitter experience amply shows.
We strongly condemn the discrimination on ethnic
grounds, the restrictions on education in the native
language of the two occupied Georgian regions, and the
reported mass demolition of houses of ethnic Georgians
in the Tskhinvali region. We are also deeply concerned
about the large number of internally displaced persons
who have been deprived of the right to return to their
homes in a safe and dignified manner.
Ukraine urges the occupying Power, the Russian
Federation, to provide immediate and unimpeded access
to independent international and regional human rights
monitors, in particular the Office of the United Nations
High Commissioner for Human Rights. In this regard,
we welcome the recent adoption of Human Rights
Council resolution 37/40, entitled “Cooperation with
Georgia”, and express our strong support for the yearly
draft resolution on the status of internally displaced
persons and refugees from Abkhazia, Georgia, and the
18-17995

12/06/2018

Tskhinvali region/South Ossetia, Georgia, which we
are discussing today (A/72/L.55).
Ukraine strongly condemns the recent decision of
the Syrian Arab Republic to recognize and establish
diplomatic relations with the occupied territories
of Georgia — Abkhazia and the Tskhinvali region/
South Ossetia. Syria’s decision is yet another breach
of the norms and principles of international law by the
Al-Assad regime and clearly demonstrates the eagerness
of the current Syrian authorities to please the Kremlin.
In this respect, I reiterate Ukraine’s unwavering support
for the sovereignty and territorial integrity of Georgia
within its internationally recognized borders.
Once again, Ukraine strongly condemns all actions
taken by the Russian Federation against basic human
rights and freedoms, in particular those of internally
displaced persons and refugees, in violation of the
relevant obligations set forth under international law.
I urge the Russian occupying authorities to stop their
illegal practices and respect the obligations that are
incumbent on Russia as aan occupying Power, in
accordance with international humanitarian law.
Ukraine will support the adoption of draft
resolution A/72/L.55 and calls on other delegations to
vote in favour of this important text.
The President: We shall now consider draft
resolution A/72/L.55.
Before giving the floor for explanations of vote
before the voting, I would like to remind delegations
that explanations of vote are limited to 10 minutes and
should be made by delegations from their seats.
Mr. Grant (Canada) (spoke in French): Canada
is pleased once again to support draft resolution
A/72/L.55, entitled “Status of internally displaced
persons and refugees from Abkhazia, Georgia, and the
Tskhinvali region/South Ossetia, Georgia”. Canada
fully supports the sovereignty, independence and
territorial integrity of Georgia within its internationally
recognized borders. Russia’s occupation of these
regions is a flagrant violation of international law and
poses a threat to the sovereignty and territorial integrity
of Georgia.
Canada calls on Russia to respect its obligations
under the 12 August 2008 ceasefire agreement and
the 8 September 2008 implementation agreement. We
also firmly condemn the Syrian regime’s recognition
of Abkhazia and the Tskhinvali region/South Ossetia,

A/72/PV.95

which are regions occupied by Russia in Georgia,
as it flouts the international rules-based order and
jeopardizes the chance for a peaceful settlement to
the conflict.
(spoke in English)
Canada notes Georgia’s recently announced peace
initiative, “A Step to a Better Future”. The initiative’s
proposals, particularly in terms of facilitating trade,
education and people-to-people ties, demonstrate
a constructive approach that can benefit people in
Abkhazia, South Ossetia and the rest of Georgia.
We look forward to the positive contribution the
initiative will make to the lives of the people living in
these regions.
Canada is deeply concerned about the plight of the
more than 40 million people worldwide, including the
hundreds of thousands in Abkhazia and the Tskhinvali
region/South Ossetia, who remain internally displaced
due to conflict and circumstances beyond their control.
The correlation between the rises in displacement
and in the number of violent conflicts around the
world calls for long-term international engagement to
respond to the needs of the forcibly displaced, seek
durable solutions and better address the root causes of
forced displacement. In this context, we welcome the
increased attention being paid to responses to internal
displacement in the light of the twentieth anniversary
of the Guiding Principles on Internal Displacement and
encourage further dialogue on this issue.
Today’s draft resolution serves to remind the
international community of the serious humanitarian
situation in the occupied regions of Georgia and the
pressing issue of protracted displacement worldwide.
Canada calls on Member States to join in sustained
efforts to alleviate the suffering of all people affected
by conflict and unite to intensify efforts to establish
sustainable peace. Supporting the draft resolution will
be a valuable step towards achieving that goal.
Mr. Kuzmin (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): For yet another consecutive year, the General
Assembly has before it the draft resolution under
consideration today (A/72/L.55). Its authors continually
state that the motive for the initiative is concern for the
needs of those who have lost their homes and means of
survival as a result of armed conflict, having been forced
to leave their area of permanent residence. However,
today’s draft resolution, like its predecessors, has simply
been politicized. The authors of the draft resolution are

18-179955/19

A/72/PV.95

not interested in the real needs and concerns of the
populations in Abkhazia and South Ossetia. Tbilisi is
attempting to achieve its own political goals by using
the humanitarian issue and speculating on the fate of
various peoples — Georgians, Abkhazians, Ossetians
and representatives of other nationalities who suffered
under the nationalist and aggressive policies of past
authorities in Georgia, including in 2008.
Instead of direct substantive dialogue with Sukhumi
and Tskhinvali in Geneva, Tbilisi continues the practice
of defaming its opponents in international forums where
Abkhazia and South Ossetia are not represented. So far
Tbilisi has refused to sign an agreement with Sukhumi
and Tskhinvali on the non-use of force. We therefore
cannot see Georgia’s calls for peace and trust as sincere.
The actions of the Georgian authorities exacerbate
the situation in the region, delaying a solution to the
real problem of refugees and undermining the trust
among parties. Today we should be discussing peaceful
coexistence in the region, taking into account today’s
geopolitical reality. It is time for Georgia to opt for a
constructive discussion of humanitarian issues rather
than groundless, senseless attacks on Sukhumi and
Tskhinvali in international forums.
The draft resolution before the General Assembly
is not objective and is based on the narrow political
interests of a single party to the conflict. It does not
enable us to normalize the situation in the region, nor
will it lead to the establishment of contact or help to
build neighbourly relations between Abkhazia and
South Ossetia and Georgia, which is a key component
of solving the refugee problem that many have
mentioned today.
With that in mind, the delegation of the Russian
Federation calls for a vote against draft resolution
A/72/L.55 and will itself vote against it. We call on
other delegations that do not wish to see the work
of the General Assembly politicized not to support
that initiative.
Mr. Allen (United Kingdom): The United Kingdom
fully supports draft resolution A/72/L.55, which is
before us today. It reaffirms the inalienable right of
internally displaced persons (IDPs) and refugees to
return to their homes in a safe and dignified manner,
regardless of their ethnic origin. This is a humanitarian
and human rights issue and should not be linked to
wider political processes.
6/19

12/06/2018

There are more than 250,000 registered internally
displaced persons in Georgia. Many live in difficult and
vulnerable conditions. It is important that the General
Assembly send a message that it has not forgotten those
people and that it will continue to call for their return
home. Indeed, it is perhaps more important to do so
with every year that passes. The United Kingdom will
therefore vote in favour of today’s draft resolution. We
encourage everyone else here to do the same.
More broadly, the United Kingdom welcomes the
Government of Georgia’s work to help improve the
situation of IDPs and is pleased with the regular reports
by both the Government of Georgia and the Georgian
Ombudsman documenting the human rights situation in
Abkhazia and South Ossetia. It is important that national
and international legislation is effectively implemented
to aid efforts to help and protect the lives of IDPs. We
call on the Russian Federation to stop the continued
borderization activities on the administrative boundary
lines with Abkhazia and South Ossetia, which are a
direct impediment to the return of Georgian IDPs to
their homes. We hope that all sides will use the Geneva
International Discussions as the forum to discuss and
make progress on humanitarian issues.
The President: The Assembly will now take a
decision on draft resolution A/72/L.55, entitled “Status
of internally displaced persons and refugees from
Abkhazia, Georgia, and the Tskhinvali region/South
Ossetia, Georgia”.
A recorded vote was taken.
In favour:
Albania, Andorra, Antigua and Barbuda,
Australia, Austria, Azerbaijan, Bahamas, Belgium,
Belize, Bulgaria, Canada, Costa Rica, Croatia,
Czech Republic, Denmark, Djibouti, Dominican
Republic, Estonia, Eswatini, Finland, France,
Gambia, Georgia, Germany, Greece, Guatemala,
Guyana, Haiti, Honduras, Hungary, Iceland,
Ireland, Italy, Jamaica, Japan, Kiribati, Latvia,
Liberia, Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg,
Malawi, Malta, Marshall Islands, Mexico,
Micronesia (Federated States of), Monaco,
Montenegro, Netherlands, New Zealand, Norway,
Papua New Guinea, Poland, Portugal, Republic of
Moldova, Romania, Saint Kitts and Nevis, Saint
Lucia, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, Samoa,
San Marino, Sao Tome and Principe, Saudi Arabia,
Sierra Leone, Slovakia, Slovenia, Solomon Islands,
18-17995

12/06/2018

Spain, Sweden, the former Yugoslav Republic of
Macedonia, Togo, Tonga, Trinidad and Tobago,
Turkey, Tuvalu, Ukraine, United Kingdom of Great
Britain and Northern Ireland, United States of
America, Uruguay, Vanuatu, Yemen
Against:
Armenia, Belarus, Burundi, Cuba, Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea, Lao People’s
Democratic Republic, Myanmar, Nauru, Nicaragua,
Philippines, Russian Federation, South Sudan,
Sudan, Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of), Viet
Nam, Zimbabwe
Abstaining:
Algeria,
Argentina,
Bahrain,
Bangladesh,
Barbados, Benin, Bhutan, Bolivia (Plurinational
State of), Bosnia and Herzegovina, Brazil, Brunei
Darussalam, Burkina Faso, Cabo Verde, Central
African Republic, Chile, China, Colombia, Côte
d’Ivoire, Cyprus, Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador,
Fiji, Guinea-Bissau, India, Indonesia, Iran (Islamic
Republic of), Iraq, Israel, Kazakhstan, Kenya,
Kyrgyzstan, Lebanon, Lesotho, Madagascar,
Malaysia, Mongolia, Morocco, Namibia, Nepal,
Nigeria, Oman, Pakistan, Panama, Paraguay, Peru,
Qatar, Republic of Korea, Rwanda, Senegal, Serbia,
Singapore, Sri Lanka, Suriname, Switzerland,
Thailand, Tunisia, Uganda, United Arab Emirates,
United Republic of Tanzania, Uzbekistan, Zambia
Draft resolution A/72/L.55 was adopted by 81 votes
to 16, with 62 abstentions (resolution 72/280).
[Subsequently, the delegation of the Syrian Arab
Republic informed the Secretariat that it had
intended to vote against.]
The President: Before giving the floor to speakers
in explanation of vote, I would like to remind delegations
that explanations of vote are limited to 10 minutes and
should be made by delegations from their seats.
Ms. Shilo (Israel): Israel welcomes the steps taken
by the Government of Georgia to improve the livelihood
and socioeconomic status of internally displaced
persons. Israel is encouraged by the constructive
discussions in the context of Working Group II of
the Geneva International Discussions, which led to
concrete activities on humanitarian issues, including
those related to environmental protection. We also
welcome Georgia’s programme of engagement through

A/72/PV.95

cooperation, which aims to build trust and confidence
among the divided communities.
Israel supports the spirit of reconciliation through
direct dialogue promoted by the Georgian Government
and would like to take this opportunity to reiterate
its support and recognition of Georgia’s territorial
integrity. We reiterate our well-established position that
the way to resolve long-standing conflicts is through
a negotiated, mutually agreed approach, not unilateral
action.
Mr. De Souza Monteiro (Brazil): Over the years,
Brazil has consistently abstained in the voting on draft
resolutions concerning internally displaced persons
and refugees from Abkhazia and South Ossetia, as
we believe such votes may prejudge or influence the
consideration of sensitive issues that should be resolved
by the relevant negotiations in Geneva.
Brazil recognizes Georgia’s territorial integrity
and hopes that its dispute with the Russian Federation
can be resolved as soon as possible, peacefully and
through dialogue. We urge all the actors involved to
seek lasting solutions to the situation of internally
displaced persons and refugees with a view to creating
political conditions that can enable their safe return and
dispel fears of a relapse into conflict. We call on all
the parties concerned to pursue further cooperation and
adopt confidence-building measures, including in the
framework of the Geneva process.
The President: We have heard the last speaker in
explanation of vote. The General Assembly has thus
concluded this stage of its consideration of agenda
item 35.
Agenda item 10 (continued)
Implementation of the Declaration of Commitment
on HIV/AIDS and the political declarations on HIV/
AIDS
The President: We will now hear the remaining
speakers in the debate on this agenda item.
Mr. Akhinzhanov (Kazakhstan): At the outset, I
would also like to thank the Secretary-General for his
comprehensive report (A/72/815).
Today’s meeting is another important opportunity
to discuss the implementation of our shared
commitments that will shape our course of action to end
the HIV epidemic, which is far from being eradicated

18-179957/19

A/72/PV.95

and continues to affect many Member States, people,
economies and the very fabric of society. That is why,
in 2016, the General Assembly endorsed the Political
Declaration on HIV and AIDS: On the Fast Track to
Accelerating the Fight against HIV and Ending the
AIDS Epidemic by 2030 (resolution 70/266), including
the 90-90-90 treatment target by 2020. Kazakhstan is
fully committed to that objective through its numerous
national programmes and services, which I am pleased
to briefly present. The full version of our national
statement will be posted online.
Kazakhstan applies a cross-dimensional approach
in its national plans for fighting the spread of HIV.
Up until now, more than 81 per cent of the funding
for HIV/AIDS in the country has been provided
by the Government of Kazakhstan. At the same
time, we cooperate closely with non-governmental
organizations, as they represent every stratum of
society, especially the most vulnerable. We have
significantly reduced the cost of drugs, including by
purchasing them through internationally recognized
mechanisms, and we sincerely thank the Joint United
Nations Programme on HIV/AIDS (UNAIDS) and
UNICEF for their continued support.
Under the 90-90-90 target, Kazakhstan provides
universal access to testing for HIV. We have also joined
the UNAIDS global initiative on accelerating action in
large cities. Every year, more than 2 million people are
tested for HIV free of charge, and more than 80 per
cent of people living with HIV know their status. In
accordance with the recommendations of the World
Health Organization, Kazakhstan has introduced a
test-and-treat strategy. We have seen considerable
improvement in the quality of life of people with HIV.
The AIDS death rate declined from 16.1 per cent in
2010 to 10.6 per cent in 2017. One of the key focus
areas is preventing mother-to-child transmission of the
virus, which has resulted in a significant reduction of
perinatal transmission, from 8.4 per cent to 1.9 per cent.
In addition, this year we set three ambitious goals,
which are to ensure that more than 80 per cent of
people with HIV know their status, that 70 per cent
are receiving treatment and that 70 per cent of those
treatments are effective. We also guarantee all citizens,
without exception, access to quality medical services.
Kazakhstan adheres to the principles of medical ethics
whereby every effort is made to prevent stigmatization
and discrimination. Similarly, foreigners with HIV/
AIDS are not barred from entering and staying in
8/19

12/06/2018

Kazakhstan and have the right to receive medical
assistance under our mandatory social health-insurance
scheme. Thanks to these proactive and remedial
measures by our Government, the World Economic
Forum has classified Kazakhstan in the group of
countries with a low incidence rate in the 15-to-49 age
group, which in our case is only 0.2 per cent.
In conclusion, I would like to reiterate that
Kazakhstan is committed to achieving the set targets.
Upholding and maintaining them in coming years is
extremely important for the total elimination of the
epidemic. Along with country-specific and global
visions, we should adopt a regional approach, as the
HIV epidemic does not recognize borders. The most
practical way to end it is therefore to ensure that
neighbouring countries formulate and implement
mutually reinforcing policies. In that context, we cannot
underestimate the importance of the coordinating role
of the United Nations on the ground, which calls for
the one-United Nations approach to be applied at the
regional level as well. The strategy can be shown to
have yielded results once we know that no one has been
left behind and as long as all stakeholders — the public
health-care system, people living with HIV, community
activists, international organizations, scientists,
experts, politicians, business people and others — work
together with determination.
Mr. Rybakov (Belarus) (spoke in Russian): Belarus
greatly appreciates the support of the United Nations
and the Joint United Nations Programme on HIV/AIDS
(UNAIDS) for our national efforts to prevent and treat
HIV/AIDS. Our vision of the fight against this scourge
is clear and outlined in our State programme documents.
First of all, that means preventing the spread of the
virus. Belarus has been able to contain the epidemic.
Our HIV rate is 25 people per 100,000, one of the
lowest in the world. HIV infection is primarily linked
to issues such as lifestyle and drugs. The consequences
of HIV infection affect specific groups and families,
and are worst of all when entirely innocent children
are infected. Dealing with preventing HIV therefore
demands the attention not just of health-care
professionals but of all of society. Needless to say, a
healthy lifestyle and a reduction of the risk factors are
key to success. The Government of Belarus is focused
on coordinating action between our State entities in
the areas of education, social protection, medicine and
law enforcement. We are actively involving non-State
18-17995

12/06/2018

partners in this work, including social and religious
organizations.
Secondly, we see our job as one of ensuring that
people in Belarus suffering from the disease — who,
according to data from our Ministry of Health, number
some 15,000 people, less than 0.2 per cent of the whole
population — receive the treatment and social support
they need so that they can live longer, support their
children and contribute to the country’s development.
Most important of all for us is caring for children,
an area in which Belarus has achieved a great deal.
For example, in 2016, the World Health Organization
(WHO) certified that we had succeeded in preventing
any case of HIV transmission from infected mothers
to their children. That is no longer a major concern
for us and our health care and society are now focused
on preventing even the slightest risk of children being
infected by HIV. We are grateful to UNAIDS for the
benefit of its progressive international experience in all
these areas. We are interested in cooperating actively
with UNAIDS not only in multilateral forums as well
as bilaterally.
In November 2016, with the support of UNAIDS
and the WHO, we held a regional meeting in Minsk
on countering HIV/AIDS and tuberculosis in which
12 countries of the regional countries participated,
as well as international and public organizations, and
we intend to continue our cooperation in that area.
The participation in such events of a wide range of
States experiencing similar problems relating to the
prevention and treatment of HIV/AIDS has promise and
will be useful for us all. We also very much appreciate
the help of UNAIDS in raising funds from international
donors, particularly for the Global Fund to Fight AIDS,
Tuberculosis and Malaria, and we are considering
further constructive cooperation in that area. Belarus
is committed to implementing the Political Declaration
on HIV and AIDS and the UNAIDS 90-90-90 strategy
adopted in New York in 2016. The guiding principles
of response measures to the HIV epidemic have been
integrated into Belarus’s national programme for
HIV prevention.
Our country has rolled out self-testing for HIV and
began selling HIV tests in pharmacies last year. We are
working on establishing a sustainable national system
for combating HIV/AIDS. Over the past 10 years, we
have more than tripled State spending in this area. The
relevant State programme for the period from 2016 to
2020 specifies that more than 70 per cent of funds for

A/72/PV.95

combating HIV should come from internal sources,
both State and local budgets. By reducing the price of
antiretroviral drugs, the volume of State financing for
antiretroviral therapy in 2018 was almost tripled by
comparison to 2016. In December 2017, the Ministry
of Health of Belarus enacted a decree that significantly
expanded the possibilities for citizens living with HIV
to adopt or foster children, a big step forward that
was made possible by the fact that the comprehensive
treatment available in our country has helped to reduce
the viral load to a level that humans are no longer
spreading it.
On 1 March, Zero Discrimination Day, as part of
our national action plan for human rights, our Ministries
for Foreign Affairs and Health, together with UNAIDS,
organized a major event for a partnership geared to
promoting safe and effective HIV/AIDS support. The
participants included members of Parliament and
representatives of State bodies, the diplomatic corps
and international and non-governmental organizations.
The main goal was to draw attention to the problems of
people with HIV and AIDS both in terms of medical
treatment and of overcoming stereotyped attitudes to
these people and preventing discrimination against
them. Belarus is committed to scaling up and ensuring
the sustainability of harm reduction programmes, and
is ready to share its national experience in overcoming
the HIV epidemic.
In conclusion, I would like to assure the Assembly
that the leadership of the United Nations and UNAIDS
can continue to count on Belarus as a reliable partner in
this area both regionally and internationally.
Ms. Mōnōko (Lesotho): I have the honour to
deliver this statement on behalf of the Government of
the Kingdom of Lesotho. I would like to align myself
with the statements delivered by the representatives
of Kenya, on behalf of the Group of African States,
and Tanzania, on behalf of the Southern African
Development Community (see A/72/PV.94).
We note with concern that Lesotho has the world’s
highest incidence of HIV and the second highest
prevalence of the disease, with more than 330,000
people living with HIV and more than 13,000 new
adult infections annually, according to a nationwide
cross-sectional household survey conducted from
2016 to 2017 by the Lesotho Population-Based HIV
Impact Assessment.

18-179959/19

A/72/PV.95

I should point out that Lesotho has made
tremendous strides in its response to AIDS and the
steps it has taken to strengthen the integration of HIV
with other health services, including those dealing
with tuberculosis, cervical cancer, non-communicable
diseases, sexual and reproductive health and maternal
and child health, with a success rate of 67 per cent of
people living with HIV having access to life-saving
medicines. We have also put strategies in place to scale
up access to HIV prevention and treatment services
and to reduce discrimination against infected people.
In 2016, Lesotho adopted a test-and-treatment strategy
that has resulted in a rapid increase in HIV testing and
enrolment in antiretroviral therapy. The Government
has also prioritized universal health coverage, with a
focus on reaching 50 disadvantaged and underserved
communities with comprehensive services.
At the same time, our new national HIV strategic
plan is fully aligned with the fast-track commitments
and the vision set out in the General Assembly’s 2016
Political Declaration on HIV and AIDS, and we expect
to launch it in August. The new plan aims to accelerate
the national response so as to reduce new infections and
mortality, while engaging all stakeholders in a more
coordinated and better financed manner.
Our Ministry of Health has also developed a
strategic plan for ensuring the integration of various
programmes, as well as progressive policies and
innovative approaches, in response to gaps identified
in our HIV Impact Assessment. To that end, we have
developed an acceleration plan with targeted testing
strategies and phased geographical expansion to highvolume sites in all districts, in order to achieve 90 per
cent treatment coverage for all age groups, sexes and
subgroups by 2020. In addition, our rapid scaling up
of infrastructure and capacity for viral load testing has
increased their volume from 11,000 to 251,000 tests
per year.
Last but not least, the Ministry of Education and
Training has rolled out a comprehensive sex education
curriculum in primary schools and the lower grades of
secondary schools. Significant progress has also been
made not only in terms of achieving the fast-track targets
through our adoption of a people-centred response,
but also in terms of the 90-90-90 treatment targets, as
Lesotho has made significant progress to reach a level
of 77-90-88, indicating a high level of coverage related
to services. According to these findings, we believe
10/19

12/06/2018

that the country is on track to achieve the 90-90-90
targets by 2020.
The antiretroviral therapy coverage in the country
is 67 per cent, up from 35 per cent in 2014, while the
population-level viral-load suppression rate is 67.6 per
cent. Moreover, a differentiated combination prevention
approach, which includes essential service packages,
has been developed for each priority-population group.
Several game-changing innovative interventions and
delivery models have also been adopted and adapted to
increase access to HIV services.
The male corners and adolescent centres
established in mid-2017 to reach men and young
people, respectively, are showing high uptake and good
results. These facilities offer integrated, client-oriented
and friendly services, including cancer screenings,
in a one-stop setting. The services offered are by
young people for young people and men for men, with
remarkable results, including high acceptance, high
enrolment and improved adherence. Attendance at the
clinics increased from 300 to 400 people per month in
2017 to 1,300 to 1,500 people per month this year.
These achievements have been possible only
because of the strong support and partnership with
our partners, such as the United States President’s
Emergency Plan for AIDS Relief (PEPFAR), the Joint
United Nations Programme on HIV/AIDS (UNAIDS)
and the Global Fund to Fight AIDS, Tuberculosis and
Malaria, among others. We acknowledge with gratitude
the recent technical support provided by UNAIDS in
the establishment of the HIV and health situation room,
which will enhance accountability and transparency.
We are also grateful for the generosity and high
investment of the United States Government through
funding and technical support received from PEPFAR.
Despite the commendable progress, Lesotho is
continuing to face challenges. For example, adolescent
girls and young women remain highly vulnerable,
with high rates of new infections. To this end, there
remains a need to intensify efforts to put in place
tailored HIV and sexual and reproductive health-rights
services, addressing risk and vulnerability, including
underlying causes.
In conclusion, the Government of the Kingdom
of Lesotho stands committed to the 2030 Agenda for
Sustainable Development, including the resolve to fasttrack efforts to end the AIDS epidemic by 2030. We
will endeavour to continue to search for solutions to
18-17995

12/06/2018

these challenges in partnership with our development
partners so as to ensure that no one is left behind.
Mr. Dzonzi (Malawi): I would like to join those
Member States that expressed concern this morning
about the low attendance in this meeting of the General
Assembly on the subject of HIV/AIDS. I hope that it
does not signify an attitude that says “This is your
problem, not ours”, because that is what got us here in
the first place.
At the outset, I would like to align Malawi’s
statement with those delivered by the representatives
of Kenya and Tanzania on behalf of the Group of
African States and the Southern African Development
Community (SADC), respectively (see A/72/PV.94).
It is indeed a great honour and privilege to be here
today to share with the General Assembly Malawi’s
successes and challenges in the implementation of
the 2016 Declaration of Commitment on HIV/AIDS.
Malawi is one of the countries with the highest HIV
burden globally. It is estimated that 1.1 million of
our 17 million people live with HIV/AIDS. In 2015,
the country aligned its national HIV/AIDS strategic
plan to the ambitious 90-90-90 targets of the Joint
United Nations Programme on HIV/AIDS (UNAIDS)
as a critical step towards ending AIDS as a public
health threat by the year 2030. Emboldened by the
2016 Declaration of Commitment, the people and
the Government of Malawi have taken a number of
significant steps to accelerate the achievement of the
90-90-90 targets and have progressively achieved an
88-84-86 score as of May 2018.
Over the past two years, the national HIV/AIDS
response has made significant progress. Recognizing
the challenges of reaching the first 90, the Government
of Malawi has introduced a new policy on HIV selftesting and voluntary assisted-partner notification,
while at the same time increasing targeted HIV testing
for key and vulnerable populations. With the support
of the United States President’s Emergency Plan for
AIDS Relief (PEPFAR), we have established a special
cadre of health-care workers to undertake HIV testing
as we try to increase our understanding of who is
infected. Consequently, a total of 7,224,892 HIV tests
were conducted in 2016 and 2017 alone, of which
286,854, or 4 per cent, were positive. Similarly, with the
introduction of the test-and-start HIV treatment policy,
we now have more than 750,000 people diagnosed with
HIV, of whom 70 per cent are virally suppressed. We

A/72/PV.95

believe that as we roll out the dolutegravir treatment
regimen, many more people on antiretroviral treatment
will achieve viral suppression to undetectable levels,
marking a major milestone in how we deal with HIV
in Malawi.
The legal and policy environment is critical for an
effective human rights-based national AIDS response.
The Government recently enacted a new national HIV/
AIDS prevention and management law, which seeks to
guarantee HIV prevention and treatment services for
all people in Malawi in an environment free of stigma
and discrimination. I would like to express my gratitude
to the UNAIDS Executive Director for his personal
engagement in this process, ensuring that the new law
is consistent with international human rights standards
and the SADC HIV/AIDS model law.
Additionally, in October 2017 Malawi launched
a new national condom strategy and guidance for
sexually transmitted diseases. We have also revised
our national HIV prevention strategy in line with the
Global HIV Prevention Coalition road map and targets,
and are now looking to establish an operational plan to
direct prevention activity in the context of the strategy.
Finally, we have also developed a new national
strategy for adolescent girls and young women
across the Government to reduce women’s and girls’
vulnerability to HIV infection, gender inequalities,
gender-based violence and harmful cultural practices.
It is my firm belief that based on those achievements,
Malawi is on track to achieving the 90-90-90 fast-track
targets and the 2016 Declaration of Commitment.
Mr. Salarzai (Afghanistan), Vice-President, took
the Chair.
While we celebrate those successes, it is important
to note that many challenges still remain in our collective
drive to end AIDS as a public health threat both in
Malawi and many other sub-Saharan African countries.
As clearly indicated in the blind spot report launched
by UNAIDS last year, access to and utilization of HIV
testing and treatment services among boys and men
are disproportionately low. Stigma and discrimination
against key and vulnerable population groups remain
pervasive in many communities.
Furthermore, the dwindling and unpredictable
financial resources for HIV and AIDS, coupled with
shrinking civil-society engagement, have resulted in
limited investments in communication for social and

18-1799511/19

A/72/PV.95

behaviour change, which will be critical to achieving
a 75 per cent reduction in new HIV infections by 2020,
as stipulated in the 2016 Declaration of Commitment.
Ensuring that we can actually reach the last mile of
undetected patients is going to take new thinking, and
not just more of the same.
While recognizing the immense contribution of the
Global Fund to Fight AIDS, Tuberculosis and Malaria,
PEPFAR and the United Nations system to the national
AIDS response, more investment and efforts are
needed to strengthen data generation and knowledge
management
for
non-biomedical
interventions.
Addressing those challenges will greatly accelerate
Malawi’s efforts to achieve the fast-track 90-90-90
targets and the 2016 Declaration of Commitment.
Political declarations on HIV and AIDS have
yielded great results in the past. The 2016 Declaration
is arguably one of the boldest yet most achievable
commitments made by the international community.
In the spirit of global solidarity, shared responsibility
and accountability, we must forge ahead with renewed
commitment and determination to end HIV and AIDS
as a public health threat by 2030. The time to act is now.
Mr. Louis (Haiti) (spoke in French): At the outset,
my delegation would like to commend the SecretaryGeneral for his complete and exhaustive report
(A/72/815), rightly entitled “Leveraging the AIDS
response for United Nations reform and global health”.
The Haitian delegation also welcomes the commendable
initiative shown by the General Assembly, which, true
to its mandate, has organized this plenary meeting to
consider the Secretary-General’s report in the light
of the mechanisms put in place to implement the
Declaration of Commitments on HIV/AIDS and the
related political declarations.
At the midpoint of the period to meet the
commitments made by the General Assembly in 2016 in
the context of the strategy to accelerate the response, we
have certainly noted significant progress in collective
and individual efforts to end the AIDS epidemic by
2030. However, despite the progress made, the disease
is still present and constitutes a major concern for all
Member States, including the potential to eliminate
mother-to-child transmission of HIV and the adoption
of a combined approach to HIV prevention that respects
and protects the rights of the most vulnerable people, as
well as dealing with the related stigma, discrimination,
gender inequality, poverty, food insecurity and other
12/19

12/06/2018

social and economic inequalities. To address such
concerns effectively, we need to take concrete steps to
make immediate use of the new HIV/AIDS screening
techniques and treatment combinations developed so
far, especially for the most vulnerable countries.
My delegation believes that we should make the
following observations at the national level. Like
many countries, Haiti is plagued by a widespread HIV
epidemic, with enormous repercussions for the economy,
institutions, families and individuals that leave no sector
or social stratum untouched. Nevertheless, according
to the latest demographic health survey in 2017, Haiti
was able to reduce its sero-prevalence rate among the
general population aged between 15 and 49 years old
from 2.2 per cent to 2 per cent. The number of people
living with HIV is currently estimated at 147,154.
The fight against the HIV epidemic is an ongoing
priority for the Government of the Republic of Haiti,
and that is why the Government and its development and
civil society partners have made a strong commitment
to the implementation of the 2016 Political Declaration.
In that regard, some progress has been made since
the high-level meeting in June 2016, including the
formulation of a multisectoral national strategic
plan for the period from 2018 to 2023; the adoption
and immediate implementation of the test-and-treat
strategy, which has facilitated access to treatment; to
date, 86 per cent of HIV-positive people know their
status, which is the first 90 target; 108,000 people tested
positive have been placed on antiretroviral treatment,
which represents 85 per cent of the second 90 target;
and 65 per cent of people in treatment already have an
undetectable viral load.
We also note the adoption of several policy and
strategy documents, among other things, to facilitate
the implementation of interventions for people at risk,
task delegation and a community strategy through
multipurpose community health workers. In addition,
the Haitian Government has undertaken to eliminate
mother-to-child transmission by 2020. More than 80 per
cent of all pregnant women have been tested for HIV,
and of those identified as HIV positive, 90 per cent are
receiving antiretroviral treatment.
I would also like to note that my Government is
committed to reducing the number of new infections
and, as a result, has prioritized prevention and
treatment, particularly for sex workers, adolescents,
18-17995

12/06/2018

young women and girls, while we continue to accelerate
the implementation of our test and treat programme.
We are also facing major challenges, including
in areas such as the capacity to mobilize adequate
domestic resources; better coordination to avoid
duplication of donor support; private-sector support
for increased national investment and sustainability;
the implementation of concrete, measurable and
effective policies and actions to address HIV/
AIDS-related discrimination, especially against
key and vulnerable populations; and pediatric
HIV treatment, patient adherence to treatment
regimes, management and so on.
In conclusion, my delegation welcomes the five
recommendations in the Secretary-General’s report,
which present information on diagnosing, preventing
and treating the AIDS epidemic appropriately. The
Haitian delegation fully supports the recommendations
and hopes that they will not be in vain, but that they will
be followed by concrete actions aimed at effectively
implementing the 10 commitments in the 2016
Declaration on HIV/AIDS, with a view to accelerating
an effective global response to the fight against HIV/
AIDS and achieving our shared objective of putting an
end to the disease by 2030.
In order to adequately address those challenges, the
Government of Haiti renews its strong commitment and
determination to meet the 2020 targets and put an end to
AIDS as a public health threat by 2030. To that end, the
Haitian Government, with its national and international
partners, recently adopted the 95-95-95 targets by 2020
in order to achieve the 2030 targets earlier.
Finally, in an effort to accelerate HIV prevention
with a view to reducing new infections by 75 per cent,
Haiti has committed to joining the coalition of countries
committed to implementing the HIV prevention road
map for 2020. The road map is focused on countries with
a high number of new infections among adolescents and
young adults.
Ms. Bakuramutsa (Rwanda): At the outset, I
would like to express my delegation’s appreciation
for the convening of this meeting two years after the
adoption of the Declaration of Commitment on HIV/
AIDS and the political declarations on HIV/AIDS. We
would also like to thank the Secretary-General for his
report, entitled “Leveraging the AIDS response for
United Nations reform and global health” (A/72/815).

A/72/PV.95

Rwanda aligns itself with the statement delivered
by the representative of Kenya on behalf of the Group
of African States (see A/72/PV.94).
At the halfway point of the fast-track phase of the
AIDS response, it is commendable that progress has
been recorded globally with regard to the commitments
made in the 2016 political declarations. That said, the
challenges to global responses to the AIDS epidemic
remain significant and persistent, hindering efforts to
achieve our ultimate goal, and continue to demand that
the international community work relentlessly to find
global solutions to our global challenges.
HIV prevalence in Rwanda has remained stable at
3 per cent in the adult population for the past decade,
with an HIV incidence of 1.28/1000 people. Rwanda
is on track to achieve the 90-90-90 treatment targets
of the Joint United Nations Programme on HIV/AIDS
(UNAIDS) by 2020 and is gearing up to meet the targets
for the 95-95-95 fast-track strategy to end the AIDS
epidemic by 2030. Eighty-eight per cent of the people
living with HIV have been tested and know their status,
in line with the ambitious target of having 90 per cent
of all people living with HIV knowing their HIV status.
In accordance with the World Health Organization
recommendations, Rwanda has adopted various
strategies that have contributed to achievements related
to HIV/AIDS patients receiving antiretroviral treatment.
These strategies include the treat-all strategy, aimed
at providing antiretroviral treatment for all who test
positive for HIV, and the differentiated service-delivery
model, aimed at decreasing the frequency of patient
clinical visits to health facilities, synchronizing
services offered to our clients and reducing the burden
for health-care providers.
Ensuring a healthy population is a top priority for
Rwanda that goes hand in hand with implementing
Sustainable Development Goal 3 of the 2030 Agenda
for Sustainable Development and specifically, in this
context, target 3.3.
We
welcome
the
Secretary-General’s
recommendation that efforts to end tuberculosis and
other co-infections and co-morbidities should be
accelerated by scaling up integrated, people-centred
tuberculosis and HIV services through collaborative
activities, as well as improving primary healthcare access, which will accelerate disease-specific
responses. In that regard, Rwanda has enrolled more
than 90 per cent of its citizens in health insurance

18-1799513/19

A/72/PV.95

through its universal health-coverage policy. Through
a combination of community-based health insurance,
community health workers and dedicated local and
global partners, Rwandan citizens have been able to
access primary health services in greater numbers than
before owing to the affordability of care and drugs.
Access to health care has enabled Rwanda to register
91 per cent of patients on antiretroviral treatment to
suppress their viral load. Various strategies have been
put in place with that goal in mind and will continue
to help to increase viral suppression, such as enhanced
adherence support for patients enrolled in HIV services,
both at health facilities and in communities through
peer education, and guideline updates with a focus on
regimens with fewer side effects.
In addition to access to health care, a gender
approach is clearly needed to address gender disparities
with regard to HIV/AIDS. Consequently, mainstreaming
gender equity as a cross-cutting area remains a priority
goal for Rwanda.
In conclusion, Rwanda believes that collective
work towards the following four key challenges will
support the continued progress in the fight against HIV
and in ending the AIDS epidemic: first, addressing the
financial gaps identified, so as to ensure implementation;
secondly, developing and implementing cost-effective
and sustainable service delivery models; thirdly,
improving supply-chain management; and fourthly,
making greater use of data-driven approaches to
identifying new infections.
Rwanda is grateful to UNAIDS, the United States
President’s Emergency Plan for AIDS Relief and the
Global Fund to Fight AIDS, Tuberculosis and Malaria,
among other partners, for their continued partnerships
and collaboration, and remains committed to global
efforts to end the AIDS epidemic.
Mr. Kafle (Nepal): Let me begin by thanking the
President for convening this important meeting. I also
thank the Secretary-General for his comprehensive
report (A/72/815).
I would like to share the important steps that Nepal
has taken to scale up, intensify, innovate and speed
up services to prevent and treat HIV, and to eliminate
discrimination, improve the integration of HIV with
other health services and align our efforts with the
Sustainable Development Goals.
14/19

12/06/2018

Only six months after making its commitments
in the Assembly, Nepal developed and began
implementing Nepal HIVision 2020 as the country’s
fast-track national HIV strategic plan for the period
from 2016 to 2021. It is designed to fully achieve the
90-90-90 treatment targets by the year 2020. With those
plans, the Government of Nepal is in effect increasing
its domestic HIV investments by procuring 50 per cent
of the antiretroviral drugs required, and we will cover
100 per cent of the necessary life-saving antiretroviral
drugs starting in the next fiscal year. Our programme
focus has shifted primarily to preventing new infections,
in addition to case finding and management through
task-sharing between the Government and civil society,
with the Government working through outreach and
communities through inreach. In order to prevent the
vertical transmission of HIV and keep mothers healthy,
HIV testing services for pregnant women have been
scaled up throughout the country.
New HIV infections in Nepal declined by more
than 60 per cent in 2017 compared to 2010. Our goal is
to reduce new HIV infections by 75 per cent by 2020.
Today, 63 per cent of people thought to be living with
HIV know their HIV status, which is still far from the
goal of 90 per cent. With the implementation of the
community-led HIV screening, which began a few
weeks ago, the percentage of people aware of their
HIV status is expected to reach 90 per cent by 2020.
Following the implementation of Nepal’s testing and
treatment strategy, the number of people receiving
antiretroviral treatment has increased significantly.
Our goal of 90 per cent treatment coverage by 2020 is
within our reach. The strategy plan calls for systematic
and coordinated action from line ministries in addition
to the Ministry of Health. All the relevant line
ministries have their roles to play in preventing HIV.
They include reducing vulnerability, contributing to
care and support, protecting human rights, reducing
discrimination and integrating HIV into their respective
development agendas.
Nepal is also focusing on reducing inefficiencies by
integrating HIV services effectively with the country’s
health system and with programmes that work with
similar and overlapping populations in connection
with tuberculosis, sexual and reproductive health, and
maternal and child health in particular. Another priority
is investing more in improving the community system’s
capacity for identifying, reaching, recommending and
ensuring the continuum of care. We aim to achieve zero
18-17995

12/06/2018

tolerance for discrimination against people with HIV/
AIDS by 2030. We are halfway to fulfilling our 2020
fast-track commitments. Nepal is confident that we can
end the HIV epidemic as a threat to public health in our
country by 2020.
What we have achieved so far is the result of
the joint work of the Government, development
partners — particularly the Joint United Nations
Programme on HIV/AIDS and the Global Fund — the
private sector and specific community networks to
improve and sustain the country’s HIV response for
and with the people, who matter the most, while leaving
no one behind. Nepal appreciates such support and
cooperation, and looks forward to continuing its
partnership and working together with the international
community in that regard.
Ms. Khyne (Myanmar): At the outset, my
delegation thanks the President of the General Assembly
for convening this meeting to review progress in the
implementation of the Declaration of Commitment on
HIV and AIDS and its subsequent political declarations.
This meeting is very important and timely, as
it coincides with the halfway point of the 2020 fasttrack commitments made in 2016 to accelerate the
fight against HIV and to end the AIDS epidemic by
2030. My delegation also thanks the Secretary-General
for his report (A/72/815) and takes note of its five
recommendations, which are critical to achieving
our global HIV/AIDS response. The world is making
significant progress towards the goal of ending the
AIDS epidemic by 2030. More people living with HIV
are receiving access to treatment, and the number of
deaths has declined. However, the report also points out
that progress in reducing new infections is slow.
As an HIV-burdened country and one of the hardest
hit in South-East Asia, Myanmar is fully committed
to ending the AIDS epidemic by 2030. To address
the scourge of HIV/AIDS, we have placed the fight
against HIV at the top of our health-care agenda. HIV
is designated a priority disease in the current national
health plan for the period from 2017 to 2021. We have
also launched a national strategic plan on HIV/AIDS
for the period from 2016 to 2020, which provides a road
map on how to fast-track the national HIV response
and end the AIDS epidemic as a public health threat
by 2030.
We fully subscribe to the idea that strengthening
health systems, private-sector engagement and

A/72/PV.95

community mobilization is crucial to ensuring the
quality and coverage of the HIV service continuum.
Safeguarding human rights and promoting gender
equality with supportive legal and political frameworks
and zero tolerance for stigmatizing, discriminating
against or committing violence against people affected
by HIV and AIDS are also critical in that regard. In our
efforts to achieve the 90-90-90 treatment target, essential
HIV services have been made available throughout the
country, including prevention, integrated testing and
counselling, clinical care, antiretroviral therapy and a
safe blood supply. More than 117,000 people belonging
to key populations received HIV testing and were aware
of their HIV status in 2017, and approximately 70 per
cent of those living with HIV subsequently received
life-saving antiretroviral therapy.
With the goal of eliminating mother-to-child
transmission by 2025, we have launched programmes
for preventing mother-to-child transmission that have
made significant progress. The joint strategy linking
the two national programmes involving tuberculosis
and HIV has also been implemented. Integrated
tuberculosis and HIV services are now available in
all 330 townships in order to intensify case finding
and improve tuberculosis and HIV awareness and the
immediate initiation of treatment. Domestic funding
for the national HIV response has increased in recent
years. For the 2017-2018 fiscal year, $14 million has
been allocated to antiretroviral treatment, close to the
20 per cent co-financing level required by the Global
Fund. Despite the overall estimated decline in the HIV
epidemic at the national level, the trend is uneven among
our regions and states, and its prevalence remains high
among key populations in Myanmar.
Our global response is not complete, and AIDS
is not over. We require stronger and more dynamic
partnerships among Member States, the United Nations
system, civil society and the private sector, among
others, on the way forward. My delegation is of the
view that refinement and reinforcement of the Joint
United Nations Programme on HIV/AIDS will better
support the global AIDS response.
Lastly, my delegation reaffirms it strong
commitment to ending AIDS as a public-health threat
by 2030 and calls for the continued commitment and
support of international donors to achieve that goal,
which remains within sight.

18-1799515/19

A/72/PV.95

Mr. Bayyapu (India): As we reach the halfway mark in the implementation of the 2016 Political
Declaration on HIV and AIDS: On the Fast-Track to
Accelerating the Fight against HIV and to Ending the
AIDS Epidemic by 2030, it is imperative to take stock
of our progress and to reaffirm our commitments to
continue the battle against HIV/AIDS.
Concerted global efforts and commitments at the
national level have resulted in measurable progress
in containing the epidemic. Globally, the majority of
people living with HIV are now receiving treatment
and deaths caused by AIDS have declined by one third
since 2010. We understand that the full achievement of
the agreed targets by 2020 will require further effort
and, above all, political will to ensure the expansion
of community-led, people-centred approaches to HIV
treatment, immediate linkage to and retention in care
and adherence to treatment. The rapid roll-out of new
and improved testing and treatment combinations also
remain critical.
India, which was facing a spectre of disastrous
consequences from the AIDS epidemic approximately
15 years ago, has succeeded in addressing the challenge.
Deaths due to AIDS have been reduced by nearly
55 per cent since 2007, while new HIV infections have
been reduced by 66 per cent since 2000. A total of
1.62 million people living with HIV have been tested
in India and know their HIV status, and 1.2 million
people living with HIV are receiving treatment.
With 20.5 million pregnant women screened for HIV,
considerable success has been achieved in containing
mother-to-child infection. India has established the
world’s largest public-private partnership to provide
viral-load testing and the monitoring of patients
under antiretroviral treatment. Synergies have been
established between HIV and tuberculosis programmes
to achieve effectiveness and efficiency in order to
eliminate both diseases in a time-bound manner.
Targeted interventions based on close collaboration
with communities and civil society, with appropriate
funding from the Government, have helped deliver key
life-saving services to the affected populations.
Access to affordable medicines has played a
critical role in India’s achievements in addressing the
HIV/AIDS epidemic. The low-cost generic medicines
produced by the Indian pharmaceutical industry
have been instrumental in scaling up access to HIV
treatment, not only in India but also in other parts of
the world, especially in the developing countries most
16/19

12/06/2018

affected by the disease. More than 80 per cent of the
antiretroviral drugs used globally are supplied by the
Indian pharmaceutical industry. The accessibility and
affordability of these drugs have helped save millions
of lives around the world.
We would like to thank the Joint United Nations
Programme on HIV/AIDS on this occasion for its
leadership in successfully mobilizing the world against
the HIV/AIDS epidemic. Lessons learned from this
public-health model will continue to enrich and inform
our strategies to address other global epidemics.
Ms. Van Munster (Netherlands): The Kingdom of
the Netherlands fully aligns itself with the statement
made by the observer of the European Union on behalf
of its member States (see A/72/PV.94).
My delegation thanks the Secretary-General for his
comprehensive report (A/72/815).
As a country known for its pragmatic approach
towards HIV/AIDS, we would like to emphasize some
of what we believe to be the key elements in the fight
against HIV and AIDS. They include the need to
conduct inclusive, evidence-based work; the need for
a human-rights-based approach that includes sexual
and reproductive health and rights; and the need for a
people-centred approach. After all, it is about people,
and they should be at the centre of the AIDS response.
From that approach, it naturally follows that we
must talk about key populations — young people,
women and girls, migrants, prisoners, intravenous drug
users, sex workers and men having sex with men. They
are the most vulnerable to infections. If we truly want
to end the epidemic and leave no one behind, we must
end stigma and discrimination against those groups and
let their voices be heard. We should therefore enable
representatives of those groups to actively engage
with policy-makers, scientists, medical practitioners,
politicians and Government representatives. We should
not just talk the talk, we should also walk the walk, and
the Netherlands is making progress in that respect. For
example, due to our harm-reduction programmes, in
the Netherlands HIV/AIDS transmission among people
who inject drugs is currently close to zero.
We are halfway through the implementation phase
of our own United Nations commitments, set at the
high-level meeting on HIV/AIDS in 2016. This is the
right time to take stock of what we have achieved so far
and ensure that we use the remaining time to further
18-17995

12/06/2018

roll out evidence-based and effective policies in order to
reach our goals. After all, despite good progress made
worldwide, much remains to be done. AIDS is not over
yet. Only by truly working together, exchanging best
practices and learning from scientific research will we
reach the targets we set during the high-level meeting
on HIV/AIDS here in New York.
We are proud to inform the Assembly that we are
hosting the perfect opportunity to further evaluate our
work, as the next International AIDS Conference will
take place in Amsterdam from 23 to 27 July. Its theme is
“Breaking Barriers, Building Bridges”. We welcome all
members to Amsterdam to share, learn and re-energize
one another, so that we can achieve the Sustainable
Development Goals by 2030 and succeed in ending the
AIDS epidemic.
The Acting President: We have heard the last
speaker in the debate on this item.
May I take it that it is the wish of the General Assembly
to conclude its consideration of agenda item 10?
It was so decided.
Agenda item 14 (continued)
Integrated and coordinated implementation
of and follow-up to the outcomes of the major
United Nations conferences and summits in the
economic, social and related fields
Draft resolution (A/72/L.56)
The Acting President: I now give the floor to the
representative of the Philippines to introduce draft
resolution A/72/L.56.
Mr. Locsin (Philippines): It is my honour and
privilege to introduce the draft resolution on the
International Day of Family Remittances, as contained
in document A/72/L.56, on behalf of the four main
sponsors of the draft resolution, Algeria, Guatemala,
Madagascar and, my own delegation, the Philippines.
We are proud to have worked closely with partners to
bring us to this historic moment.
The draft resolution is sponsored by 38
delegations — friends and partners from across all
regions of the world. We thank all Member States
for their active participation and constructive input
during the five informal consultations and bilateral
negotiations conducted in recent weeks. Together
Algeria, Guatemala, Madagascar and the Philippines

A/72/PV.95

endeavoured to accommodate the views, concerns,
contributions and suggestions expressed by many
delegations in consultations that were conducted in an
open, inclusive and transparent manner.
The objective of the draft resolution is to
recognize and raise global awareness of the link
between remittances and sustainable development
and to acknowledge the fundamental contribution of
migrant workers to the well-being of their families
and communities of origin. The International Day of
Family Remittances provides an opportunity to come
together as a global community to recognize the efforts
of millions of migrants who are using remittances to
improve the lives of their families and to create a future
of hope for their children.
The global scale of remittances is impressive.
A total of $466 billion in remittances to developing
countries was recorded in 2017, representing an increase
of more than 8.5 per cent compared to 2016 and more
than three times the value of official development
assistance. During the 2015-2030 period for achieving
the Sustainable Development Goals, remittances
are projected to exceed a cumulative $6.5 trillion to
developing countries.
Remittances are private funds transferred through
private channels that represent more than 50 per cent
of family income to help sustain 800 million people.
Remittances have a transformative impact across the
Sustainable Development Goals, as they support longterm development strategies, particularly those related
to poverty eradication and access to basic services
at the household level, and through the promotion of
local investments that can encourage entrepreneurship
and financial inclusion, especially in the rural areas of
developing countries where poverty rates are highest.
Beyond the focus on the aggregate flows of
remittances, what matters most is not measured in
millions or billions but in the individual amounts of
$200 or $300 sent home regularly and consistently.
Those amounts represent 60 per cent of total household
income and, if leveraged, can effectively improve the
living standards of migrants’ communities of origin.
That initiative was originally endorsed by the
thirty-eighth session of the Governing Council of
the International Fund for Agricultural Development
(IFAD), which proclaimed 16 June as the International
Day of Family Remittances. We are pleased that,
through the adoption of draft resolution A/72/L.56, the

18-1799517/19

A/72/PV.95

12/06/2018

Day will be universally recognized and that IFAD will
continue to facilitate the observance of this Day by all
stakeholders, including through the Global Forum on
Remittances, Investment and Development.
On behalf of Algeria, Guatemala, Madagascar and
the Philippines, I now humbly request that all Member
States adopt by consensus draft resolution A/72/L.56,
on the International Day of Family Remittances.
The Acting President: The Assembly will now
take a decision on draft resolution A/72/L.56, entitled
“International Day of Family Remittances”.
I give the
the Secretariat.

floor

to

the

representative

of

Mr. Nakano (Department for General Assembly
and Conference Management): I should like to announce
that since the submission of the draft resolution, and
in addition to those delegations listed in the document,
the following countries have become sponsors of draft
resolution A/72/L.56: Australia, the Plurinational
State of Bolivia, Brazil, Canada, China, Costa Rica,
Egypt, Guyana, India, Indonesia, Ireland, Jamaica,
Malawi, Mexico, Myanmar, Nepal, Nicaragua, Nigeria,
Paraguay, the Republic of Moldova, the Russian
Federation, Samoa, Singapore, the Sudan, Thailand,
Timor-Leste, Uruguay and Viet Nam.
The Acting President: May I take it that the
Assembly decides to adopt draft resolution A/72/L.56?
Draft resolution A/72/L.56
(resolution 72/281).

was

adopted

The Acting President: Before giving the floor
for explanations of position, I would like to remind
delegations that explanations of position are limited
to 10 minutes and should be made by delegations from
their seats.
Mr. Bagwell (United States of America): While
we joined the consensus on resolution 72/281, we
would like to take this opportunity to clarify some
important points.
With regard to its references to the 2030 Agenda for
Sustainable Development and the Addis Ababa Action
Agenda, we underscore that the 2030 Agenda and the
Action Agenda are non-binding documents that do not
create rights or obligations under international law. The
United States recognizes the 2030 Agenda as a global
framework for sustainable development that can help
countries work towards global peace and prosperity.
18/19

We applaud the call for shared responsibility, including
national responsibility, for the 2030 Agenda, and
emphasize that all countries have a role to play in
achieving its vision. The 2030 Agenda recognizes that
each country must work towards implementation in
accordance with its own national policies and priorities.
The United States also underscores that paragraph
18 of the 2030 Agenda calls for countries to implement
the Agenda in a manner that is consistent with the
rights and obligations of States under international
law. We also want to highlight our mutual recognition
in paragraph 58 that the 2030 Agenda implementation
must respect and be without prejudice to the independent
mandates of other processes and institutions, including
negotiations, and does not prejudge or serve as a
precedent for decisions and actions under way in other
forums. For example, the Agenda does not represent a
commitment to providing new market access for goods
or services. It also does not interpret or alter World
Trade Organization agreements or decisions, including
the agreement on trade-related aspects of intellectual
property rights.
We take this opportunity to make important points
of clarification with regard to the reaffirmation of the
Addis Ababa Action Agenda. We note in particular that
much of the trade-related language in the Addis Ababa
Action Agenda outcome document has been overtaken
by events since July 2015 and is immaterial, and that
our reaffirmation of the outcome document has no
standing for ongoing work and negotiations involving
trade. Some of the intervening events happened just
months after the release of the outcome document.
Ensuring that remittances continue to flow through
regulated channels serves the dual purpose of stopping
the abuse of the financial system by illicit actors,
while providing access to funds in areas of need. The
United States supports the robust implementation of
international anti-money-laundering and counterterrorism financing standards by all jurisdictions,
including those related to the regulation, supervision
and enforcement of anti-money-laundering and
counter-terrorism financing obligations for remitters.
The effective implementation of those standards fosters
both financial transparency and financial inclusion.
However, it is unacceptable to use the references to
migrants and migration without any qualifiers. The
United Nations should not be recognizing irregular
or illegal migration as a positive contribution to
development, as it occurs contrary to national laws.
18-17995

12/06/2018

The United States must therefore dissociate itself from
consensus on such language.
The Acting President: We have heard the last
speaker in explanation of position.
We will now hear statements following the adoption
of resolution 72/281.
Mr. Castañeda Solares (Guatemala) (spoke in
Spanish): As a main sponsor of resolution 72/281,
which establishes 16 June as the International Day
of Family Remittances, I would like to thank all the
delegations that took part in the consultations process.
The consensus-based outcome recognizes that family
remittances contribute to the sustainable development
of our peoples.
Remittances can contribute to reducing household
poverty in migrants’ communities of origin, and more
broadly to the other Sustainable Development Goals,
such as facilitating access to health and education,
housing construction, access to new technologies and
serving as an entry point to formal financial services.
In Guatemala, around 11 per cent of the gross
domestic product is attributable to the remittances
entering the country, which benefit more than 6.2 million
people, according to the International Organization for
Migration’s 2016 survey on migration and remittances.
Faced with the global economic context, we can
appreciate the sensitive nature of remittance flows
because while they are so necessary for the survival
of many people, they are highly vulnerable to various
external shocks, such as exchange rates or changes in
the flow of migrants.
A decrease in remittances in the coming years
due to external shocks could exacerbate poverty
rates, which in 2016 reached almost 60 per cent of the
population, because families depend on that income to
meet their basic needs. The dependence on remittances
by so many people in my country indicates that we must
encourage diversified investment in productive sectors
and therefore reduce the vulnerability of families and
the country to changes in the flows of remittances. One
area in which the Government can support families
sending and receiving remittances is in financial
education and counselling aimed at encouraging savings
and investment. It is important to design policies to
support remittance-receiving communities, which will
act as a buffer against falls in remittance income.

A/72/PV.95

The adoption of resolution 72/281 on the
International Day of Family Remittances is an
important occasion that also uniquely reminds us of
the efforts of migrants who contribute to the society in
which they live and also to the support of their families.
In addition, it allows us to recall the importance of
continuing to advocate for the interests and rights of
families and communities receiving and benefiting
from remittances.
Mr. Soriano Mena (El Salvador) (spoke in
Spanish): El Salvador is grateful for the initiative of
resolution 72/281 to commemorate 16 June as the
International Day of Family Remittances, as well as for
its adoption by consensus today. We are also grateful
for the work done by the group of delegations taking
the initiative in drafting the text and advancing us to a
mutual agreement.
El Salvador attaches great importance to
remittances, which account for a considerable
percentage of our gross domestic product and are the
fruits of the arduous labour and positive contribution
of many migrant workers and their families, regardless
of their migration status, with great potential for
contributing to sustainable development in their
countries of origin, transit and destination. We
underscore that remittances are private funds and
should never, in any circumstance, be compared to any
other type of financial flow, as we established in the
Addis Ababa Action Agenda of the Third International
Conference on Financing for Development. We
therefore believe that the commemoration of this Day
is of the utmost importance.
El Salvador stands ready to give the highest profile
possible to this celebration, and we are willing to work
hand in hand with all interested parties to implement
and follow through on the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development and the commitments included in the
Sustainable Development Goals and their targets,
especially where we agreed to reduce to less than 3 per
cent the remittance transaction costs for migrants,
as well as to eliminate remittance corridors that cost
more than 5 per cent. In that regard, we also call on
the international community to lend its support to our
efforts to achieve those common goals.
Once again, El Salvador, as a sponsor of this
initiative, is grateful for the support it has enjoyed.
The meeting rose at 5.15 p.m.

18-1799519/19
