S/2003/688

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
7 July 2003
Original: English

Report of the Security Council mission to West Africa,
26 June-5 July 2003
I. Introduction
1.
By his letter dated 5 May 2003 (S/2003/525) the President of the Security
Council informed the Secretary-General that the members of the Council had
decided to send a mission to the West African subregion. The mission was
conducted from 26 June to 5 July 2003. Its terms of reference and composition are
set out in the annex.
2.
The mission left New York on 26 June and visited Guinea-Bissau (27 and 28
June), Nigeria (28 and 29 June), Ghana (29 and 30 June) and Côte d’Ivoire (30 June2 July). The mission was scheduled to visit Liberia on 2 July. However, because of
the conflict in the country at that time, the mission travelled instead to Accra, where
the parties to the Liberian peace talks led by the Economic Community of West
African States (ECOWAS) were gathered. The mission then visited Guinea (2 and 3
July) and Sierra Leone (3 and 4 July).

II. Summary
3.
The Security Council mission was carried out at a time when the stability of
the subregion was looking particularly precarious. Although Sierra Leone was much
more stable than it had been at the time of the Council’s previous mission, in
October 2000, the situation in some other countries of the subregion had seriously
deteriorated. Côte d’Ivoire, recently emerged from conflict, was struggling with the
challenge of implementing the Linas-Marcoussis peace agreement; Guinea-Bissau,
although apparently peaceful, was at risk of falling back into conflict with
postponements of the legislative elections, democratic freedoms threatened,
economic regeneration inhibited and the National Assembly’s powers usurped; and,
most seriously, the conflict had intensified in Liberia, with fighting in the streets of
Monrovia and hundreds of civilians killed even as peace talks were under way. The
mission therefore concentrated on supporting efforts to improve the situation in
those three countries.
4.
In Guinea-Bissau, President Kumba Yalá set 12 October 2003 as the election
date and welcomed international observers, but he made no commitments on
restoring democratic freedoms or respecting human rights. It is crucial, therefore,
that the Council monitor the situation closely and maintain pressure on the
03-41929 (E) 080703

*0341929*

S/2003/688

Government to make progress towards good governance. Progress in this regard will
help the international community provide aid to Guinea-Bissau.
5.
Côte d’Ivoire has a clear road map to peace in the form of the LinasMarcoussis Agreement. President Laurent Gbagbo agreed with the mission that the
Agreement was the viable way forward and had to be implemented in full. The
mission also stressed this message, with some success, to the Forces nouvelles, who
at the time of the mission’s visit were threatening to withdraw their cooperation on
Linas-Marcoussis. The Council now needs to monitor closely the fulfilment of the
outstanding provisions of Linas-Marcoussis, including ministerial appointments, as
well as the other challenges which the mission encouraged the Government to
tackle, particularly disbanding militias, adopting an amnesty law and accelerating
disarmament and reintegration.
6.
The mission deliberately did not get involved in the Liberian peace talks led by
ECOWAS, but it strongly urged all the parties to respect the ceasefire, engage
sincerely in the negotiations and allow the return of humanitarian agencies. The
Government of Liberia, Liberians United for Reconciliation and Democracy
(LURD) and Movement for Democracy in Liberia (MODEL) claimed that they too
wanted peace and would return to the negotiating table. However, the mission noted
that the significant differences between their negotiating demands might make
reaching acceptable compromises difficult. The mission was struck by the unity and
fervour of the calls from Liberian civil society and political parties for international
assistance — both humanitarian aid and an international stabilization force — and
strongly hopes that the international community and the United Nations will respond
rapidly.
7.
The mission heard a highly consistent message throughout its visit regarding
the causes of conflict in the subregion, including widespread poverty and poor
governance, and the proliferation of small arms and light weapons and cross-border
flows of mercenaries. There is a clear need for international action to address these
and other persistent problems in the subregion, including lack of observance of
human rights, treatment of refugees, use of child soldiers, and humanitarian access
issues — all of which have been frequently identified but are not yet being tackled
with enough political resolve or resources. The mission is recommending enhanced
assistance for ECOWAS and subregional initiatives.

III. Activities and findings of the mission
Guinea-Bissau
8.
The mission visited Guinea-Bissau on 27 and 28 June 2003 jointly with a
mission of the Ad Hoc Advisory Group on Guinea-Bissau of the Economic and
Social Council. The composition and terms of reference of the Ad Hoc Advisory
Group mission are set out in the annex. The mission followed the presidential
statement of 19 June 2003 (S/PRST/2003/8), in which the Security Council appealed
to the President and Government of Guinea-Bissau to effectively organize in a
timely fashion the forthcoming legislative elections; to ensure that they are
conducted in a transparent and credible manner; to promulgate the new Constitution;
to have the President and Vice-President of the Supreme Court duly elected without
further delay; to facilitate a constructive dialogue with the international community

2

S/2003/688

and the Bretton Woods institutions; to fully endorse the partnership approach
defined by the Ad Hoc Advisory Group on Guinea-Bissau of the Economic and
Social Council; and to take measures to improve human rights and civil liberties.
9.
The mission received briefings from the Representative of the SecretaryGeneral, David Stephen, and senior staff of the United Nations Peace-building
Support Office in Guinea-Bissau (UNOGBIS) and the United Nations country team,
including a representative of the International Monetary Fund. It was informed that
the schools and health systems in the country barely function: 60 per cent of schoolage children do not attend school and 88 per cent of the population live on less than
$1 per day. Widespread unemployment, especially among young people, poses a
potential long-term threat to peace and stability. On the economic situation it was
noted that Guinea-Bissau had witnessed a decline in real GDP of 7 per cent in 2002
and the fiscal situation was described as disastrous, State revenues being very
limited.
10. The mission met twice with President Yalá, and with the Prime Minister and
several other ministers. It called on the Government to implement the measures
outlined by the Council in its statement of 19 June 2003. The mission stressed the
strong desire of the international community to increase assistance to GuineaBissau, but warned that this was contingent on the Government taking the requisite
steps to fulfil the partnership approach arrangement proposed by the Economic and
Social Council Advisory Group in November 2002. The partnership foresees a
compact under which the provision of assistance would be contingent on political
and constitutional measures being taken by the Government and plans of action
drawn up addressing both short and long-term development needs of the country.
11. The President and a number of ministers asserted that the situation in the
country was still peaceful, thanks to the efforts of the Government. The mission was
told that there was much disinformation being disseminated by opposition parties
and “other provocateurs” who had misappropriated State funds and wanted to run
electoral campaigns on the proceeds. The President noted his readiness to hold the
parliamentary elections, but underlined that international funding was a prerequisite.
12. At a meeting with the Chief of Staff of the armed forces, the Mission
welcomed the assurance given that the armed forces of Guinea-Bissau would not
interfere in the political process. The Chief of Staff indicated that the army’s loyalty
to the legitimate, constitutional authority was firmly maintained despite the fact that
troops suffered from lack of supplies and long delays in salary payments. The
mission encouraged the armed forces to continue efforts to collect more of the small
arms that are circulating in the country in disturbingly high numbers.
13. The mission met a number of leaders of civil society and political parties and
representatives of the diplomatic community in Bissau. Most interlocutors
underlined the vital importance of the promulgation of a new Constitution, and the
election of a new President and Vice-President of the Supreme Court. Those
currently in office have been selected by the President, whereas, according to the
existing law, as approved by the National Assembly while President Yalá was a
member of the body, the positions should be filled by elections among Supreme
Court judges. Concern was voiced that, since dissolving the National Assembly in
November 2002 and appointing a “caretaker” government, President Yalá had
significantly increased his own power at the expense of all other branches of the
Government and that the judiciary had been gravely weakened.

3

S/2003/688

14. The mission was also told that serious acts of intimidation and persecution by
the security forces against members of opposition political parties, the media and
civil society were constantly being carried out. The importance of the Government
ensuring the protection of civil liberties and human rights was underlined. A number
of political parties advanced a proposal for the establishment of a government of
national consensus for a transitional period leading to free and credible elections.
15. Members of the mission met with representatives of the National Electoral
Commission and visited its headquarters. The Commission officials indicated that it
was technically impossible to hold the parliamentary elections in July, as scheduled.
However, the advance completion of voter cards for voters already on the rolls and
the reproduction of voter registration documents was under way.
16. Some interlocutors, however, noted that elections in themselves were not the
whole solution, not least because a new National Assembly could be as much at risk
of dissolution by the President as the previous one. The mission was told that civil
society in Guinea-Bissau had high hopes that its visit would result in concrete action
by the Government to improve the situation in their country. Members were
concerned to hear fears expressed about a possible new wave of repression once the
mission left the country and asked the Representative of the Secretary-General to
keep them closely informed about any developments in this regard.
17. At a second meeting with President Yalá, the mission expressed the conviction
that a date for the elections needed to be fixed and concrete steps taken to establish
the credibility of the process leading to that election and to ensure that it would be
free and credible. Concomitant with that, the Government needed to show its
commitment to uphold the rule of law, to promote civil liberties and freedom of the
press, to avoid any persecution of political parties and to observe and defend human
rights. The mission stressed that such signals were needed to fully restore the
confidence of the international community in the democratic process in the country,
as a basis for the partnership between Guinea-Bissau, international financial
institutions and donor countries. A frank and friendly dialogue was held on specific
issues raised by the mission.
18. The President informed the mission that he had decided to set the election date
for 12 October 2003 and that international observers would be welcomed. He said
that he would respect the results of the elections and live up to them. Shortly after
the mission left the country the date of the elections was officially announced.
Regarding the election of the President and Vice-President of the Supreme Court,
the President said that application of the law would be the responsibility of the new
National Assembly. Likewise, it would be the Assembly’s responsibility to decide
on a Constitution: he explained that he refused to promulgate the current draft as the
Assembly had used it to arrogate certain powers, such as selecting the Chief of Staff
of the armed forces. He added that the new Assembly would have to examine the
issue of the Constitution. If it disputed his views regarding the Constitution, he
would organize a referendum on whether there should be a presidential or semipresidential system. As for improving civil liberties and human rights, the members
of the mission were discouraged by the lack of a substantive response to some of the
concerns raised.
19. After leaving Guinea-Bissau, the members of the mission reported to the
Chairman of ECOWAS, President John Agyekum Kufuor of Ghana, in Accra, and
the Executive Secretary of ECOWAS, Mohamed Ibn Chambas, in Abuja, on their

4

S/2003/688

meetings with President Yalá. They said that ECOWAS would strongly encourage
the Government to take the necessary steps to ensure that the elections planned for
12 October 2003 were free and credible. ECOWAS was planning to send electoral
observers. The importance of addressing the dire levels of poverty in the country
was noted, as was the intention of ECOWAS to send a Council of Elders Mission to
the country.
Observations and recommendations
20. The overall impression gained by the mission is that Guinea-Bissau is gripped
by a deep social, economic, administrative and political crisis. UNOGBIS —
established in 1999 to carry out peace-building activities in a post-conflict
environment — is increasingly obliged to play a preventive, pre-conflict role. There
are concerns that mounting tensions and public discontent could result in popular
unrest, perhaps even civil war. As the armed services are said to be increasingly
demoralized, unprofessional and unpaid and there are tensions among officers and
men of different ethnic origins, this scenario should not be ruled out.
21. The mission welcomes President Yalá’s statement that he intends to hold
elections on 12 October 2003. Other requirements must be met, however, including
the complete revision of current electoral registers and ensuring that all parties can
campaign freely, having equal access to the media. It recommends that the
Security Council monitor closely the progress being made in the electoral
process and in implementing the other steps outlined in the presidential
statement of 19 June 2003. To that end, the Council should request the
Secretary-General to update it by the end of July and regularly thereafter
during the electoral period on the progress being made by the Government.
22. Now that the date of 12 October has been announced for the
parliamentary elections, the mission recommends that donors urgently consider
providing financial and technical assistance so that the required electoral
preparations can proceed and the polls can be held as scheduled. The
continuing provision of such assistance should be contingent on the
Government creating the conditions for the conduct of free and credible
elections. International electoral observers would play an important role and
the international community should be prepared to respond quickly to a
request from the Government for the provision of monitors.
23. The Government must now urgently take the actions necessary to
implement all steps outlined in the presidential statement of 19 June. The
international community should maintain pressure on the Government to that
end. The mission is gravely concerned that, unless the Government takes such
actions promptly and unless enough well-targeted assistance is provided in the near
future, there is a strong possibility that the country will slide back into conflict, with
dire consequences for the people of Guinea-Bissau and the subregion.
24. The mission greatly appreciates the cooperation of the Economic and Social
Council regarding the visit to Guinea-Bissau and recommends that the Security
Council continue such collaborative initiatives with the Economic and Social
Council in the area of peace-building in post-conflict countries.

5

S/2003/688

Côte d’Ivoire
25. In Abuja, the mission discussed the situation in Côte d’Ivoire with the
President of Nigeria, Olusegun Obasanjo, the Executive Secretary of ECOWAS and
the Special Representative of ECOWAS for Côte d’Ivoire, Raph Uwechue. It also
exchanged views on the issue with the Chairman of ECOWAS and the Foreign
Minister of Ghana in Accra. At those meetings, concern was expressed about the
continuing activities of the armed militias, which some allege have links at high
levels in the Government of Côte d’Ivoire; there are also continuing reports of
murders and disappearances of persons suspected of having links with the Forces
nouvelles. Concern was also expressed by senior ECOWAS officials about the
Government’s economic priorities, including the continuing acquisition of new and
sophisticated weapons.
26. The Executive Secretary of ECOWAS reported significant achievements since
the inauguration of the Government of National Reconciliation on 13 March 2003.
Debates on the major provisions of the Linas-Marcoussis Agreement had been
ongoing in the National Assembly. However, strong sentiments and opposition had
been expressed by President Gbagbo’s party, the Front populaire ivoirien (FPI), on
some issues, especially the question of amnesty for certain Forces nouvelles
personnel. Throughout the region, including in Côte d’Ivoire, the mission heard that
the delay in appointing the Ministers of Defence and National Security was a serious
impediment to progress. There was a general consensus that there was little chance
of reducing tensions in the country until this was resolved.
27. The interlocutors mentioned above and the members of the Monitoring
Committee encouraged the mission strongly to urge President Gbagbo and other
political figures in Côte d’Ivoire to make progress on these and other points. They
asked the mission to convey the widespread concern that threats to the full
implementation of the Linas-Marcoussis Agreement were growing. Lack of
statesmanship on the part of some leaders who had made inflammatory remarks was
deplored, particular reference being made to the Speaker of the National Assembly
who had recently called for civil servants to disregard instructions from ministers
from the Forces nouvelles. Heads of State encouraged the mission to raise with
President Gbagbo the need for the Government to do far more to rein in the
activities of youth groups demonstrating against ministers from parties other than
FPI and to take additional measures to increase the level of confidence between
former antagonists in the country.
28. ECOWAS officials expressed the view that the ECOWAS Mission in Côte
d’Ivoire (ECOMICI) had demonstrated the subregion’s capability to take care of its
problems, given the necessary support. Appreciation was expressed to the
Governments of France, the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland
and the United States of America for their material and financial support for
ECOMICI. It was stressed that ECOMICI was working effectively and
harmoniously with French forces but was in serious need of additional resources
from the international community; its current funding would run out by October
2003.
29. In Abidjan, the mission met twice with President Gbagbo, the Prime Minister,
Seydou Diarra, and leaders of the Forces nouvelles. It met the Speaker and Bureau
of the National Assembly, senior military officers from the Forces armées nationales

6

S/2003/688

de Côte d’Ivoire (FANCI), and from the Forces nouvelles, and representatives of
Ivorian political parties and civil society. The mission was also briefed by the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General for Côte d’Ivoire, Albert Tevoedjre,
the United Nations country team, the Monitoring Committee, the commander of the
French forces of Operation Licorne, the ECOMICI commander, and diplomats.
30. On 30 June, the Forces nouvelles had issued a communiqué in which they
announced the end of their participation in the programme of disarmament, the
closure of all the corridors of access to the zones under their control and the
declaration of a state of emergency. The stated reasons for this included the attack
by armed elements on the Secretary-General of the Mouvement patriotique de Côte
d’Ivoire (MPCI) and Minister of Information, Guillaume Soro, on 27 June during an
official visit to the national television complex in Abidjan — a crime with which, at
the time of the mission’s visit, no one had been charged by the Ivorian authorities —
the lack of security for ministers, and the refusal of President Gbagbo to respect the
allocation of ministerial portfolios as agreed under the Linas-Marcoussis
Agreement.
31. During its meetings in Abidjan, the mission repeatedly raised a number of
issues of concern on which actions needed to be taken. These included the need to
appoint Ministers of Defence and National Security; to disband the pro-Government
militias; to provide an equal level of security for all ministers, of whatever party; to
adopt an Amnesty Law to ensure both the release of political prisoners and the
return of exiles and former combatants; to extend government services and State
authority to areas under the control of the Forces nouvelles; to accelerate the
implementation of the disarmament and reintegration programme; and to terminate
the activities of mercenaries. Concern was also voiced by the mission about reports
of major new defence expenditures by the Government, which were being
interpreted in some quarters, whether correctly or not, as evidence of a preparedness
by the Government to restart hostilities in the future, and whose sources of financing
lacked transparency.
32. The mission emphasized to all parties that strict implementation of the LinasMarcoussis Agreement, leading to the holding of free and fair elections in 2005, was
the only path that would be acceptable to the international community. Any return to
hostilities would lead to strong condemnation and measures by the international
community against those responsible. The importance of continued dialogue, even at
moments of great tension, was stressed to all interlocutors. At a meeting with
Ivorian civil society, the negative impact of hate media was stressed to the mission.
33. It was also made clear to all parties by the mission that impunity for human
rights abuses would not be tolerated; that the practice — especially in the west of
the country — of recruiting child soldiers was abhorrent and must cease; and that
full humanitarian access must be assured. The mission was informed by the Force
Commander of ECOMICI that the situation in the west of the country had recently
improved to the extent that humanitarian agencies should be able to operate there.
34. President Gbagbo responded to several of the issues raised by the mission. He
accepted that the Linas-Marcoussis Agreement should be implemented in full, but he
also pointed out that he was bound by the constitution of Côte d’Ivoire. He denied
that there were any “armed militias” on the Government side, only unarmed
citizens’ groups. Regarding the two ministerial appointments, President Gbagbo said
that if FANCI and the Forces nouvelles could agree on nominations for these

7

S/2003/688

positions, he would not hesitate to appoint them. He said that only the unofficial
armed groups, not the Ivorian armed forces, recruited child soldiers: there were, he
claimed, strict minimum age limits for FANCI recruitment.
Observations and recommendations
35. The mission recognizes that significant progress has been made in the
implementation of the Linas-Marcoussis Agreement, thanks to the efforts of the
President, the Prime Minister, the new Government of National Reconciliation and
other political forces. Although Côte d’Ivoire remains an issue of serious concern
for the subregion and the international community, the precise modalities of
implementing the Agreement are largely a matter for internal Ivorian discussion.
36. Nevertheless the mission found strong consensus in the subregion and among
representatives of the wider international community that decisive action by
President Gbagbo on a number of key issues was essential if a creeping deterioration
in the situation was to be avoided. The mission strongly encourages the President,
his Government and his supporters, and all parties to the Agreement, to take
the required steps so that the programme of disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration can proceed according to plan. In this connection, the mission
suggests that the United Nations Mission in Côte d’Ivoire (MINUCI) pay
serious attention to the important lessons learned from a similar experience in
Sierra Leone.
37. The mission recommends that the Security Council pay sustained
attention to the implementation of the actions mentioned in paragraph 31,
especially relating to the appointment of the Ministers of Defence and National
Security and the assured security of all government ministers. It suggests that
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General for Côte d’Ivoire, as
Chairman of the Monitoring Committee, should keep the Council closely
informed of developments in this regard. The mission encourages all political
forces to commit themselves in public to strict implementation of the LinasMarcoussis Agreement as the road map to reconciliation and lasting peace in
the country and with its neighbours.
38. The mission draws the Security Council’s attention to the essential linkage
between scrupulous implementation of the Linas-Marcoussis Agreement and the
holding of elections in 2005. President Gbagbo indicated to the mission a strong
interest in receiving international assistance for the preparations and monitoring of
the elections, and said he would be writing to request this. The mission
recommends that, at the appropriate time, the Security Council support
international involvement in the electoral process.
39. The people, politicians and various armed forces in Côte d’Ivoire will need to
give serious attention to the future not only of the country’s democratic institutions,
in the lead-up to elections in 2005, but also to its security institutions and indeed all
aspects of good governance, including transparent budgeting. They must also be
prepared to make compromises for the sake of peace, continue the path of dialogue,
and avoid inflammatory words or actions.
40. Côte d’Ivoire’s moves towards national reconciliation deserve full support
from the international community. In this connection, the mission hopes that
MINUCI will soon receive its full complement of staffing, especially in such

8

S/2003/688

crucial areas as the political and human rights components. The mission
commends the cooperative way in which Licorne and ECOMICI forces, under
excellent leadership, are monitoring the ceasefire and working to support
implementation of the Linas-Marcoussis Agreement. It notes with concern the
funding constraints of ECOMICI and urges Member States in a position to do
so to provide additional resources to ECOMICI so that it can continue its
important work.

Liberia
41. The mission discussed the situation in Liberia with virtually all of its
interlocutors. The Executive Secretary of ECOWAS and the ECOWAS mediator for
the ECOWAS-led Liberian peace talks, General Abdulsalami Abubakar, described
recent progress in the negotiations. On 27 June, the talks were suspended until 4
July because the ceasefire agreement signed on 17 June had been violated. The
Executive Secretary expressed concern about the extent of the parties’ commitment
to peace: their delay in fulfilling the requirements for the deployment of the Joint
Verification Team appeared to be a tactic to gain time to win military advantage. The
political parties and civil society represented in the political negotiating committee
seemed to have little influence on either the Government of Liberia or the rebel
groups in the military committee. LURD and MODEL apparently had no set of
common objectives beyond the exclusion from power of President Taylor. The
humanitarian cost of the continued fighting was disastrous: hundreds of civilians
had been killed, thousands displaced and most humanitarian aid agencies forced to
cease operations.
42. The Executive Secretary of ECOWAS and the ECOWAS mediator
recommended that the mission urge the parties to return to negotiations, respect the
ceasefire and facilitate the early deployment of the Joint Verification Team. It was
crucial to create the conditions for the return of humanitarian agencies. They urged
the mission to exert pressure on any outside parties providing assistance to the
armed groups to stop such action. ECOWAS hoped to be ready to secure the
ceasefire by creating a buffer zone through the deployment of a stabilization force,
but they needed financial and logistical assistance from the international community
to do so. The Defence and Security Commission of ECOWAS was meeting on 3 July
to consider the composition of such a force. An international stabilization force, led
by a State outside the region, was needed urgently to deploy alongside an ECOWAS
force. The Executive Secretary hoped the United States might consider involvement
in such a force. The Minister for Foreign Affairs of Ghana said subsequently that
ECOWAS was considering a force of 5,600 troops, including 3,600 requested from
Ghana, Mali, Morocco, Senegal and South Africa. The Executive Secretary
considered that a neutral transitional government composed of technocrats should
then be appointed, for 18 to 24 months, with a specific mandate to create the
conditions for disarmament, security sector reform and elections.
43. President Obasanjo described how the announcement of the indictment of
President Charles Taylor by the Special Court for Sierra Leone had complicated the
efforts of subregional leaders to persuade him to leave office peacefully. He recalled
that, initially, President Taylor had said that he would be prepared to step down in
the interest of peace in Liberia. However, he was now insisting that the indictment
first be rescinded. Unless an exit route could be found, President Taylor might well

9

S/2003/688

feel that he had enough political support to return to the bush to fight, using the still
considerable military resources at his disposal. President Kufuor also emphasized
the need to find a solution for the sake of the Liberian people: but the indictment
against President Taylor could not lapse — those who offended against humanity
had to be brought to book. The Minister for Foreign Affairs of Ghana said he
believed that President Taylor would depart quickly, if a satisfactory arrangement
could be made. In response, the mission said that the Security Council had
authorized the establishment of the Special Court and would support its decisions.
There must be no impunity for gross abuses of human rights and international
humanitarian law. Equally, they recognized that the Liberian people were in a dire
predicament and that their well-being had to be a significant consideration in the
international community’s approach.
44. Following its discussions with senior ECOWAS officials and the Presidents of
Nigeria and Ghana, the mission met the parties to the peace negotiations in Accra,
namely, the Government of Liberia, LURD, MODEL, the registered political parties
and civil society. The mission emphasized that it was not there to mediate or to
intervene in the Liberian peace talks. It insisted, to all parties, however, that there
must be full respect for, and implementation of, the ceasefire; a comprehensive
political settlement making possible the appointment of a transitional government
which would organize free and fair elections; respect for international humanitarian
law, including full and immediate access for humanitarian organizations to provide
food and medicines; full respect for human rights, including an end to the
recruitment of child soldiers; and investigations of human rights abuses.
45. The mission warned against attempts to seize power by force, which would not
be accepted by the international community. Although the mission made clear that it
would not involve itself in the detail of the negotiations, it noted from its meetings
with the parties that there were still significant differences to be resolved,
particularly regarding the question who might be appointed to lead a transitional
government. The government delegation indicated that President Taylor would be
willing to step down at the end of his term in January 2004. They advocated a
constitutional approach regarding transitional arrangements, with a new transitional
government headed by the Vice-President. The Inter-Religious Council and the Bar
Association of Liberia advocated the rescinding of the indictment of President
Taylor by the Special Court for Sierra Leone, but this position was not shared by all
civil society representatives. The political parties and civil society were however
united in their strong desire for peace, their urgent appeal to the international
community for an international stabilization force and immediate humanitarian aid,
and their wish for a comprehensive agreement and a transitional government that
would lead to free and fair elections.
46. The mission met the Prime Minister and Foreign Minister of Guinea in
Conakry. The position indicated was that the Government of Guinea supported the
ceasefire in Liberia and was not trying to install a representative of LURD as head
of a transitional government. They strongly supported the indictment of President
Taylor by the Special Court for Sierra Leone. The mission urged the Government to
put pressure on LURD to participate constructively in the peace talks. Also in
Conakry, the mission met Sekou Conneh, Chairman of the political wing of LURD,
who set out the movement’s political objectives, including its claim to head any
transitional government of Liberia. He indicated, however, that LURD might be

10

S/2003/688

open to negotiation on the precise arrangements once it was clear that President
Taylor was to play no further part in Liberian political life.
Observations and recommendations
47.

The mission recommends that:

(a) The Security Council should commend the dedication of General
Abubakar, the ECOWAS team and the Government of Ghana as current chair
of ECOWAS for their facilitation and mediation of the Liberian peace talks,
and express its strong support for their work.
(b) The Security Council should insist on strict implementation of the
ceasefire in order to create a sufficiently stable security environment for
humanitarian agencies to return and to give space for a negotiated political
agreement. It should condemn the initiators of any breaches of the ceasefire.
(c) The Security Council should make clear that it will not condone any
attempts to seize power by force or accept the appointment of those responsible
for such attempts to key positions of political leadership.
(d) The implementation of the ceasefire and a comprehensive agreement
should be closely monitored by the international community.
(e) The Security Council should urgently consider authorizing an
international stabilization force on the basis of current ECOWAS plans, taking
account of the ECOWAS appeal for troops and other support from outside the
region. While any decision on such a force will inevitably be linked with
progress in the political negotiations, plans for deployment should be drawn up
rapidly, since delay will risk renewed breakdowns of the ceasefire.
(f) Countries in a position to do so should consider rapidly providing
financial or logistical support to ECOWAS and its member States to facilitate
their deployment of a stabilization force.
(g) The Security Council must insist to all parties that international
humanitarian law and the human rights of all, especially women and children,
must be respected; that recruitment of child soldiers must cease; and that
action will be taken against those who abuse these principles.
(h) The donor community should respond urgently to the serious and
immediate humanitarian needs of the Liberian people.
(i) Liberia is likely to require an increased level of United Nations
attention and involvement in the short- to medium term. The SecretaryGeneral should consider appointing a suitably senior representative in Liberia
at the appropriate time, suitably resourced. A United Nations operation in
Liberia should promote close coordination between peacekeeping and peacebuilding, development and humanitarian programmes, perhaps through the
appointment of a Deputy Special Representative of the Secretary-General who
also acts as United Nations resident coordinator, as has worked very well in
Sierra Leone.

11

S/2003/688

Sierra Leone
48. The mission spent a day in Sierra Leone and noted with satisfaction the
progress made in consolidating the rehabilitation of the country in the past two
years. The members of the mission were, nevertheless, made fully aware of the
distance Sierra Leone still has to travel to self-sufficiency.
49. The Special Representative of the Secretary-General, Oluyemi Adeniji, told
the mission in Freetown on 3 July that the situation in Sierra Leone continued
steadily to improve. However, the conflict in Liberia would always threaten Sierra
Leone’s stability until it was resolved. Over 80,000 refugees had returned, and
hundreds of deserters from both the armed forces of Liberia and LURD had crossed
the border into Sierra Leone. The Government of Sierra Leone’s capacity to
accommodate this influx was hampered by lack of resources.
50. The Acting Force Commander of the United Nations Mission in Sierra Leone
(UNAMSIL) described the progress with drawdown of the force. Of the original
17,500 troops 13,000 now remained. He reiterated the recommendation in the
Secretary-General’s report of 23 June 2003 (S/2003/663) that the Council endorse
the “modified status quo” option for the drawdown of UNAMSIL, with a target
completion date of December 2004. He also suggested that this needed careful
monitoring to allow for adaptation to circumstances.
51. The mission congratulated President Ahmad Tejan Kabbah on the progress
achieved. He and several of the mission’s interlocutors underlined the contribution
the presence of UNAMSIL had made, not just to Sierra Leone’s security but also —
thanks to the excellent integration of development and humanitarian issues into the
structure and work of UNAMSIL — to wider peace-building efforts. They were
concerned that an over-hasty withdrawal of UNAMSIL could jeopardize the
country’s security and the significant investment of the international community.
Some interlocutors also suggested that UNAMSIL should not withdraw completely,
but that a residual force should remain.
52. The Special Representative of the Secretary-General said that progress was
being made towards the key benchmark of improving the capacity of the Sierra
Leonean armed forces and police to assume full responsibility for internal and
external security after the departure of UNAMSIL. The International Military
Advisory and Training Team continued to assist with restructuring the Sierra Leone
army, while the UNAMSIL civilian police contingent, now 125 strong, was helping
to train new recruits to the Sierra Leone police and was mentoring existing officers.
The mission asked detailed questions in this area, and was left with the impression
that a considerable amount remained to be done.
53. Several of the mission’s interlocutors expressed concern about the extent of
government control over the diamond-mining areas, a prerequisite for the country’s
stability. Although civil servants had now returned to these areas, unlicensed mining
continued on a large scale, especially by young people. The Government’s mining
monitors lacked the capacity and resources to enforce the official licensing regime.
This had an economic impact as well as presenting a security risk: diamonds which
went through the official certification regime were often seriously undervalued,
while only a small proportion of all diamonds exported went through the official
regime, and on those the Government levied only a 3.5 per cent tax. The mission
recognized the considerable challenge that the Government faced in ensuring that all

12

S/2003/688

diamonds were channelled through the official regime, but it stressed the priority the
Government should give to meeting this challenge, particularly now that the
Security Council embargo on the export of uncertified Sierra Leonean diamonds had
expired. President Kabbah considered that good progress was being made, but he
agreed that more needed to be done in this area. The Government was particularly
keen to involve a reliable inward investor in this sector.
54. The United Nations country team reported that nearly three quarters of the
57,000 former combatants had entered the reintegration programme and been given
training opportunities, and the programme should be completed by the end of the
year. President Kabbah confirmed that the Civil Defence Force had been disbanded
and would not be allowed to re-establish itself. Representatives of civil society
asked that particular consideration be given to women, including refugees without
resources or job opportunities, for inclusion in post-conflict peace-building and
reconciliation programmes — particularly those who had been forcibly recruited as
combatants and subsequently rejected by their families.
55. In response to a question regarding refugees, President Kabbah said that he
thought that most of those in Guinea had already returned. He was not sure that
those remaining in Côte d’Ivoire, the Gambia and Liberia would necessarily make a
constructive contribution to the current stage of Sierra Leone’s development,
although he confirmed that Sierra Leone was ready to receive them.
56. The mission heard that it was important for Sierra Leone’s future to create a
climate of political inclusion in which all groups had the opportunity to participate.
The local elections in 2004 would be an important test of this; community groups
should be encouraged to participate. President Kabbah agreed, although he hoped
that candidates’ local credentials would be a more important determining factor in
the elections than national political party affiliations. The continuing
decentralization of authority in the country was cited by several interlocutors as
another positive trend.
57. The mission visited the Special Court for Sierra Leone and reiterated its strong
support for the Court and for the principle of no impunity. The mission
congratulated the Registrar and Chief Prosecutor on the remarkable progress made
in the past year in setting up the Court from scratch to the point where 12
indictments had been issued and 9 of the indictees arrested. One, former
Revolutionary United Front commander, Sam Bockarie, had been killed in Liberia;
his remains were undergoing forensic testing by the Court. The Court was following
up reports that a further indictee, the former leader of the Armed Forces
Revolutionary Council, Johnny Paul Koroma, had also been killed in Liberia.
58. The Registrar appealed for more funding; the Court’s operations were running
on schedule, and within budget, but there was a funding gap of $25 million and the
Court would run out of funds by the end of the year if no new pledges were made.
The Prosecutor explained the reasons for the timing of his announcement of the
indictment of President Taylor and asked the Security Council to consider acting
under Chapter VII of the Charter of the United Nations to compel all Member States
to cooperate with the Court, so that the Court did not have to rely solely on the
conclusion of bilateral agreements to secure the handover of indictees.
59. President Kabbah noted that the indictment of President Taylor had been
widely welcomed in Sierra Leone and that, if he escaped the Court’s jurisdiction,

13

S/2003/688

this could provoke a violent reaction in Sierra Leone. Representatives of civil
society also stressed the importance of President Taylor’s being brought to justice.
The mission was also briefed by officers from the Truth and Reconciliation
Commission whom it congratulated for the progress being made in the
Commission’s important work.
60. The mission thanked the Special Representative for his dedication and service
in Sierra Leone and congratulated him on his recent nomination as Foreign Minister
of Nigeria.
Recommendations
61.

The mission recommends that:

(a) The Government of Sierra Leone should intensify its efforts to
develop the capacity of the Sierra Leonean armed forces and police to ensure
security when UNAMSIL leaves. Donors should support such efforts
generously, as assistance here will be less costly than the continuation of
UNAMSIL.
(b) The Security Council should recognize the linkage between
establishing peace in Liberia and consolidating stability in Sierra Leone and
the Mano River Union subregion, and should take this into account when
deciding on the best option for the drawdown of UNAMSIL.
(c) The successful disarmament, demobilization and reintegration
programme in Sierra Leone should be thoroughly assessed by the United
Nations system to ensure that such programmes in other countries, particularly
in due course in Liberia, take full account of the lessons learned.
(d) The Security Council should examine the lessons to be drawn from
UNAMSIL for the coordination of United Nations peacekeeping, peacebuilding, humanitarian and development efforts, so that the transition from
peacekeeping to longer-term development can be more effectively managed in
other United Nations operations.
(e) The Security Council and other parts of the United Nations system
should give careful consideration to the different roles women play in conflict
and in subsequent peacemaking and peace-building; donors should support
efforts by civil society to empower women’s peace-building efforts and to help
those who have been victims of conflict, including refugees.
(f) The Government of Sierra Leone should devote special effort to
consolidating its control over the diamond-mining areas by ensuring that police
and other civil servants are fully deployed there; and should take all the
necessary measures to enforce fully the certification and licensing regime and
to enable Sierra Leone to participate fully in the Kimberley Process.
(g) Donors should respond rapidly and generously to the urgent funding
needs of the Special Court for Sierra Leone, and the Truth and Reconciliation
Commission. UNAMSIL should provide full cooperation to and support for the
Court.
(h) The local elections in Sierra Leone in 2004 should allow as much
community representation as possible, so as to reinforce the principles of

14

S/2003/688

inclusion and high standards of governance. The United Nations system should,
with the cooperation of the Government of Sierra Leone, monitor the conduct
of the elections carefully.

The West African subregion
Observations and recommendations
62. The reasons for instability in West Africa are many, including abject poverty,
poor standards of governance and irresponsible leadership in certain countries,
illegal exploitation of natural resources and cross-border flows of small arms and
mercenaries. An additional major factor has nevertheless been the persistent
tendency of certain Governments, in particular that of Liberia, to exacerbate already
existing tensions in one or other of their neighbours by meddling in domestic
disputes and using proxies to undermine Governments. The mission believes that
the Security Council, as agreed in resolution 1478 (2003), should consider ways
of promoting regional compliance by following up its demand that such
interference, particularly the provision of weapons to armed groups in
neighbouring countries, must cease.
63. The mission believes that the international community should step up its
support for ECOWAS. ECOWAS is gaining experience and operational traction,
not just in its efforts to resolve individual crises in West Africa, but also in its
broader efforts to promote better governance, subregional economic integration and
observance of human rights and international humanitarian law, and implementation
of peace agreements in the subregion. It is time to give concrete expression to
repeated calls in recent years for increased international support for ECOWAS. The
mission recommends that the Special Representative of the Secretary-General
for West Africa, Ahmedou Ould-Abdallah, undertake a comprehensive study,
in conjunction with the Executive Secretary of ECOWAS and concerned
Member States, of ways in which the international community can increase its
cooperation with, and assist in strengthening the capacity of, ECOWAS.
64. The study should make practical proposals for helping ECOWAS to address
recurrent subregional problems such as the flows of small arms and mercenaries and
the use of child soldiers, including through existing mechanisms such as the
ECOWAS Moratorium on the Importation, Exportation and Manufacture of Small
Arms and Light Weapons in West Africa, the ECOWAS Mechanism for Conflict
Prevention, Management, Resolution, Peacekeeping and Security, and ECOWAS
peacekeeping forces in the subregion. In the meantime, the mission believes that
the Security Council would benefit from more regular exchanges with the
Executive Secretary of ECOWAS and invites him to transmit the
Organization’s reports to the Council, as appropriate.
65. Concerns were expressed to the mission that a major disadvantage for potential
troop-contributing countries of ECOWAS-led peacekeeping operations was that,
unlike United Nations peacekeeping forces, there was no automatic reimbursement
for the costs of deployment. In one such example, the Minister for Foreign Affairs
of Ghana had noted that Ghana had so far received only one $3 million contribution
towards the $17 million cost of its deployment of troops to ECOMICI. The
ECOMICI Force Commander indicated that there was discontent among the troops
regarding the lower level of daily subsistence allowance they received compared to

15

S/2003/688

that received by United Nations peacekeeping troops. Given the proactive and
essential role ECOWAS forces have played in a number of West African countries in
recent years, the mission recommends that the international community should
give priority to the provision of timely and adequate funds and materiel for the
various peacekeeping forces set up by ECOWAS.
66. The mission shares the conviction of ECOWAS, expressed at an extraordinary
session of the Authority of Heads of State and Government held on 28 May 2003,
that only a concerted regional approach can guarantee peace, security and stability
in the subregion. The new Office of the Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral for West Africa, based in Dakar, though yet to be fully staffed, has a
mandate that is both region-wide and multidisciplinary. The mission believes that
this Office should be strengthened by resources from within the United Nations
or from Member States in order to carry out some of the additional tasks
suggested in this report. The mission calls on other branches of the United
Nations system to provide maximum cooperation, information-sharing and
other support to the Office. In order to further improve cooperation with
ECOWAS, the mission recommends that, if acceptable to ECOWAS, an officer
from the Office of the Special Representative of the Secretary-General be colocated at ECOWAS headquarters. This would be consistent with
recommendations made by the Security Council mission to West Africa in October
2000 regarding increasing cooperation between the United Nations and ECOWAS.
67. Some of the mission’s interlocutors proposed that additional assistance be
given to reinforcing the capacity of the Mano River Union secretariat. The mission
recommends that donors give consideration to the funding proposals made by
the Economic Commission for Africa for strengthening the secretariat and for
economic initiatives among the Mano River Union countries as ways of building
subregional cooperation.
68. The mission noted that in each country which has been a source of instability
in the subregion in recent years the issue of the reform of the security sector is of
paramount importance. Donor countries and institutions should pay far greater
attention to this problem — by providing expert assistance, training and
funding — than many have done to date. The United Nations system, with
appropriate assistance from Member States, should, with the experience now
gained, be ready to provide essential elements for security sector reform in the
subregion. This might include the possibility of a regional disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration programme.
69. The mission was encouraged to note the determined stance of ECOWAS States
regarding non-recognition of any group taking power by force, as well as insistence
on respect for constitutional legality, the rule of law and human rights. Any group
considering the use of unconstitutional means to overthrow a Government should be
aware that the era of tolerance for military coups has passed. At the same time, the
mission stresses that the use of force and coups d’état are not the only
unconstitutional methods of seizing or holding on to power. States of the subregion
and the international community should make clear that good governance, stability
and development must receive the highest priority from all governments.
70. In the West African subregion weapons are too readily available without
effective controls. The mission recommends that Member States should take all
necessary measures to stem the sales of arms to countries under arms

16

S/2003/688

embargoes imposed by the Security Council. Panels of experts reporting to
Security Council sanctions committees should monitor national efforts,
including in countries outside the subregion, to investigate and prosecute
sanctions violators. The mission recommends that the United Nations and
ECOWAS propose concrete measures for strengthening the ECOWAS
Moratorium on small arms and light weapons in the subregion, as proposed in
Council resolution 1467 (2003), inter alia, through establishing mechanisms for
verification and information exchange. Halting the activities of mercenaries is
another area where concerted international action is required.
71. Prior to their departure, the members of the mission met with and received
briefings from representatives of the Economic and Social Council and concerned
Secretariat departments and United Nations programmes and agencies, the African
Union and non-governmental organizations. The purpose of the meetings was to
hear a broad range of views on the situation in the subregion. The briefings detailed
the desperate humanitarian situation in much of the subregion; the appalling impact
of conflict on civilians, particularly women, children and families; the widespread
practice of recruiting children as combatants; the serious constraints on access for
humanitarian agencies; and the urgency of ensuring that food, water and medical
supplies reach refugees and internally displaced people, especially in Liberia and
other zones of conflict.
72. Incidents of abduction, rape, looting, mutilation, murder, blocking
humanitarian access, the recruitment of child soldiers, and targeting of civilians are
all too common in West Africa. During the mission’s visit, hundreds of people were
killed in Monrovia by indiscriminate mortar fire and in fighting in other parts of
Liberia, while human rights abuses continued in areas of Côte d’Ivoire. The mission
made it clear to all its interlocutors that the principle of no impunity must be upheld,
and that the Security Council would consider the imposition of serious measures
against Governments and groups that consistently commit human rights abuses or
violate international humanitarian law. It also expressed to the warring parties in
Liberia its extreme concern about the reports of indiscriminate bombardment in
Monrovia, which has caused hundreds of civilian deaths.
73. The recruitment of child soldiers, sadly, continues in West African conflicts. In
its resolution 1460 (2003), the Security Council urged parties that are known to
recruit or use children in violation of international humanitarian law immediately to
halt such recruitment. The mission urges the parties to conflict to arrest and
prosecute anyone responsible for the recruitment of children.
74. The mission emphasized to its interlocutors the necessity of protecting
civilians, particularly women and children, from the effects of armed conflict. It
requests the Secretary-General’s representatives in the subregion to make a
particular effort to monitor the protection of children, as well as the protection
of women from sexual and other types of violence. The mission also encourages
them to continue to include this issue in their reports to the Security Council. The
abuse of women and the forcible recruitment of girls and women as soldiers are
crimes which should rank with other gross abuses of human rights law.
75. In addition, the mission noted the serious shortfall in funding for the
operations of the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees to
provide assistance and protection to refugees and also for programmes for internally
displaced persons in the subregion, and it calls on donors to make additional

17

S/2003/688

contributions. It urges all countries of the subregion to ensure full access for
humanitarian agencies, including across borders if necessary.
76. In every country visited, the mission heard about the problem of
unemployment, especially among young people, and how this was a perennial
source of instability in West Africa. The mission hopes that the Office of the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General for West Africa will undertake
a major collaborative effort with the peace-building and peacekeeping
operations. as well as the rest of the United Nations system and its partners in
the subregion, to devise a practical and concerted regional approach to this
pressing problem.
77. The existing cooperation between the Security Council and the Economic and
Social Council should be further strengthened to produce a coordinated and effective
United Nations response at the intergovernmental level to the need for effective
action on issues of peace and security and of sustainable development in Africa.
78. The mission commends the work of the representatives of the SecretaryGeneral whom it met in West Africa and thanks them for their efforts in organizing
and contributing to programmes for the mission: the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for Côte d’Ivoire, Albert Tevoedjre; the Representative of the
Secretary-General for Guinea-Bissau, David Stephen; the Representative of the
Secretary-General for Liberia, Abou Moussa; the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for Sierra Leone, Oluyemi Adeniji; and the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for West Africa, Ahmedou Ould-Abdallah.
The mission trusts that the Security Council will continue to give full support to
each of them in their efforts to promote stability, democracy and reconciliation in
West Africa.
79. The mission likewise expresses its gratitude to the resident coordinators and
other United Nations staff who did so much towards ensuring the success of the
mission. Finally, all members of the mission acknowledge with admiration the
support of the Secretariat staff, including the ever-watchful security team and everefficient interpreters, throughout the mission’s itinerary.

18

S/2003/688

Annex
A.

Terms of reference and composition of the Security
Council mission
Terms of reference
Regional
• Demonstrate continuing Security Council interest in the subregion
• Encourage more cooperation among countries of the subregion (e.g., the Mano
River Union and ECOWAS); assess follow-up to the Rabat summit; and
identify any obstacles to improved cooperation
• Review the activities of the Office of the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for West Africa
• Examine the links between the conflicts in Liberia, Côte d’Ivoire and Sierra
Leone and their impact on neighbouring countries (including mercenaries,
arms trafficking and refugees)
• Assess progress towards Council objectives on the protection of civilians and
children affected by armed conflict
• Emphasize the need for all countries to respect their obligations with regard to
human rights and international humanitarian law
Sierra Leone
• Assess the success of UNAMSIL in building security in Sierra Leone and its
impact on the protection of civilians
• Assess progress in the UNAMSIL drawdown and the ability of the Sierra
Leone police and armed forces to provide security as it withdraws
• Assess the transition from peacekeeping to longer-term development
• Examine how the Special Court and the Truth and Reconciliation Commission
are addressing justice and reconciliation
Liberia
• Urge the Government of Liberia, LURD and any other armed rebel groups to
engage in ceasefire negotiations and to implement Security Council resolutions
• Call on the Government of Liberia to enhance its cooperation with
neighbouring countries
• Assess how the Government has responded to the Council’s proposals for
resolving the crisis, including an assessment of the chances of free and fair
elections
• Assess the impact and effectiveness of the United Nations Office in Liberia,
how it works with the operational parts of the United Nations country team,
and the Government of Liberia’s expectations of its new mandate

19

S/2003/688

Côte d’Ivoire
• Urge all parties to respect fully the provisions of the ceasefire
• Urge the Government and all the parties to implement fully the LinasMarcoussis Agreement
• Discuss with the Special Representative of the Secretary-General, Albert
Tevoedjre, progress with the United Nations Mission in Côte d’Ivoire
• Emphasize the need for respect for human rights by all parties
• Consider how to tackle the problem of insecurity in western Côte d’Ivoire
Guinea-Bissau
• Urge the Government and President Kumba Yalá to ensure that the
forthcoming elections are conducted in a transparent, fair and credible manner,
and to take the necessary confidence-building steps required of them
• Urge the Government to endorse the partnership approach defined by the ad
hoc advisory group of the Economic and Social Council
Composition
Following consultations among the members of the Security Council it was
decided that the composition of the mission would be as follows:
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland (Ambassador Jeremy
Greenstock, head of mission)
Mexico (Ambassador Adolfo Aguilar Zinser, head of mission in Guinea-Bissau
and Chairman of the Security Council sanctions Committee on Sierra Leone)
Angola (Ambassador Ismael Abraão Gaspar Martins)
Bulgaria (Ambassador Stefan Tafrov)
Cameroon (Ambassador Martin Chungong Ayafor)
Chile (Ambassador Cristián Maquieira)
China (Counsellor Jiang Jiang)
France (Ambassador Michel Duclos)
Germany (Counsellor Monika Iwersen)
Guinea (First Counsellor Cheick Ahmed Tidiane Camara)
Pakistan (First Secretary Asim Iftikhar Ahmad)
Russian Federation (Ambassador Alexander V. Konuzin)
Spain (First Secretary Ana Jiménez)
Syrian Arab Republic (First Secretary Ghassan Obeid)
United States of America (Ambassador Richard S. Williamson)

20

S/2003/688

B.

Terms of reference and composition of the mission of the
Ad Hoc Advisory Group on Guinea-Bissau of the Economic
and Social Council
Terms of reference
• To promote a dialogue with the authorities of Guinea-Bissau
• To appeal to the Government to take measures to prepare for the forthcoming
elections
• To promote a better understanding between the authorities and donors
• To address the humanitarian situation in the country
Composition
South Africa (Ambassador Dumisani Shadrack Kumalo, head of the Ad Hoc
Advisory Group on Guinea-Bissau)
Brazil (Ambassador Ronaldo Mota Sardenberg)
Netherlands (Minister, Arjan Paul Hamburger)
Portugal (Ambassador Gonçalo Aires de Santa Clara Gomes)

21
