S/PV.9302

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-eighth year

9302nd meeting

Wednesday, 12 April 2023, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Nebenzia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Russian Federation)

Members:

Albania . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Brazil. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ecuador. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Gabon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ghana . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Japan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Malta. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Mozambique . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Switzerland . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Arab Emirates . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Ms. Dautllari
Mr. De Almeida Filho
Mr. Zhang Jun
Mr. Pérez Loose
Mr. De Rivière
Mr. Biang
Mr. Agyeman
Mr. Ishikane
Mrs. Frazier
Mr. Fernandes
Mrs. Baeriswyl
Mrs. Alhefeiti
Dame Barbara Woodward
Mr. DeLaurentis

Agenda
The situation in Mali
Report of the Secretary-General on the situation in Mali (S/2023/236)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of
the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room AB-0601
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

23-10188 (E)
*2310188*

The situation in Mali

S/PV.9302

The meeting was called to order at 10.05 a.m.
The President (spoke in Russian): I shall now make
a statement in my capacity as the representative of the
Russian Federation.
Before adopting today’s agenda, I would like to
remind colleagues that today, 12 April, is International
Day of Human Space Flight, which commemorates the
day that Yuri Gagarin became the first person in the
world to carry out a crewed flight into outer space. We
hope that space will remain an area for cooperation,
non-confrontation and peaceful exploration, and not for
an arms race.
I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in Mali
Report of the Secretary-General on the
situation in Mali (S/2023/236)
The President (spoke in Russian): In accordance
with rule 37 of the Council’s provisional rules of
procedure, I invite the representative of Mali to
participate in this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite Mr. El-Ghassim
Wane, Special Representative of the Secretary-General
and Head of the United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali, to participate
in this meeting.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I wish to draw the attention of Council members to
document S/2023/236, which contains the report of the
Secretary-General on the situation in Mali.
I now give the floor to Mr. Wane.
Mr. Wane (spoke in French): I thank you,
Mr. President, for this opportunity to address the
Security Council today. I will begin with an update
on the security situation, which will be followed by an
overview of political and other developments related to
the implementation of the mandate of the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in
Mali (MINUSMA).
2/21

12/04/2023

As described in the report of the Secretary-General
before the Council (S/2023/236), the security situation
remains volatile, marked by ongoing acts of violence by
terrorist groups in some areas of Mali, with devastating
consequences for the civilian population.
The Council may recall that it was around this time
last year that I first briefed the Council on the ongoing
security crisis in the Ménaka region in north-east Mali
(see S/PV.9012). Subsequently, in June of the same year,
I highlighted my concerns about the worsening security
situation and its consequences for the protection of
civilians (see S/PV.9061). I also highlighted the limited
capacities of the Mission and the Malian authorities to
deal with it.
Since the beginning of the year, the situation has
further deteriorated, with the resurgence of clashes
between the Islamic State in the Greater Sahara
(ISGS) and the Jama’a Nusrat ul-Islam wa al-Muslimin
(JNIM), which are competing to increase their areas
of influence and control supply routes and engage in
relentless attacks on the civilian population.
The Malian Defence and Security Forces are
conducting operations against the ISGS around the
town of Ménaka and in areas further south, including
Indelimane, while carrying out convoy escorts along
the Ménaka-Anderamboukane axis and on the road
between Ménaka and Ansongo. On 24 March, the
armed forces of the Niger announced that they had
conducted operations aimed at pursuing elements of
the ISGS in Hamarat, in the Ménaka region. Despite
those efforts, the security and humanitarian situation
remains dire, with more than 30,000 people currently
displaced who have sought refuge in the city of Ménaka
since the beginning of last year. Around 2,400 displaced
persons have also found refuge in an area less than
two kilometres to the north of the MINUSMA camp
in Ménaka. I saw first-hand the devastating impact of
those developments during my visit to Ménaka three
weeks ago, my fifth such visit since my arrival in Mali
in 2021. The influx of internally displaced people has
increased pressure on the humanitarian response, with
populations in urgent need of drinking water, food,
medicine and shelter. Listening to the displaced people
as they literally begged us for drinking water was a
shocking experience.
In an increasingly complicated environment,
MINUSMA, with its limited capabilities, continues to
do its best to protect civilians through a combination of
23-10188

12/04/2023

The situation in Mali

S/PV.9302

day and night patrols in coordination with the Malian
Defence and Security Forces, up to 15 kilometres
outside the city of Ménaka. In addition, the Mission is
pursuing its reconciliation and social cohesion activities
with the aim of defusing the growing intercommunal
tensions. The Mission has also on occasion supported
local authorities through the provision of essential
social services, including the delivery of drinking
water to the displaced population in Ménaka. I would
like to take this opportunity to pay tribute to the
humanitarian actors for their commitment and to plead
for the provision of additional resources so that they
can respond to the needs on the ground. So far only
8 per cent of the $751 million requested by the 2023
humanitarian response plan has materialized.

presence of the Prime Minister, several Malian partners
and representatives of MINUSMA, is an important
step in advancing a comprehensive approach to the
complicated crisis throughout the centre of the country.
MINUSMA, which supported the development of the
strategy, will support the permanent secretariat of the
Cadre politique de gestion de la crise au Centre and
the regional coordination committees, in addition
to providing direct support on the ground through
social cohesion, conflict resolution and reconciliation
activities, including in the Niono, Douentza and Koro
areas. MINUSMA is also continuing its protection-ofcivilian operations in Ogossagou and Douentza, as
well as helping to protect critical infrastructure and
providing access to roads.

In addition to Ménaka, Gao and the centre of the
country are also still dealing with difficult situations.
In the Gao region more than 61,000 people have been
displaced over the past year. In the past three months,
the Islamic State and the JNIM have clashed near
Bara, N’tillit, Anchawadi and Tessit. The signatory
movements have also been involved in fighting with the
Islamic State. The Malian Defence and Security Forces
reported on the mainly aerial operations that they have
been conducting against extremists in the region. In
collaboration with them, MINUSMA is conducting
protection-of-civilian patrols covering 17 sites for
internally displaced persons in Gao and Ansongo, in
north-eastern Mali, aimed at improving the security
and safety of the displaced while at the same time
preventing possible attacks by extremists. Operations
were also conducted in other areas, including Djebock,
which is approximately 34 kilometres to the north-east
of Gao, as well as elsewhere in the region.

(spoke in English)

Central Mali also continues to face complex
security challenges. Most of the incidents reported over
the past three months have occurred in the Mopti and
Ségou regions. In general, the operations led by the
Malian Defence and Security Forces in those areas have
disrupted extremist groups’ activities, mainly by forcing
them to disperse to surrounding areas in the direction
of Timbuktu and Gao. Under that pressure, extremist
groups are using more improvised explosive devices
targeting the ground movements of the Malian Defence
and Security Forces, in addition to making surprise
attacks on several police stations along the major
supply routes. In that context, the Malian Government’s
adoption in September 2022 of its political strategy
for stabilizing the centre, launched in March in the

The Mission has continued to pay particular
attention to the human rights situation in Mali, in
line with its mandate. The preliminary findings for
the first quarter, from January to March, show once
again that the majority of human rights violations
and abuses were committed by extremist groups. As I
have stressed in previous briefings to the Council, it
is important that the Malian authorities make every
effort to ensure that military operations against
terrorist and extremist groups are conducted in full
compliance with international human rights law and
international humanitarian law and that violations and
abuses are transparently and promptly investigated and
the perpetrators brought to justice. At the same time,
I will continue to engage with the Malian authorities
to enhance our cooperation and facilitate the full
implementation of the Mission’s human rights mandate,
in particular investigations into allegations of human
rights violations and abuses, the objective of which
is to strengthen justice and accountability, which are
essential to achieving lasting stabilization in Mali. I
want to take this opportunity to underscore that during
the period under review, we have continued to provide
the Malian Defence and Security Forces with important
capacity-building support in the areas of human rights
and international humanitarian law, as well as carrying
out awareness-raising activities for their members. I
welcome the collaboration that we have developed in
that respect.
In view of the security challenges I have mentioned,
the need for closer coordination between the Malian
Defence and Security Forces and MINUSMA cannot
be emphasized enough. It will enable existing resources

23-101883/21

S/PV.9302

The situation in Mali

to be used more judiciously and ensure greater
effectiveness on the ground. In that regard, I welcome
the steps already taken at the regional level between
local former commanders and the MINUSMA force and
police, as well as the concerted efforts of the leadership
of the MINUSMA force and police and their Malian
counterparts in Bamako. Those steps must be enhanced
in line with the 2017 memorandum of understanding
between Mali and MINUSMA, as emphasized in
successive resolutions mandating the Mission and
in the recently concluded internal strategic review
(S/2023/36). We will continue our consultations with
our Malian partners to arrive at a level of coordination
that is commensurate with the challenges at hand and
can help MINUSMA to better deliver on its mandate in
support of the Malian people.
Freedom of movement is equally important to the
efficacy of our efforts. As indicated in the SecretaryGeneral’s report, we continue to encounter challenges in
that regard, particularly where the use of our intelligence,
surveillance and reconnaissance assets and some of
our ground movements are concerned. Improvements
in that area will be critical to the Mission’s ability to
meet the legitimate expectations of the Malian people
and authorities for enhanced effectiveness. We will
continue to engage with the Malian authorities on the
matter, especially by enhancing coordination.
Finally, it is critical that MINUSMA retain full
operational capability if it is to make a meaningful
contribution to the improvement of the security
situation and the protection environment in Mali. I
want to pay tribute to all the members of troop- and
police-contributing countries for the sacrifices that
they have made during their deployment in Mali and
look forward to the Council’s continued support to
ensure that MINUSMA has the required uniformed
personnel and capabilities.
Let me now turn to the recent political developments
in Mali. As Council members are aware, MINUSMA
and the international mediation, under the leadership of
Algeria, have continued to engage the signatory parties
to the 2015 Agreement on Peace and Reconciliation
in Mali to find ways to ensure the resumption of the
various monitoring mechanisms of the peace agreement.
The paralysis of their activities since December
has heightened tensions and fuelled concerns about
the viability of the peace process. Following a long
consultation process with the parties, the international
mediation submitted proposals last week to facilitate
4/21

12/04/2023

the resumption of the activities of the monitoring
mechanisms and accelerate the implementation of the
outstanding provisions of the peace agreement. It is the
considered view of the entire international mediation
that those proposals should take into account the
concerns expressed by the parties in the course of the
consultations held in Mali and Algeria since January. It
is my earnest hope that the parties will consider those
proposals with the required spirit of compromise in
order to bring about lasting security and stability and
deliver on the long-awaited peace dividends in Mali.
Equally, the parties must refrain from any action or
statement that could heighten tensions or undermine
the ongoing efforts. Now, more than ever before, is
the time for the parties to respond to the profound
aspiration of the Malian people for peace and to rise
above particular interests. The Council’s continued
support for the efforts of the international mediation is
critical at this juncture.
Regarding the transition, the Malian authorities
on 10 March announced the postponement of the
constitutional referendum, which was initially scheduled
to be held on 19 March. The delay was attributed to
the need to ensure the full operationalization of the
newly established Autorité indépendante de gestion
des élections, including the establishment of its local
branches. Another element relates to the need to
popularize the draft constitution, which was presented
by the transition President to Malian stakeholders
on 20 March. Although a new date has yet to be
communicated, the Malian authorities have stated
that the delay will not compromise the restoration of
constitutional order within the agreed timeline — that
is, by March 2024. To that end and as detailed in the
report of the Secretary-General, several steps have
been taken by the Malian authorities to facilitate the
completion of the transition process, including the
finalization of the draft constitution and the adoption
of critical pieces of legislation related to electoral law
and territorial reorganization. It is also worth noting
the ongoing efforts to fully operationalize the local
structures of the Autorité indépendante de gestion des
élections and the printing and distribution of biometric
identity cards, which will serve as voter cards.
While key challenges remain — ranging from the
number of polls to be conducted within the remaining
period of the transition to the related logistical and
financial requirements and the security conditions in
parts of the country — no effort should be spared to
23-10188

12/04/2023

The situation in Mali

S/PV.9302

ensure the return to constitutional rule by the agreed
deadline of March 2024. The United Nations integrated
electoral team, which includes MINUSMA and the
United Nations country team in Mali, has continued to
extend multifaceted support to the transition process by
providing technical assistance to build the capacities of
the members of the Autorité indépendante de gestion
des élections at the national and local levels, as well
as logistical and financial resources to support the
administration of elections, including the acquisition of
ballot boxes and computer equipment, in addition to the
efforts made to encourage inclusivity and consensus
at all stages of the electoral process. I reiterate the
Secretary-General’s call on all partners to extend the
necessary assistance to Mali for the successful conduct
of elections.

Mr. De Rivière (France) (spoke in French): I thank
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General for
his briefing. I wish to highlight three points.

In conclusion, while the challenges in Mali are
manifold, advances are also being made in some areas.
It is important not to overlook them, even if what has
been achieved after a decade of intense international
engagement falls below expectations — not least those
of the Malian people. Indeed, those advances are proof
that, with the sustained engagement of the international
community and the commitment of the Malian
stakeholders, the situation can be turned around. Clearly,
the primary responsibility for stabilizing the country
falls to the Malians, and that cannot be otherwise. The
predicament in which their country finds itself calls for
renewed commitment and efforts to fully harness the
goodwill of the international community, including the
Council, which has unfailingly renewed MINUSMA’s
mandate since 2013. In the same vein, I remain convinced
that the United Nations offers the best framework within
which to support the lasting stabilization of Mali and
the larger Sahel region, in close partnership with the
African Union and the Economic Community of West
African States. We have all the tools required, ranging
from peacekeeping to peacebuilding and development,
and our action is predicated on the principles that bind
the entire membership of the Organization, of which
Mali is a part. That unique position should continue to
be leveraged, given the importance of Mali’s stability
for the region and beyond.

Secondly, I wish to refer the political transition,
which must continue in a timely manner. The Security
Council must be attentive to the assessments of the
African Union and the Economic Community of West
African States, which have taken very clear decisions
and are closely monitoring the process, in particular
following the postponement of the constitutional
referendum initially scheduled to be held on 19 March.
It is crucial that all political and civil society actors be
able to express themselves freely and participate in the
electoral campaign.

The President (spoke in Russian): I thank Mr. Wane
for his briefing.
I shall now give the floor to those members of the
Council who wish to make statements.

My first point concerns the Agreement on
Peace and Reconciliation in Mali. The Council has
always been unanimous in emphasizing the major
importance of that agreement and calling for its full
implementation. We now see that it is under greater
threat than ever. The temptation of escalation is real.
The resumption of hostilities would be disastrous, not
only for the people of Mali but also for the people of
the entire region, and would play into the hands of the
terrorists. The Council must therefore call on all parties
to take responsibility and support the mediation efforts
of Algeria and the United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali (MINUSMA).

Thirdly and finally, I would like to underscore the
role played by MINUSMA. For almost 10 years, it has
represented the considerable efforts of the international
community, with the help of dozens of troopcontributing countries that are paying a heavy price and
to which I would like to hereby pay tribute. MINUSMA
also has an annual budget of over $1.2 billion. Of course,
that tool is not perfect. We must be more demanding
of MINUSMA. Its mandate is robust and must be
implemented in order to protect civilians, support
the peace agreement and guarantee humanitarian
access to the thousands of displaced persons. Like all
peacekeeping operations, MINUSMA has a mandate
in the area of human rights and must be able to carry
out its tasks without hindrance. In that regard, it is not
right that we have yet to be informed about the Moura
massacre, which was committed more than one year
ago, with the involvement of the Wagner Group as we
know. Those responsible must be prosecuted. However,
we must also recognize that MINUSMA is doing what
it can in a difficult environment. We are extremely
concerned about the restrictions on its activities, which

23-101885/21

S/PV.9302

The situation in Mali

are unacceptable. I recall that without drones, the
Mission cannot conduct operations. The announcements
regarding the withdrawal of many contingents, which
represent 20 per cent of the Force, should alert us to the
gravity of the situation.
France calls on Mali and all members of the
Security Council to give the most careful consideration
to the internal review submitted in January by the
Secretary-General (see S/2023/36), which raises
important questions that we must answer together
before the mandate is renewed. The priority for us
all should be to take the necessary decisions so that
MINUSMA can carry out its mission. In that regard, I
would like to recall that the Secretary-General has set
four key parameters — the continuation of the political
transition, the implementation of the peace agreement,
MINUSMA’s freedom of movement and respect for
its entire mandate, including in the area of human
rights. France is ready to work constructively to ensure
MINUSMA’s success, together with all members of
the Council, the troop-contributing countries and, of
course, Mali.
Mrs. Alhefeiti (United Arab Emirates) (spoke in
Arabic): I thank Mr. Wane, Special Representative of
the Secretary-General and Head of the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in
Mali (MINUSMA), for his briefing. We appreciate his
efforts and those of MINUSMA in supporting Mali’s
stability. We also welcome the participation of the
representative of Mali in today’s meeting.
I would like at the outset to reiterate our continued
solidarity with the Malian people, who aspire to live
a dignified and secure life and put an end to the cycle
of challenges their country faces. A comprehensive
approach is needed to address those challenges, paying
equal attention to the political, security, humanitarian
and development aspects, as is the Council’s continued
support for those efforts, including in the upcoming
discussions on the renewal of MINUSMA’s mandate.
We hope that the Council will speak with one voice in
the interests of the Malian people, while taking into
account regional perspectives on the matter. There
is no question that if peacekeeping missions are to
carry out their duties effectively, they must maintain
their cooperation with their host countries, while the
Council must focus on enabling peacekeeping forces to
carry out their duties safely. In that context, we look
forward to the joint study of the Department of Peace
Operations on the capabilities of the military and police
6/21

12/04/2023

forces, which should inform the Council’s discussions
on the future of MINUSMA. I would like to highlight
three points.
First, our main goal must continue to be the success
of the political process, given its importance in building
State institutions. It is therefore essential to continue
making progress during the political transition, in
particular with regard to electoral arrangements for
next year, as well as the related constitutional steps.
Dialogue at the national and regional levels, including
with the Economic Community of West African
States and the African Union, remains a fundamental
pillar for building on the gains made in the political
process, which also requires the continued support
of the international community. The Agreement
on Peace and Reconciliation in Mali provides a
framework for establishing sustainable security and
stability in Mali, and in that regard, we hope that
international mediation efforts will help the signatories
to communicate constructively in order to address
outstanding issues and overcome the obstacles to the
Agreement’s implementation.
Secondly, addressing the security challenges in
Mali requires an approach that matches their complexity,
in particular where the transborder challenges are
concerned. The most salient example is the threat
posed by terrorist groups, such as the Islamic State in
the Greater Sahara and those affiliated with Al-Qaida,
which continue to threaten the security and stability of
Mali and the region through their spread of extremism
and violence. Regional and subregional cooperation is
a major element in addressing those grave threats, and
we believe that regional initiatives and leaders’ efforts
to enhance coordination and cooperation in the Sahel
are encouraging steps that deserve support. The United
Arab Emirates continues to support regional initiatives,
which reflect the commitment of the countries of the
region to continuing to work together to advance shared
goals and enhance collective security. Achieving
long-term peace and stability in Mali demands that
we focus our efforts on addressing the root causes
of violence and extremism. That includes ensuring
that those efforts are adapted to the local contexts in
Mali and to the community’s needs, including those of
religious leaders, women and young people, as well as
initiatives aimed at spreading the values of tolerance
and moderation.
As we all know, there can be no security
without development and no development without
23-10188

12/04/2023

The situation in Mali

security. Supporting development and humanitarian
programmes in Mali is therefore crucial. Initiatives
such as the strategy for Central Mali have the potential
to help protect peoples against extremist ideology and
provide opportunities for prosperity. We also believe
that consolidating national efforts would improve
the security situation in Mali, including by making
progress in the disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration process.
Thirdly and lastly, particular attention must be
paid to the humanitarian crisis in Mali resulting from
violence, food insecurity and climate change. The fact
that nearly 9 million people are in need of humanitarian
assistance demands that we make further efforts to
strengthen Mali’s resilience. We also reiterate the
importance of improving our understanding of the
relationship between climate change and insecurity,
including its impact on the humanitarian situation.
We stress the importance of including information
and analysis on the threats posed by climate change to
peace and security in the Secretary-General’s report,
which would help the Council to address such issues
proactively, comprehensively and effectively.
Ms. Dautllari (Albania): I thank Special
Representative of the Secretary-General Wane for
his briefing and commend the work of the dedicated
peacekeepers and personnel of the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in
Mali (MINUSMA). We also welcome the representative
of Mali to today’s meeting.
This year is crucial for Mali as the country
prepares for a return to constitutional order by March
2024. However, Albania remains concerned about
the multidimensional crisis facing the country and
the outstanding benchmarks that need to be reached
to facilitate the transition. I would like to make
three points.
First, we acknowledge that some progress has
been achieved by the transitional authorities in recent
months, and we welcomed the advancement of the
constitutional review. However, it is now crucial to
ensure that the draft constitution is adopted with a
broad-based consensus. We encourage the authorities
to facilitate the return to constitutional order within
the timelines agreed with the Economic Community
of West African States, and stress the importance
of organizing a transparent, inclusive and credible
electoral process that includes women and civil society

S/PV.9302

and ensures respect for freedom of expression. The
constitutional reform should not be a reason to delay
the elections.
The stalled implementation of the Algiers Accord is
a major concern, and we urge all parties to demonstrate
their commitment to implementing the agreement. In
that regard, we commend the international mediation
efforts and the communiqué issued on 9 April, and
we join the call for the parties to accept the proposals,
overcome their differences and resume a dialogue.
Secondly, we remain deeply concerned about
the security situation in Mali. As highlighted in the
Secretary- General’s report (S/2023/236), the Gao and
Ménaka regions have become an epicentre for hostilities
by violent jihadist groups targeting civilians, causing
mass displacement and using improvised explosive
devices, which have killed three peacekeepers and
injured five others. We recognize the challenges that the
transitional authorities face in tackling insecurity, but
it is a deplorable fact that since the Malian Defence and
Security Forces started conducting military operations
with the Wagner Group, violations and abuses have
increased. We stress that States are responsible for
conducting military operations with full respect for
human rights and within the framework of international
humanitarian law.
Thirdly, we commend MINUSMA’s efforts to
work with the transitional authorities to stabilize the
country, but regrettably, the Mission continues to face
major restrictions on its freedom of movement, with
approximately 300 flight denials just in the last quarter
and restrictions on the effective implementation of its
mandate, especially the human rights pillar. To that
end, we have yet to receive a report on the atrocities
committed last year during the Moura operations and
call for the release of those findings.
As we approach the mandate renewal in June,
the MINUSMA review conducted by the SecretaryGeneral will play a crucial role in determining the best
course of action for the Mission. During that period, the
authorities must show commitment, end all restrictions
and respect the status of forces agreement with
MINUSMA, which affects the protection of civilians
and the safety of peacekeepers.
Mr. Agyeman (Ghana): I have the honour of
delivering this statement on behalf of the African
members of the Security Council (A3), namely, Gabon,
Mozambique and Ghana.

23-101887/21

S/PV.9302

The situation in Mali

We welcome the quarterly report of the SecretaryGeneral on the situation in Mali (S/2023/236) and
thank Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral El-Ghassim Wane for his insightful briefing
and for his effective leadership of the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in
Mali (MINUSMA). We also welcome the participation
at this meeting of our brother, the Permanent
Representative of Mali.
While the situation in Mali continues to be complex
and difficult, we acknowledge that some gains have
been achieved since the last briefing to the Council
three months ago (see S/PV.9251), including on the
substantive elements of the Peace and Reconciliation
Agreement in Mali, such as the draft constitution, the
justice, truth and reconciliation commission and the
efforts to operationalize the electoral management body.
We pay tribute to the gallant MINUSMA personnel
who continue to sacrifice their lives to achieve peace
in Mali. We believe that the continued operation of the
Mission is essential to stabilizing the security situation
in the country. The A3 welcomes the resolve of the
Malian Armed Forces to secure the Malian territory in
line with its sovereign commitments.
In this statement, the A3 intends to address the
political, security and humanitarian situation in Mali.
First, on the political situation, we remain concerned
by the paralysis of the Follow-up Committee on the
Peace and Reconciliation Agreement in Mali, which
has not met since November 2022. We urge the early
convening of the seventh high-level session of the
Agreement Monitoring Committee to address the
differences in the implementation of the Agreement
and encourage the safeguarding of the civic space since
it underpins efforts in advancing the political process.
We note the partial implementation of the accelerated
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration process,
the continued holding of the ceasefire arrangements
under the Peace Agreement and some progress in the
transition road map. We believe that these factors are
necessary building blocks that must be consolidated in
the transition to restore constitutional order through the
conduct of peaceful elections by March 2024.
While recognizing the efforts being made by
the Malian authorities to restore constitutional order
in the country, we remain concerned about some
obstacles, including unresolved differences over
the draft constitution and the postponement of the
8/21

12/04/2023

referendum. The transition serves as a springboard to
the effective realization of the Peace Agreement as well
as the fulfilment of the country’s obligations under
the Protocol on Democracy and Good Governance of
the Economic Community of the West African States
(ECOWAS). It is important that the remaining time be
effectively organized to realize the institutional reforms
and fulfil the electoral commitment.
We call on all the parties to the Peace Agreement
to remain united in resolving prevailing differences
since the lack of unity undermines the disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration process, including the
development of the national strategic plan for 2022–
2024. The implementation of the Peace Agreement
remains essential to getting the country out of the
crisis, and we accordingly urge all the signatories to
show political will. We commend in this regard the
diplomatic efforts and investments of Algeria on
the issue.
Secondly, on the security horizon, we remain
worried about the nature of the situation, which has
been characterized by persisting incidents of terrorist
attacks and the continuous use of improvised explosive
devices, leading to civilian and military casualties.
We strongly condemn such attacks and express our
condolences to the families and victims of these
atrocious acts. The security gaps in parts of Mali,
especially in the north and centre, risk heightening
insecurity and emboldening terrorist groups to navigate
their way through and wreak more havoc. We welcome
the launch of the strategy for the stabilization of the
centre by the Prime Minister in Mopti on 17 March
and call for strong commitment in its implementation
to help tackle the security situation. We hope that the
withdrawal of some troop-contributing countries, the
most recent being Jordan, will be mitigated and that
State presence will be enhanced.
While awaiting the outcome of the joint military
and police capability study on the strategic review, it
is important for urgent steps to be taken in addressing
the logistical and operational constraints facing the
Mission. The provision of adequate troop strength,
enhancement of the counter-terrorism strategies,
provision of airlift assets, and removal of both land
and air restrictions are critical in making the Mission
more responsive to the evolving security challenges in
Mali. We continue to encourage the host authorities’
cooperation with MINUSMA in accordance with the
status-of-forces agreement.
23-10188

12/04/2023

The situation in Mali

The A3 recalls that the destabilization of Mali and the
Sahel region is directly connected to the destabilization
of Libya, as we note with concern the spillover effect on
the Sahel of the lingering crisis in that country. We call
for coordinated action to help manage the threat that the
return of foreign terrorist fighters and the proliferation
of small arms and light weapons pose to the stability of
Mali. We also note the complementary role of regional
security arrangements, such as the Multinational Joint
Task Force, the Accra Initiative and the Group of Five
for the Sahel Joint Force, and hope that the upcoming
report of the high-level panel on the Sahel will interlock
the benefits of those arrangements in ways that would
advance Mali’s stability.
The dire humanitarian situation, arising from the
persisting conflict, climate shocks and food insecurity
that has resulted in 175,000 additional refugees and an
estimated 8.8 million people in need of humanitarian
assistance in 2023, requires urgent attention. We recall
that climate change is one of the causes of persistent
insecurity and the rise of communal tensions in Mali
and the Sahel region. We appeal to donor partners
to consider increasing their funding support to help
meet the $751.4 million target required to tackle the
humanitarian situation.
Despite the efforts being made by the host
authorities on the human rights front, including the
establishment of a human rights division within the
Ministry of Justice, we consider that we are not yet out
of the woods, given the persistence of grave human
rights violations against women and children, including
conflict-related sexual violence, as well as abductions
that are committed mainly by armed groups. For justice
to prevail, we encourage the authorities to expedite
investigations and facilitate the speedy arrest and
prosecution of perpetrators of such crimes.
Lastly, we urge the prioritization of investments
in inclusive processes for socioeconomic development
in addressing the root causes of instability in Mali.
This can be achieved through interventions that create
meaningful jobs for women and youth, and harness
their potentials in the governance process, including
in decision-making, conflict-prevention and mediation
efforts. The intervening role of the Peacebuilding
Commission in climate-related peace and development
interventions as well as in the promotion of communitybased dispute-resolution mechanisms, inter alia,
remains paramount and should be encouraged.

S/PV.9302

In concluding, the A3 believes that the expected
peace dividends in Mali can be realized if all
stakeholders comprising the Security Council, the
African Union, ECOWAS, donor partners and the host
authorities consider the solution to the crisis as a shared
responsibility and demonstrate strong political will in
fulfilling their respective obligations. Additionally, the
convergence of views among Council members towards
the successful mandate renewal of MINUSMA in the
coming months will be critical. The A3 encourages
the Malian authorities to continue their efforts in
addressing the crisis and improve access to basic social
services, including the restoration of State authority
and presence nationwide. We express our solidarity
with the people of Mali, reaffirm our respect for
their sovereignty and territorial integrity and call on
the international community to unite their actions in
restoring lasting peace in the country.
Mr. Pérez Loose (Ecuador) (spoke in Spanish): I
thank Mr. El-Ghassim Wane, Special Representative of
the Secretary-General and Head of the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in
Mali (MINUSMA), and acknowledge the presence of
the representative of Mali at today’s meeting.
Today’s briefing on the situation in Mali shows
that the challenges in the security environment persist
and that unfortunately little progress has been made.
In this context, an analysis of the MINUSMA mandate
in the light of next June is pertinent. For now, I will
focus on four axes: first, the implementation of the
Peace and Reconciliation Agreement in Mali; secondly,
the MINUSMA mandate; thirdly, progress made by
the truth, justice and reconciliation commission; and
fourthly, completion of the transition process.
First, the implementation of the Agreement on
Peace and Reconciliation in Mali is, and will remain,
essential. We therefore commend the role played by the
international mediation, led by Algeria, and the steps
taken on 13 March, with the support of MINUSMA.
Mali’s security and stability are indisputably linked to
the stability of the Sahel region and the entire NorthWest Africa region. In that regard, Ecuador calls for the
meetings of the implementing bodies to resume as soon
as possible, particularly the Monitoring Committee.
As the Secretary-General’s report (S/2023/236)
rightly points out, the peace agreement is the best way
to promote lasting reconciliation and break the cycles
of violence. Re-establishing State authority throughout

23-101889/21

S/PV.9302

The situation in Mali

the country is essential to strengthening the peace
process. That will allow for building an environment
conducive to development, the defence of human rights
and inclusion policies, which, among other factors, will
facilitate the return of the displaced — a situation that
is currently exacerbating the humanitarian crisis facing
the country.
Secondly, MINUSMA’s ability to implement its
mandate requires respect for, and the implementation
of, the status-of-forces agreement. I am referring in
particular to the Mission’s freedom of movement and
intelligence, surveillance and reconnaissance flight
permits, including the use of unmanned aerial vehicles,
both of which are essential for the effective protection
of civilians and the safety of Mission personnel in an
environment of asymmetric threats.
It must be borne in mind that the rules of engagement
of United Nations peace operations do not allow
the deployment of forces to fight against terrorists.
It is therefore essential to strengthen regional and
subregional strategic cooperation in an environment
of porous borders in order to stop the proliferation of
terrorist activities and organized crime.
Thirdly, we recognize the progress of the Truth,
Justice and Reconciliation Commission, which has the
support of MINUSMA. Let us remember that there
is no peace without justice and no justice without
the reconciliation and reintegration process of excombatants. In that regard, we believe that the Malian
Government should bring to justice the perpetrators
of serious violations and criminal activities, whatever
their origin. My delegation wishes to recall that the
MINUSMA mandate regarding investigative activities
is an indispensable tool to that end. We therefore call on
the Government to allow access for such activities to be
carried out in an unimpeded manner.

12/04/2023

Meanwhile, I would like to recall some aspects
that continue to cause us concern. Ecuador condemns
the smear campaigns and attacks on social networks
to which the civil society representative invited to
the Security Council consultations on 27 January
has been subjected, illustrating a reduction in civic
space. We call for such attacks to be counteracted by
encouraging campaigns to combat disinformation,
especially against the opposition and MINUSMA. In
that context, we deplore the expulsion of the Head of
the MINUSMA Human Rights and Protection Division,
which sends an adverse signal of the politicization and
instrumentalization of human rights.
I would like to reiterate that, for Ecuador, the full,
equal and meaningful participation of women in all
areas is a priority. We urge the further strengthening
of the presence of women in all functions and political
positions, in compliance not only with the minimum
30 per cent quota but beyond it.
Finally, I would like to mention the MINUSMA
internal review, which identifies three options for the
Mission’s future. Its analysis by Council members
should point out that it is always preferable to bring
about and strengthen cooperation on all fronts, and not
in isolation.
Ecuador reiterates its support for any effort that
benefits the Malian population and respectfully calls
on that country’s authorities to advance on the path of
dialogue and conciliation.
Mr. Zhang Jun (China) (spoke in Chinese): At
the outset, I thank Special Representative Wane for
his briefing. I welcome Ambassador Issa Konfourou,
Permanent Representative of Mali, to this meeting.

We also call on all actors to respect human rights
and international humanitarian law. In that regard, we
recognize the training activities that MINUSMA carries
out with the Malian Armed Forces to combat terrorism.

As Special Representative Wane said in his
briefing, Mali is at a crucial stage in implementing the
peace agreement, promoting the political transition and
preparing for elections. The international community
must move in the same direction with the Malian parties
and provide constructive support for its peace and
development. Allow me to stress the following points.

Fourthly, the timely completion of the transition
process, including the adoption of the draft constitution,
is crucial. We encourage the continued support of the
African Union, the Economic Community of West
African States and MINUSMA, whose catalytic
management requires the necessary resources to bring
about a return to constitutional order.

First, we must support Mali’s efforts to counter
terrorism and maintain stability. That is the top
priority. The Malian Government has been vigorously
conducting counter-terrorism operations, launched
a comprehensive strategy to stabilize the central
regions and made robust efforts to improve the
regional situation and ensure the safety and security

10/21

23-10188

12/04/2023

The situation in Mali

of its people. Such efforts merit our recognition.
Nonetheless, terrorist activities in central and northern
Mali remain rampant. Terrorists ransacked villages
and expelled villagers, causing massive casualties
and displacement and posing a serious threat to the
stability in Mali and the wider region. The international
community must prioritize supporting Mali’s efforts in
counter-terrorism, maintaining stability and protecting
civilians. Assistance must be increased by, inter
alia, funding equipment, intelligence and logistics.
The United Nations Multidimensional Integrated
Stabilization Mission in Mali (MINUSMA) must
effectively fulfil its mandate from the Council and
provide all-round support.
The representatives of some countries spoke of
the human rights issue. We believe that the ultimate
purpose of counter-terrorism operations is to protect
the rights of civilians to life, security and other basic
human rights. We object to using human rights as a
political instrument to interfere with counter-terrorism
operations, and we do not uphold linking human rights
with counter-terrorism support. That would amount
to intervention in Mali’s sovereignty and be counterproductive to the protection of human rights.
Secondly, we must promote the implementation of
the peace agreement. That is critical to maintaining
peace and stability in Mali. We look forward to
concerted efforts by the Malian Government and
other signatories. We commend and support Algeria
for its mediation and good offices. The parties should
effectively fulfil their commitments, adopt measures
such as high-level dialogue to accommodate each
other’s concerns and resolve their differences in a
collective effort to maintain national sovereignty,
security and unity. MINUSMA must provide more
support in areas such as supporting the parties’
compliance with the ceasefire arrangement, advancing
the disarmament, demobilization and reintegration
process and assisting in capacity-building for the
national security forces. China supports MINUSMA in
rolling out the community violence reduction projects
and quick-impact projects in central and northern
Mali and providing more support for water supply,
agriculture, infrastructure, vocational training, et
cetera, to eliminate the root causes of conflicts.
Thirdly, we must provide constructive support for
the political transition. The Malian authorities have
engaged in extensive dialogue with the parties and have
done a great deal of work in drafting the constitution

S/PV.9302

and preparing for the general elections, among other
things. The international community should support the
Malian parties in taking the opportunity of the political
transition, resolving their differences through dialogue
and ensuring the smooth holding of general elections
so as to lay a solid foundation for lasting stability in
Mali. China supports the Economic Community of
West African States in its continued good offices
and mediating efforts on the basis of respect for
Mali’s sovereignty and ownership. The international
community must remain patient, provide more support
and encouragement for Mali’s political transition and
take practical steps to help Mali tackle any difficulties
that may arise in the electoral preparations and other
areas.
In guiding MINUSMA to overcome its trials and
tribulations, Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral Wane has also accomplished a great amount
of work. In the current context, the Mission has been
confronted with many new issues and challenges
in discharging its duties. China supports closer
communication between the Mission and the Malian
authorities to resolve issues through dialogue and
consultation. In June, the Security Council will discuss
the Mission’s mandate renewal. It is our view that the
Security Council should listen attentively to the views
of the Malian Government and should streamline and
optimize the Mission’s mandate, as required, in order
to enhance its operational performance. Recently,
MINUSMA tweeted a video clip showcasing a typical
day in the working life of Zhou Juan, a female Chinese
paramedic at a level-2 hospital. The tweet was widely
praised and received numerous likes. Such practices
help project a positive image of peacekeeping operations
by winning the support and trust of the Government
and the people of the country concerned. China stands
ready to work with the international community to make
a greater contribution to lasting peace and development
in Mali.
Mrs. Baeriswyl (Switzerland) (spoke in French): I
thank Special Representative of the Secretary-General
El-Ghassim Wane for his briefing.
Switzerland condemns the violence and attacks
perpetrated since our previous meeting (see S/PV.9251)
against Blue Helmets, the Malian armed forces and
civilians, and at the outset I would like to express my
deepest condolences to the families of the victims.

23-1018811/21

S/PV.9302

The situation in Mali

The report of the Secretary-General (S/2023/236)
notes progress in the political transition process. The
next milestone will be the timely holding of credible and
transparent elections. The seating of the 15 members,
including four women, of the Autorité indépendante
de gestion des élections is a positive development
in anticipation of the elections to be held in the first
quarter of 2024.
Women’s participation in the elections, both as
candidates and voters, must be substantial. It is a matter
of “winning with women”, a motto that was echoed
in an initiative supported by Switzerland and the
United States Agency for International Development,
which enabled the political parties to assess women’s
representation within their official ranks.
In view of the parameters presented by the
Secretary-General in the internal review of the United
Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization
Mission in Mali (MINUSMA), let me highlight three
key points concerning the overall situation in Mali:
First, the Agreement on Peace and Reconciliation
in Mali is a critical instrument for peacebuilding.
It must remain the central framework in order to
avoid a resumption of hostilities among the signatory
movements. However, the implementation of the
agreement currently appears to be at an impasse. We
encourage the Government and the signatory movements
that have committed to the agreement to resume
regular dialogue through the established mechanisms.
Switzerland welcomes the efforts undertaken in that
regard by the members of the international mediation,
led by Algeria. We remain committed to supporting the
implementation of the peace agreement.
Secondly, in order to strengthen security in Mali, the
launch of the strategy for the stabilization of the central
regions and its 2022 to 2024 action plan is an important
step. We support that consolidated approach, which is
aimed at restoring peace, security and social cohesion,
as well as improving governance and strengthening
justice. The challenge now is to implement the strategy
without delay, in close collaboration with MINUSMA.
In order to combat the current growing insecurity
in Mali, all actors must act in a concerted manner.
MINUSMA’s freedom of movement and increased
coordination with the Malian Defence and Security
Forces must be guaranteed. Flight restrictions reduce
both the safety of the Mission’s personnel and its ability
to fulfil its mandate for the benefit of Malians.
12/21

12/04/2023

Thirdly and lastly, international humanitarian
law and international human rights law must be
respected in all circumstances. In particular, both
the Working Group on Children and Armed Conflict
and the Informal Expert Group on Women and Peace
and Security recently have noted a worrisome trend
in Mali. The number of grave violations against
children continues to grow, including the cases of their
recruitment, exploitation and abduction. Similarly,
sexual and gender-based violence is increasing, in
particular violence related to armed conflict, in areas
in which the humanitarian situation is precarious and
armed groups are present. We urge all parties to the
conflict in Mali to immediately end such violations
and release all children within their ranks. We also
call on the authorities to prosecute the perpetrators in
order to combat impunity. Without respect for those
fundamental rights and for accountability, achieving
lasting peace will be impossible.
Over the past 10 years, the Security Council has
repeatedly adapted the Mission’s mandate to best
meet the needs and expectations of the Malian people.
The continued support of the Council and the work
of MINUSMA are vital for resolving the multiple
challenges that threaten the security and the future of
Mali. Restoring peace requires, first and foremost, a
firm commitment to unconditionally respect human
rights and international humanitarian law, implement
the peace agreement without delay and take the
necessary measures to build mutual trust — and not to
undermine it.
Mrs. Frazier (Malta): I also thank the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for his
comprehensive briefing, and I welcome the presence of
our colleague the Permanent Representative of Mali at
this meeting.
Malta reiterates its full support for the United
Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization
Mission in Mali (MINUSMA) and its work on the
ground. We pay tribute to all the brave women and men
who have served and continue to serve as peacekeepers,
and we unreservedly condemn all attacks made
against them.
Malta underscores its continued support for the
implementation of the 2015 Agreement on Peace and
Reconciliation in Mali. We welcome the mediation
efforts under Algeria’s leadership as integral to
fostering constructive dialogue among the parties. We
23-10188

12/04/2023

The situation in Mali

also express our support for the Economic Community
of West African States in assessing the progress of
Mali’s transition. As we look forward to MINUSMA’s
mandate renewal, we shall approach the discussion
from three angles: first, the need to achieve political
progress towards a democratic transition; secondly, the
imperative need for all parties to holistically address
the grave security, human rights and humanitarian
situation; and thirdly, the need for collective efforts
to be made to ensure that MINUSMA operates in an
unhindered manner.
We acknowledge the relative progress made in the
political sphere through the formal launch of the strategy
for the stabilization of the central regions, in line with
MINUSMA’s main priorities, which is a decisive step
towards the reopening of schools, accessing basic and
social services, improving working conditions and
enhancing women’s participation in policy formulation.
Malta also acknowledges the consultative process
towards the drafting of a constitution, in particular
its references to elements within the peace agreement,
while recognizing the need for further deliberations.
It is crucial that timelines for the holding of the
referendum be established and respected. However, we
are deeply concerned about the ongoing grave security
threats emanating from persistent terrorist threats in
the region, which also serve to further exacerbate the
cycle of violence. Malta commends the cooperation
provided by MINUSMA to the Malian armed forces in
that regard.
It is crucial that all ancillary acts are conducted
with respect for international humanitarian law and
human rights law. We condemn all violations and
abuses committed against civilians by armed groups
and State and non-State actors, as well as private
military companies such as the Wagner Group. We call
for accountability and stress that the perpetrators must
not go unpunished. As we remember the hundreds of
civilians killed in the deplorable massacre in Moura last
year, we urge for a thorough investigation and for those
responsible for the atrocities to be held to account.
As Mali grapples with an alarming humanitarian
crisis precipitated by conflict, climate and food
insecurity, an estimated 8.8 million people will require
assistance in 2023 — a number that is up 17 per cent
from 2022. Conflict continues to drive large-scale
displacement, both within and outside Mali’s borders.
Concerns about protection, especially those related to
conflict and gender-based violence, continue to be an

S/PV.9302

unacceptable feature of the conflict. In that regard,
we urge the Malian authorities to create a conducive
environment that protects and empowers women and
girls while ensuring that any violence against them is
addressed promptly. Malta remains concerned about
the grave violations that have been reported against
children in Mali and will continue working with the
Malian authorities to address the matter.
As we recognize the critical work of MINUSMA, we
call for the lifting of any restrictions on the movement
and access of the Mission. Any hindrance to its work
constitutes a violation of the status of forces agreement.
In conclusion, Malta underscores that political
dialogue remains central to our collective efforts in
Mali. Mutual trust and respect among all stakeholders
are critical. Malta remains engaged in supporting the
work of the Special Representative and MINUSMA
as they support Mali in its journey towards peace
and stability.
Dame Barbara Woodward (United Kingdom):
I thank Special Representative Wane for his briefing
and underscore our appreciation for the hard work
and courage of the United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali (MINUSMA)
peacekeepers.
When the Council last met to discuss Mali (see
S/PV.9251) we had just received the SecretaryGeneral’s review (S/2023/36). It established four
parameters against which progress was needed for
MINUSMA to remain effective and relevant. There are
clear indications in the latest report (S/2023/236) that
such progress has not been made. In fact, the trajectory
seems to be worsening in several respects.
First, ground and air movement restrictions
continue to hinder peacekeepers, with almost a quarter
of flight requests rejected by the authorities during
the reporting period. That impedes the protection of
civilians and puts peacekeepers at risk.
Secondly, MINUSMA’s human rights director was
expelled following the dangerous criticism directed at
the civil-society representative who briefed the Council
in January. That reflects a worrisome disregard for
the Mission’s mandate. We count on the Mission’s
continued commitment to investigating and reporting
on human rights. In that regard, we urge the release,
without further delay, of the United Nations report
on the alleged massacre of civilians in Moura by

23-1018813/21

S/PV.9302

The situation in Mali

12/04/2023

Malian armed forces and Wagner Group personnel in
March 2022.

obligations, under its status-of-forces agreement, to
ensure MINUSMA’s freedom of movement and access.

Thirdly, tensions persist between signatories
to the Agreement on Peace and Reconciliation in
Mali. The United Kingdom, along with the wider
international mediation representatives, stands ready
to provide support. We urge the parties to engage
with the international mediation proposals presented
last week and aimed at relaunching the peace process.
While all the parties need to show a willingness to
engage on concrete implementation measures, it is the
Malian authorities that ultimately have the primary
responsibility to implement the agreement. We urge
them to take the first step.

We are gravely concerned about the transition
Government’s decision to expel MINUSMA’s human
rights chief. We condemn the continued obstruction
of the United Nations human rights mandates in Mali
and reject the assertion that human rights are being
politicized. The Council has mandated MINUSMA
to report impartially on the human rights situation in
Mali, and interference with its ability to carry out that
mandate is unacceptable. We urge the Mission to ensure
that all information-sharing arrangements are in full
compliance with the United Nations Human Rights Due
Diligence Policy. We are also greatly concerned about
the fact that the Malian transition Government did not
issue visas to the Panel of Experts of the Committee
established pursuant to resolution 2374 (2017). Without
on-the-ground reporting from the Panel, the Sanctions
Committee is affected. We call on all members to
cooperate with the Panel of Experts and facilitate
their travel.

Fourthly, the timely transition to constitutional
rule by March 2024 remains imperative. Electoral
and constitutional reforms should not be allowed to
impede that.
The Council will be faced with some difficult
decisions in June. With few visible signs from the
Malian authorities of a commitment to meeting the
Secretary-General’s parameters, the June renewal of
MINUSMA’s mandate cannot be seen as business as
usual. We should be ready to adapt and refocus the
Mission, reviewing any support that carries risks to the
credibility and reputation of the United Nations.
Mr. DeLaurentis (United States of America): I
thank Special Representative Wane for his briefing.
We are pleased to see that the Secretary-General’s
report (S/2023/236) focuses on the four parameters
included in the United Nations strategic review of
the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated
Stabilization Mission in Mali (MINUSMA) (S/2023/36).
They are essential benchmarks for assessing the
continued viability of the Mission. We urge the transition
Government of Mali to demonstrate immediate
progress on the political transition, the implementation
of the Algiers accords and MINUSMA’s freedom of
movement and ability to implement the entirety of its
mandate, including its human rights provisions.
I have to say that it is unacceptable that the
Malian authorities denied nearly 300 flight requests
during the reporting period. That threatens the safety
and security of the peacekeepers serving in Mali and
hinders their ability to implement their mandate. While
we fully support MINUSMA’s efforts to resolve those
restrictions, we emphasize the transition Government’s
14/21

As we recognize the one-year anniversary of the
civilian massacre in Moura, we are disappointed that
the United Nations has not released its report on the
incident. The Malian people deserve an honest and
transparent account of it and of all allegations of human
rights violations and abuses within their borders.
Furthermore, the Council needs to have all the facts
to hand before entering into negotiations to renew
MINUSMA’s mandate.
While we are concerned about the postponement of
the 19 March constitutional referendum, we nonetheless
commend the preparations and progress made by the
transition authorities on fulfilling an ambitious timeline
for elections. We offer our full support to MINUSMA
and its United Nations partners as they provide critical
technical assistance and capacity-building support to
ensure that Malians can safely go to the polls and see
constitutional rule successfully restored.
The lack of progress on resuming the normal
functioning of the implementation mechanisms of the
Algiers accords is of significant concern as well. The
tireless efforts of MINUSMA, the Algerian Government
and the international mediation to revitalize those
mechanisms are commendable, but the responsibility for
overcoming the impasse lies with the signatory armed
groups and the transition authorities. Parties should
demonstrate their renewed commitment to the Algiers
23-10188

12/04/2023

The situation in Mali

Agreement. As the Secretary-General wrote in his
review of the Mission, MINUSMA’s success hinges on
the full cooperation of the Malian authorities. It would
be irresponsible of the Security Council to continue to
deploy peacekeepers in conditions in which they cannot
succeed. We urge the Malian transitional Government
to end its restrictions on MINUSMA and demonstrate
that it will carry out its political commitments.
Mr. Ishikane (Japan): I thank Special
Representative Wane for the insightful briefing, and I
also welcome the participation of the representative of
Mali in today’s meeting.
Japan expresses its sincere condolences to the
families of the peacekeepers who lost their lives in
the service of the United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali (MINUSMA),
including the three Senegalese peacekeepers killed
in February. Japan appreciates and fully supports the
work of MINUSMA.
I would like to start by reiterating Japan’s
determination to stand by the people of Mali and their
desire for peace and stability. We must keep their
aspirations foremost in our minds as we discuss the
issue here in the Security Council. The best way forward
towards establishing lasting peace is to strengthen
cooperation among all stakeholders, domestically,
regionally and internationally, including the Council
and MINUSMA.
Japan notes the progress made towards a return to
constitutional order. Securing a safe, political and civic
space for all parties concerned to express their views
and engage in political dialogue is essential as the
country prepares to conduct free, fair and transparent
elections to complete the democratic transition in Mali
by March 2024.
The 2015 Agreement on Peace and Reconciliation
in Mali is the only existing framework for achieving
durable peace and reconciliation, and its implementation
should go hand in hand with the democratic transition.
The role played by the international mediation is ever
more important, including through efforts such as
those announced last Friday, aimed at relaunching the
implementation of the peace agreement.
For a stable, prosperous society, civil society plays
an important role. It is also imperative that the Council
hear the diverse voices of a variety of actors, including

S/PV.9302

civil society. No one should experience intimidation
before or after briefing the Council.
The worsening security situation, which now also
prevails in the south, is alarming. We recognize the
efforts by Malian forces to address the situation. At the
same time, Japan echoes the Secretary-General’s view,
stressing that efforts to foster social cohesion, address
structural fragility, deliver basic services and ensure
respect for human rights and international humanitarian
law must accompany security operations.
Japan commends the continued commitment
by MINUSMA to fulfil its mandate despite facing
difficulties, including restrictions on its freedom of
movement, which not only constrain its work but also
threaten the safety and security of its peacekeepers. We
stress the importance of enhanced cooperation between
the Malian transitional authorities and MINUSMA. As
the Council discusses MINUSMA’s mandate renewal
in the coming months, Japan will continue to work
closely with the members of the Council and all other
stakeholders, while taking into consideration various
elements, such as the four parameters identified by the
Secretary-General’s internal review, the significant role
that MINUSMA plays in ensuring peace and stability
in Mali and the humanitarian and development needs of
the Malian people.
Mr. De Almeida Filho (Brazil): Let me start by
thanking Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral Wane for his comprehensive briefing and
welcoming the delegation of Mali to today’s meeting.
The security situation in Mali remains unstable and
continues to take a heavy toll on the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in
Mali (MINUSMA). In that vein, we regret the casualties
of three peacekeepers near Songobia on 21 February
and offer our sincere condolences and solidarity to
the Government of Senegal and to the families of
the victims.
Brazil reiterates its firm condemnation of
terrorism in all its forms and manifestations. There is
no justification for such acts or for the attacks against
schools and hospitals. We note with deep concern an
increase in such attacks. We also find the reported
rise in the use of and recruitment of child soldiers
alarming. We must redouble our efforts to protect the
most vulnerable.

23-1018815/21

S/PV.9302

The situation in Mali

As rightfully noted in the Secretary-General’s
report (S/2023/236), insecurity hinders the presence
of State authority. Therefore, we should continue to
support the efforts of the Malian Armed Forces to
fight terrorism, which remains a major challenge to the
restoration of State authority in the centre and north
of Mali. We note with concern that no solution for the
resumption of unmanned intelligence surveillance and
reconnaissance (ISR) flights has been reached to date,
despite the fact that MINUSMA adopted the measures
agreed with the Malian transitional Government. The
safety and security of peacekeepers should be a top
priority. We call on the Malian authorities to work
with MINUSMA without delay on the review of the
procedure for drone ISR flights, which are essential to
ensure MINUSMA’s freedom of movement.
In June, the Council will discuss the renewal of
MINUSMA’s mandate. Brazil considers it essential to
ensure that MINUSMA have the necessary means to
support the implementation of the Agreement on Peace
and Reconciliation in Mali and the political transition,
as well as to protect civilians and support the restoration
of Malian State authority throughout the entire country.
We believe that regional cooperation can be equally
beneficial in helping Mali pave the way to a successful
transition process. In that regard, Brazil fully supports
the current engagement with the Economic Community
of West African States mediator, Goodluck Jonathan,
and hopes that his dialogue with the Malian transitional
authorities will lead to closer collaboration on the
development and implementation of a transition plan that
is conducive to the restoration of constitutional order.
The return to democratic normality, including
the drafting of a new constitution, is a collective
endeavour that must include women, young people
and ethnic and religious minorities. We commend the
Malian authorities for the conclusion of that phase and
for adding legitimacy to that exercise by including
women, trade unions, political parties and civil society
representatives in the work of the drafting commission.
At the same time, we welcome not only the
cooperation established between MINUSMA and the
Autorité Indépendante de Gestion des Elections with a
view to coordinating the technical and logistical support
for the ballot, but also the provision to civil society
organizations of capacity-building on gender promotion
in the electoral process and preventing election-related
16/21

12/04/2023

violence. Those are encouraging, concrete steps
towards more inclusivity and participation in the poll.
While the developments I mentioned with respect
to the transition process and constitutional reforms are
remarkable, they cannot establish a sound foundation
for durable peace without an agreement for peace and
reconciliation in Mali. Therefore, we wish to commend
Algeria’s leadership of the mediation process to
overcome the current impasse, and we urge all Malian
political forces to remain engaged in dialogue and
redouble their efforts aimed at the full implementation
of the peace agreement.
Before I conclude, and in view of the dire
humanitarian situation, my delegation wishes to seize
this opportunity to underscore again the need to address
the root causes of conflict. This notion should guide
our collective endeavour to adjust and review the tasks
of the Mission in the upcoming mandate-renewal talks.
The President (spoke in Russian): I shall now make
a statement in my capacity as the representative of the
Russian Federation.
I thank the Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral, Mr. El-Ghassim Wane, for his briefing and
welcome the Permanent Representative of Mali,
Mr. Issa Konfourou, to today’s meeting.
The
Malian
Government
is
undertaking
systematic efforts to normalize the situation and to
lay the groundwork for holding elections at all levels
within the agreed time frame. It is implementing
the road map for the transitional period and taking
measures, such as drafting electoral laws, conducting
territorial-organization reforms and discussing a new
draft constitution on a national level.
On 10 March, the Government of Mali announced
a postponement of the constitutional referendum,
apparently for valid reasons: it had to ensure that a
maximum number of Malian citizens could cast their
votes freely and safely. Currently, the absolute priority
is ensuring security in the country, especially given the
entire withdrawal of the French Barkhane force and
the European Union Takuba Task Force. The Malian
Government has also affirmed its commitment to the
Algiers peace agreement, which remains the basis
for attaining lasting peace and national harmony in
the country.
As part of the work of the Agreement Monitoring
Committee, steps are planned to accelerate development
23-10188

12/04/2023

The situation in Mali

in the northern territories to restore the institutions and
integrate former combatants into the national armed
forces. The negotiation process is complicated. It is
important for signatories of the peace agreement to
be flexible and willing to compromise for the sake of
peace and unity in Mali.
Without normalization in Mali, stability in the
Sahel region is not possible. On a large swath of the
Malian territory, terrorist groups affiliated with the
Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant and Al-Qaida
continue to be active, and they engage regularly in
raids on the civilian population as well as units of the
Malian army and United Nations peacekeepers. Despite
these real difficulties, however, the Malian armed
forces have shown that they are capable of effectively
combating terrorists.
We welcome the launch of the national strategy
for stabilization in the centre of Mali. We believe
that the Malian Government is focused on doing all
it can to overcome the challenges currently facing
the country, especially when it comes to ensuring
security and political stability. We support the work
of the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated
Stabilization Mission in Mali (MINUSMA) in assisting
Bamako and the country’s population in resolving their
current problems. We note the efforts of the Mission
in facilitating stabilization in Mali. We understand
the dangers that peacekeepers face when serving in
this country, and we pay tribute to those peacekeepers
who have laid down their lives for peace and stability
in Mali.
The key to achieving the Mission’s goals is close
coordination with the host country and respecting
Mali’s sovereignty. At the same time, it is important
to focus on implementing key elements of the Mission
mandate, especially the protection of civilians and
supporting the Malian security and defence forces to
this end. MINUSMA should also strictly adhere to its
mandate when it comes to human rights, especially
with regard to support for the Malian Government in
carrying out investigations.
It is unfortunate that a number of troopcontributing countries have decided to end or suspend
their participation in MINUSMA. In terms of options
for reconfiguring the peacekeeping presence, we
believe that any option for revising the modalities of
the Mission’s work should be aligned with the main
challenges the country is facing, be agreed upon

S/PV.9302

in advance with Bamako and be based on the host
country’s in-depth views.
Russia is providing the Malian army with
comprehensive assistance, including with regard to
increasing its combat readiness and training soldiers
and law enforcement agents. Our bilateral cooperation
is taking place at the request of Bamako, in strict
accordance with applicable norms of international law.
Thanks in part to Russian support, the Malian armed
forces have been able to significantly increase their
capacity to counter terrorism and convert the potential
into real results on the ground.
We have once again heard a negative reaction from
Western colleagues to the growing Russian-Malian
cooperation. We find it unfortunate that they cannot
set aside their geopolitical rivalry. In essence, their
claims have nothing to do with concern for Mali’s wellbeing. On the contrary, the Malians’ views are of no
interest to them and never have been. Everyone knows
that the need for stabilization of the Sahel — and Mali
in particular — is the result of Western countries’
irresponsible military actions in Libya. No tangible
results have emerged from the many years of presence
of Western countries in this part of Africa.
In that regard, we call on our colleagues in the
Council to acknowledge their mistakes and renounce
their neocolonial habits. This region does not belong
to them. Let the Malians and people of neighbouring
countries in the region take the wheel and resolve
their own problems, with help from partners that they
themselves have chosen.
We have received no complaints from our
African partners with regard to the parameters of our
cooperation with them. We believe that, under these
circumstances, we should effectively assist Malian
authorities in overcoming urgent problems instead of
telling them how to behave, as certain countries tend
to do.
We call on Bamako’s international partners to
refrain from politicizing donor assistance, which
has led to the suspension of financing of Malian
development-assistance programmes. These decisions
could lead to a further exacerbation of an already dire
humanitarian situation, especially in the light of the
chronic underfunding of the humanitarian plan for
this country.

23-1018817/21

S/PV.9302

The situation in Mali

Russia intends to provide further support the
normalization of the situation in Mali, using the Security
Council as a platform, and by providing comprehensive
assistance to Bamako on a bilateral basis. We are
working on ways to provide additional assistance to
Mali in the food and energy sectors. We believe that
effective assistance to the Malian Government for
ensuring security and overcoming the crisis will foster
lasting peace and stability in the entire Sahelo-Saharan
region. We believe that a leading role in stabilizing the
Sahelo-Saharan region should be played by the peoples
of the region themselves in according to the principle of
“African solutions to African problems”.
I now resume my functions as the President of
the Council.
I give the floor to the representative of Mali.
Mr. Konfourou (Mali) (spoke in French): I should
like to begin by extending to you, Mr. President, the
warm congratulations of the delegation of Mali on the
assumption of the presidency of the Security Council for
the month of April 2023 by your country, the Russian
Federation, a country that is a friend and strategic
partner of Mali.
The Government of Mali takes note of the
report of the Secretary-General under consideration
(S/2023/236), and I commend the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General, Mr. El-Ghassim Wane, Head
of the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated
Stabilization Mission in Mali (MINUSMA), for his
briefing and for the updates since the publication of
the report.
The detailed observations of the Government of
Mali are contained in the memorandum transmitted
to the Security Council yesterday. I would now like to
make a few remarks on the issues raised in the report
of the Secretary-General and on Council members’
comments, to which I have listened carefully.
First, on the political level, I am pleased to note
that the Secretary-General has recognized the immense
progress made in this area. Indeed, in addition to the
consequences of the military intervention in Libya,
the effects of which continue to be felt, the transitional
authorities in Mali remain well aware of the other causes
that have accentuated the multidimensional crisis that
the country has been going through for over a decade.
That is why the Government is working, within
the framework of a transparent and inclusive process,
18/21

12/04/2023

to implement the political, institutional and electoral
reforms necessary to rebuild the Malian State. In that
regard, His Excellency Colonel Assimi Goita, President
of the Transition and Head of State, approved the final
draft of the new constitution of the Republic of Mali
on 16 March and presented it to the country’s political
stakeholders on 20 March. The referendum planned for
that purpose has been postponed in order to introduce
a secure biometric national identity card to prevent the
risk of fraud, create the conditions for the effective
participation of all citizens in electoral consultations
and reduce the time needed to operationalize the
Autorité indépendante de gestion des élections so
as to meet the transition deadline. The Government
is currently raising awareness regarding the draft
constitution among the Malian populations.
Regarding the Agreement on Peace and
Reconciliation in Mali emanating from the Algiers
process, notwithstanding some difficulties related to the
unilateral decision of the Coordination des mouvements
de l’Azawad and the Platforme to suspend their
participation in the Agreement Monitoring Mechanism,
I can affirm the Government’s commitment to
continuing its effective and judicious implementation,
in particular with the Mouvements de l’inclusivité, also
signatories to the Agreement, while waiting for our
other brothers to join us in the peace process.
Part of that dynamic is the territorial reorganization
and the adoption by the Council of Ministers on 29 March
of draft decrees aimed at improving the functioning
of the National Commission for Disarmament,
Demobilization and Reintegration and the National
Commission for Integration. I recall that, to date, 2,750
ex-combatants have been reintegrated into the Malian
Defence and Security Forces.
Furthermore, following the submission of the
final report of the Truth, Justice and Reconciliation
Commission at the end of 2022, on 1 March the
Council of Ministers adopted the texts relating to the
establishment of the authority managing reparations for
crisis victims since 1960. Those relating to the centre
for the promotion of peace and unity are in the process
of being adopted.
I would like to express our thanks for the
international mediation efforts, particularly their
leader, the sister Republic of Algeria. We take note of
the recent proposals of the mediation efforts to relaunch
23-10188

12/04/2023

The situation in Mali

the peace process, and we reiterate our readiness to
work with it to restore peace and stability in my country.
At the security level, the Malian Defence and
Security Forces are continuing their offensives against
terrorist organizations and obtained very encouraging
results. Several dozen terrorists have been neutralized,
their sanctuaries destroyed and large quantities of
war materiel seized and destroyed. Also, during the
reporting period, several dozen terrorists were arrested
and brought to justice, in parallel with the voluntary
surrender of many terrorists in the central regions. As
the report of the Secretary-General emphasizes, those
actions have also made it possible to strengthen the
State presence on the territory, lift the blockade and
the terrorist hold on certain localities in the north and
central regions and promote the supply of basic social
services to the populations, including the reopening of
some schools in areas still affected by insecurity. Those
operations are being carried out in strict compliance
with human rights and international humanitarian law,
in accordance with our traditional human values and as
a duty to our populations.
In the same vein, on 17 March, the Prime Minister
and Head of Government officially launched the strategy
for the stabilization of the centre, the implementation of
which is a priority for the Government.
On the issue of human rights, through the State’s
gradual return to localities liberated from terrorist
influence, the Government is working to reduce
human rights violations, which, it must be recalled, are
perpetrated mainly by armed terrorist groups.
In that respect, the institutional mechanism has
taken a crucial step, with the establishment on 1 February
of the National Human Rights Commission, which,
among other things, is responsible for coordinating
public policies on human rights and ensuring the
implementation of measures to prevent violations and
abuses of human rights.
At the same time, the Government is working to
fight against impunity, as shown, if it were needed,
by the 24 January sentencing by the Bamako Court
of Assizes of a person found guilty of an attack that
claimed the lives of five peacekeepers and a civilian on
22 January 2019.
I can therefore affirm that the Government will
continue to work tirelessly for the protection and
promotion of human rights and respect for international

S/PV.9302

humanitarian law on our territory. However, Mali will
stand firm and just as resolutely against any use of that
issue for political or destabilization purposes.
First, the Council just heard the representative
of France speak with resolve about the human rights
situation in Mali. I would simply like to say that he
had a selective memory, particularly when speaking
about the Moura incident. The French Ambassador
will recall that several paragraphs of the report of
the international commission of inquiry for Mali are
devoted to human rights violations against the Malian
people by the French forces. I would have like to have
seen him mention that with the same resolve.
Secondly, if he did not have such a selective
memory, I would have liked the Ambassador of France
to have told the Council that, in January 2021, the
French forces transformed a wedding ceremony in
Bounty into a national tragedy. If he did not have such
a selective memory, I would have liked him to tell us
about the efforts made in follow-up to the report on that
incident, to give just two examples.
Around this table, I heard several interpretations,
including from my neighbour from Ecuador. I would
like to say to him that Mali has very few, if any, lessons
to learn from a country that has also been guilty
of human rights violations. Freedom of expression,
freedom of assembly and the persecution of journalists,
prosecutors and judges are equally as widespread in his
country. Let us not have a selective memory regarding
human rights. They apply to everyone. I just want to
reaffirm that we remain resolved to work with the
Council to improve the human rights situation, but we
are against politicization and stigmatization on that
specific issue.
Despite the immense efforts made by the
Government of Mali, the humanitarian situation is
contingent on certain external factors, such as armed
terrorist groups, as well as the humanitarian situation
and climate change. Only one third of the funding
needs are covered, while the price of basic foodstuffs is
constantly rising on the world markets.
For its part, the Government of Mali is committed
to redoubling its efforts to meet the humanitarian needs
of our compatriots in vulnerable situations, including
internally displaced persons and refugees, in accordance
with the National Humanitarian Action Policy, hence
my call for greater international solidarity for Mali.

23-1018819/21

S/PV.9302

The situation in Mali

On the operational challenges, according to the
figures provided by the Secretary-General, 75 per cent
of MINUSMA’s requests for movement have been met.
Thus, contrary to what is being said, there is no desire
to restrict MINUSMA’s movements, as the Mission’s
unauthorized requests for movement simply did not
respect the procedure agreed between the two parties.
We therefore call on MINUSMA to work more closely
with the competent Malian authorities through the
agreed framework set up for that purpose in the interest
of the security of all.
Turning to the future of MINUSMA, I would like to
draw the attention of Council members to the fact that
the conclusions of the report on the internal review of
MINUSMA (S/2023/36) do not meet the expectations
of the Government and the people of Mali. However,
the Government remains open to discussions on that
specific issue. Similarly, I want to underscore that in
its letter of 1 March addressed to the President of the
Security Council (S/2023/161, annex), the Government
of Mali explicitly requested a change of penholder on
all files concerning Mali in the Security Council, owing
to the many documented incidents in which France has
been guilty of misdeeds vis-à-vis my country. I know
that I can count on the wisdom of the Security Council
in meeting Mali’s expectations and thereby facilitating
our commitment, especially during the negotiations
on the renewal of the MINUSMA mandate, which will
begin very soon.
In conclusion, I would like to say that while Mali is
undeniably facing many challenges, the Malian people,
with their great capacity for resilience, have decided
to stand up, take their destiny into their own hands
and avoid the mistakes of the past in order to restore
their former cohesion and the stability needed for their
sustainable development. Proud in the support of the
Malian people, the Government remains committed to
ensuring the successful execution of the political and
institutional reforms under way, including the holding
of the referendum and the general elections, with a
view to ending the political, institutional and security
instability that our country has known for several years.
At the same time, the Malian Defence and Security
Forces are stepping up their offensive operations to
defend the country and protect the population and
their property. I hope that our partners — including
Council members — will show greater understanding
and support for the sovereign choices of the Malian
people and their Government, which remains willing
20/21

12/04/2023

to cooperate with all who are willing to do so, provided
that they respect the guiding principles of Mali’s
foreign policy. I sincerely thank all Mali’s bilateral and
multilateral partners for their meaningful support in its
efforts to end this crisis.
Lastly, I bow in tribute to all the victims of the Malian
crisis — civilian, military, Malian and foreign — who
have fallen on the field of honour. My thoughts go out
especially to our Senegalese brothers who recently lost
their lives in Mali in helping us achieve peace.
The President (spoke in Russian): The
representative of France has asked for the floor to make
a further statement.
Mr. De Rivière (France) (spoke in French): I
will be brief. I obviously have no intention of arguing
with the representative of Mali. Anything excessive is
unimportant, and what he just said about my country
was excessive and therefore unimportant. I would just
like to point to three things.
First, at the beginning of 2013 — when in my
previous role I was involved in those decisions at every
stage — France intervened in Mali at the request of
the Malian authorities. At the time, Mali was dealing
with an offensive inside its borders by Al-Qaida, whose
forces were advancing towards the capital and would
have taken full control of Mali within a day or two.
Whether one would prefer to admit it or not, at the
beginning of 2013 it was the French army that preserved
the independence of Mali, which otherwise would have
fallen into the hands of the terrorist group Al-Qaida in
the Islamic Maghreb and its partners.
Secondly, since the beginning of 2013, 50 French
soldiers have died in Mali in defence of its territorial
integrity and sovereignty and to bring about peace in
the country — and for no other reason. That is a fact.
Thirdly, everything that the representative of
Mali said about the incidents he brought up is entirely
inaccurate, starting with the accusations relating to
the marriage that took place in the village of Bounty. I
myself was able to meet with the Secretary-General and
show him the images recorded at the time to explain
what had happened. The first assessments and reports
of the United Nations were unfortunately entirely
inaccurate and unfounded. Let us therefore base our
remarks on facts and help the United Nations do its job.
Let us hope that it will be able to continue to investigate
human rights abuses. Let us wait patiently for the report
23-10188

12/04/2023

The situation in Mali

on Moura, where 300 people died in March 2022 and for
which we are still waiting for the report of the Human
Rights Council. For its part, France will continue to
help Mali and the Malian people who are suffering and
are in need of peace and, I believe, democracy.
The President (spoke in Russian): The
representative of Ecuador has asked for the floor to
make a further statement.
Mr. Pérez Loose (Ecuador) (spoke in Spanish):
Likewise, it is not my intention to argue with the
representative of Mali. I simply want to clarify a
few points.
First, I did not intend to pontificate or give lessons
to the Government of Mali on the subject of human
rights. Human rights should not be politicized. They
are the concern of all humankind and not the property
of any one country. I was struck by the remark made in
reference to Ecuador. The people of Ecuador today live
under a democratic regime. No journalists, prosecutors
or judges have been persecuted. The representative of
Mali may be unaware of the fact that the Government of
Mr. Correa ended more than four years ago.
The President (spoke in Russian): I should point out
that our discussion has taken on an interactive aspect.
The representative of Mali has asked for the floor
to make a further statement. I now give him the floor.
Mr. Konfourou (Mali) (spoke in French): I will be
very brief. I do not want to engage in a polemic either. I

S/PV.9302

would simply like to say that the human rights situation
in Mali is a major source of concern for the Government,
and we are working to improve it. It is closely linked
to the country’s security situation and that is also
why we are focusing on the security situation. On the
other hand, with regard to the French representative’s
comments just now, I completely disagree with what he
said concerning the various reports. Those documents
exist, are available and tell the story of what happened.
I refer him to those documents.
Secondly, we requested a special Security Council
meeting to discuss the repeated violations of our
airspace and the acts of espionage to which we have
been subjected. If the representative of France will
agree to it, I believe that now would be the time to end
the refusal to hold such a meeting. We would be able
to express our views. Once again, our major concern
is ensuring the security of the Malian people and
accomplishing the work of political and institutional
reform, which is what we are doing. I remain open to
discussion with my friend from Ecuador and with the
representative of France. We certainly have the space to
reach an understanding. But let us stop politicizing the
issue of human rights.
The President (spoke in Russian): There are no
more speakers on my list. I now invite Council members
to informal consultations to continue our discussion on
the subject.
The meeting rose at noon.

23-1018821/21
