S/2008/826

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
29 December 2008
Original: English

Letter dated 23 December 2008 from the Secretary-General
to the President of the Security Council
I have the honour to write to you regarding the support to my Special Envoy
for the Lord’s Resistance Army (LRA)-affected areas, Joaquim Alberto Chissano,
the former President of Mozambique. As you will recall, on 21 November 2007, I
had proposed, and members of the Security Council had subsequently agreed, that
the mandate of the temporary Liaison Office should be extended and his Office
upgraded to a special political mission for the Special Envoy for the LRA-affected
areas in Uganda for a period of one year through 31 December 2008 (see
S/2007/719). This was to enable my Special Envoy to move the peace talks forward
until their completion.
In March 2008, the Chief Mediator, Riek Machar Teny, Vice-President of the
Government of Southern Sudan, and Mr. Chissano helped the parties successfully
conclude their negotiations and sign agreements on all the various agenda items.
However, regrettably, the leader of LRA, Joseph Kony, has yet to sign the final
peace agreement which provides the capstone for the various agreements. His most
recent failure to sign the final peace agreement has resulted in the launching by the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, Uganda and Southern Sudan of joint military
action against his camps in eastern Democratic Republic of the Congo. I am told
that this military action is intended not to derail the peace process, but rather to
pressure Joseph Kony into assembling, with his rebel forces, in Ri-Kwangba
(Southern Sudan), and signing the final peace agreement.
It is possible, therefore, that the political process, suspended in early
December by the Chief Mediator, may resume shortly. The Government of Uganda
remains committed to the continuation of the peace process, and the door remains
open for Joseph Kony to sign the final peace agreement. Meanwhile, as a direct
result of the successes in the peace process so far, security has returned to northern
Uganda, economic activities are gradually being resumed, and internally displaced
persons have returned home. It is important, therefore, that my Special Envoy
continue, on my behalf, his good offices in the region with the support of the Office
in Kampala.
The mandate of the Office of my Special Envoy will expire at the end of this
month. I recommend, therefore, that the mandate be extended for an additional year,
until 31 December 2009, to allow my Special Envoy to continue his efforts towards
achieving a durable peace in northern Uganda. Should the Security Council agree to
extend the special political mission through 31 December 2009, it would inherit the
existing mandate.
08-67107 (E) 291208

*0867107*

S/2008/826

The Office would continue to perform the following activities: (a) assist the
Special Envoy in developing a relationship of mutual trust among the parties and the
mediation and in building their confidence in the political process; (b) assist the
Special Envoy in coordinating the efforts of the regional players, donors and civil
society organizations involved; (c) follow up on the peace talks on behalf of the
Special Envoy and promote a peaceful agreement between the Government of
Uganda and LRA through the support of the African ambassadors; (d) coordinate the
activities of the five African ambassadors/guarantors of the peace process; (e) serve
as a focal point for the Special Envoy’s regional activities, including the
coordination of all international activities in support of the talks; (f) liaise with all
stakeholders in Uganda and in the region; (g) monitor and analyse internal and
regional political and security developments in Uganda and neighbouring countries;
(h) coordinate the activities of the unit in Juba; and (i) maintain close consultation
with the United Nations Organization Mission in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo and the United Nations Mission in the Sudan on security and military issues
in connection with the Special Envoy’s mandate.
(Signed) Ban Ki-moon

2

08-67107
