S/PV.9056

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-seventh year

9056th meeting

Monday, 6 June 2022, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Hoxha. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Albania)

Members:

Brazil. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Gabon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ghana . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
India . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ireland. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kenya. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Mexico. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Norway . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Arab Emirates . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Costa Filho
Mr. Dai Bing
Mr. De Rivière
Mr. Biang
Ms. Oppong-Ntiri
Mr. Raguttahalli
Ms. Byrne Nason
Mr. Kimani
Mrs. Buenrostro Massieu
Ms. Heimerback
Mr. Nebenzia
Mrs. Nusseibeh
Mr. Kariuki
Mrs. Thomas-Greenfield

Agenda
Maintenance of peace and security of Ukraine

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

22-37194 (E)
*2237194*

S/PV.9056

Maintenance of peace and security of Ukraine

The meeting was called to order at 10 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Maintenance of peace and security of Ukraine
The President: In accordance with rule 37 of the
Council’s provisional rules of procedure, I invite the
representatives of Germany, Italy, Latvia, Poland,
Slovakia and Ukraine to participate in this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the following
briefers to participate in this meeting: Ms. Pramila
Patten, Special Representative of the Secretary-General
on Sexual Violence in Conflict; Ms. Natalia Karbowska,
Co-founder and Director on Strategic Development of
the Ukrainian Women’s Fund; and Ms. Sherrie Rollins
Westin, President of Sesame Workshop.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I also invite His
Excellency Mr. Charles Michel, President of the
European Council, to participate in this meeting.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I give the floor to Ms. Patten.
Ms. Patten: I wish to thank the Albanian presidency
for organizing this meeting and for inviting me to brief
the Security Council.
In April, on the occasion of the annual open debate
of the Security Council on sexual violence in conflict,
I posed a question:
“What do the 10 resolutions on women and peace
and security — five of which are squarely on
preventing and addressing conflict-related sexual
violence — mean right now for a woman in
Ukraine?” (S/PV.9016, p. 2)
That was the question that compelled me to visit Ukraine
in early May. Painfully, my visit cast into stark relief the
gap that still exists between the aspiration of prevention
expressed by the Security Council through the robust
normative framework that has been established over
the past decade and the reality on the ground for the
most vulnerable.
The commitment of the Security Council is
unequivocal — to bring all tools to bear to break
2/32

06/06/2022

the seemingly endless cycles of sexual violence and
impunity. The resolutions on sexual violence articulate
the elements of a compliance regime to influence the
conduct of perpetrators and potential perpetrators. The
resolutions reinforce international humanitarian law,
which makes it clear that even wars have limits, and
that sexual violence is beyond the scope of acceptable
conduct, even in the midst of battle. Those limits have
been universally agreed upon and must be universally
respected. They include a categorical prohibition of all
forms of sexual violence, which can never be excused,
justified or amnestied.
Yet, as the conflict in Ukraine passes the 100-day
mark, we are faced with mounting allegations of sexual
violence. Due to the active hostilities, mass internal
displacement, the breakdown of referral pathways
for services and the stigma associated with sexual
violence, victims have often been unable or unwilling
to report to law enforcement authorities or service
providers. The referral pathways for the relevant
services are not functioning in many places, especially
in eastern Ukraine. For example, prior to 24 February,
20 medical service delivery points and maternity
hospitals were providing assistance to survivors of
gender-based violence, with the support of the United
Nations Population Fund. As of 18 April, only nine
such facilities were operational, due to damage from
hostilities and staffing shortages. In the current context,
many allegations of conflict-related sexual violence
are difficult, if not impossible, to verify, making it
challenging to assess prevalence.
As of 3 June, the human rights monitoring team of
the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner
for Human Rights had received reports of 124 alleged
acts of conflict-related sexual violence, occurring
against women, girls, men and boys in the Chernihiv,
Dnipropetrovsk, Donetsk, Kharkiv, Kherson, Kyiv,
Luhansk, Mykolaiv, Vynnytsya, Zaporizhzhya,
Zakarpattia and Zhytomyr regions.
Women constitute most of the alleged victims — 56
of 124 allegations concern women. Forty-nine of the
allegations are against children — 41 against girls, 7
against boys and, in one case, the gender was unknown.
Nineteen of the allegations are against men, including
rape, attempted rape, forced public stripping and
threat of sexual violence. The verification of cases is
still ongoing.
22-37194

06/06/2022

Maintenance of peace and security of Ukraine

From our experience of conflicts the world over,
we know that sexual violence is the most consistently
and massively underreported violation, and that
available data represents only the tip of the iceberg.
An active battleground is never conducive to accurate
bookkeeping. But if we wait for hard data and statistics,
it will always be too late. That is why we must mobilize
immediately on the basis of our common conviction that
even one case of sexual violence is unacceptable. We do
not need hard data for a scaled-up humanitarian response
or for all parties to put in place preventive measures.
In that regard, I wish to acknowledge and commend
the leadership-by-example of the Ukrainian authorities
in their agreement of a framework of cooperation with
the United Nations on the prevention and response to
conflict-related sexual violence, which was signed
by the Deputy Prime Minister, Olha Stefanishyna,
in Kyiv on 3 May as an outcome of my visit. That
framework will serve as the basis for a comprehensive
and multifaceted preventive and service response
and more effective coordination of all stakeholders,
including the United Nations agencies in Ukraine and
neighbouring countries.
Allow me to emphasize five critical areas of
the framework.
First, strengthening the rule of law and accountability
must be ensured as a central aspect of deterrence and
the prevention of crimes of sexual violence.
Secondly, strengthening the capacity of the
security and defence sector to prevent sexual violence
must be ensured. That will require specific action
plans by the military, police, border guards and other
Government security and defence forces, encompassing
more than 100,000 volunteer forces.
Thirdly, it must be ensured that survivors of
sexual violence, as well as their children, have
access to comprehensive services, including sexual
and reproductive health, psychological, legal and
socioeconomic services and reintegration support. That
will entail support for Ukraine’s national health and
social services systems.
Fourthly, even as we deal with the immediate
challenge of unabated conflict, we must cast our
view ahead to ongoing and future negotiations for
the cessation of hostilities, while ensuring that sexual
violence is addressed in the framework of a ceasefire
agreement and that such crimes are ultimately reflected

S/PV.9056

in the specific provisions of any peace agreement,
including those related to security arrangements
and transitional justice mechanisms. That includes
ensuring that amnesties for sexual violence crimes are
explicitly prohibited.
Furthermore, it is essential that we ensure the full,
equal and meaningful participation of women in all
political processes, including negotiations for peace.
Ukrainian women-led organizations are active on the
front lines of the sexual and gender-based violence
response, yet women have been conspicuously absent
from the negotiating table to date.
Fifthly, we must address conflict-related trafficking
in persons for the purposes of sexual exploitation and
prostitution. That will entail awareness-raising and
training for military personnel, border guards, police
and immigration officials and will require the action
of neighbouring and receiving countries and the
institutions of the European Union.
Too often, the needs of women and girls in
conflict settings have been sidelined and treated as
an afterthought. The framework of cooperation makes
them an explicit priority, and I call for the solidarity
of the Council and the international donor community
to support the Ukrainian authorities and relevant
United Nations entities to implement the framework.
Fundamentally, that is as important for Ukraine’s future
as the defence and security sector expenditures, for
which billions of dollars have already been mobilized.
I also wish to note that, last week, I had the
opportunity to debrief the Permanent Mission of the
Russian Federation to the United Nations on my visit
to Ukraine. I emphasized that my Office is at the
disposal of all parties to the conflict to support the
implementation of preventive measures that mitigate
the acute risks of conflict-related sexual violence.
Resolutions 1820 (2008), 1888 (2009), 1960 (2010), 2106
(2013) and 2467 (2019) provide a clear and unanimously
agreed preventive framework that includes the issuance
of clear orders through military chains of command
that reinforce zero tolerance for sexual violence and
the designation of high-level civilian and military focal
points to engage with my Office and other relevant
United Nations actors, among other measures. I look
forward to further consultation with the Permanent
Mission of the Russian Federation to the United Nations
on possible modalities for cooperation in that sphere,

22-371943/32

S/PV.9056

Maintenance of peace and security of Ukraine

06/06/2022

including the facilitation of access to areas not under
Ukrainian Government control.

roaming the sleeping quarters in the early morning
hours and intervened.

I wish to draw particular attention to the
trafficking dimension. As the Secretary-General stated
in March, for predators and human traffickers war is
not a tragedy: it is an opportunity. Women and children
fleeing the conflict are being targeted for trafficking
and exploitation, in some cases facing further exposure
to rape and other risks while seeking refuge.

Another man, wearing a yellow volunteer’s vest
and standing with a sign at the Przemyśl train station
hall, was offering free transportation from Poland to
Germany. Other volunteers became suspicious and
informed local law enforcement when they noticed
that the man was selecting only young women for
transportation in his minivan.

In addition to my engagement with Polish and
Moldovan local and State authorities, I visited reception
centres at border-crossing points in both countries. We
must acknowledge and commend the outpouring of
financial and moral support for the Ukrainian people by
national and local authorities, as well as private citizens,
which is perhaps unprecedented in modern times.

In Warsaw, during a meeting with officials from
the Ministry of Justice, a Judge of the Criminal Court
shared with me how, while she was at the Rzeszów
reception centre, she was personally approached by a
man who sought her help to have access to eight young
women and adolescent girls whom he had identified
and wanted to offer transportation to Germany. She
told me that, even as a judge, she was not initially
suspicious until a volunteer intervened and informed
her that the same man had been coming every two days
to hand-pick young women and girls. The judge made
an urgent appeal for awareness-raising and training for
law enforcement officials and other relevant actors.

Yet the protection challenges related to the
displacement in the past 100 days of close to 14 million
people — mostly women and children, 6.8 million of
whom have fled across borders — is also unprecedented.
From the outset of the conflict, the heightened risks
of trafficking in persons, including for the purposes
of sexual exploitation and prostitution, have been
alarmingly evident.
The lack of consistent vetting of accommodation
offers and transportation arrangements is a serious
concern, as is the limited capacity of protection services
to address the pace and volume of displacement.
There are also concerns regarding the multiplicity of
volunteers with limited vetting and little or no training
or experience.
In Przemyśl, Poland, my team and I visited the site
of a Tesco supermarket that had been converted into
a receiving centre for Ukrainian refugees. While the
range of services being provided is exemplary, there are
grave security and protection concerns in a facility run
by volunteers and with only a bare-bones presence of
United Nations agencies.
For example, we heard a number of credible
anecdotal accounts from humanitarian staff. With
minimal security screening, a man registered as a
volunteer at the Tesco centre in the afternoon and
entered the room where refugees were waiting for
transport to France. At that time, he made contact with
a 19-year-old woman, whom he later woke up in the
sleeping hall at 2 a.m. to offer her a ride to France.
Another volunteer became suspicious of that individual
4/32

Within the humanitarian response architecture in
Ukraine, a temporary task force on human trafficking
has been established to strengthen coordination and
foster cross-border cooperation, including among
criminal justice actors. However, it is critical to ensure
that effective protection systems be in place in all transit
and destination countries and at all border crossings.
Strengthening the overall response to trafficking is
a critical aspect of the framework of cooperation, which
will also require a coherent and coordinated response at
the level of European institutions. That is of the utmost
urgency, as I believe that the humanitarian crisis is
turning into a human trafficking crisis. It requires
a concerted, integrated and holistic cross-border
response by humanitarian partners, law enforcement
agencies, border forces, immigration officials and
political leaders.
A regional compact is urgently required. In that
regard, I am encouraged that His Excellency Mr. Charles
Michel, President of the European Council, is in the
Security Council Chamber today, as I believe that the
issue will require European leadership at the highest
levels in order to address the problem.
It will also require the continued focus and
leadership of the Security Council, in line with
22-37194

06/06/2022

Maintenance of peace and security of Ukraine

resolution 2331 (2016), which articulates the nexus of
conflict-related human trafficking and conflict-related
sexual violence. I consider that dimension to be a core
aspect of the conflict-related sexual violence mandate
and the Ukraine crisis to be a critical litmus test for the
implementation of key aspects of resolution 2331 (2016).
During my mission, I witnessed with awe the
resilience and fortitude shown by the communities
affected by the conflict, including the women forced to
flee their homes with their children and nothing but the
clothes on their backs and the bags of belongings they
were able to carry by hand. Many survivors have braved
the risk of reprisals and retaliation to tell their stories.
We owe them more than solidarity; we owe them a swift
and serious response.
The prevalence of sexual violence in conflicts
throughout history teaches us that it is critical to
reinforce prevention, protection and the delivery of
services from the very beginning of any armed conflict.
The Framework of Cooperation that I referred to paves
the way politically for tangible support and technical
advice and assistance from my Office and the wider
United Nations system, and we also serve as a platform
for the mobilization of resources. In order to address
that challenge, it is crucial to ensure that the level of
political focus, as well as the allocation of resources for
a comprehensive response, is commensurate with the
scale and complexity of the problem.
Lastly, I want to acknowledge that even as we
focus on Ukraine, the ripple effects of the conflict are
also being felt in other war zones around the world by
women and girls who risk becoming forgotten victims
of forgotten conflicts. From Yemen to the Central
African Republic, Afghanistan to Myanmar or Tigray
in northern Ethiopia, resources are being drained and
attention diverted. As other crises escalate behind the
scenes, we must reassure all populations at risk that
they are not forgotten and that international law is not
an empty promise.
The President: I thank Ms. Patten for her briefing
and availability while travelling, and I hope that the
minor technical glitches did not affect the entirety of
her message.
I now give the floor to Ms. Karbowska.
Ms. Karbowska: I would like to thank you, Sir,
for the opportunity to participate in such an important
event today. My voice is the voice of my organization,

S/PV.9056

which has been working to support women in Ukraine
for 22 years. It is also the voice of hundreds of other
women’s rights organizations that have been working
24/7 in Ukraine to support women, provide food and
medicine, heal trauma and give the women whose
lives have been destroyed by Russia the strength to
continue — women who have been raped, whose kids
have been killed and whose houses have been burned.
Every Ukrainian has a story of how the war started
for her or him that each of us will remember forever.
For me, the war started during our meeting on the
localization of our national action plan on resolution
1325 (2000). Ukraine had adopted a second national
action plan on the implementation of the resolution,
and on 23 and 24 February we were meeting in Kyiv
with the representatives of 13 regional coalitions to
plan our work for the year. The Russian invasion forced
us to end the meeting early, but it did not change our
plans. The war showed that today the women and peace
and security agenda in Ukraine is more relevant than
ever. It has a new, very concrete and clear meaning,
which is that the security of each and every woman
is inseparable from the security of the whole country.
None of us can feel safe when sexual violence and
rape are taking place close to where we live. Women’s
organizations are usually the first to be approached by
women who have experienced sexual violence. They
provide psychological assistance. Together with lawenforcement agencies, they document the cases and
support investigation processes.
I am not going to tell the stories of those women
and children. The Council has heard them. But sexual
violence in this war is the least visible crime, and, for
every girl or woman who is willing to tell her story,
there are many others who will remain silent for years.
That is because of the notion of rape as a crime of shame,
because of survivors’ feelings of shame, because of the
guilt felt by those who were not able to defend them and
because of the fear of neighbours that they too may end
up in the same situation. All of that weakens the social
connections within communities, and that is because
this is a strategy aimed at establishing control over
those communities. Russia is using sexual violence and
rape as a means of terror to control civilians within
the temporarily occupied territories. Although the
full scale of conflict-related sexual violence is not yet
known, human rights activists and law-enforcement
agencies estimate that there are hundreds of cases, not

22-371945/32

S/PV.9056

Maintenance of peace and security of Ukraine

06/06/2022

just among women and girls, but also among men, boys
and people of other gender identities and of every age.

and traditional international security systems no
longer work.

I therefore have a question. If Russia is using terror
against civilians in Ukraine — and there is a lot of
evidence to prove that — why is Russia still a member
of the Security Council? How is it possible that it can
participate in United Nations peacekeeping operations?
In the past three months I spent time on the border
with Poland and saw the faces of women refugees. One
in particular had no relatives. She was dealing with a
language barrier and had no savings in the bank. It was
just her, her child and a suitcase. I remember another
young woman from the Chernihiv region. She did not
even have a suitcase. A Russian missile had destroyed
everything in her house. She said that her only family
member now was her cat. According to international
organizations, because of the Russian aggression
against Ukraine, Europe is currently experiencing its
largest displacement since the Second World War.

We are revising our national action plan on
resolution 1325 (2000) in Ukraine because realities have
changed. But we still believe that resolution 1325 (2000)
is a powerful instrument. We just need to create new
tools that will make it work properly at different levels,
and, very importantly, for the women on the ground. I
urge the Council to develop such instruments, maintain
pressure with sanctions, continue providing military
and humanitarian support and do more every day.

The majority of refugees are women and children,
the two groups most vulnerable to falling victim to
sexual and labour abuse. Civil society and Governments
have made huge efforts to protect refugees in Europe
and prevent trafficking at border crossings. I myself
saw many volunteers at the border helping with
registration, offering rides, providing accommodation
and distributing hotline contact information. But as
the war has continued, Ukrainian women refugees
in Europe who had initially planned to seek only
temporary shelter are finding themselves in need of
more permanent housing and work. That opens up new
risks of sexual and labour exploitation.
We are also hearing the stories of women and
children whom Russian troops forced to go to Russia
through the so-called filtration camps. Two months
ago I met a 16-year-old boy named Roman in western
Ukraine. He is from Mariupol. A neighbour helped him
escape and brought him to western Ukraine. Roman’s
mother is in Russia. The last time he saw her was when
she was brutally transported to a filtration camp. No
one knows what has happened to her and if Roman will
ever see her again. There are hundreds of stories like
that. What do we call this — trafficking, slavery, terror
or crime? Russia is using war crimes as a weapon in
this war. Military experts confirm that the last time
an aggressor behaved so brutally towards civilians in
war was during the Second World War. This is an utter
violation of international humanitarian law. Russia’s
war on Ukraine has shown that customary practices
6/32

The President: I thank Ms. Karbowska for
her briefing.
I now give the floor to Ms. Rollins Westin.
Ms. Rollins Westin: I thank the Government
of Albania for inviting me to address the Security
Council on behalf of Sesame Workshop, the non-profit
educational organization behind Sesame Street, which
has been reaching children with early learning for 50
years in more than 150 countries.
In the past decade we have been working with
humanitarian organizations, Governments and United
Nations agencies to support children and caregivers
who face the trauma of conflict and displacement.
To date, we have reached millions of young children
affected by crises in the Middle East, Bangladesh,
East Africa, Latin America and Afghanistan — and
now Ukraine. Today the Council has heard about some
of the most devastating impacts of war and conflict,
including increased gender-based and sexual violence.
The gender dynamics of the crisis in Ukraine are
particularly pronounced, with women and children
accounting for 90 per cent of all those who have fled
the country, while for those who remain the situation
is equally dire.
Today I want to draw the Council’s attention to the
impact this war has on children, many of whom bear
witness and have been subjected to atrocities, and all
of whom are deeply affected. I am here to urge the
international community to prioritize young children
and caregivers in its response to the conflict in order to
help mitigate a crisis of generational proportions.
Young children are not only incredibly vulnerable
to the immediate physical impacts of war but also have
the most to lose because the early years are such a
critical time in their development. There is no time in
a child’s life that is more fragile and more important
22-37194

06/06/2022

Maintenance of peace and security of Ukraine

than the first five years, when the brain is developing
faster than at any other time in life. That is also the
period when the brain is most sensitive to a child’s
environment. Repeated exposure to traumatic events
can inhibit brain development in children, with longterm repercussions for their cognitive abilities, health
and productivity that extend long after they survive the
immediate danger.
I ask the Council to look at this conflict through the
lens of children growing up in the throes of war, shaken
by bombs, forced to leave their homes and all they
have ever known, without the stability that children so
desperately need. Their caregivers are still tasked each
and every day with providing for their children, while
they themselves have been traumatized by violence.
All of those effects are compounded in Ukraine in
particular, because so many women and children have
had to leave behind their fathers, brothers, uncles and
male family members.
Right now, children are experiencing the kind of
exposure to violence and stress that has the potential
to derail their future if they do not receive the right
support. The urgency simply cannot be overstated.
However, the truth is that the international community
has viable solutions to support children and their
caregivers, many of which can be integrated into the
existing humanitarian response. I would like to leave
the Council today with three ideas for supporting young
children and caregivers during crises.
First, we must directly provide mental health
and psychosocial support for the immediate needs
of children, as nothing less than a first-line and
life-saving intervention. Advocates for mental health
in crisis contexts have begun to have some success in
building support into the Ukraine response, which must
be continued and expanded.
Secondly, we must invest in early childhood
development, from nurturing care to playful learning,
and fold it into humanitarian and national response
plans. Quality early childhood development has been
proven to help mitigate the effects of the trauma
that children experience in crisis situations. Those
interventions do not necessarily add significant cost.
In fact, building early childhood support directly
into existing interventions can be an effective use of
limited resources. We have seen it in Jordan, where we
partner with the International Rescue Committee and
the Ministry of Health to integrate early childhood

S/PV.9056

support directly into visits with health-care providers.
In Ukraine, we align our work with national education
objectives, following the lead of the Ministry of
Education and Science, which, despite extraordinary
challenges, continues to reach Ukrainian children with
invaluable education.
Finally, we must not forget the caregivers. We
know that the most important intervention for young
children experiencing trauma is more engagement with
a caring adult. We must therefore structure support to
meet the unique challenges of parenting in crises and
help caregivers provide the nurturing care that children
so desperately need.
Such early childhood interventions bolster children,
communities and societies at large. Yet less than 3 per
cent of humanitarian assistance funding is allocated
to that critical need — a number that simply must rise
to meet the challenge of Ukraine and the crises yet to
come. If we do not focus on the impact of the issues
discussed here today on children, prioritizing their
needs and giving them the chance to thrive, how can
they possibly be expected to have the skills they need
to rebuild their society?
Our hopes for a prosperous and peaceful future
depend on the action we take now to support young
children, because our future depends on them. I urge
the Council to prioritize children and their caregivers
in responding to this crisis. If not, there will be lasting
consequences for our future security and stability for
generations to come.
The President: I thank Ms. Rollins Westin for
her briefing.
I shall now give the floor to those members of the
Council who wish to make statements.
Mr. De Rivière (France) (spoke in French): I thank
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General
for her commitment since the start of the Russian
aggression. I welcome the signing of a framework of
cooperation between the United Nations and Ukraine.
I thank Ms. Karbowska and Ms. Rollins Westin
for their remarks, and I pay tribute to all civil
society members working to defend the rights of
Ukrainian women.
I also welcome the President of the European
Council to today’s meeting, which demonstrates the
European Union’s unshakable support for Ukraine.

22-371947/32

S/PV.9056

Maintenance of peace and security of Ukraine

Since the start of the Russian aggression, the European
Union has mobilized more than €4.6 billion to help
Ukrainians. Assistance has been provided at all
levels — for budgetary and humanitarian purposes
as well as for the fight against impunity, in particular
through the establishment of joint investigative teams,
coordinated by the European Union Agency for
Criminal Justice Cooperation.
The sanctions adopted by the European Union have
but one objective — to restore Russia’s respect for the
Charter of the United Nations. Such efforts are essential
because, for more than 100 days, the Russian army has
waged a war of aggression, whose effects on civilians
are worsening daily.
France is appalled at the numerous allegations
of sexual violence. If proved to be true, they would
constitute crimes. We must all enforce Security
Council resolutions on sexual violence. We have the
responsibility to provide support to victims. They must
be able to tell their stories without being stigmatized.
France supports United Nations actions on the
ground to establish the facts. Those responsible for
acts of violence must be prosecuted and punished.
It is for that reason that France has made available
to Ukraine expertise in collecting evidence and
establishing accountability.
We are concerned about the risks faced by displaced
persons. France fully supports United Nations action
that seeks to prevent the trafficking and smuggling of
human beings. In that regard, we applaud the efforts
of the United Nations Population Fund. The victims
of violence must be protected. France calls for that
protection to be strengthened.
In the light of the aggression, which has tragic
consequences for the civilian population, France
remains fully engaged. We will spare no effort in
working to restore peace. We continue to call for the full
withdrawal of Russian troops, in line with the ruling of
the International Court of Justice and full respect for
international humanitarian law.
Lastly, France reiterates its support for all Ukrainian
women. There can be no lasting peace without the full
participation of women.
Mrs. Buenrostro Massieu (Mexico) (spoke in
Spanish): I thank Special Representative Patten,
Ms. Karbowska and Ms. Rollins Westin for their
8/32

06/06/2022

briefings. I also welcome the President of the European
Council, Charles Michel, to today’s meeting.
The testimonies we heard today reveal another
dimension to the tragic consequences of the invasion
of Ukraine for the civilian population. According to the
information available to us, 90 per cent of the people
who have left the country are women and children,
and 60 per cent of the internally displaced persons are
also women, which makes it clear that this conflict
has an inescapable gender component. The vulnerable
situation of all those women and children increases the
risk of trafficking, including for sexual exploitation, as
we heard this morning. A short time ago (see S/PV.9052)
we heard High Commissioner Michelle Bachelet refer in
the Security Council to cases of rape of women in areas
under Russian control, although she also reported that
there were incidents of sexual violence committed by
both sides. What is truly deplorable is that the reports
seem to indicate that incidents of sexual violence
against women and girls are on the rise. Stigma, social
conventions, stereotypes faced by victims and limited
mechanisms for reporting such incidents make it
difficult to report and fully investigate those crimes.
The reports of Ukrainian women being raped and
subsequently murdered, which Special Representative
of the Secretary-General Patten shared with us
following her recent visit to the region, are extremely
disturbing. We must prioritize investigations into
alleged war crimes, crimes against humanity and other
violations of international humanitarian law so that
the perpetrators are brought to justice and the crimes
do not go unpunished. Mexico is closely following the
ongoing investigation by the Office of the Prosecutor,
the International Criminal Court and the Independent
International Commission of Inquiry on Ukraine
initiated by the Human Rights Council. We recognize
the importance of the coordination of the Protection
Cluster led by the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees, and we will follow with
special attention the important work of the sexual and
gender-based violence sub-cluster led by the United
Nations Population Fund.
The medium and long-term consequences of
the war for the health of the entire population, and
especially for women victims and survivors of sexual
violence, are very worrying. It is urgent that we
ensure that they have unhindered access to sexual and
reproductive health services and also mental health
services, which are critical in such times. We welcome
22-37194

06/06/2022

Maintenance of peace and security of Ukraine

the signing of the Framework of Cooperation between
the United Nations and the Government of Ukraine on
preventing and responding to conflict-related sexual
violence. We trust that it will serve as a pillar for
prevention and deterrence. The United Nations system
should continue to gather evidence, disaggregated data
and gender-sensitive analysis on sexual and genderbased violence and work in coordination with the
Independent International Commission of Inquiry. We
will be watching for the results of the upcoming visit to
Ukraine this month.
Women have taken on a fundamental role since the
beginning of the Russian invasion, and we must ensure
that they can participate fully and on an equal footing in
decision-making and in the negotiations that represent
a pathway to putting an end to the war in Ukraine. Once
again, Mexico calls for an immediate ceasefire to end
this tragedy.
Mrs. Thomas-Greenfield (United States of
America): Since I was not here for the beginning
of your presidency, I would like to enthusiastically
welcome you, Mr. President, to your new role and to
wish you the best during this month. I thank Albania
for calling this very important meeting, and I would
also like to give a special thanks to our briefers,
Special Representative of the Secretary-General
Patten, Ms. Karbowska and Ms. Rollins Westin, for
their illuminating remarks. I welcome the participation
of the Permanent Representative of Ukraine in today’s
meeting, as well as that of Mr. Michel, the President of
the European Council.
Since Russia launched its illegal and unprovoked
further invasion of Ukraine, the mountain of credible
reports of atrocities committed by Russia’s forces
against civilians has grown every day. The reports
include horrific accounts of sexual violence. There are
more and more allegations of sexual assault of women
and girls by Russian soldiers, and of men and boys as
well. We have heard from Ukraine’s Foreign Minister of
multiple cases of sexual violence by Russian soldiers in
Ukrainian cities that were under the control of Russia’s
forces. We have heard from Ukraine’s Deputy Prime
Minister that Russian soldiers raped Ukrainian women
for hours and then killed them.
The corroborating evidence goes beyond Ukrainian
officials. In Bucha, we have evidence of atrocities,
including imagery that confirms the presence of mass
graves. And just today we heard from the Special

S/PV.9056

Representative of the Secretary-General. There, in
Bucha, the indications of Russia’s brutality include
credible reports of violence perpetrated up close and
in cold blood, with individuals killed execution-style,
bodies showing signs of torture and sexual violence
against women and girls. There have been multiple
reports from survivors of Russia’s soldiers breaking
down doors to basements where women were sheltering
and raping them. Those terrible acts were done in front
of their children, and they were filmed by the Russian
soldiers. Those are bone-chilling accounts. And we
know that for every account we hear, many more
are unknown.
In addition to the women suffering inside Ukraine,
we cannot forget that more than 90 per cent — and we
have heard this mentioned several times today — of
refugees from Ukraine are women and children. As
we have heard before in the Security Council, women
and children bear disproportionately high risks in this
war. Family separation leaves girls, in particular, at
increased risk for sexual exploitation and trafficking.
And we have heard sobering reports of traffickers
targeting women as they seek protection abroad. So
we, the members of the Council, cannot stay silent. We
must seek and achieve justice for victims. And we must
do everything we can to prevent further violence.
The responsibility starts first and foremost with
Russia. As a reminder to the Russian Federation,
resolution 1820 (2008) recognized that rape and other
forms of sexual violence can constitute war crimes
and crimes against humanity. Furthermore, under
international humanitarian law, sexual violence is
prohibited. It is up to Russia to take measures within
its forces and proxy forces to ensure adherence to
that resolution and to international humanitarian law.
It is up to Russia to stop rape, violence and atrocities
from within its ranks. It is up to Russia to end this
unconscionable, unprovoked war on the people of
Ukraine, and we call on the Russian Federation to do
just that.
And though the primary responsibility rests with
Russia, I also want to talk about what the rest of us
can do to address this heartbreaking situation. The
Framework of Cooperation established by Special
Representative Patten and her team and signed with
the Government of Ukraine last month deserves our
strong support. It should serve as a vehicle for United
Nations alignment and coordination. We should share
the key elements of the Framework, and we should do

22-371949/32

S/PV.9056

Maintenance of peace and security of Ukraine

everything we can to support the Ukrainian authorities
as they follow it. The United States will continue to
support Special Representative Patten’s office to
facilitate that important work.
The Independent International Commission of
Inquiry on Ukraine created by the Human Rights
Council can also ensure that Russia does not get
away with hiding atrocities. Last month, the Human
Rights Council passed another resolution that called
for the Commission of Inquiry to address the events
in the areas of the Kyiv, Chernihiv, Kharkiv and Sumy
regions, with a view to holding those responsible
to account. Both the Commission of Inquiry and the
United Nations Human Rights Monitoring Mission in
Ukraine are critical to ensuring accountability. Sharing
information and documenting crimes is critical to
ensuring accountability for crimes of rape and other
forms of gender-based violence. That can be done only
through effective investigations of reports of such
crimes and trials in appropriate criminal courts.
All of that requires resources. Many on the
Council have emphasized their political commitment to
preventing gender-based violence. Now is the time to
provide proof of that commitment — to match words
with action. Ukraine is counting on us.
Finally, as we work to achieve accountability,
we must also do right by the survivors of sexual
violence. They urgently need improved and expanded
comprehensive service provision, including sexual
and reproductive health services, medical and
specialized mental-health services, legal assistance and
livelihood support.
All of that work needs to be survivor-centred and
trauma-informed. Above all, it must give survivors
hope. Together, let us take on the scourge of conflictrelated sexual violence. Let us demand accountability
and justice for survivors, and provide the resources
to see it through. And let us do everything in our
power to prevent more violence and end Russia’s
unconscionable war.
Mr. Dai Bing (China) (spoke in Chinese): I thank
Special Representative Patten and the other briefers for
their briefings.
As the conflict in Ukraine enters its fourth month,
it has taken a heavy toll on the Ukrainian people.
The security risks faced by women and children are
particularly worrisome. Parties to the conflict should
10/32

06/06/2022

comply with international law and take measures to
protect civilians from all forms of violence, including
sexual violence against women and girls and human
trafficking. People affected by the violence should
have timely access to medical, psychological and social
services, and parties to the conflict should ensure that
hospitals and other civilian facilities are protected
from attacks. The United Nations and the Ukrainian
Government signed a framework agreement last
month to help survivors of sexual violence and prevent
human trafficking. We hope that will provide effective
protection for vulnerable groups, such as women and
children. The use of sexual violence as a tactic of
war is a serious crime, and any allegations should be
investigated impartially on the basis of facts.
Since the outbreak of the conflict, 6.8 million
Ukrainian people have crossed the border into
neighbouring countries for refuge, the vast majority
of whom are women and children. China appreciates
the humanitarian spirit shown by Ukraine’s
neighbouring countries in providing safe shelter and
a basic livelihood for women and children refugees.
Meanwhile, the increasing number of cases of human
trafficking, sexual exploitation and sexual abuse
targeting women and children refugees is disturbing.
China calls for immediate international cooperation
to identify and punish relevant criminal acts and to
resolutely stop the secondary victimization of women
and children. The Office of Special Representative
Patten, UN-Women, UNICEF, the Office of the United
Nations High Commissioner for Refugees, the United
Nations Office on Drugs and Crime, the Office of the
United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights
and other international agencies should strengthen
monitoring and analysis and provide professional and
technical support to combat human trafficking, sexual
exploitation and sexual abuse against refugees.
Eliminating sexual violence and human trafficking
in conflict is not the end of our efforts. Only through
a ceasefire and by restoring peace can the trauma of
conflict for women and children be fundamentally
avoided. The international community should work
together to promote peace talks and encourage Russia
and Ukraine to return to the negotiation track. We hope
that the upcoming meeting among Russia, Ukraine,
the United Nations and Türkiye will help the parties to
gradually build mutual trust, while resolving the food
issue in Ukraine.
22-37194

06/06/2022

Maintenance of peace and security of Ukraine

S/PV.9056

Providing weapons or imposing sanctions and
pressure will not solve the problem but will only
perpetuate and expand the conflict. People in Ukraine
and other developing countries have no reason to pay
the price for geopolitical and bloc confrontations. At a
time when human destiny is shared and global security
is indivisible, no country can, or should, seek its own
absolute security at the expense of the security of
others. International and regional security cannot, and
should not, be guaranteed by strengthening military
blocs and cutting off supply and industrial chains.
China once again calls on the parties concerned to put
international and regional peace and security first and
to play a constructive role in the proper resolution of
the crisis in Ukraine.

Ghana condemns all acts of sexual violence and
human trafficking in Ukraine, including as a weapon
of war, and stresses the need to hold perpetrators
accountable. We reiterate our support for all ongoing
accountability efforts, including the investigations by
the Ukrainian authorities, civil society organizations
and the International Criminal Court, among others.

Ms. Oppong-Ntiri (Ghana): The gendered impact
of conflict is of importance to peace and security and
must continue to engage the attention of the global
community so that appropriate and tailored responses
are provided to the many women and girls who,
unfortunately, fall victim to actions that constitute
a violation of both their rights and international law.
We are therefore grateful to Special Representative
Pramila Patten, Natalia Karbowska and Sherrie Rollins
Westin for their briefings and for drawing attention to
the unfortunate development of conflict-related sexual
violence and human trafficking in Ukraine and, more
important, the protection assistance and support being
provided to the women and girls.

Ghana is appreciative of the efforts of all
humanitarian and aid agencies present in Ukraine, as
well as the Member States that responded to the call for
real action and continue to offer a hand of hope in the
parts of the country where it is most needed.

Two months ago, in this very Chamber, the members
of the Security Council and the wider United Nations
membership were briefed by Ms. Patten during the
open debate on conflict-related sexual violence, with
an emphasis on accountability as a form of prevention
(see S/PV.9016). At that open debate, Ukraine was
listed among conflict environments where the scourge
of conflict-related sexual violence remained a chilling
reality for many.
Today, as Ukraine takes centre stage in our
discussions on conflict-related sexual violence and
human trafficking, we, who are entrusted with the
details of their heartbreaking circumstances, owe it to
victims and survivors to channel our dissatisfaction
into action. We are reminded of our obligation as an
international community to ensure that prevention,
accountability and a survivor-centred approach, which
are at the heart of resolution 2467 (2019), are not
reduced to mere rhetoric but are translated into real and
tangible action on the ground.

We further express our support for global calls
to designate such acts as war crimes and submit that
conflict-related sexual violence and human trafficking
should be treated as a basis for targeted sanctions
against culpable actors in keeping with the importance
that the Security Council attaches to accountability and
ending impunity.

Training and capacity-building for United
Nations field and humanitarian workers, civil society
organizations, local women’s groups and media
organizations in Ukraine are absolutely essential in
ensuring that such entities are adequately equipped to
provide sufficient sensitization against stigma. Dealing
with the problem of stigmatization would encourage
an increasing number of victims not only to report
violations against them, but also to support the delivery
of justice on their behalf by testifying and staying
engaged throughout the prosecution processes.
In accordance with resolution 2475 (2019), the United
Nations must urgently reduce the risk of trafficking
through the provision of effective assistance and
protection to refugees and internally displaced persons
without discrimination, in particular on grounds of
race, gender, disability or other status, recognizing that
discrimination and racism may increase vulnerability
to trafficking.
No child in Ukraine should have to endure the
horrible experience of being trafficked for the purposes
of sexual exploitation. We urge all relevant United
Nations agencies to ensure that child-protection systems
in Ukraine are continuously and adequately resourced.
There is also a crucial need to ensure access to safe
accommodation and enhance the protection of displaced
and refugee children, taking into consideration their
best interests, to prevent them from being trafficked.

22-3719411/32

S/PV.9056

Maintenance of peace and security of Ukraine

It is important to recall that the effects of
conflicts on populations are innumerable. Whenever
conflicts occur, innocent civilians are often exposed
to unspeakable physical, mental, environmental and
economic damage, with very little hope for restoration.
When sexual violence and human trafficking are
introduced into this already-toxic cocktail, victims
experience an agony most of us can never imagine.
A ceasefire is most urgent now to eliminate
the conditions within which these unbridled and
gross violations of international law, international
humanitarian law and human rights abuses have been
manifested. Consequently, we reiterate the call on the
Russian Federation to unconditionally withdraw its
forces from the internationally recognized territories of
Ukraine and for the two parties to commit to diplomacy
and dialogue for an early and negotiated settlement of
their dispute. We believe that, through meaningful
and sustained engagement centred on the principles
of the Charter, international law and the norms that
facilitate peaceful coexistence and assure stability, the
parties will be better equipped to address their mutual
security concerns.
In concluding, we urge the sustained engagement
of the Security Council on this important matter, with
a view to ensuring freedom from sexual oppression as
well as accountability for all acts of impunity against
women and girls in Ukraine.
Ms. Heimerback (Norway): I thank the three
briefers for their important statements.
Norway condemns in the strongest terms Russia’s
unprovoked war of aggression against Ukraine, which
is a blatant violation of the United Nations Charter.
Russia must stop the war and withdraw its troops
immediately. We reiterate our demand that civilians
be protected and international humanitarian law fully
respected and implemented. We are appalled by the
forced deportations of Ukrainian citizens, including
children, to Russia, Russian-controlled territories and
Belarus. We call for the restoration of family links,
the immediate release of Ukrainian citizens, and
their relocation to safety in Government-held areas
of Ukraine.
The war has a gendered impact. It affects women
and men, girls and boys, and members of lesbian,
gay, bisexual, transgender and intersex communities
differently. Let me highlight three issues in this
regard. First, attacks on health-care institutions
12/32

06/06/2022

and staff are denying people, including women who
are pregnant or in labour, safe access to sexual and
reproductive-health services. Secondly, the number of
survivor accounts of rape and other forms of sexual and
gender-based violence is high. Children will be born
of war. Their rights and well-being — and that of their
mothers — must be ensured. And thirdly, we note the
high risk of trafficking, as displaced people seek safety
across borders.
The foregoing violations and risks must be addressed.
In response, Norway has increased our support to the
United Nations Population Fund and other humanitarian
actors that provide sexual and reproductive-health
services. We underline the importance of gender- and
age-differentiated responses to meet the needs of the
civilian population, including Ukrainian internally
displaced persons and refugees. This must include
access to mental-health and psychosocial support
and sexual and reproductive-health services for
all, regardless of the gender indicated in a person’s
passport. Also, unaccompanied Ukrainian children are
in a particularly vulnerable situation. Child protection
services must be ensured.
But first and foremost, we must take steps to
prevent sexual and gender-based violence, including
trafficking, from happening. We welcome the agreed
framework on cooperation between the Government
of Ukraine and the United Nations on prevention and
response to conflict-related sexual violence. Engaging
and supporting women human rights defenders and
civil society in our responses is key. We insist on a
survivor-centred approach. It is vital for survivors,
their communities and Ukraine as a whole to be able to
overcome the trauma and stigma that has been brought
on them by this war and to move forward together.
Atrocities must be investigated, and those
responsible held to account. We therefore support
the ongoing investigations, including the work of the
International Criminal Court and the Commission of
Inquiry for Ukraine. Expertise on conflict-related
sexual violence, gender, and children’s rights are
crucial in these processes. We underline the critical
importance of strong and independent human rights
institutions and accountability mechanisms in Ukraine.
There must be zero tolerance for sexual and genderbased violence and trafficking, and no impunity for
perpetrators. Accountability is vital to ensure justice
22-37194

06/06/2022

Maintenance of peace and security of Ukraine

for the survivors and prevent future sexual and genderbased violations everywhere.
Mr. Costa Filho (Brazil): At the outset, let me thank
the briefers — Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral on Sexual Violence in Conflict Pramila Patten,
Ms. Karbowska and Ms. Rollins Westin — for their
valuable accounts of the situation in Ukraine with
respect to sexual violence and human trafficking.
As the conflict in Ukraine has entered its fourth
month, the full extent of its humanitarian consequences
is still being assessed by the international community.
We know for sure that the conflict has caused immense
suffering for both the people directly affected by military
action and for the civilians fleeing confrontation. In
the wider context of destruction and gross violations
of human rights brought about by the war, we take
note, with great concern, of reports of alleged cases of
sexual violence directed against women and girls in the
context of the conflict in Ukraine.
The numbers reported are alarming and suggest
that rape is being systematically deployed as a weapon
of war. Brazil reiterates its calls for urgent independent
investigations. It is admittedly difficult to document
sexual violence because victims often do not want to
speak about it. The insufficiency of reports further
contributes to the sense of impunity that surrounds
such war crimes.
The use of gender-based violence as a weapon of
war, as well as a tool of intimidation and social control
in conflict situations, is unacceptable. Such crimes are
often used to humiliate and punish innocent civilians.
It is well documented that sexual violence destroys the
social fabric of communities and inflicts long-lasting
psychological trauma on its victims. In its aftermath,
the stigmatization and discrimination of survivors can
endure and contribute to further gender inequality.
Perpetrators of such acts, be they agents of the
State or not, should be held accountable for committing
clear violations of international human rights and
international humanitarian law. Such abhorrent acts
are prohibited both in times of war and peace. The
proper investigation and prosecution of sexual violence
cases in Ukraine are necessary not just as a means of
reparation but also of delivering justice. As experience
has shown us, the delivery of justice in such cases is
also an important tool for consolidating peace in postconflict situations.

S/PV.9056

Since the outbreak of the conflict, nearly 15 million
people have been displaced, and humanitarian needs
continue to soar. Unfortunately, human traffickers
and criminal networks may take advantage of such
movements of people, for the most part women and
children. Such criminals attempt to exploit refugees’
vulnerability and lure them with false promises of free
transport, accommodation, employment or other forms
of assistance. Although we do not know the exact
numbers of victims who have already fallen prey to
traffickers and abusers, the risks are clear and deserve
the international community’s attention. As Ms. Gillian
Triggs, Assistant High Commissioner for Protection of
the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner
for Refugees (UNHCR), acknowledged in April,
States have a duty to prevent predatory individuals
and criminal organizations from profiting from such
situations. We commend UNHCR for launching an
awareness-raising campaign among refugees and
distributing printed material with information on how
they can protect themselves and report incidents of
sexual misconduct or criminal activity.
The growing numbers of reports of sexual violence
and human trafficking, as well as the numbers of
refugees and internally displaced people themselves,
show that the situation in Ukraine is continuing to
deteriorate. In order to prevent such atrocities in the
region and in other countries, it is crucial that we work
to establish effective strategies for avoiding unsafe and
irregular routes and promoting sustainable and safe
legal pathways for those in need of protection. It is our
duty and responsibility to ensure that people fleeing
hostilities are appropriately received and cared for. To
that end, Brazil has introduced special humanitarian
visas for Ukrainian nationals and stateless persons
affected by the conflict in Ukraine who want to live and
work in Brazil. The Brazilian Embassies in Bratislava,
Budapest, Bucharest, Prague and Warsaw have been
granting those visas since March, in a policy that
has previously benefited Afghan, Syrian and Haitian
nationals and is an example of Brazil’s unshakable
commitment to human rights and the protection of the
most vulnerable.
The Council has already failed to prevent the
outbreak of the conflict and ensure a cessation of
hostilities. It must not fail to repudiate sexual crimes
and human trafficking. Immediate investigation by the
relevant international bodies is called for, including by

22-3719413/32

S/PV.9056

Maintenance of peace and security of Ukraine

the Independent International Commission of Inquiry
on Ukraine of the Human Rights Council.
Mr. Raguttahalli (India): Let me begin by
thanking Under-Secretary-General Pramila Patten, the
Special Representative on Sexual Violence in Conflict,
for her remarks. I also thank our civil-society briefers,
Ms. Natalia Karbowska and Ms. Sherrie Rollins Westin,
for their insights.
In the past three decades, the international
community has played an important role in establishing
accountability for conflict-related sexual violence,
thereby sending a strong message that sexual violence
should have no place in the civilized world. Despite that
progress, it is indeed distressing that sexual violence in
situations of armed conflict continues unabated amid
a culture of impunity and as a tactic of war, torture
and terror in armed conflicts, especially by non-State
actors. National Governments have a primary and
important responsibility to prosecute and deter such
crimes in conflict situations on their territories, even if
they are committed by non-State actors. At the request
of Member States, the United Nations must assist
national authorities in developing their capabilities to
strengthen their national legal frameworks and related
structures for the speedy investigation and prosecution
of perpetrators. We also support effective cooperation
and appropriate mechanisms to combat illegal migration
and human trafficking.
India remains deeply concerned about the
worsening situation in Ukraine and reiterates its call
for an immediate cessation of the violence and an end
to hostilities. The conflict in Ukraine has resulted in
much loss of life and countless miseries for its peoples,
particularly women, children and the elderly, with
millions made homeless and forced to take shelter in
neighbouring countries. We support all diplomatic
efforts to end the conflict and alleviate the suffering of
the people of Ukraine. We also call for a resumption of
talks between Ukraine and the Russian Federation to
end the conflict.
The conflict is having a destabilizing effect, with
broader regional and global implications. The resulting
increase in oil prices and shortages of food grains and
fertilizers are having a disproportionate impact on the
Global South, especially developing countries. The
developed world needs to do much more to alleviate the
adverse impact on the daily lives of people in vulnerable
countries. India is committed to working constructively
14/32

06/06/2022

to mitigate the adverse impact of the conflict on food
security and to ensuring that vulnerable countries
have a sufficient cushion against fluctuations in the
global market. In order to manage our own overall
food security and support the needs of neighbouring
and other vulnerable developing countries, we have
announced some measures that will allow for wheat
exports, based on approval, to countries that need to
meet their food security demands, a policy that will
ensure that countries in need are given priority.
In that context, it is essential that we all adequately
appreciate the importance of equity, affordability
and accessibility when it comes to food grains.
Regrettably, we have already seen how those principles
were disregarded in the case of coronavirus disease
vaccines. Open markets must not become a pretext for
perpetuating inequity and promoting discrimination.
India has been providing financial assistance as well
as supplying food grains to neighbouring countries that
are facing the consequences of the Ukraine conflict.
We hope that the international community will continue
to respond positively to the evolving humanitarian
requirements. We reiterate the importance of the
guiding principles of humanitarian assistance of the
United Nations. Humanitarian action must always be
guided by those principles, that is, humanity, neutrality,
impartiality and independence, and such measures
should never be politicized.
Let me conclude by reaffirming that the
contemporary global order is built on the Charter of the
United Nations, international law and respect for the
sovereignty and territorial integrity of States.
Mr. Kariuki (United Kingdom): Let me start by
thanking Special Representative Patten, Ms. Karbowska
and Ms. Rollins Westin for their powerful briefings.
I also welcome the representative of Ukraine and
European Council President Michel among the
participants in this meeting.
On Friday we marked 100 days since Russia
launched its illegal war against Ukraine. During that
time, we have witnessed death and destruction on a
scale not seen in Europe since the Second World War.
Thousands have been killed or injured. More than
6.6 million people have fled Ukraine and millions
inside the country remain displaced, stranded in
conflict-affected areas and in dire need of humanitarian
support. As we have heard, women and girls are the
worst affected.
22-37194

06/06/2022

Maintenance of peace and security of Ukraine

We have seen evidence of serious breaches of
international law, including atrocities in places such as
Bucha and Irpin and attacks on schools, hospitals, railway
stations, apartment buildings and journalists — even
on Kyiv while the Secretary-General was visiting.
We have seen a disturbing increase in conflict-related
sexual violence, including horrific reports of rape and
sexual violence committed by Russian armed forces,
and a significant increase in human trafficking. Russia’s
actions, including its destruction and blockading of key
ports, have also exacerbated one of the most severe
worldwide food crises in recent history.
We applaud the work of the United Nations and
the humanitarian and civil-society organizations
seeking to address the suffering wrought by the war,
including efforts to secure grain exports from Ukraine.
The United Kingdom is committed to supporting
those efforts in every way it can. We have pledged
$500 million to help Ukraine, including through funding
to the United Nations and to civil-society organizations
helping survivors of gender-based violence, including
sexual violence.
Accountability is vital to upholding the rule of law
and the rights of all States. The United Kingdom is
assisting with the important task of evidence collection
and preservation, including on sexual violence. We are
collaborating closely with the Ukrainian ProsecutorGeneral and have deployed specialist United Kingdom
experts on war crimes and conflict-related sexual
violence to Poland to provide support. At the open
debate on 13 April (see S/PV.9016) we launched
the Murad Code, which is designed to support safe
evidence collection from survivors of sexual violence.
A Ukrainian-language translation has been shared with
the Ukrainian Prosecutor-General. We continue to
look at all international options to tackle those heinous
crimes and hold the perpetrators to account.
This war is as appalling and unjustified on its
hundredth day as it was on its first. Russia is ignoring
all our calls for peace and continuing its attacks on
eastern Ukraine, and it struck Kyiv yet again this
weekend. We must not allow Russia to normalize the
illegal aggression with its disinformation, distraction
and lies. We must rather demand that Russia end the
suffering that it is causing. That means immediately
ceasing its invasion and withdrawing its forces, as the
Secretary-General, Council members and the General
Assembly have demanded and as the International
Court of Justice has ordered.

S/PV.9056

Mr. Biang (Gabon) (spoke in French): As I am
taking the floor for the first time since your term
began, I would like to congratulate you, Sir, on your
presidency of the Security Council and on taking the
initiative to convene this important debate on sexual
violence and human trafficking in connection with the
situation in Ukraine. I thank Special Representative
Pramila Patten for her informative briefing and
Ms. Natalia Karbowska and Ms. Sherrie Rollins Westin
for their first-hand accounts.
As we take the floor before the Council this
morning, our thoughts are with the people in Ukraine
and its neighbouring countries who have fallen prey to
the ravages of the war that has been under way there for
the past 100 days. We want to convey our solidarity with
them in this time of trouble. On behalf of my country
I pay tribute to the women and men who are working
determinedly within the framework of humanitarian
missions to mitigate the daily suffering of the war’s
survivors. We reiterate that humanitarian aid, which is
so vital in such situations, must be provided unhindered
to the populations in need, without politicization and
in the safe and dignified conditions guaranteed by
international humanitarian law.
The statistics in the most recent situation report of
the Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs
on the war in Ukraine are disturbing. They confirm
the projections for an increasing toll as the fighting on
the ground intensifies. Civilians continue to bear the
brunt of the hostilities, with more than 7 million people
internally displaced and approximately 6.8 million
refugees. We are very concerned about the allegations of
sexual and gender-based violence, particularly against
women and children, as well as the continuing reports
of emerging human trafficking networks. In that regard,
we welcome the initiatives taken by the United Nations
bodies and specialized agencies to prevent and counter
threats to human rights and actual violations of them.
We welcome the work of monitoring and awarenessraising being done by Ms. Patten’s Office to that end,
and we hope that the Framework for Cooperation
signed with the Ukrainian Government will improve
the prevention of those crimes and strengthen the
operational response. We also welcome the mechanisms
put in place by the United Nations Population Fund and
the International Organization for Migration to provide
appropriate short-, medium- and long-term responses
in terms of medical care and legal support.

22-3719415/32

S/PV.9056

Maintenance of peace and security of Ukraine

It is vital to stress that the international conventions
protecting civilians in conflict and the relevant
Security Council resolutions, including resolutions
1820 (2008) and 1325 (2000), which condemn sexual
violence against women and the use of rape as a
weapon of war and recognize sexual violence as a
major security risk, are binding on all warring parties.
The international community must ensure that sexual
violence, human trafficking and all other human rights
abuses during armed conflict can be independently
and impartially investigated in order to establish the
facts and attribute responsibility. Mafia-style networks
involved in trafficking and sexual exploitation and
operating along exit corridors or host centres must
be neutralized and the perpetrators held accountable
for their crimes. To that end, we must strengthen the
coordination among the various organizations involved.
Information-sharing must be ramped up in order to
prevent criminal networks as far as possible from
taking advantage of distressed populations fleeing
war zones. The threat of exploitation posed by illegal
labour, recruitment into paedophile networks and
illegal adoption would undoubtedly be substantially
reduced if their communication networks and means of
operationalization and financing were undermined.
I would like to once again echo what has been said
about the situation of those fleeing the war, especially
the many African nationals. We continue to receive
shocking testimony from many who have been mistreated
because of their origin as they try to leave. Since the
war in Ukraine began, we have repeatedly brought up
the stigmatization of many African nationals. It is not
merely a question of skin colour but of humanity — of
the universal nature of suffering and the respect we
have for the noble values of the United Nations and
the peoples of the world, or rather, all peoples of
the world. It is obvious that in a situation of war, all
suffering should be taken equally seriously, because
suffering has no face. Every tear caused by suffering
should elicit our emotions and our condemnation
without any prior consideration of the colour of the
eyes from which it flows. Indifference before such
human misery is as indecent and unacceptable as such
hateful discrimination. As we take stock of the current
situation, the ordeal faced by young Africans fleeing the
war in Ukraine, who are being discriminated against,
humiliated and incomprehensibly and inhumanely
treated, must not be forgotten. We must remember the
deafening silence of some and the selective pleas of all
who know how to make their voices heard and could
16/32

06/06/2022

take action, but who have remained unresponsive to
the cries of distress of young Africans who have found
themselves marginalized by protection mechanisms
and at greater risk of exploitation.
As we have just heard from Ms. Patten, the
humanitarian situation in Ukraine is extremely
worrying and requires urgent action to meet the major
needs of the civilian population. We owe a response to
the women and children trapped amid the fighting. We
owe a response to those who are abused and exploited.
We owe a response to all the separated families who
have been stripped of their dignity. And our response
must transcend our differences in order to meet the
needs of all the victims. My country calls for a ceasefire
and the opening of humanitarian corridors in every
area in order to provide humanitarian aid in optimal
security conditions.
In conclusion, on behalf of my country, I reiterate
our call for good-faith negotiations to end the war.
It goes without saying that the most effective way to
eliminate the risk of sexual and gender-based violence
and exploitation is to end the conflict.
Mr. Kimani (Kenya): I thank Special Representative
of the Secretary-General Pramila Patten, Ms. Natalia
Karbowska and Ms. Sherrie Rollins Westin for
their briefings. I also welcome the participation of
the Permanent Representative of Ukraine and the
Permanent Representatives of the countries affected in
the region.
It was with a heavy heart this morning that the
Kenyan delegation conveyed its condolences to the
people and the Government of Nigeria following
the brutal murder of dozens of worshippers at the
Catholic church of Saint Francis in the town of Owo in
Ondo state. Such acts of terrorism are crimes against
humanity, which we condemn in the strongest terms.
We urge the Council to redouble its efforts to ensure
that terrorist groups are met with the strongest possible
condemnation and opposition.
Wars of aggression are transgressions of
international law that open the floodgates to serious
violations against civilians, particularly when they are
wars in breach of the Charter of the United Nations.
Even as we justly condemn war crimes, we must not
forget that war itself is the greatest crime. Sexual
violence against women, children and men is a frequent
outcome of war and is also used deliberately and
sometimes systematically as a weapon of war. We
22-37194

06/06/2022

Maintenance of peace and security of Ukraine

recognize with the deepest concern the women, girls
and boys in Ukraine who have suffered this uniquely
horrifying crime. We condemn the violations against
them and the violations of international law, the laws
of war, the United Nations Charter and the most basic
human decency. We call on all military commanders
to ensure that those responsible for such atrocities are
held accountable. Soldiers in the field should be subject
to severe discipline for abusing civilians or captured
combatants. Political leaders should also be aware that
using ideology to label entire populations increases the
risk that rank-and-file soldiers will commit atrocities.
Leaders should uphold the human dignity, worth
and equality of all of the people of Ukraine in all
public communications.
We urge all the United Nations agencies concerned
and those in Ukraine and neighbouring countries to
do their utmost to deliver medical and psychosocial
support to the survivors of sexual violence and
trafficking. More should be done to ensure the
establishment of humanitarian corridors and to protect
the millions who remain vulnerable in besieged cities
and villages from military targeting. We say that in the
full understanding that the truest protection is stopping
the war and demonstrating respect for the territorial
integrity and sovereignty of Ukraine. In the meantime,
there is a crucial need for effective cross-border
coordination between border-security personnel, earlywarning mechanisms and national and regional women
protection advisers, as well as humanitarian actors,
to protect those in danger of abuse. In that regard, we
commend the signing of the United Nations Framework
of Cooperation in early May to assist the survivors
of sexual violence, with a purview that also covers
the prevention of conflict-related trafficking amid
increasing displacement.
We also commend all the individuals, institutions
and Governments helping in every possible way.
We especially thank United Nations bodies and
agencies, including the Office for the Coordination
of Humanitarian Affairs, UN-Women, UNICEF, the
Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for
Refugees, the United Nations Population Fund and the
United Nations Development Programme, for their
reports and action briefings highlighting the plight
of civilians, especially women and children, and for
spearheading the response of the United Nations.
We applaud the brave women of Ukraine who
are fighting for peace and for their country. We

S/PV.9056

recognize with admiration the women who are leading
in Government and civil society. We are pleased to
see women playing a role as agents of change and we
advocate for their participation in decision-making at all
levels and in all aspects, including diplomatic efforts to
find lasting peace and security in Europe and globally.
I must once again bring up the plight of the Africans
who are trapped in the war. Unfortunately, we continue
to see reports of racial discrimination directed at
people of African descent who are also seeking safety
in Europe, like other fleeing Ukrainians. We recently
heard Gerald Ezeani’s heartfelt story of his experience
crossing the border from Ukraine to Hungary and then
to Berlin. Although as a valid resident of Ukraine he
was aware of his rights and the laws outlined in the
Charter that allow him right of passage, he experienced
discrimination on the train, from which between 15
and 20 German police officers asked him to disembark
and demanded that he undergo further processing to be
allowed to leave, based on the fact that he was not born
in Ukraine. Based on those appalling justifications,
every black person on the train was made to disembark
and held for 23 hours, enduring unjust and inhumane
treatment by law enforcement. We simply have to repeat
that people of African descent are equally human and
deserving of equal protection and facilitation in line
with the Charter.
The war in Ukraine continues to worsen food
insecurity in many countries, particularly in the Global
South. As a mitigating measure, we support the urgent
call by the World Food Programme for the opening of
Ukrainian ports on the Black Sea to allow for the export
of food. The humanitarian and development response
must leave no country or region behind. We commend
the efforts of the Chairperson of the African Union and
the Chairperson of the African Union Commission for
their engagement with leaders who are in a position
to enable food to be moved from Ukraine and out into
the world.
In conclusion, I reaffirm Kenya’s support for
the sovereignty, territorial integrity and political
independence of Ukraine and our continued call for
prioritizing dialogue as the only plausible avenue for
resolving serious disputes.
Mrs. Nusseibeh (United Arab Emirates): I
would like to join others in thanking Ms. Patten,
Ms. Karbowska and Ms. Rollins Westin for their very
insightful briefings. I also welcome the participation of

22-3719417/32

S/PV.9056

Maintenance of peace and security of Ukraine

Charles Michel, President of the European Council, as
well as the representative of Ukraine, in today’s meeting.
Before the most recent crisis in Ukraine, the world
was already in the midst of the worst refugee crisis
since the Second World War. That in turn has been the
cause of almost unfathomable levels of sexual violence
and human trafficking. In 2016, the International
Labour Organization estimated that 28.7 million
women and girls around the world were in a condition
of forced labour, debt bondage, forced marriage,
slavery or trafficking. The Secretary-General’s report
on human trafficking (A/75/289) in 2020 noted that
70 per cent of all identified trafficking victims were
women and girls, 77 per cent of whom were trafficked
for sexual exploitation.
My region, the Middle East, has been at the epicentre
of that crisis for more than a decade, with millions
displaced and exploited. The conflict in Ukraine is
therefore making an already horrifying global crisis
worse. In just over 100 days, almost 14 million people
have been displaced, more than a quarter of Ukraine’s
population. The majority of them are women and
children. We have already seen disturbing reports of
conflict-related sexual violence and of women and
children falling victim to organized criminal gangs
operating human trafficking rings. As we have heard
today, this conflict demands a serious, gender-centred
international response that prioritizes the needs and
safety of women and children in times of conflict. Like
our colleagues from Kenya and Gabon, we are also very
concerned about the issue of ensuring that all refugees
are treated equally and without racism.
Based on the topic chosen for today’s discussion,
I would like to focus on the following points. First,
we commend the Framework of Cooperation that
Special Representative Patten’s Office signed with the
Government of Ukraine on preventing and responding
to conflict-related sexual violence. Cooperation
between the United Nations and the relevant authorities
in Ukraine and their human trafficking task force in
various areas, including regarding improved access for
survivors of sexual violence to health and social services,
is critical. We support the Special Representative’s plan
to deploy an expert on trafficking to cooperate with the
authorities in Ukraine and its neighbours because we
believe it will help mitigate the horrific exploitation of
women and children across the region. Such initiatives
are positive and necessary steps that can boost the
capacity and efforts of neighbouring countries to
18/32

06/06/2022

prevent exploitation and combat trafficking. We note
Ms. Patten’s message that a regional compact is urgently
required and that the Security Council should continue
to provide its support in the humanitarian context of
this conflict. The United Arab Emirates supports
both suggestions.
Secondly, we already know how essential yet
difficult it is to collect sex-disaggregated data in conflict
situations, including in order to better understand the
impact of a conflict on human trafficking and conflictrelated sexual violence. Initiatives such as the rapid
gender analysis carried out by UN-Women and CARE
International provide insight into the gender dynamics
of the conflict in Ukraine and are the type of analysis
that can guide a better and more tailored response to
the needs of Ukrainian women and girls. They should
continue to be well funded.
Thirdly, the conflict continues to undermine
food security globally, which disproportionately
affects women and girls. While it is mostly men who
take part in conflict, it is women who are forced to
put food on the table for their families by any means
necessary. We know that food insecurity exacerbates
vulnerabilities and can result in women facing violence
and exploitation as they seek to support their families,
especially in rural areas. Because of such knock-on
effects, the Security Council must keep the issue of the
exacerbation of global food insecurity by the conflict at
top of its agenda. To that end, the United Arab Emirates
commends the Secretary-General for his efforts to
facilitate the shipment of grain from Ukrainian ports
and encourages all ongoing efforts in that regard.
There are many actions that can be taken to
mitigate, prevent and respond to conflict-related sexual
violence and human trafficking in Ukraine. But there
is only one real way to stop it. That is by ending the
conflict with a diplomatic solution in which women
are full, equal and meaningful participants and are
included in all mediation and dialogue efforts. We hope
to see that happen and without delay, in accordance with
international law and the Charter of the United Nations.
Ms. Byrne Nason (Ireland): I too would like
to welcome the President of the European Council,
Charles Michel, to the Chamber today and, as always,
to welcome our colleague the Ambassador of Ukraine.
I extend our sincere thanks to our briefers this
morning — Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral Pramila Patten, Natalia Karbowska and Sherrie
22-37194

06/06/2022

Maintenance of peace and security of Ukraine

Rollins Westin. We are very grateful for their deeply
sobering accounts of the suffering and destruction
caused by Russia’s senseless and illegal war in Ukraine,
which as we all know has now surpassed 100 days.
Every day since then we have been watching the fallout
of this abhorrent war, with civilians attacked and killed,
schools and hospitals targeted, mass displacement and
family separation — and the subject that brings us to
the Chamber today, conflict-related sexual violence and
human trafficking. I want to make it clear that this is no
special military operation. It is an illegal war, causing
intentional damage and suffering.
More than 15 million people have now fled their
homes, the vast majority of them women and children.
The speed and scale of this displacement are unheard
of in modern times. When the Russian Federation
further invaded Ukraine in late February, the alarm
about human trafficking was raised immediately.
We know that conflict and displacement exacerbate
human trafficking. We know that they provide fertile
ground for those who trade in human beings — the
organized criminal networks looking to take advantage
of the most vulnerable in our societies, as Pramila
Patten, the Special Representative, sadly and very
graphically highlighted this morning. Civil society,
national authorities and the United Nations agencies
on the ground have mobilized quickly to respond, raise
awareness and provide information to refugees and
training to service providers and border police. I want
to express our sincere gratitude today for their work. It
has undoubtedly prevented harm. But more needs to be
done to ensure that prevention efforts are robust.
As the war rages on, the vulnerability of those
fleeing has only increased. Members of marginalized
groups, such as unaccompanied children and those
with disabilities, face particular risks. The groundswell
of volunteers who have mobilized to support those
fleeing represents humankind at its best. It speaks to
the foundation on which human rights, and indeed the
United Nations, were built, which is that all people
are born with inherent dignity. But we must ensure
that rigorous vetting and registration procedures are
in place to prevent exploitation and to protect against
trafficking. As Special Rapporteur Siobhán Mullally
and others have highlighted, expanded international
protection measures and safe migration routes are
also essential to reducing the risk of trafficking. In
welcoming more than 30,000 Ukrainians to Ireland

S/PV.9056

under the European Union’s Temporary Protection
Directive, we have sought to mitigate such risks.
We also know that conflict and displacement
exacerbate sexual and gender-based violence. The
Security Council has heard the horrifying reports
of sexual violence perpetrated by Russian soldiers
against women and girls and men and boys. Rape is
not an inevitable by-product of war; it is an act that
may constitute a war crime and that leaves victims and
their communities with lifelong effects and trauma.
As Special Representative of the Secretary-General
Patten said earlier, even one case of such abuse is one
case too many. The Security Council has condemned
conflict-related sexual violence and recognized that it
can constitute a war crime. But now is the time for the
international community to do more and to ensure that
such crimes do not go unpunished.
As Ms. Patten stated while she was in Kyiv,
international law will not be an empty promise. It
cannot be. The efforts under way to gather evidence and
investigate these crimes, including through the United
Nations Framework for Cooperation, will help bring
those responsible to account. We fully support Special
Representative Patten in her work in the context of the
Framework for Cooperation with the Government of
Ukraine, and we echo the calls she made this morning
for cooperation from the Russian Federation. There
will be justice for victims and survivors.
The reports of an increase in domestic violence in
Ukraine are also very worrying. The survivors of genderbased violence now face a double crisis, as services
are not fully able to provide protection and respond
to their needs. In addition to justice, all survivors of
sexual and gender-based violence and of trafficking
deserve protection and assistance. Comprehensive
survivor-centred services must be provided at every
stage — within Ukraine, on the borders and in transit
and host countries. That means taking account of the
particular needs of groups and individuals in vulnerable
situations. Sexual and reproductive health services and
psychosocial supports must be prioritized.
Let me conclude by speaking directly to the Russian
Federation. There should be no doubt that this war will
end. They all do. Light always overcomes darkness. If
Russia has any compassion for the millions of victims
and any respect for international law and can still
show humanity, it should end this war now and stop

22-3719419/32

S/PV.9056

Maintenance of peace and security of Ukraine

the senseless suffering. It is never too late to do the
right thing.
Mr. Nebenzia (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We thank the briefers for the information
they provided.
The ratcheting up of accusations that Russian
service personnel have committed crimes of a sexual
nature has been a favourite tactic of the Kyiv regime
and our Western colleagues since the very beginning of
our special military operation in Ukraine. We all recall
how in the Ukrainian and Western media and in this
Chamber our soldiers have been repeatedly accused
of sexual violence, with references to certain reports
containing allegedly reliable information. However, no
evidence has been provided. Nor have the briefers and
representatives who have spoken today offered a single
example. But such accusations fit well with the image
of Russian soldiers as beasts and brutal barbarians
carefully created by Western political strategists, just
as Goebbels’s henchmen did in the final stages of the
Second World War. Members probably remember the
Permanent Representative of Ukraine, using the same
fascist handbook, telling us how Russian soldiers stole
home appliances, and even toilets, when leaving Bucha
because “many people do not have toilets in Russia”?
The staging in Bucha, which our British colleagues
considered not to be enough reason to convene the
Security Council meeting that we had requested, has
so far been the climax of that lies-based and groundless
smear campaign. By now, so many inconsistencies and
refutations of the official version have surfaced that our
Western partners have become wary of mentioning it.
At the same time, the baseless accusations of sexual
violence do not become fewer, as we have had the
opportunity to see today.
I would like to address the colleagues who were
particularly vocal about that today, and recommend that
they be careful, because none of Kyiv’s allegations is
backed by any proof. That was best demonstrated lately
by the Ukrainian Commissioner for Human Rights
herself, Ms. Denisova. As it turned out, she overstepped
the mark and was dismissed by the Kyiv regime on
an interesting pretext — because of her inexplicable
focus on the numerous details of sexual crimes and
the rape of children in the occupied territories, which
could not be confirmed by evidence. In other words,
the Ukrainian Commissioner had been lying to the
entire world all that time, which was shocking news,
20/32

06/06/2022

even for the authorities in Kyiv. I urge those who, out
of habit, have been relishing the accusations against
Russian soldiers to think carefully about whether they
can trust the information, or rather disinformation, that
is propagated by Kyiv — and it is not only Denisova.
Many cases of alleged sexual violence, which
Western media trumpeted from Kyiv’s propaganda
machine, have already been refuted by either officials
or the so-called victims themselves. For example, the
Kherson authorities reported that there was no evidence
to prove that Russian troops used sexual violence
against 11 female residents of the city, as some dubious
online platforms had reported.
Nastya Savchishin, who made the globe-circling
news headlined “Girl raped and killed by Russians just
for being a Ukrainian”, herself admitted that she was
fine and that it was just a very strange photo shoot.
Another example: the girl who, according to Oleksiy
Arestovych, an adviser at the Office of the President of
Ukraine, was raped and tortured by Russian troops in
Hostomel and died. But it happened in Mariupol, not
Hostomel, and the perpetrators were neo-Nazis from
the Azov Battalion, not Russians. There is evidence of
that crime.
While our opponents limit themselves to baseless
allegations, I will provide specific examples of crimes
committed by Ukrainian nationalists.
As reported by the Investigative Committee
of Russia, criminal charges were brought against
the Deputy Commander of a fire support company
responsible for morale building in the A-2777 military
unit of the 36th Marine Brigade of the Armed Forces
of Ukraine, Senior Lieutenant Sergey Batynsky, who
committed an appalling crime. At the beginning of
April, Ukrainian troops from the Brigade detained
two civilian cyclists in Mariupol, a husband and wife,
on suspicion of separatism, and confined them in a
basement. Later on, Batynsky, in a state of intoxication,
raped the woman in the presence of her husband while
threatening to kill her. When the husband tried to stop
the crime, the Ukrainian soldier shot him dead in plain
view of his wife. Batynsky himself confessed to what
he had done during a video-taped interrogation, which
is publicly available.
On 7 March, military of the Donetsk People’s
Republic, when mine-clearing in the vicinity of the
Kommunar mine in the Donetsk region, discovered
22-37194

06/06/2022

Maintenance of peace and security of Ukraine

a grave containing four female bodies. Forensic tests
showed that before their deaths they had been tortured
and raped. One of the victims was pregnant. The
nationalist Aidar Battalion was based in that area.
On 28 March, nationalists from the Azov Battalion
raped and tortured a young woman to death in a building
of school No. 18 in Mariupol. Her disfigured body, with
severed hands and a swastika burned onto her stomach,
shocked everyone who saw it. We mentioned that
tragedy at the Security Council meeting on 11 April
(see S/PV.9013).
Currently, work is under way in the liberated
territories of Ukraine and the Donetsk and Luhansk
People’s Republics to uncover facts and evidence
of crimes by the Ukrainian armed forces. It is being
documented by the investigative authorities of Russia
and the Donbas Republics.
Ukrainian nationalists are notorious for their
cruelty, but they also include units whose atrocities, even
in the eyes of the authorities in Kyiv, have exceeded all
acceptable limits. For example, in the summer of 2015,
there was a scandal in Ukraine around the nationalist
Tornado Battalion. The Ukrainian authorities accused
its combatants of acts of pillaging, torture, violence
against both men and women, paedophilia, murder
and abductions of Ukrainian civilians. Many of the
perpetrators were prosecuted, including battalion
commander Onishchenko. However, in March this
year, all those culprits were granted amnesty by
President Zelenskyy.
After almost 2,500 fighters of the nationalist
neo-Nazi Azov Battalion and Ukrainian military
surrendered in Mariupol, ending the meaningless
resistance at the Azovstal steel works, their crimes are
now being investigated. Residents of liberated Mariupol
are playing an active role in that.
Soon enough the international community will
learn the truth about the crimes, including sexual
crimes, committed by Ukrainian nationalist units and
armed forces, whom the Kyiv authorities and their
Western sponsors are trying to glorify.
There is abundant evidence of how such scum shot
at civilians, doctors and volunteers who were trying to
help the wounded. Ukrainian tanks and artillery directly
targeted residential buildings. Prisoners from Azovstal
testified to those orders from their commanders;
indeed, they took shelter from Russian bombardments

S/PV.9056

in the residential buildings. The Azov fighters would
not let the sick and wounded out of hospitals; they
set fire to premises and intimidated and humiliated
civilians. A grave with up to 300 bodies was discovered
in Mariupol, where eyewitnesses say the Azov forces
dumped the bodies of the people they had killed while
they were in control of the city.
The conflict in Ukraine has boosted the exploitation
of Ukrainian refugees in European countries. Ms. Patten
touched on that earlier today. Judging by the available
information, the European Union’s specialized
agencies assess the threat of trafficking in Ukrainian
refugees as pretty high, taking into account the fact
that, in recent years, Ukraine has ranked among the
top five countries in terms of the number of victims of
human trafficking and sexual exploitation in Europe.
It is important to remain vigilant regarding that issue
and prevent violence against, and the exploitation of,
refugees in Europe.
It is no secret to anyone how the West receives
female refugees from Ukraine, who have suffered a
great deal. In Las Vegas, there are billboards inviting
strippers from Ukraine to auditions. In Germany, the
Kentucky Fried Chicken fast-food chain displayed
an advertisement with the inscription “Chicks from
Ukraine are welcome” against the image of a bed as a
background. It is hard to believe that it is only harmless
advertising. That is clearly only the tip of the iceberg,
showing how great the risk of sexual exploitation of
Ukrainian refugees is in the West. We all have seen the
terrifying footage of the sadistic treatment of Russian
detainees and prisoners of war by the Ukrainian military,
which has been widely circulated on the Internet.
Ukrainian nationalists are just as cruel to the peaceful
populations of Donbas and south-eastern Ukraine in
general, whom they perceive only as separatists, who
opted for autonomy from the Maidan authorities in
2014. That is also how the Ukrainian thugs treat women,
whom they do not consider it necessary to spare.
We would once again like to categorically refute
all allegations of sexual abuse by Russian soldiers.
That is a lie that we firmly reject. We would like to say
with all responsibility that the actions of the Russian
military are subject to a set of stringent rules. The
law prescribes severe penalties for attempted violence
against civilians. Compliance with the norms of
international humanitarian law is an absolute priority
for us. Unfortunately, the same cannot be said for
members of the Ukrainian armed forces and nationalist

22-3719421/32

S/PV.9056

Maintenance of peace and security of Ukraine

battalions. Therefore, if we really want to combat the
practice of sexual crimes in Ukraine, we must not
turn a blind eye to the numerous cases of such crimes
committed by the Ukrainian military, even though
political considerations encourage members to ignore
such a shameful practice.
In conclusion, I would also like to address subjects
that are not directly linked to the subject of today’s
meeting. We have taken note of the intention of the
United States of America and the United Kingdom to
supply long-range artillery and multiple-launch rocket
systems (MLRS) to Ukraine. Leaving aside the entirely
unconvincing explanations of such an irresponsible
step, I would like to point out that the Kyiv regime has
already taken this as carte blanche to continue and to
intensify the shelling of civilian targets in Donbas,
which, after a number of recent defeats, the Ukrainian
artillery was no longer able to reach.
The American munitions that were recently
delivered to the Ukrainian armed forces are already
being actively used to attack Donbas, including schools
and other educational facilities. There are casualties,
including among children. We already spoke about
this at the 2 June meeting (see S/PV.9052). There is
no military expediency for this sort of shelling, and
Kyiv knows this fully. I would like to point out to my
American and British colleagues that their countries
are becoming directly complicit in the crimes of
the Ukrainian armed forces in Donbas, with all the
attendant consequences. The fact that, in the eyes of
the Kyiv regime, there are no limits in the use of these
long-range artillery and MLRSs is demonstrated by
the recent statements of their representatives, which
deviates from the assertions made from Washington,
D.C., and London that there are restrictions in place.
Against this backdrop, such statements by a
number of Western officials, in particular United States
Secretary of State Antony Blinken, to the effect that
Kyiv will not use American MLRSs against targets
on the territory of Russia, do not sound convincing.
Thus the head of American diplomacy is essentially
trying to legalize strikes by Ukrainian armed forces
on the territory of the Donetsk People’s Republic and
the Luhansk People’s Republic, which are killing
civilians, including children. In that regard, we not
only reserve the right to move the line of the threat
that neo-Nazis pose to the Russian Federation and the
Donbas republics beyond the possible range of those
new long-range munitions, but also to launch strikes
22/32

06/06/2022

on the centres where the criminal decisions to use these
forms of weapons are made.
I also must note that thanks to the well-known
incredible corruption of Ukrainian officials, the arms
being supplied from America and Europe are virtually
openly being sold on the Ukrainian black market.
A very simple Internet search shows that American
Stingers are being sold for $7,000 apiece, and Javelins
for $30,000 each. The choice of Western small arms
and ammunition is simply more than abundant. Of
course, international terrorists, including those that
act in Europe and America, will not miss out on those
bargains. I therefore warn my British and American
colleagues that, when their own citizens start to ask
them discomfiting questions, they should not try to
shift the blame onto us.
The President: I shall now make a statement in my
capacity as the representative of Albania.
I thank Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral Patten for her insightful briefing.
Ms. Karbowska brought us a painful but muchneeded civil society perspective on what is going on
in Ukraine today. I thank Ms. Rollins Westin for the
tremendous work that Sesame Workshop is doing for
children throughout the world. We took note of her
recommendations and thank her for highlighting the
critical importance of early-childhood support.
I welcome the participation of the President of the
European Council, His Excellency Mr. Charles Michel,
at this meeting, which is further proof of the importance
and pertinence of the issue under discussion.
The so-called Russia special mission operation in
Ukraine — in reality, an unprovoked and unjustified
aggression which is turning into a war of attrition — has
entered its fourth month. Some 103 days have passed
since this unacceptable and totally avoidable war of
choice began. It continues to destroy the country and
is having a devastating impact on the entire population.
With every day that goes by this war brings its lot
of new victims, and every time we meet on this issue
in this Chamber, we hear about civilians being caught
in conflict, mounting significant human rights abuses
and crimes committed, and the unprecedented number
of displaced people. Nine thousand victims have been
documented by the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Human Rights so far, keeping
in mind that the real number is always much higher.
22-37194

06/06/2022

Maintenance of peace and security of Ukraine

Some 6.8 million people have crossed the border out
of Ukraine. They did not ask for it; they were forced to
abandon their lives and their routines overnight, which
makes it the quickest and most massive displacement
in Europe since the Second World War. These are
facts, not fiction. Such massive displacements have
created an environment that exacerbates inequality
and vulnerability, in particular for those first and most
affected, as is the case in every conflict — women and
children, who face sexual and gender-based violence,
human trafficking and exploitation.
As the devastating escalation continues in eastern
Ukraine, conditions worsen for civilians to find shelter
without basics, including water, and, in many cases,
these people cannot be reached with aid or evacuated
safely. We have witnessed the depth of inhumanity in
Mariupol. We hope not to see it elsewhere.
We would like to also express our deep concern
about thousands of children who, according to reports,
have been deported to Russia and are being held in
filtration camps. International humanitarian law is
clear. It classifies the forced mass deportation of people
during a conflict as a war crime. We call for full clarity
and an independent investigation into this issue.
Various assessments from actors on the ground
have revealed that the top concerns for women and
girls include threats to physical safety from active
conflict and continued bombardment, food insecurity,
lack of access to health care, including the full range
of reproductive-health services and care for survivors
of rape and mental health. Growing evidence of sexual
violence is emerging daily from the de-occupied
areas. We know now from the findings in the liberated
towns and cities of Kyiv oblast that civilians have been
targeted, tortured and killed on a large scale and that
women and girls have been subject of rape as a weapon
of war.
There have been multiple reports and accounts of
Russian soldiers breaking down the doors of cellars
and basements where people were sheltering, and
raped women. Some of these despicable actions have
taken place in front of these women’s children. Also,
Ukrainian authorities have repeatedly reported cases
of rape and sexual violence in the non-Governmentcontrolled areas of Ukraine. Human Rights Watch has
documented alleged war crimes, including rape.
As
other
towns
and
villages
remain
occupied — actually, almost 20 per cent of the territory

S/PV.9056

of Ukraine is occupied — only limited evidence reaches
the outside world. What was discovered in Bucha and
Irpin raises concerns for the safety of women and girls
in other Russia-occupied towns that are cut off from
the outside world. We reiterate our call for a detailed
investigation on what amounts to be a systematic
element of attacks on civilians committed by soldiers.
Conflict-related sexual violence is a despicable act.
It is a war crime. All documented cases of sexual violence
must undergo rigorous investigation. Accountability
cannot and should not be an option, but a must. We
strongly support the work of the International Criminal
Court, which has deployed teams on the ground for
the purposes of collective evidence of serious crimes,
war crimes, genocide, and crimes against humanity,
including sexual abuse of women and children. We also
look forward to the visit of the Commission of Inquiry
that begins tomorrow.
The documentation of sexual violence should be
a standardized process. Everything must be done to
collect credible, relevant and reliable information on
sexual violence in a manner that empowers survivors
and strengthens accountability mechanisms. It is vital
that all efforts are made to ensure protection and the
provision of life-saving and recovery services for
survivors of sexual violence in Ukraine, including
access to sexual and reproductive health and rights.
We need to adopt a survivor-centred approach so as
to empower survivors and address problems related to
their stigmatization.
Increased risk of vulnerability goes hand in hand
with human trafficking. Reports are showing that there
is a high risk of trafficking for sexual exploitation at
borders, especially for children and young women who
are often not accompanied by their family members,
where perpetrators take advantage of the human drama
and also use aggression. As we heard from Special
Representative Patten, traffickers proliferate with
false promises of all kinds in efforts to lure victims
into situations of exploitation. Greater collaboration is
therefore needed with border agencies and Government
partners to strengthen prevention mechanisms.
The Ukrainian people want the war to stop. They
want to return to their homes, reunite with their loved
ones, rebuild their lives safely and securely and in
peace. We wish for the same. Let us help Ukrainians,
particularly women and girls, go from nightmares

22-3719423/32

S/PV.9056

Maintenance of peace and security of Ukraine

06/06/2022

to normal life — and, why not? — to dreams. Only
Russian tanks, missiles and soldiers stand in their way.

and any Ukrainian cities and villages could be targets
for Russian rockets, as was the case in Kyiv yesterday.

This war should never have started, and it must stop.
However, as long as our calls go unheeded, we must
prioritize and ensure the protection of civilians, women
and children, gather evidence and ensure accountability.
Let us not forget that one day proof will reach the Court
and the perpetrators will be held accountable.

Any war means that the most vulnerable suffer
the most — that is, women, children, the elderly and
people with disabilities. Russia’s invasion of Ukraine
is no exception. The savage cruelty of the invaders
has turned the lives of millions of Ukrainians into an
endless nightmare. As many as 5 million people have
been recorded across Europe as individual refugees
from Ukraine, most of them women and children, and
remain abroad. Almost 12 million people have become
internally displaced persons (IDPs). We thank each and
every friend providing shelter for Ukrainians until the
Russian forces are pushed out of Ukraine.

I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.
I give the floor to the representative of Ukraine.
Mr. Kyslytsya (Ukraine): Let me start by
expressing my gratitude to Special Representative
Pramila Patten, as well as Ms. Natalia Karbowska of
the Ukrainian Women’s Fund and Ms. Sherrie Rollins
Westin of Sesame Workshop, for their comprehensive
presentations. I would also like to thank the Albanian
presidency for organizing this meeting. We appreciate
the commitment to keeping the issue of Russia’s war
of aggression on Ukraine at the top of the Security
Council’s agenda. Even if the Council is unable to take
effective steps to respond to what is currently the most
dangerous threat to international peace and security, it
is still important that we are gathered here today. In
that regard, I want to reiterate that there is no option
other than resolving the problem of Russia’s squatting
in the Soviet permanent seat, the sooner the better. As
an aggressor and a violator, that squatter threatens the
stability of the entire construct. We need a credible
Council and efficient solutions.
I also want to recognize the representative of
Putin’s regime in the permanent seat of the Soviet
Union. It is important that the Russian delegation
continues to show up to Security Council meetings on
Ukraine. They constitute a form of pre-trial meeting
and are valuable because they are on the record, which
means that everything that those accomplices to crimes
say can and will be used against them in court. Of
course, for their own sake, they have the right to talk to
a lawyer for advice before they speak here, and perhaps
they are already doing so.
All of Ukraine is bleeding now, especially on the
front lines, where the Russian army continues to use the
most barbaric and inhumane methods of warfare. In the
occupied territories, Russians are consolidating their
practices of terror, neo-colonialism and genocide. All
24/32

We remain extremely concerned about the destiny
of the Ukrainians who have been forcibly transferred
to Russia. As Russia has itself admitted, more than a
million Ukrainian citizens have been transferred to
various regions of Russia, including more than 234,000
children, several thousand of whom are orphans or
deprived of parental care. We strongly condemn the
decision by Russia to simplify the procedure for
obtaining Russian citizenship for Ukrainian orphans
and children left without parental care, in a gross
violation of the Fourth Geneva Convention relative to
the protection of civilian persons in time of war, which
obliges an occupying Power not to change the civil status
of children, as well as the 1989 Convention on the Rights
of the Child. Russia refuses to provide any information
to Ukrainian authorities or international organizations
about the people who have been forcibly transferred,
and we see a real danger that they may become victims
of human trafficking or exploitation and abuse. We call
on the United Nations agencies to explore ways and
means by which they can contribute more effectively
to protecting Ukrainian children affected by armed
conflict and facilitating the rapid and safe return to
Ukraine of children who have been forcibly displaced
or transferred to the Russian Federation.
Ukrainian law enforcement, non-governmental
organizations and the media continue to record
numerous cases of sexual violence committed by
Russian troops in Ukraine. Complaints about sexual
crimes committed by the invaders have been received
in the Donetsk, Zaporizhzhia, Kyiv, Luhansk, Kharkiv,
Kherson and Chernihiv regions of Ukraine. According
to our Ministry of Internal Affairs, minors and elderly
women have been among the victims of Russian rapists.
Fatalities have also been registered. The investigation
22-37194

06/06/2022

Maintenance of peace and security of Ukraine

of sexual crimes in the temporarily uncontrolled
territories of Ukraine is complicated. The Russian
occupiers continue to remove the traces of such crimes
by burning the bodies of tortured and raped civilians.
We commend the first mission to Ukraine of the
members of the Independent International Commission
of Inquiry on Ukraine, which starts tomorrow. The
Commission is to visit several locations in Ukraine to
obtain first-hand information on alleged human rights
violations and abuses, as well as to meet with victims,
witnesses and IDPs.
Ukraine remains committed to finding solutions
to prevent a global food crisis and is ready to work
to create the necessary conditions to resume exports
from the port of Odesa. The issue is how to make sure
that Russia does not abuse the trade route to attack the
city itself. That issue has become even more relevant
following Sunday’s missile strike on Kyiv, where four
rockets hit the facilities of the Darnytskyi car repair
plant. As always, Russia claims it destroyed military
hardware, including tanks sent by our allies. In
reality, however, the plant was focusing on repairing
grain-carrier freight cars, used for railway transfers of
grain to Ukrainian seaports. What that shows is that
all of Putin’s fairy tales — which he so eloquently tells
his rare interlocutors — about his readiness to facilitate
Ukrainian wheat exports are far removed from reality.
When we listen to Putin saying that he will not use
trade routes to attack Odesa, we should not forget that
he is the same person who told Germany’s Chancellor
Scholz and President Macron of France that he would
not attack Ukraine, just days before launching a fullscale invasion. The shared international response to
Putin’s empty promises must be greater pressure
rather than premature and unjustified gratitude. We
are continuing our work with the United Nations and
other partners to ensure that the maritime routes for
the export of Ukrainian agricultural products are
functioning. As a first step, Russia has to withdraw its
naval forces in the maritime waters around Ukraine and
provide security guarantees against attacks on ports
and commercial convoys.
Russia has never considered local residents to
be trustworthy, and its attitude to the population in
the part of Donbas that has been occupied since 2014
speaks volumes in that regard. Conscription raids on
streets and apartments and the forced mobilization
of all men who fail to hide are the sad realities of
Donetsk, Luhansk and other cities in the occupied

S/PV.9056

part of Donbas. Ill-equipped and without any means of
protection, those men are thrown against the Ukrainian
positions on the front lines, serving as cannon fodder
and a shield for Russian soldiers. There can be no doubt
that the same practices will be used on the population of
the territories that have been occupied since February.
If they are not liberated, Russia will turn them into
new strongholds for renewed attacks. We therefore
reiterate that any concessions, as some well-wishers are
currently advising, will only pave the way for a new
war — with the same scope for violence, and closer to
our Western borders.
As a nation, Ukraine and its genetic pool have
been devastated multiple times in the course of the
past 100 years at least, beginning with the Bolshevik
invasion and Ukraine’s incorporation into the Union
of Soviet Socialist Republics in the first quarter of the
twentieth century. That was followed by the genocide
ordered by Stalin during the great artificial famine
of 1932 and 1933, widely known as the Holodomor,
in which as many as 10 million Ukrainians starved to
death when the Soviet Army confiscated their crops.
And that was followed by the Soviet Army’s invasion of
western Ukraine in 1939, as agreed between Stalin and
Hitler, when hundreds of thousands fled their homes to
Europe and the Americas, and thousands were executed
if they chose to stay or could not run. That continued
with the annihilation launched when the Second World
War started and the Soviets were withdrawing, burning
everything down and doing everything they could
to prevent the advancing Nazi troops from taking
advantage of the situation. Next came the withdrawing
Nazis, who set fire to everything and destroyed it before
the Soviets regained control. Millions were killed
during the war in both Nazi and Soviet camps. The
Russification of Ukraine followed until it was finally
able to re-establish its independence.
The invasion of 2014 was followed by eight long
years of war and the eventual full-scale invasion of
2022, since when millions have fled abroad and a
couple of million more have been deported or moved to
Russia, where children have been fostered or adopted en
masse in violation of international humanitarian rights.
Scarcely any other European nation has experienced
the deep devastation wrought by the Bolsheviks, Stalin,
Hitler and eventually “Putler” within such a short
period of time. Most, if not all of it, has been manmade and executed on purpose. The lack of empathy,
or the hypocrisy, of some politicians in this context, is

22-3719425/32

S/PV.9056

Maintenance of peace and security of Ukraine

appalling and is seen by many as the final nail in the
coffin, as Ukrainians might say.
Seventy-seven years ago, humankind united in its
struggle to destroy evil. Dozens of millions of lives were
lost so that we could understand that appeasement and
concessions to the aggressor do not work. History tends
to repeat itself if its lessons are not learned. I hope that
it is not about us or the United Nations. Putin’s Russia
must be defeated for the sake of international peace and
security; for the sake of the Ukrainian people, who are
paying the ultimate price; for the sake of people all over
the world, especially those depending on grain supplies
from our region, and for the sake of the people of Russia,
which should return to the family of democratic nations
following its de-Putinization.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of the European Union in its capacity
as observer.
Mr. Michel: I would first like to thank you,
Mr. President, for organizing this meeting and giving
me the opportunity to address the Council.
I was born in Belgium in the 1970s. At school, we
studied the great European artists, including names
like Victor Hugo, Leonardo, Shakespeare, Picasso and
Goethe. But we also studied masterpieces by people
with names like Dostoevsky, Kandinsky, Tchaikovsky,
Tolstoy and other great Russian artists from Russia’s
great culture who influenced and inspired my own
education. But today Russia’s savagery stands in stark
contrast to the heritage of those brilliant artists.
A few months ago, I was in Borodyanka, where
atrocities were committed by Russian soldiers. War
crimes and crimes against humanity must and will
be punished. In order to hold those responsible
accountable, we need evidence. That is why we are
now helping to collect the evidence of those crimes.
Impunity is not an option. And we welcome the
International Court of Justice’s provisional measures
ordering Russia to suspend military operations
immediately. We fully support the investigation by the
Prosecutor of the International Criminal Court and the
work of the Independent International Commission of
Inquiry on Ukraine. The European Union is assisting
the Ukrainian Prosecutor-General and civil society in
collecting the evidence of war crimes.
The subject of women and peace and security is
a critical and timely one. Two years ago, Secretary26/32

06/06/2022

General Guterres called for an end to violence both
on the battlefield and in people’s homes. As we speak,
however, we are hearing reports of Russian forces
wielding sexual violence as a weapon of war. Sexual
violence is a war crime, a crime against humanity and a
tactic of torture, terror and repression — shameful acts
in a shameful war. That must be exposed to the light
of day and prosecuted without impunity. The war has
also caused millions to flee their homes and seek refuge
outside Ukraine. They are mostly women and children.
I met many of them when I went to Ukraine, Poland
and Moldova, and they are particularly vulnerable
to human traffickers. We, the European Union (EU),
are committed to protecting them and keeping them
safe without discrimination. I listened carefully to
what some speakers said today. We intend to provide
education, health care and access to the labour market.
We are also working to eradicate trafficking in order to
protect people fleeing the war.
Sadly, sexual and gender-based violence is a global
threat, used as a weapon of war and faced by women
across the world, including in Afghanistan, Ethiopia,
the Democratic Republic of the Congo, the Central
African Republic, Myanmar, South Sudan, Yemen
and other countries. That is why, in just a few days
in Brussels, together with UN-Women, the Dr. Denis
Mukwege Foundation and Nadia’s Initiative, we will
be hosting a second conference on women in conflict.
I sincerely hope that we can build momentum and
step up our collective efforts to seriously address this
critical issue.
I want to say to the representative of the Russian
Federation that we should be honest. The Kremlin
is using food supplies as a stealth missile targeting
developing countries. The dramatic consequences of
Russia’s war are spilling over across the globe, and
that is driving up food prices, pushing people into
poverty and destabilizing entire regions. Russia alone
is responsible for the looming food crisis, despite the
Kremlin’s campaign of lies and disinformation. I saw it
with my own eyes a few weeks ago in Odesa. Millions
of tons of grain and wheat were stuck in containers and
ships because of Russian warships in the Black Sea and
Russia’s attacks on transport infrastructure. And it is
Russia’s tanks, bombs and mines that are preventing
Ukraine from planting and harvesting. The Kremlin is
also targeting grain storage facilities and stealing grain
in Ukraine, while shifting the blame onto others. That
is cowardly propaganda, pure and simple.
22-37194

06/06/2022

Maintenance of peace and security of Ukraine

S/PV.9056

Let us get to the facts. The EU has imposed no
sanctions on Russia’s agricultural sector — none. And
even our sanctions on the Russian transport sector do
not go beyond our EU borders.

Mr. Massari (Italy): I would like to thank Albania
for organizing today’s timely meeting, and I thank the
briefers for their insightful descriptions of the situation
on the ground.

The Russian representative may leave the room if
he so chooses. It is perhaps easier for him not to listen
to the truth.

Italy aligns itself with the statement just delivered
by the President of the European Council and would
like to add some remarks in its national capacity.

Our sanctions do not prevent Russian-flagged
vessels from carrying grain, food and fertilizers to
developing countries. On the contrary, the EU is doing
all that it can to help Ukraine’s agricultural exports and
support Ukraine’s agricultural sector for the coming
season. Global food security is a top priority for the EU.
We will do everything we can to help solve that challenge
and assist developing countries. To do that, we need to
unlock the Black Sea. We fully support the efforts of
Secretary-General Guterres to find solutions to reopen
maritime routes for Ukraine’s exports. We will actively
contribute to the work of the Global Crisis Response
Group on Food, Energy and Finance and cooperate with
the Group of Seven and the African Union.

During all conflicts, including in this illegal and
unjustified war launched by Russia, internally displaced
and refugee women and girls are the groups at higher
risk of sexual violence. As we heard from Special
Representative Patten, in addition to that already
alarming situation, Ukrainian women face the risk of
trafficking, which is yet another channel for sexual
violence and exploitation. Indeed, women continue to
represent the vast majority of the victims of trafficking.
Those women, who are also often mothers, are attacked
as a symbolic representation of their people.

The Kremlin may prohibit and prosecute the
use of the word “war” but that does not change the
heartbreaking reality. Thousands of dead Ukrainian
women, children and men, atrocities, rape, countless
Ukrainian cities bombed to rubble — that is a war. It
is a barbaric war waged by a permanent member of the
Security Council.
We say to the Ambassador of Ukraine that we will
continue to back Ukraine. We will continue to support
his country and his people. We will continue to put
pressure on Russia and confront it with the truth. Russia
is attacking one country and one people — Ukraine.
However, Russia is also attacking the values and
principles of the Organization — human dignity,
tolerance, multilateral cooperation and international
law. Those are our shared values and the bedrock of
the Organization.
This is therefore more than a war against one nation.
It is a war against all that we have built over generations
since the Second World War. The EU’s commitment to
the Charter of the United Nations is unwavering. The
EU is a reliable, loyal and respectful partner and will
continue to cooperate on the global stage to build a
safer, freer and more prosperous world.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Italy.

Rape is indeed similar to military aggression on an
individual scale. It is also used as a psychological tactic
of war to humiliate, dominate, instil fear in, and then
forcibly relocate, the children of the victims, steering
them into trafficking or forced adoption. In that regard,
it is important to strongly reiterate the extent to which
minors are also the main victims of this conflict.
They experience both its immediate and indirect
consequences. They suffer the loss of their parents,
country, schools and homes, which is a factor that may
result in the loss of a future.
Displaced and refugee children are indeed less safe
and more exposed to violence and trafficking. Those
considerations prompted Italy to include the issue
of the trafficking in persons in conflict among the
priorities of its last mandate in the Security Council in
2017. Our efforts resulted in the unanimous adoption
by the Council of resolution 2388 (2017), on combating
trafficking in persons, which emphasizes the urgency
of strengthening protection and assistance for displaced
persons who fall prey to trafficking, especially women
and children.
Italy also believes that the response to this
terrible phenomenon should be based on a common
understanding and the widely accepted legal framework.
Therefore, we support the universal ratification and
full implementation of the Palermo Convention and
the related Protocol to Prevent, Suppress and Punish
Trafficking in Persons, Especially Women and
Children, adopted in Italy more than 20 years ago.

22-3719427/32

S/PV.9056

Maintenance of peace and security of Ukraine

The rape of women in armed conflict cannot go
unpunished. To avoid the risk of impunity, we must
also increase the risk of legal consequences for all
those who commit that barbaric war crime. The blatant
non-compliance with Security Council resolutions and
international humanitarian law and human rights law
in this conflict shows us that much remains to be done.
The work of the Security Council, if not hindered
by the abuse of the veto power, could benefit from the
more systematic involvement of international justice.
However, when investigations and prosecutions by
national or international courts are impossible or
ineffective, the General Assembly should consider
creating international fact-finding mechanisms in order
to conduct gender-sensitive investigations and ensure
the collection and preservation of evidence.
At the same time, it is crucial to assist countries
in situations of conflict in strengthening the rule of
law and accountability mechanisms. Italy welcomes
the framework of cooperation on prevention and
accountability for sexual violence in conflict that was
recently signed by the Government of Ukraine and
Special Representative Pramila Patten.
In addition to accountability, we have only one
other way to prevent sexual violence and trafficking in
this conflict, namely, through humanitarian assistance
to protect women and children from the heinous crimes
that are currently being committed in Ukraine. We
must use them both.
In conclusion, the true solution to those problems,
needless to say, is to stop the war. We reiterate our call
on the Russian Federation to stop it.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Latvia.
Mr. Pildegovičs (Latvia): I have the honour to speak
on behalf of the Baltic States — Estonia, Lithuania and
my own country, Latvia.
Let me start by thanking Albania for organizing
today’s briefing, and the briefers for their briefings.
We particularly welcome the voice of Ukrainian civil
society at the Security Council. It is of the utmost
importance to keep our focus on Russia’s ongoing
aggression against Ukraine.
We are deeply alarmed by the shocking reports on
the brutal and systematic sexual violence perpetrated
by Russian armed forces in Ukraine and are concerned
28/32

06/06/2022

about the increasing risk of trafficking of human
beings in the region. We recall that, in its resolution
1820 (2008), the Council demanded the immediate
and complete cessation by parties to armed conflict
of all acts of sexual violence against civilians, with
immediate effect. We reiterate that demand on the
Russian Federation to immediately stop the sexual
violence perpetrated by its armed forces in Ukraine.
To ensure that occurs, clear orders must be
issued through the chain of command that prohibit
sexual violence, and perpetrators must be brought to
justice. Ultimately, Russia must immediately stop
its military aggression, enabled by its accomplice
Belarus, immediately and unconditionally withdraw all
forces from the entire territory of Ukraine and fully
respect Ukraine’s territorial integrity, sovereignty and
independence within its internationally recognized
borders, as demanded by General Assembly resolution
ES-11/1, adopted on 2 March.
We welcome the recent visit to Ukraine by the
Special Representative to the Secretary-General on
Sexual Violence in Conflict, Ms. Pramila Patten,
and the framework of cooperation signed with the
Government of Ukraine. We look forward to, and
encourage support for, its implementation. After her
visit, the Special Representative assessed that the
sexual violence committed by the Russian armed forces
raises all of the red flags.
We call on the relevant United Nations entities to
continue to closely monitor the situation in Ukraine
and at its borders, including regarding conflict-related
sexual violence, through the mechanisms created by the
Security Council. The recording and verification of the
incidence of violence by the United Nations and other
international actors is crucial.
The current situation provides fertile ground
for human traffickers. We commend the creation of
the European Union Agency for Law Enforcement
Cooperation task force to protect vulnerable Ukrainian
refugees from human trafficking networks. We have to
carefully approach the situation to avoid instances in
which predators can exploit the chaos. In that regard,
United Nations entities play a significant role, but so do
actors from civil society.
We condemn in the strongest possible terms
the unlawful deportation of Ukrainian residents, in
particular the forced deportation of unaccompanied
children to the Russian Federation by the Russian
22-37194

06/06/2022

Maintenance of peace and security of Ukraine

authorities and their local collaborators, as well as the
illegal adoption of Ukrainian children. Those actions
grossly violate international law and the Charter of the
United Nations and undermine international security
and stability.
We commend Ukrainian women for their bravery
and resilience in the light of Russia’s aggression and
their role in humanitarian, political and military
responses. We need decisive and vigorous action to
ensure the meaningful participation of women and
girls, including from the most vulnerable groups, in all
decision-making processes related to the crisis response
and peace. Women must not to be seen as victims but as
the force of change.
In resolution 2467 (2019), the Council recognized
the need for a survivor-centred approach in responding to
sexual violence in conflict, including access to medical
and psychosocial care. It is of the utmost importance
that the survivors of conflict-related sexual violence in
Ukraine have the opportunity to report cases as soon
as possible and to receive proper assistance, including
access to comprehensive services, and in particular
sexual and reproductive health services. However, at
the moment reporting is possible only after survivors
move to a safe area outside the territories occupied
by Russian forces or in which active hostilities are
taking place.
The Baltic States have welcomed tens of thousands
of Ukrainian refugees. We make sure that the human
rights of the survivors of sexual violence are at the heart
of our response. We follow standards for the safe and
effective documentation and recording of survivors’
experiences — while respecting their rights with regard
to their dignity, privacy and health.
We recall that the Council has clearly reaffirmed its
intention to continue to forcefully fight impunity and
uphold accountability for sexual violence. The Baltic
States have taken several practical steps to call the
aggressor to account for the atrocities perpetrated in
Ukraine. We have joined the referral to the International
Criminal Court of the situation in Ukraine in order
to enable the Prosecutor to open investigations into
allegations of war crimes, crimes against humanity and
genocide perpetrated in Ukraine. In order to facilitate
investigations and prosecutions before the International
Criminal Court, the Baltic States have nominated
national experts and provided voluntary contributions.
Our prosecutors, alongside those of Slovakia, Poland,

S/PV.9056

Ukraine and the International Criminal Court, have
formed the Joint Investigation Team.
In conclusion, we commend the efforts of the United
Nations bodies, non-governmental organizations
and members of civil society working on the ground
in Ukraine to provide services to survivors of sexual
violence and trafficking. The security and access of
those workers is crucial to alleviating the immeasurable
human suffering that Russia’s unprovoked war
is causing.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Germany.
Ms. Leendertse (Germany): I thank Albania for
organizing this important Security Council meeting. I
also thank the briefers for their important contributions.
Germany aligns itself with the statement made by
the President of the European Council.
We have learned from the history of war and
conflicts around the world that conflict-related sexual
violence has been used as a tactical or strategic means
of weakening, if not destroying, the adversary by
targeting the civilian population. A multitude of reports
indicates that the ongoing unjustified, unprovoked
war of aggression of the Russian Federation against
its neighbouring State, Ukraine, is unfortunately
no exception.
Germany calls on the Russian Federation to stop
this illegal war, withdraw its troops from its sovereign
neighbouring State, Ukraine, and also stop the
aggression that we are hearing about.
We have heard with shock and horror many accounts
about brutal cases of conflict-related sexual violence in
the war in Ukraine, predominantly perpetrated against
women and girls but also against men and boys. And
we know that, amid the chaos of the war unleashed
by the Russian Federation, given the limited support
on the ground and the almost complete lack of access
to services while millions of people are fleeing, as
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General
reported today, there is a high risk that acts of sexual
and gender-based violence are largely unaccounted for.
In that context, I would like to address five points.
First, reporting and monitoring are key to holding
the perpetrators accountable. We therefore support
Special Representative of the Secretary-General
Patten’s request that the staff of the United Nations

22-3719429/32

S/PV.9056

Maintenance of peace and security of Ukraine

06/06/2022

Human Rights Monitoring Mission and the Prosecutor
General in Ukraine be reinforced with personnel who
specialize in conflict-related sexual violence. With the
escalation of Russia’s aggression in eastern Ukraine,
the United Nations Human Rights Monitoring Mission
in Ukraine is already reaching its limits.

Fifthly, Germany reiterates its pledge to fight
conflict-related sexual violence in all contexts. In the
case of Ukraine, that means that, while we continue our
efforts to stop this illegal and unjustified war, we will
work equally hard to mitigate its immediate effects on
the Ukrainian people.

Secondly, we also commend the framework
of cooperation that Special Representative of
the Secretary-General Patten and the Ukrainian
Government signed during her recent visit to Ukraine.
It is a vital condition for the Office of the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General and her team
of experts to commence their work on site.

Human security, responding to the humanitarian
crisis and addressing the profoundly gender-specific
implications of wars and conflicts are not secondary
considerations — they are central to our foreign
policy decisions. Our feminist foreign policy implies,
inter alia, taking into account the repercussions of
war and conflict on all segments of the population,
especially individuals who are particularly vulnerable
or marginalized.

We see that as a matter of urgency, since the
situation in Ukraine is deteriorating in the course
of Russia’s ongoing war. The levels of health care,
especially of sexual and reproductive health services,
mental health services and psychological counselling
services, are insufficient considering the scale of the
crisis and the huge numbers of internally displaced
people. Rapid and effective action is necessary. That
is why we will continue our funding for the Office of
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General
in 2022.
Thirdly, a survivor-centred approach is essential
for preventing and responding to conflict-related sexual
violence. Three years after the adoption of resolution
2467 (2019), which was proposed by Germany, we
are concerned about its slow implementation. The
international community must strengthen survivors’
rights and improve their access to justice, sexual and
reproductive health services and rights, rehabilitation,
reparations and reintegration.
Fourthly, women often suffer most from the
consequences of war. It is mostly women who are
fleeing Ukraine, together with children and elderly
persons. They are the ones who are the main targets
of conflict-related sexual violence and of trafficking in
persons, even as they try to escape the violence.
Germany will continue its engagement to fight
trafficking in persons, including by promoting the
resolution on that topic in the Human Rights Council.
To protect Ukrainian women coming to Germany, we
have installed several protection mechanisms, such as
websites that provide information in Ukrainian, the
provision of active information on the trains that the
refugees use and a police presence at train stations.
30/32

Finally, let me stress that our concerns are not
limited to the tragic situation in Ukraine. In the
global context, Germany will keep efforts related to
and support for combating sexual and gender-based
violence at the top of its priorities.
In 2021 alone, German humanitarian assistance
provided funding in excess of $80 million for projects
with vital components to address sexual and genderbased violence, making Germany the largest donor at
the Oslo pledging conference.
Germany also continues to be the largest donor for
the special appeal on sexual and gender-based violence
of the International Committee of the Red Cross.
Earlier this year, German humanitarian assistance
launched a new and innovative project with UNWomen to strengthen measures to combat sexual and
gender-based violence in humanitarian response plans.
We will continue to remain focused on that highly
important issue.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Poland.
Mr. Szczerski (Poland): I wish to thank you,
Mr. President, for this briefing, which allows us to
discuss yet another troubling aspect of the war in
Ukraine that needs to be brought to the attention of
the international community. I also thank the briefers
for their valuable words, but even more for their very
valuable deeds on the ground.
Every conflict brings terrible suffering to civilians.
The Russian aggression against Ukraine is no exception.
Civilians, in particular women and children, have
become targets of not only Russian rockets and bombs
22-37194

06/06/2022

Maintenance of peace and security of Ukraine

but also the cruel, cynical and merciless perpetrators of
trafficking in human beings and gender-based violence.
As a neighbouring country and a primary
destination for the refugees coming from Ukraine,
Poland is especially aware of those harsh realities.
Along with humanitarian aid related to hosting on
Polish soil the largest number of refugees in history, we
are also undertaking considerable efforts to address the
effects of conflict-related human trafficking and sexual
abuse. All our efforts are conducted according to
Polish, European Union and international regulations
in a non-discriminatory manner.
The Polish Border Guard and police have
implemented numerous measures aimed at preventing
and mitigating those effects, including specialized
and awareness-raising training for officers, as
well as information campaigns for existing and
potential victims.
Any incident of possible human trafficking and
sexual crimes can be reported 24/7 to police officers
who speak Ukrainian and Russian. All reported
incidents are subject to prompt verification. Relevant
information leaflets in Polish, English and Ukrainian
are widely distributed among the refugees, local
governments, non-governmental organizations (NGOs)
and the media and through the Internet. In addition,
to prevent human trafficking, the police are deploying
officers from anti-crime sections to the border regions,
border crossings and train and bus stations, as well as
reception centres, in order to help potential victims and
identify individuals or groups trying to exploit them.
In the case that an alleged crime is reported, the police
assist a potential victim who does not speak Polish with
an interpreter and other specialized assistance that may
be needed. State structures are joined in those efforts
by numerous NGOs active on the ground from day one.
Moreover, the Polish Government urgently
implemented new immigration measures for Ukrainians
fleeing the war by adopting a special law in March,
effective from 24 February. It stipulates that Ukrainian
refugees can obtain a Polish identification number,
which entitles them to work legally in Poland and have
free access to the public health-care system, schooling
and social benefits and support. Ukrainian citizens
have access to the Polish health-care system on the
same footing, and are subject to the same entitlements
as insured Polish citizens, including when it comes to
psychological and sexual health care. What is more, all

S/PV.9056

reception centres in the regions neighbouring Ukraine
have first-aid medical points and are assigned to
specific hospitals and emergency services in the region.
We commend the work of the United Nations
system in preventing and responding to conflict-related
sexual violence and on its support to Member States
aimed at strengthening national responsibilities in that
respect. In that context, I would like to mention the
important actions by the Office of the United Nations
High Commissioner for Refugees and UNICEF,
which provide valuable expertise and support in
emergency situations.
Aside from immediate action, we must ensure
accountability for such crimes at both the national and
the international levels. It constitutes a key element of
prevention and justice for victims, on which we must
deliver. It is a matter of urgency not only for the victims,
but also for the credibility of the whole international
system established by us, the United Nations.
Let me conclude by referring to the ranking of
States helping Ukraine the most in terms of political,
military, financial and other support, just published
by Forbes Ukraine, where Poland has ranked first,
with the United States and Estonia following. We are
thankful for that kind appreciation, but we would prefer
to trade it for the end of this war of aggression waged by
Russia and, instead, enter the ranking of States helping
Ukraine to rebuild stronger and even more resilient.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Slovakia.
Mr. Chatrnúch (Slovakia): At the outset, let
me thank the Special Representative, Ms. Pramila
Patten, and the representatives of civil society for their
comprehensive, insightful briefings.
For more than 100 days, we have been witnessing
the unjustified and unprovoked Russian aggression
against Ukraine, in blatant violation of international
law. For more than 100 days, Ukrainian citizens have
been bravely defending their own motherland, their lives
and their basic right to decide freely about their future.
Over more than 100 days, they have been defending
rules that have guaranteed stability and peace for the
European continent — the very rules that the Russian
Federation decided to flagrantly breach.
The international community already made a
commitment to helping Ukraine in its reconstruction
and recovery as soon as this nightmare is over. Ukraine

22-3719431/32

S/PV.9056

Maintenance of peace and security of Ukraine

will undoubtedly flourish once again, but the blood of
the victims of this senseless war will be forever dried
on the palms of the hands of the Russian Federation.
As of 3 June, more than 9,000 civilian casualties had
been recorded by the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Human Rights. Needless to say, that
number is much higher in reality.
The situation of vulnerable groups, including
women, is particularly disturbing. While fully
recognizing the impact that this shameless war has
on them, we must unfortunately expect worse until
President Putin decides to stop this heinous war.
Since 24 February, women specifically have been
disproportionately affected by the war. The Office of
the United Nations High Commissioner for Human
Rights, other agencies and world media have recorded
the rise in conflict-related sexual violence, including
rape, sexual abuse and human trafficking. We take
this opportunity to once again condemn acts of
sexual violence perpetrated by Russian forces, which
are part of the most hideous violations of the laws of
armed conflict. Slovakia will continue to work with
its partners to ensure that those perpetrators are held
accountable for the crimes committed in Ukraine.
Another deplorable issue is the detrimental
effect that rape, human trafficking and other forms

32/32

06/06/2022

of sexual abuse and exploitation have on the physical
and mental health of victims. For traffickers, the crisis
is not a tragedy but an opportunity to exploit people
in need. In that regard, women and other vulnerable
groups who experienced trauma and sexual violence
must have access to adequate medical care, including
access to psychological support and basic sexual and
reproductive health services and rights.
So far since the beginning of the aggression by the
Russian Federation, about 490,000 refugees, mostly
women and children, have entered Slovakia. My country
has adopted numerous legislative and administrative
measures to help women in need, and we will continue
to do so. In that vein, I would also like to praise civil
society and the people of Slovakia, who have expressed
great solidarity and provided those fleeing Ukraine
with the necessary assistance.
Last but not least, allow me to reiterate that the
aggressor accountable for this situation is evident.
Slovakia calls for an immediate cessation of Russian
military activities in Ukraine and the unconditional
withdrawal of all Russian troops from the whole
territory of Ukraine.
The meeting rose at 1 p.m.

22-37194
