UNITED
NATIONS

S
Security Council
Distr.
GENERAL
S/PRST/1994/9
25 February 1994
ORIGINAL:

ENGLISH

STATEMENT BY THE PRESIDENT OF THE SECURITY COUNCIL

At the 3339th meeting of the Security Council, held on 25 February 1994, in
connection with the Council’s consideration of the item "The situation in
Liberia", the President of the Security Council made the following statement on
behalf of the Council:
"The Security Council takes note of the report of the SecretaryGeneral on the situation in Liberia (S/1994/168 and Add.1).
"The Council welcomes the agreement reached at Monrovia contained in
the communiqué of 15 February 1994 (S/1994/187, annex), in which the
parties once again reaffirmed their commitment to the Cotonou Agreement as
the basis for a lasting political settlement to the Liberian conflict. The
Council calls upon the parties to uphold strictly the timetable outlined in
that communiqué: the commencement of disarmament and the installation of a
transitional government on 7 March 1994, and the holding of free and fair
general elections on 7 September 1994. The Council urges the parties to
resolve quickly their differences on the disposition of the four remaining
Cabinet posts.
"The Council, however, wishes to express its concern about the recent
upsurge in violence in Liberia and the related disruption of humanitarian
relief shipments, to which the rise of new military groups and problems of
military indiscipline among the existing factions have contributed. It
deplores the consequent loss of life, destruction of property and the
increased number of people that have since been displaced. The Council
calls on all Liberian parties to adhere strictly to the cease-fire
agreement and to cooperate fully with the international relief efforts in
order to put an end to the obstacles periodically impeding the delivery of
humanitarian aid.
"The Council is gravely concerned at the delays in implementing the
commitments entered into by the parties under the Cotonou Agreement, in
particular the commencement of disarmament and the installation of the
Liberian National Transitional Government.

94-09761 (E)

250294

/...

S/PRST/1994/9
English
Page 2

"The Council reminds the parties that they themselves bear ultimate
responsibility for the successful implementation of the Cotonou Agreement.
The Liberian parties should bear in mind that the support of the
international community and of the Security Council will not continue in
the absence of tangible progress towards full and prompt implementation of
the Agreement, in particular, the revised timetable. These delays
jeopardize both the viability of the Cotonou Agreement itself and the
ability of UNOMIL to fulfil its mandate.
"The Council looks forward to the proposed meeting of ECOWAS Foreign
Ministers in March and to continued progress on the ground. The Council
underlines the importance of adhering to the timetable and will review the
situation again in March 1994 to evaluate what progress has been made.
"The Council underlines the importance of disarmament to the
successful implementation of the Cotonou Agreement and in this context,
notes the central role in the disarmament process given to ECOMOG under the
Agreement.
"The Council, therefore, takes note of the Secretary-General’s
observation that the ECOMOG forces face considerable financial and
logistical difficulties and strongly supports his call on Member States to
assist the peace process by providing the necessary financial and
logistical resources to ECOMOG to enable it to meet its obligations under
the Cotonou Agreement. The Council supports the Secretary-General’s appeal
to all Member States which have not already done so to contribute
generously to the United Nations Trust Fund for Liberia. The Council
concurs with the Secretary-General that UNOMIL’s ability to carry out its
mandate depends on the capacity of ECOMOG to discharge its
responsibilities.
"The Council commends ECOWAS and the Organization of African Unity
(OAU) for their continued efforts to restore peace, security and stability
in Liberia. The Council notes with appreciation that the ECOMOG force has
now been expanded pursuant to resolution 866 (1993) and commends all
countries which have contributed troops and resources to ECOMOG since its
inception in 1990.
"The Council commends also the efforts of Member States and
humanitarian organizations in providing humanitarian assistance to the
victims of the Liberian civil war. The anticipated reunification of the
country by 7 March 1994 and the ensuring repatriation of Liberian refugees
will accelerate the demand for additional humanitarian relief, and in this
regard the Council urgently appeals to Member States and humanitarian
organizations to increase their assistance to Liberia.
"The Council reaffirms its appreciation for the tireless efforts of
the Secretary-General and his Special Representative towards the
establishment of a lasting peace in Liberia."

-----
