II.

Commending the decisions of oil-exporting countries
that have declared it their policy not to sell oil to South
Africa,
Considering that measures to ensure effective implementation of such embargoes through international co-operation are essential and urgent,
Noting with concern that, through a combination of military and economic pressures, in violation of international
law, the authorities of South Africa have sought to
destabilize the neighbouring States,
Considering that contacts between apartheid South
Africa and its neighbouring States, necessitated by geography, colonial legacy and other reasons, should not be used
by other States as a pretext for legitimizing the apartheid
system or justifying attempts to break the international
isolation of that system,
Convinced that the efforts to entrench apartheid by force
will continue to lead to ever-increasing resistance by the
oppressed people by all possible means and increased tension and conflict that will have far-reaching consequences
for southern Africa and the world,
Convinced that policies of active and direct collaboration with the apartheid regime, instead of respect for the
genuine representatives of the great majority of the people,
will encourage its repression and aggression against
neighbouring States and defiance of the United Nations,
Expressing its full support for the legitimate aspiration of
African States and peoples, and of the Organization of
African Unity, for the total liberation of the continent of
Africa from colonialism and racism,
l. Strongly condemns the policy of apartheid which
deprives the majority of the South African population of
their citizenship, fundamental freedoms and human rights;
2. Condemns the recent killings, arbitrary arrests and
the detention of members of mass organizations for opposing the apartheid system and the so-called "new constitution";
3. Further condemns the overt and the covert aggressive actions of South Africa directed at the destabilization
of neighbouring States, and those aimed against refugees
from South Africa and Namibia;
4. Demands that the authorities of South Africa:
(a) Release without conditions Nelson Mandela and all
other political prisoners, detainees and restrictees;
(b) Abrogate discriminatory laws and lift bans on organizations, news media and individuals opposing apartheid;
(c) Grant freedom of association and full trade union
rights to all workers of South Africa;
(d) Dismantle the bantustan structures;
(e) Immediately withdraw its troops from southern
Angola and end the destabilization of front-line and other
States;
5. Urges the Security Council to consider without
delay the adoption of effective mandatory sanctions
against South Africa;
6. Further urges the Security Council to take steps for
the strict implementation of the mandatory arms embargo
instituted by it in resolution 4 I 8 ( 1977) and, within this
context, to secure an end to military and nuclear co-operation with South Africa and the import of military equipment or supplies from South Africa;
7.. Appeals to all States that have not yet done so,
pending mandatory sanctions by the Security Council, to
consider national legislative or other appropriate measures
102 Official Records o f the Third United Nations Conference on the Law o f

vol. XVII (United Nations publication. Sales No. E.84.Y.3), document A/CONF.621122.

the Sea,

45

Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

to increase the pressure on the apartheid regime of South
Africa, such as:
(a) Cessation of further investments in, and financial
loans to, South Africa;
(b) An end to all promotion of trade with South Africa;
(c) Cessation of all forms of military, police or intelligence co-operation with the authorities of South Africa;
(d) An end to nuclear collaboration with South Africa;
8. Appeals to all States, organizations and institutions:
(a) To increase humanitarian, legal, educational and
other assistance to the victims of apartheid;
(b) To increase support for the liberation movements
recognized by the Organization of African Unity and to all
those struggling against apartheid and for a non-racial,
democratic society;
(c) To increase assistance to the front-line States and
the Southern African Development Co-ordination Conference in order to increase their economic strength and independence from South Africa;
9. Appeals to all Governments and organizations to
take appropriate action for the cessation of all academic,
cultural, scientific and sport relations that would support
the apartheid regime of South Africa as well as relations
with individuals, institutions and other bodies endorsing
or based on apartheid and also appeals for further
strengthening of contacts with those opposed to apartheid;
10. Reaffirms the legitimacy of the struggle of the
oppressed people of South Africa for the total eradication
of apartheid and for the establishment of a non-racial,
democratic society in which all the people, irrespective of
race, colour or creed, enjoy human rights and fundamental
freedoms;
11. Pays tribute to and expresses solidarity with organizations and individuals struggling against apartheid and
for a non-racial, democratic society in accordance with the
principles of the Universal Declaration of Human
Rights. 88
99th plenary meeting
13 December 198 4

39/73. Law of the sea
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 37/66 of 3 December 1982 and

38/59 A of 14 December 1983, regarding the Third United
Nations Conference on the Law of the Sea,
Taking note of the increasing and overwhelming support
for the United Nations Convention on the Law of the
Sea, 102 as evidenced, inter alia, by the one hundred and
fifty-nine signatures and fourteen ratifications as at the
closing of the Convention for signature,
Seriously concerned at any attempt to undermine the
Convention and the related resolutions of the Third
United Nations Conference on the Law of the Sea, 103
Recognizing that, as stated in the third preambular paragraph of the Convention, the problems of ocean space are
closely interrelated and need to be considered as a whole,
Convinced that it is important to safeguard the unified
character of the Convention and related resolutions
adopted therewith and to refrain from any action to apply
their provisions selectively, in a manner inconsistent with
their object and purpose,
103 Ibid., document A/CONF.62/121, annex I.

46

General Assembly-Thirty-ninth Session

Noting the increasing needs of countries, especially
developing countries, for information, advice and assistance in the implementation of the Convention and in
their developmental process for the full realization of the
benefits of the comprehensive legal regime established by
the Convention, as also recognized by the Economic and
Social Council in its resolution 1983/48 of 28 July 1983,
Noting also that the Preparatory Commission for the
International Sea-Bed Authority and for the International
Tribunal for the Law of the Sea has decided to hold its
third regular session at Kingston from 11 March to 4 April
1985 and its summer meeting in 1985 at Geneva, Kingston or New York as it may decide, 104
Taking note also of activities carried out in 1984 under
the major programme on marine affairs, set forth in chapter 25 of the medium-term plan for the period I 9841989, 105 in accordance with the report of the SecretaryGenerat 1°6 as approved in General Assembly resolution
38/59 A,
Recalling its approval of the financing of the expenses of
the Preparatory Commission from the regular budget of
the United Nations,
Taking special note of the report of the Secretary-General 107 prepared in response to paragraph 8 of General
Assembly resolution 38/59 A,
I. Recalls the historic significance of the United
Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea as an important
contribution to the maintenance of peace, justice and progress for all peoples of the world;
2. Expresses its satisfaction at the large number of signatures affixed to the Convention as well as at the number
of ratifications deposited with the Secretary-General;
3. Calls upon all States that have not done so to consider ratifying or acceding to the Convention at the earliest
possible date to allow the effective entry into force of the
new legal regime for the uses of the sea and its resources;
4. Calls upon all States to safeguard the unified character of the Convention and related resolutions adopted
therewith;
5. Calls upon States to desist from taking actions
which undermine the Convention or defeat its object and
purpose;
6. Expresses its appreciation for the effective execution
by the Secretary-General of the central programme in law
of the sea affairs under chapter 25 of the medium-term
plan for the period 1984-1989;
7. Further expresses its appreciation for the report of
the Secretary-General1°7 in response to General Assembly
resolution 38/59 A and requests the Secretary-General to
continue the activities outlined therein, special emphasis
being placed on the work of the Preparatory Commission
for the International Sea-Bed Authority and for the International Tribunal for the Law of the Sea, including the
implementation of resolution II of the Third United
Nations Conference on the Law of the Sea; w3
8. Approves the programme of meetings of the Preparatory Commission for 1985; 104

cies and bodies within the United Nations system to cooperate and lend assistance in these endeavours;
IO. Requests the Secretary-General to report to the
General Assembly at its fortieth session on developments
relating to the Convention and on the implementation of
the present resolution;
11. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its
fortieth session the item entitled "Law of the sea".
99th plenary meeting
13 December 1984

39/74. United Nations Conference for the Promotion

of International Co-operation in the Peaceful
Uses of Nuclear Energy

9. Calls upon the Secretary-General to continue to
assist States in the implementation of the Convention and
in the development of a consistent and uniform approach
to the new legal regime thereunder, as well as in their
national, subregional and regional efforts towards the full
realization of the benefits therefrom and invites the agen-

The General Assembly,
Reaffirming the principles and provisions of its resolution 32/50 of8 December 1977,
Recalling its subsequent resolutions 33/4 of 2 November I 978, 34/63 of 29 November 1979, 35/112 of 5
December I 980, 36/78 of 9 December I 981, 37/167 of 17
December 1982 and 38/60 of 14 December 1983,
Noting that the pending issues related to the United
Nations Conference for the Promotion of International
Co-operation in the Peaceful Uses of Nuclear Energy were
successfully resolved at the fifth session of the Preparatory
Committee for the Conference as reflected in its report to
the General Assembly, 108
Noting that the Preparatory Committee once again
emphasized the importance of adequate preparations for
the Conference and agreed on the importance of inter-sessional intergovernmental consultations and contacts,
Noting also that the Preparatory Committee agreed to
begin formal/official inter-sessional intergovernmental
work with its sixth session,
Noting further the decision of the Preparatory Committee relating to the convening of a meeting of a group of
internationally eminent experts to provide advice on
major issues of concern to the Conference,
I. Approves the recommendations and decisions contained in the report of the Preparatory Committee for the
United Nations Conference for the Promotion of International Co-operation in the Peaceful Uses of Nuclear
Energy on its fifth session; 108
2. Expresses its appreciation for the efforts of the
Chairman of the Preparatory Committee and the Secretary-General of the Conference in pursuance of paragraph
2 of General Assembly resolution 38/60;
3. Requests the Chairman of the Preparatory Committee and the Secretary-General of the Conference, on the
basis of the practice successfully used before the fifth session of the Committee, to continue informal individual
and group consultations, as necessary, in order to assist the
Committee in expediting the necessary procedural and
substantive preparations for the Conference;
4. Notes with appreciation the progress made in the
preparations for the Conference and requests the Secretary-General of the Conference to continue with the preparations as outlined in the report of the Secretary-General
to the Preparatory Committee at its fifth session; 109
5. Decides that the Preparatory Committee shall hold
its sixth session at Vienna from 21 October to I November 1985 to consider, inter alia, the mechanism for for-

104 See A/39/647 and Corr.I, para. 130.
105 Official Records of the General Assembly, Thirty-seventh Session, Supplement No. 6A, (A/37/6/Add.l), annex II.
106 A/38/570 and Corr. I and Add. I and Add. I !Corr. I

I07 A/39/64 7 and Corr. I and Add. I.
I08 Official Records of the General Assembly, Thirty-ninth Session, Supplement No. 47 (A/39/47).
I 09 NCONF.108/PC/ I I and Add. I.
