United Nations

S/PV.3454 (Resumption 2)

Security Council

Provisional

Forty-ninth Year

3454th Meeting
Wednesday, 9 November 1994, 3.30 p.m.
New York

President:

Mrs. Albright................................................................................................... (United States of America)

Members: Argentina Mr. Peláez
Brazil ................................................................................................................. Mr. Sardenberg
China................................................................................................................. Mr. He Yafei
Czech Republic................................................................................................ Mr. Kovanda
Djibouti............................................................................................................. Mr. Olhaye
France............................................................................................................... Mr. Mérimée
New Zealand.................................................................................................... Mr. Keating
Nigeria .............................................................................................................. Mr. Ayewah
Oman................................................................................................................. Mr. Al-Khussaiby
Pakistan............................................................................................................ Mr. Marker
Russian Federation......................................................................................... Mr. Fedotov
Rwanda............................................................................................................. Mr. Bakuramutsa
Spain ................................................................................................................. Mr. Yañez-Barnuevo
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland............................ Sir David Hannay

Agenda
The situation in the Republic of Bosnia and Herzegovina
Letter dated 3 November 1994 from the Permanent Representative of Pakistan to the United Nations addressed to the
President of the Security Council (S/1994/1248)

94-87013 (E)
This record contains the original text of speeches delivered in English and interpretations of speeches delivered in the other languages. The
final text will be printed in the Official Records of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to original speeches only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and be sent under the signature of a member of the delegation concerned, within one week of
the date of publication, to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Section, room C-178.

Security Council
Forty-ninth year
The meeting was resumed at 3.55 p.m.
The President: The next speaker is the representative
of the Sudan. I invite him to take a place at the Council table
and to make his statement.
Mr. Idris (Sudan) (interpretation from Arabic): On
behalf of my delegation, allow me to congratulate you,
Madam, on your assumption of the presidency of the
Council for this month. Allow me also, through you, to
convey our gratitude to last month's President for the
wisdom with which he conducted the business of the
Council during his presidency.
In the wake of the crumbling of the socialist camp we
have witnessed many radical changes on the international
scene. However, this has also led to the emergence of some
negative phenomena on the international arena, such as the
brutal injustices, continuing oppression and bloody
suffering inflicted upon the Bosnian people. This people
has been made the victim of an acute conflict that has
ethnic and cultural dimensions. Hence the brutal cultural
siege against Islamic presence on the European continent.
This residual conflict between cultures has resulted, among
other things, in such atrocities as the practices of Aethnic
cleansing@.
In what is known as the former Yugoslavia, the Serbs
of Bosnia and neighbouring States have played the role of
the cat's paw in pursuing a policy that has breached all
humanitarian laws and trampled the Bosnian people's right
to life itself without any qualm. This has continued to take
place under the very eyes of the international community
which stood by with all its regional and international
organizations, under various pretexts. At times, the pretext
has been the need for peace-keeping forces to be neutral.
At other times, the pretext was the weakness of the
mandate of the United Nations Protection Force
(UNPROFOR) or the Council's inability to act. This has
thrown into sharp focus the double standards of the new
inequitable international order.
The argument of the slow search for peace in Bosnia
has become an illusion for the international community. A
settlement cannot be reached so long as the Serbs enjoy
military superiority and are being supplied with the
sophisticated armaments that were available to the former
Yugoslavia, while the Bosnians lack even the basic means
that would enable them to defend themselves, their
territories, their properties and their honour.

58

3454th meeting
9 November 1994
The people of Sudan have followed with deep
sorrow and grave concern the developments of this
problem of the steadfast people of Bosnia, with its ethnic
and cultural dimensions. At a time when the international
community seems unable to protect the victim against the
terrible aggression of the Serbs, we should like to
emphasize that we support the Bosnian people in its
tragedy and make clear the following facts:
First: Bosnia and Herzegovina, as a sovereign State
Member of the United Nations, is entitled to all the
rights set forth in the United Nations Charter
particularly in Article 51, which enshrines the
inherent right of every State to self-defence.
Second: Sudan considers that the aggression
against the State of Bosnia and Herzegovina poses a
threat to international peace and security. Also, we
find it unacceptable that the territory of others is
being acquired by force. Proceeding from this, the
Sudanese people vigorously condemn Bosnian
Serbs for their failure to abide by Security Council
resolutions.
The people and Government of Sudan take this
opportunity to commend Bosnia and Herzegovina for its
acceptance of the peace plan that was approved by the
international community. We welcome the measures
adopted recently by Croats and Bosnians with a view to
the creation of the Bosnian Federation, and we should like
to launch an appeal for the immediate lifting of the siege
that has been laid to the courageous city of Sarajevo, the
capital of Bosnia
That this human tragedy should have been allowed
to continue for so many years, coupled with the failure to
implement Security Council resolutions on Bosnia and
Herzegovina is an unfortunate situation that was brought
about by the military superiority enjoyed by Serbian
militias and the support they receive from the former
Yugoslavia. It is a situation that can be resolved only by
redressing the arms imbalance. The Serbian militias
possess enormous military arsenals, including various
high-tech weapons, whereas the Bosnians lack the
weapons that are necessary for their self-defence and the
defence of their identity and territory.
Sudan appeals for the restoration of balance and
calls upon the Council to lift the arms embargo imposed
upon the Bosnian State. The delegation of Sudan, in
calling upon the Security Council to lift the embargo,
firmly believes that the adoption of such a resolution

Security Council
Forty-ninth year
would have a positive impact on this problem, which can be
summed up as follows:
First, the peace process, which, because of its slow
pace, is at a very early stage, would be rendered more
effective if the Serbs were made to realize that they will
not be able to achieve their objectives by armed force
but, rather, through negotiations. They would thus be
more inclined to engage in dialogue with a view to
securing a settlement through peaceful negotiations.
Second: the restoration of a proper balance between
the two parties would open the door for the delivery
of the humanitarian aid, medicines and other items of
health care that are needed by many people. The first
obligation of Bosnia and Herzegovina is to ensure that
it has enough food for all, and it should be enabled to
cooperate with the international community to this
end.
Third: the restoration of balance in armaments would
result in the de-escalation of hostilities and lead to
their cessation. The defenceless people of Bosnia and
Herzegovina could then be protected by their
Government. They would no longer be at the mercy of
the militias' barbaric practices which are pursued in
particular against the young and the elderly.
It is clear that the qualitative and quantitative
imbalance, in terms of armaments, between the various
parties in Bosnia is the main reason for the resurgence
of violations of human rights as stated in the report of
the Special Rapporteur on the human rights situation
in Bosnia and Herzegovina, issued in November 1994.
Fourth: The lifting of the arms embargo imposed on
Bosnia and Herzegovina would confirm the view that
it is necessary to strengthen the United Nations
Protection Force (UNPROFOR) so that it may not
continue to be passive and neutral. UNPROFOR's
passiveness and neutrality have encouraged the
continuous violation of human rights.
For all these reasons, Sudan joins in the urgent appeal
for the lifting of the arms embargo against the steadfast
people and Government of Bosnia.
The President: I thank the representative of Sudan for
his kind words addressed to me.

3454th meeting
9 November 1994
The next speaker is the representative of Tunisia. I
invite him to take a place at the Council table and to make
his statement.
Mr. Abdellah (Tunisia) (interpretation from
French): First of all, allow me, Madam President, to
congratulate you very sincerely on your assumption of
the presidency of the Security Council for the current
month. We are convinced that under your guidance the
work of the Council will be successful.
Our thanks go also to your predecessor,
Ambassador Hannay of the United Kingdom, for the
manner in which he conducted the business of the
Council last month.
Once again the Security Council is considering the
situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina, which for almost
three years now has been deteriorating, both on the
ground and within this body. We are profoundly
concerned at the failure of so many efforts on the part of
the international community C specifically, those of the
Security Council, which, although acting often under
Chapter VII of the Charter, has been paralysed by an
absence of political will to secure compliance with its own
resolutions.
Indeed, we are entitled to ask today whether the
Council really has any means other than the lifting of the
arms embargo to solve this problem, which is beginning
to give rise to doubts about the credibility of this body.
Each day, the chances of finding a lasting and
peaceful solution are becoming slimmer because of the
hostilities that are continuing in Bosnia and Herzegovina,
the flagrant violations of the Asafe areas@, the systematic
pursuit of the policy of Aethnic cleansing@, the
obstruction of the United Nations observer mission and
the persistent rejection of the peace plan.
We are calling upon the Security Council to play its
full role as the guarantor of international peace and
security and ensure the withdrawal of the Serb forces
from the territories seized by force and their return to their
legitimate owners. But we are also asking it to reconsider
the applicability of the provisions of resolution 713 (1991)
to Bosnia and Herzegovina. Indeed, we could not
understand a situation in which the Bosnian people are
disarmed by the will of the Council and at the same time
are prevented from enjoying the Council's protection.

59

Security Council
Forty-ninth year
We remain convinced that, far from complicating the
situation, the present initiative would have the immediate
effect of making the Bosnian Serbs negotiate peace
seriously and stop taking advantage of a flagrant and
morally unacceptable military imbalance.
With its right to self-defence under Article 51 of the
Charter of the United Nations legally re-established, Bosnia
and Herzegovina will help at the political level to facilitate
the Contact Group's task of making the Serb side
understand that it must accept the peace plan. This will
also help UNPROFOR on the ground, particularly in
carrying out its mandate to safeguard humanitarian
convoys that furnish aid to destitute, defenceless and
displaced people. This task, need I recall, is now being
hampered by the harassment by the Serbs, who are
diverting international humanitarian and medical aid to the
armed militias.
Finally, allowing the army of the Bosnian Government
legally to have the means to defend itself would be a
positive factor that could dissuade the Serbs from
continuing their policy of Aethnic cleansing@.
It is, to say the least, strange to regard as acts of
aggression purely defensive operations conducted by the
Bosnian army in certain occupied zones, disregarding the
fact that the Serb army and militias occupy 70 per cent of
the territory of the Republic of Bosnia and Herzegovina,
and, at the same time, denying the victim its inherent right
to defend itself against the aggressor.
What is happening right now is merely an attempt by
the Republic of Bosnia and Herzegovina to exercise its
inalienable right to regain its territory in the face of the
refusal of the Bosnian Serbs to comply with the solution
advocated by the international community.
It is high time for the Council to shoulder its full
responsibility with respect to this tragedy. At stake are its
credibility and authority, which the Serbs are obstinately
seeking to compromise by flouting the principles of the
Charter and of international law.
The President: I thank the representative of Tunisia
for the kind words he addressed to me.
The next speaker is the representative of Romania. I
invite him to take a place at the Council table and to make
his statement.

60

3454th meeting
9 November 1994
Mr. Gorita (Romania) (interpretation from French):
Madam President, allow me to begin by congratulating
you most warmly on your assumption of the presidency
of the Security Council for this month. Your personal
qualities, which have been unanimously recognized,
guarantee the success of the Council's work. We should
like also to express appreciation for the manner in which
Ambassador David Hannay of the United Kingdom
discharged his duties as President of the Council for the
month of October.
For more than two years now, the conflict in Bosnia
and Herzegovina has been one of the priority concerns of
the international community. Very recently, on
3 November 1994, the General Assembly adopted
resolution 49/10, entitled "The situation in Bosnia and
Herzegovina". The debate that preceded the adoption of
this resolution revealed the situation's extreme gravity,
urgency and complexity and the difficulties in the way of
achieving a peaceful settlement.
Sharing the deep concerns at the chronic and
particularly dangerous persistence of the state of war in
Bosnia and Herzegovina, and for reasons that determined
the similar attitude of 60 other delegations, particularly
with respect to the scope of operative paragraph 22, on
the lifting of the embargo on arms deliveries, the
Romanian delegation abstained in the voting on draft
resolution A/49/L.14/Rev.1.
As a country neighbouring the former Yugoslavia,
Romania has always spoken out and acted C including in
its capacity as a member of the Security Council until the
end of 1991 C in favour of an exclusively political
settlement of the problems involving the Yugoslav crisis
in general and the conflict in Bosnia and Herzegovina in
particular. We have firmly condemned all practices of
"ethnic cleansing" as well as the policy of fait accompli.
The economic sacrifices that my country has faithfully
made in the implementation of the sanctions regime
imposed on the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia are well
known. We are doing our best to use our good relations
with all the States that emerged from the former
Yugoslavia to encourage and bring about a lasting
political settlement, with the participation of all the parties
and the joint contribution of all those who have
committed themselves to facilitating this process.
Furthermore, Romania has supported the plan of the
Contact Group as the only realistic and pragmatic basis
for a settlement of the Bosnian conflict.

Security Council
Forty-ninth year
This is a particularly critical time. We are faced with
an alternative: either to quickly unfreeze the process
designed to bring about a political settlement, or to wait
and run the risk of a worsening of confrontations and
tensions. Every effort must be exerted to put an end to this
war and defuse tensions in Bosnia and Herzegovina. We
are very concerned at the intensification of fighting in
Bosnia and Herzegovina, and we appeal to all the parties to
cease all military activities. Moreover, there can be no talks
or political negotiations so long as Bosnian Serbs continue
to reject the plan proposed by the Contact Group.
The sanctions regime has been an important element
in the quest for a peaceful solution to the Yugoslav crisis.
Recently the Security Council decided, in resolution 942
(1994), to strengthen the sanctions against the Serbs of
Bosnia and Herzegovina following their rejection of the
peace plan. At the same time, by resolution 943 (1994), the
Council decided to ease the sanctions against the Federal
Republic of Yugoslavia. We welcome the indication in the
report of the co-Chairmen of the Steering Committee of the
International Conference on the Former Yugoslavia,
submitted to the Security Council in document S/1994/1246
of 3November 1994, that the Government of the Federal
Republic of Yugoslavia
"is meeting its commitment to close the border between the
Federal Republic of Yugoslavia (Serbia and
Montenegro) and the areas of ... Bosnia and
Herzegovina under the control of the Bosnian Serb
forces". (S/1994/1246, para. 3)
We share the view of the many delegations that, in the
recent debate in the plenary General Assembly and in this
very Chamber, emphasized how essential the presence of
the United Nations Protection Force is to guaranteeing that
humanitarian aid continues to be furnished to Bosnia and
Herzegovina.
The conflict in Bosnia and Herzegovina and the
decisions and actions of the Security Council in this
connection have also led to important actions with regard
to questions of more general scope, such as those of the
actual mandate and the conduct of peace-keeping
operations or the particularly important issue of the
application of the provisions of Article 50 of the United
Nations Charter with a view to resolving the economic
difficulties of States resulting from the implementation of
sanctions measures adopted by the Security Council.
The period up to 31 March 1995 C the deadline for the
extension of the current mandate of the United Nations

3454th meeting
9 November 1994
Protection Force (UNPROFOR) C should not be
considered as any kind of respite. As we also emphasized
at the time of the debate in the plenary meeting of the
General Assembly, every effort must be made by the
parties directly concerned, as well as by those who are
called upon to make a contribution to a peaceful
settlement, to define and establish a global approach
where there will be a convergence of views designed to
get the Bosnian Serbs to accept the territorial settlement
proposed by the Contact Group and to bring the three
parties back to the negotiating table. In the same dynamic
context, we should look at the parallel process initiated by
Security Council resolution 943 (1994) designed to
achieve a gradual lifting of economic sanctions against
the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia.
It is important now more than ever before to stress
those elements that can bring the parties closer together,
to encourage those who are showing a real, positive
political will, in order to ensure that the logic of peace and
of political settlement between the parties in Bosnia and
Herzegovina will prevail.
The President: I thank the representative of
Romania for his kind words addressed to me.
The next speaker is the representative of Canada. I
invite him to take a place at the Council table and to make
his statement.
Mr. Karsgaard (Canada): Last Thursday the General
Assembly debated a draft resolution on the situation in
Bosnia and Herzegovina. Canada, along with many
others, abstained from voting despite its support for most
of the content of the draft resolution. We did so because
the text called for an exemption from the arms embargo for
the Government of the Republic and the Federation of
Bosnia and Herzegovina.
Lifting the arms embargo, in our view, is not an
acceptable way to proceed. However, my Government
does not wish to see the status quo maintained. Canada
fully supports the efforts of the Contact Group and the
multi-track peace process that is now gaining momentum.
The Bosniac-Croat Federation and the cease-fire in central
Bosnia are examples of what can be achieved by peaceful
means. We believe the Contact Group plan offers the
basis for a fair and durable settlement of the conflict in
Bosnia. Our focus must therefore continue to be on
convincing the Bosnian Serbs to accept this plan and
map.

61

Security Council
Forty-ninth year
Recent signs show that these efforts are having an
effect. We are heartened by the decision of the Government
of the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia (Serbia and
Montenegro) to close the border with the Bosnian Serbs
and allow for direct monitoring.
Six Canadian monitors joined the International
Conference on the Former Yugoslavia (ICFY) Mission last
Friday and another nine will be arriving shortly. The
Security Council has accepted the report of 2November
certifying that the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia (Serbia
and Montenegro) Government continues to meet its
commitment. We urge President Milosevic to take all
possible measures to stop the smuggling, which is
weakening the effectiveness of the border closure.
Lifting the arms embargo on the Bosnian Government
would not bring us closer to a solution. Allowing more and
heavier weapons into Bosnia would escalate and intensify
the conflict. The delivery of humanitarian assistance would
be rendered impossible and the prospects for a negotiated,
peaceful settlement to the conflict would be greatly
diminished.
Canada recognizes that there may be conditions where
there would be no alternative to lifting the arms embargo.
But this would be a last resort and we have not yet reached
that point. ALift and stay@ is not an acceptable or realistic
option for the United Nations Protection Force
(UNPROFOR), given its mandate and force structure.
The peace-keepers in UNPROFOR can fulfil their
mandate only if they are seen to be impartial and to have
the consent of the parties to the conflict. Lifting the arms
embargo would jeopardize both conditions. If the arms
embargo were to be lifted, Canada would be left with no
choice but to withdraw its troops from UNPROFOR.

3454th meeting
9 November 1994

The President: The next speaker is the
representative of Bulgaria. I invite him to take a place at
the Council table and to make his statement.
Mr. Pashovski (Bulgaria): Allow me first, Madam
President, to offer you our sincere congratulations on
your assumption of the presidency of the Security
Council. At the same time we express our thanks to your
predecessor for the excellent job he did.
It is evident that in order to achieve a speedy, just
and peaceful solution to the conflict in Bosnia and
Herzegovina a decisive step has to be taken to put an
immediate end to the ongoing hostilities. All parties to the
conflict should make the necessary compromises.
Bulgaria for its part will continue to support the
endeavours of the international community in this
direction.
The war in Bosnia and Herzegovina has revealed
many important and complex problems. Bulgaria regards
the abhorrent practice of ethnic cleansing as
unacceptable and is of the view that it will constitute a
precedent with unforeseeable consequences, not only for
the new States which have emerged on the territory of the
former Yugoslavia, but for the Balkans as a whole.
Furthermore, we believe that the conduct of all countries
neighbouring the conflict zone should be conducive to its
settlement. Judging on the basis of our historical
experience, we have called upon all Balkan countries not
to participate with military force in any hostilities in the
former Yugoslavia. For our part, we went even further by
declaring that we would not be involved in any form of
military activities on the territory of ex-Yugoslavia. For
this reason we have also stated that we are against the
formation of any axes in the region, which we regard as a
practice of the past.

(spoke in French)
We are concerned at recent military developments on
the ground and by reports that the arms embargo is being
circumvented. No one side should believe that it can gain
more on the battlefield than it has already been offered at
the negotiating table.
We must stop the intense suffering and destruction
that the conflict in Bosnia is wreaking. Lifting the arms
embargo in Bosnia would not bring us any closer to this
goal. Rather, we must all continue to work together to
further the peace process as this is our best chance for a
lasting solution.

62

Bulgaria is also concerned at the possibility of a
spill-over of the conflict to other areas or countries in the
region, especially to the south-east. Peace is quite fragile
there, and for this reason we support a full resort to the
instruments of preventive diplomacy.
Bearing in mind the principled position of my
country to support all international efforts aimed at
finding a solution to the conflict, Bulgaria welcomed the
cooperation of the United Nations, the North Atlantic
Treaty Organization, the European Union, the United
States of America and the Russian Federation to this end.
We endorse the importance and role of the peace-keeping

Security Council
Forty-ninth year

3454th meeting
9 November 1994

forces under the auspices of the United Nations. At the
same time, decisions regarding the problem of the
composition of the United Nations Protection Force should
take into account prospects for future stability in the region
with a view to avoiding fostering an environment of
increasing suspicions and mutual claims.

dynamism and the many initiatives he has taken. His
Agenda for Peace, for example, is an invaluable source of
inspiration for safeguarding and consolidating
international peace. The preventive diplomacy that it
advocates is a mechanism that deserves the support of
the entire international community.

Bulgaria has declared its support for the peace plan of
the Contact Group. We consider it a good basis for
compromise in the search for a peaceful solution to the
conflict. Once again we call upon the Bosnian Serbs to
accept the proposals of the Contact Group, which will open
up prospects of reviving cooperation in the region and will
help the gradual integration of the Balkan States into the
European processes and structures.

The Government of Guinea-Bissau warmly greets the
members of the Security Council, whose ability and
humanity have been amply demonstrated.

At the same time, Bulgaria continues to express its
hope that the members of the Contact Group, and especially
the permanent members of the Security Council, will
carefully weigh the pros and cons of lifting the arms
embargo vis-à-vis the Government of the Republic of
Bosnia and Herzegovina. The influx of new weapons may
lead to an escalation of the hostilities in Bosnia and
Herzegovina and to their possible spread to neighbouring
territories. It is mainly for this reason that we abstained in
the voting on General Assembly resolution 49/10.
In conclusion, I should like once again to reiterate the
readiness of my country to contribute to the efforts of the
international community in the process of finding a lasting
and peaceful solution to the conflict in Bosnia and
Herzegovina.
The President: I thank the representative of Bulgaria
for his kind words addressed to me.
The next speaker is the representative of GuineaBissau. I invite him to take a place at the Council table and
to make his statement.
Mr. Touré (Guinea-Bissau) (interpretation from
French): It gives me great pleasure, beyond mere tradition,
to congratulate you, Madam, on your assumption of the
presidency of the Council. I am convinced that your work
will yield tangible results, so great are your personal
experience and the international standing of your country.
Your predecessor also deserves our congratulations for the
skill and dedication with which he conducted the Council's
business.
I also take this opportunity to pay tribute to our
Secretary-General, Mr. Boutros Boutros-Ghali, for his

Among the many problems forming the dangerous
framework within which the people of Bosnia are
struggling are violence, war, scorn for the principles of
the United Nations Charter, violations of the most
fundamental norms of human rights that govern
international relations, the massacre of thousands of
human beings and the destruction of vast swaths of
property. The terrible sufferings inflicted upon the heroic
people of Bosnia, far from weakening them, have shown
their strength, courage, determination and great political
maturity, maturity demonstrated by the responsibility of
that people, who personify the aspirations that inspire our
debate.
An outraged world has expressed unflagging
indignation at the atrocities committed in Bosnia and
Herzegovina. The international community has
consistently manifested its strong repugnance at the
killing of defenceless, isolated Bosnians. The tragedy of
Bosnia and Herzegovina is a disgrace to those involved
and the entire international community, for which it is also
a constant source of anxiety and serious concern.
With regard to the current conflict in Bosnia and
Herzegovina, we must do all we can to take the path of
dialogue and reason in order to safeguard peace in that
country and region. To that end, my country, GuineaBissau, which is actively involved in the search for a
solution to the problems afflicting the international
community, will spare no effort to find appropriate
solutions commensurate with the magnitude of the
conflict in Bosnia and Herzegovina. The international
community and the United Nations in particular must
pursue their efforts to help defenceless people and
redeem the tragic situation of Bosnia and Herzegovina.
Our firm conviction that peace is possible
everywhere strengthens our resolve to settle the ongoing
conflict. That is why Guinea-Bissau endorses any
initiative that might allow the speedy implementation of
measures to end the rigidity of the Serbs.

63

Security Council
Forty-ninth year

Guinea-Bissau, like other countries, is profoundly
concerned at the armed aggression and the policy of
Aethnic cleansing@ being implemented against the Republic
of Bosnia and Herzegovina and its people.
Everything should be done to ensure that the relevant
resolutions of the Security Council are implemented and
strictly complied with. My country's action with regard to
Bosnia and Herzegovina should be seen in the context of
reducing regional conflicts. The aspirations of the people of
Bosnia to freedom and democracy are now seen to be
demands that cannot be refused. That is why we support
the draft resolution submitted for discussion by the
Government of the United States of America, for whose
work we are grateful. We are also grateful for the Contact
Group's peace plan, which has been rejected by the Serbs.
We support the lifting of the arms embargo, if necessary,
and all measures to that end.
The President: I thank the representative of GuineaBissau for the kind words he addressed to me.
The next speaker is the representative of Latvia. I
invite him to take a place at the Council table and to make
his statement.
Mr. Baumanis (Latvia): Latvia condemns the massive
violations of humanitarian law in Bosnia and Herzegovina
that have haunted the international community for years
and that are still continuing. We welcome the efforts and
acknowledge the sacrifices that have been made by the
personnel of the United Nations Protection Force
(UNPROFOR) and of the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR) in providing
humanitarian relief to the people of Bosnia and
Herzegovina.
Latvia supported the adoption of General Assembly
resolution 49/10, including the provisions encouraging the
Security Council to give all due consideration and exempt
Bosnia and Herzegovina from the arms embargo imposed
by the Security Council in resolution 713 (1991). At the
same time, we urge Bosnia and Herzegovina to act in
compliance with the appropriate Security Council
resolutions and to cooperate fully with UNPROFOR in
implementing the Force's mandate.
Latvia bases its position on Article 51 of the Charter
of the United Nations, which enshrines the inherent right of
individual and collective self-defence. Bosnia and

64

3454th meeting
9 November 1994
Herzegovina has a clear legal right to protect its people
and its territory from armed attack.
In addition to firmly holding this view, Latvia is
guided by a moral conviction that a fellow small State that
is under siege must be granted the opportunity to defend
itself, especially when international efforts have not led to
a peaceful settlement of the conflict. Small States must
take note if the present application of an arms embargo is
allowed to become a precedent.
The hope that a policy of treating even-handedly all
parties involved would lead to a negotiated settlement
has not come to fruition. There has not been sufficient
incentive for all parties to reach a diplomatic solution to
the conflict.
Notwithstanding its concrete legal claim under
Article 51 of the Charter, the Government of Bosnia and
Herzegovina has been greatly forthcoming in seeking the
de jure lifting of the arms embargo with effective
application deferred for up to six months or as further
deferred by the Security Council. We believe that such an
arrangement would provide an urgent incentive for all
parties to exhaust all available diplomatic remedies and
enhance the possibility of a negotiated conclusion to the
conflict in Bosnia and Herzegovina.
The President: The next speaker is His Excellency
Mr. Engin Ahmet Ansay, Permanent Observer of the
Organization of the Islamic Conference to the United
Nations, to whom the Council has extended an invitation
under rule 39 of its provisional rules of procedure. I invite
Mr. Ansay to take a place at the Council table and to
make his statement.
Mr. Ansay (Organization of the Islamic Conference):
Allow me, Madam, to begin by extending to you my
warmest congratulations on your assumption of the
presidency of the Council. I am confident that your
experience and very well known professional skills will
serve you well in moving forward the work of the Council.
I should like to take this opportunity to thank your
predecessor, the Permanent Representative the United
Kingdom, for his able performance in steering the work of
the Council during the month of October.
The Permanent Representative of Pakistan, in his
additional capacity as Chairman of the Islamic Group and
the Contact Group on Bosnia and Herzegovina of the
Organization of the Islamic Conference (OIC), yesterday

Security Council
Forty-ninth year
eloquently presented the position of principle of the
Organization of the Islamic Conference vis -à-vis Bosnia and
Herzegovina. I shall therefore be brief.
The Contact Group on Bosnia and Herzegovina of the
Organization of the Islamic Conference met two days ago
and decided, inter alia, to recommend to the Islamic Group
of the Whole that it issue a statement with regard to the
latest situation prevailing in Bosnia and Herzegovina.
At the request of the Secretary-General of the
Organization of the Islamic Conference, Mr. Hamid Algabid,
I would like to read out the statement issued yesterday in
that regard. The statement reads as follows:
AThe member States of the Organization of the Islamic
Conference held a meeting on 7 November 1994 in
New York to review the deteriorating situation in the
Republic of Bosnia and Herzegovina, after continuous
rejection of the proposed five-nation peace plan by
the Serbian side and, in particular, in view of the
General
Assembly
resolution
adopted
on
3 November 1994 on the situation in Bosnia and
Herzegovina.
AThe member States of the OIC reaffirm the political
independence, territorial integrity, sovereignty and
unity of the Republic of Bosnia and Herzegovina. In
this context, they express their alarm that the arms
embargo imposed by Security Council resolution 713
(1991) continues to be applied against the Government
of the Republic of Bosnia and Herzegovina, thereby
defying its inherent right to self-defence according to
Article 51 of the United Nations Charter.
AThe member States of the Organization of the Islamic
Conference reiterate, in accordance with the
provisions of the five-nation peace plan, their call for
the lifting of the arms embargo unjustly imposed
against the Government of the Republic of Bosnia and
Herzegovina and take favourable note of the
statement by the President of the Republic of Bosnia
and Herzegovina, His Excellency Mr. Alija
Izetbegovic, before the General Assembly on 27
September 1994, including the proposed compromise,
as well as the call for a unilateral response by members
of the international community in the event that the
compromise proposal is not accepted by the members
of the five-nation Contact Group. They fully support
the efforts towards this goal in the General Assembly
and the Security Council.

3454th meeting
9 November 1994
AThe member States of the OIC express their
willingness to contribute troops to the United
Nations Protection Force (UNPROFOR) should any
of the troop contributors decide to withdraw
unilaterally. Stressing the need for strengthening the
mandate of UNPROFOR in order to fully implement
its task, they reiterate their call for the strong
protection and extension of the safe areas as
enunciated in Security Council resolutions 824
(1993) and 836 (1993) and in accordance with
provisions of article 6 of the five-nation peace plan
and paragraph 4 of the communiqué issued by the
North Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO) on 9
February 1994.
AThe member States of the OIC emphasize the need
to strengthen UNPROFOR's mandate with respect to
peacemaking in order to confront more effectively
ongoing Serbian aggression and human rights
abuses, as well as to support the implementation of
the relevant Security Council resolutions. They
express their confidence that such mandatestrengthening, complemented by a better-armed
Bosnian army, which would be able to undertake at
least a portion of the responsibilities for delivery of
humanitarian efforts, would enable UNPROFOR to
continue more effectively with all its humanitarian
efforts.
AIn this context, the Foreign Ministers of the OIC
Contact Group on Bosnia and Herzegovina remain
seized of the matter@.
As we all know well, when the arms embargo was
imposed on the former Yugoslavia C the consequence of
which is the denial today to the Government of Bosnia
and Herzegovina of the exercise of its inherent right of
self-defence under Article 51 of the Charter C the
Republic of Bosnia and Herzegovina was not yet born.
Consequently, the OIC has long taken the view that
paragraph 6 of resolution 713 (1991), relating to the arms
embargo, does not and cannot legally apply to the
Republic of Bosnia and Herzegovina. In other words, the
Republic of Bosnia and Herzegovina did not exist as a
Member State when resolution 713 (1991) was adopted,
and certainly today's circumstances could not have been
foreseen when that resolution was adopted.
Therefore, should the Security Council be of the
view that in the current situation the arms embargo
should apply to the Republic of Bosnia and Herzegovina,
then the Council ought to adopt an unprecedented,

65

Security Council
Forty-ninth year
specifically-targeted resolution. Otherwise, as indicated by
the Foreign Ministers of the OIC in their most recent
communiqué, we can only come to the conclusion that
paragraph 6 of resolution 713 (1991) cannot properly apply.
In conclusion, the Organization of the Islamic
Conference would like once again to reaffirm its strong and
unswerving support for the just struggle of the Bosnian
people against aggression, genocide and Aethnic-religious
cleansing@. The OIC fully endorses the Bosnian
Government's constructive position on the principles of a
peaceful settlement to the conflict. Unless all parties
concerned take cognizance of the legitimate demands of the
Bosnian people, as I have stated here in the Council on
previous occasions, peace will remain elusive in the entire
Balkan region. Thus, the security of the area, as well as that
of the world at large, will continue to be in jeopardy.
The President: I thank Mr. Ansay for his kind words
addressed to me.
The next speaker is the representative of Thailand. I
invite him to take a place at the Council table and to make
his statement.
Mr. Pibulsonggram (Thailand): May I first
congratulate you, Madam President, on your assumption of
the presidency of the Security Council for this month and,
through you, your predecessor, the Permanent
Representative of the United Kingdom, for his successful
presidency in October.
Thailand has been following the tragic situation in the
Republic of Bosnia and Herzegovina with great concern.
The massive human-rights violations resulting from the
atrocities of the war, under the guise of Aethnic cleansing@,
and the continuing obstructions of United Nations
humanitarian missions C these are totally abhorrent and
unacceptable to the international community. We are also
concerned with the continued blatant violations of the
United Nations Charter and principles for the peaceful
conduct of international relations. Since 1991, more than 60
resolutions relating to the former Yugoslavia have been
adopted by the Security Council, but violations of the
United Nations Charter and principles continue unabated.
My country has always been among those that have
consistently supported and upheld the principles of nonaggression, non-use of force and non-acquisition of
territory by armed aggression, in South-East Asia and in
other regions of the world. My delegation believes that the
victims of aggression, including Bosnia and Herzegovina,

66

3454th meeting
9 November 1994
should have the legitimate right to self-defence, a
principle enshrined in Article 51 of the United Nations
Charter. They should also be able to rely on international
support in their fight for self-determination and their fight
against armed aggression.
In this spirit, Thailand has consistently given its
support to resolutions on Bosnia and Herzegovina,
including the recent General Assembly resolution 49/10
adopted on 3 November which, among other things,
encourages the Security Council to
Aexempt the Government of the Republic and Federation
of Bosnia and Herzegovina from the embargo on
deliveries of weapons and military equipment
originally imposed by the Security Council in
resolution 731 (1991)@. (resolution 49/10, para. 22)
The situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina has also
caused great concern to the countries members of the
Association of South-East Asian Nations (ASEAN) and
has remained an item of high priority on the agenda of the
ASEAN Ministerial Meetings. At the last such Meeting at
Bangkok last July, the ASEAN Foreign Ministers issued a
joint communiqué on the situation in Bosnia and
Herzegovina. It reads as follows:
AThe Foreign Ministers expressed their support for
the latest peace proposal made by the Contact
Group comprising representatives of the United
Nations, the European Union, the United States and
the Russian Federation, which emphasized the
preservation of the unity and integrity of the State of
Bosnia and Herzegovina as a single State within
internationally recognized borders. They called upon
all concerned to support the peace proposal. They
also called for the lifting of the arms embargo against
Bosnia and Herzegovina in the light of the rejection
by the Serbs of the peace proposal.@
In pursuance of the above principles articulated by
the ASEAN Foreign Ministers, the Thai delegation
therefore wishes to join with other delegations in urging
the Security Council to consider lifting the arms embargo
as well as to support other constructive proposals as
contained in the resolution recently adopted by an
overwhelming majority of the States Members of the
United Nations in the General Assembly on 3 November
1994.
The President: I thank the representative of
Thailand for his kind words addressed to me.

Security Council
Forty-ninth year

Mr. Olhaye (Djibouti): There have been numerous
disingenuous attempts at negotiating an end to the war in
Bosnia, with agreements openly flouting Council
resolutions on not rewarding aggression, on protecting
designated safe areas, on respecting cease-fire deadlines,
and more. Yet, as evidence of their rapacious appetite for
seizing even more Aethnically cleansed@ territory, the
Bosnian Serbs have simply found new ways to prolong this
war, perhaps in the expectation C one well supported by
events in Bosnia C that they could expect additional
concessions. Unfortunately, they may have played their
hand with too little regard for the possible action of other
parties.
The outright rejection of the 51-49 per cent proposal
of the Contact Group has further turned opinion against the
Bosnian Serbs, hardening the attitude of many who seek an
end to this conflict. Similarly, it has weakened the position
of some who would symp athize with them. Rejection has
also confronted Yugoslavia with some hard choices in the
face of a certain tightening of United Nations sanctions,
leaving little choice but to impose and strengthen its own
embargo against the Bosnian Serbs.
While the last report of the International Conference
Mission to Yugoslavia on the border-closure measures
concludes that Yugoslavia is continuing to meet its
commitments, a judgement we still hold in abeyance, it
would probably indicate that resupplying the Bosnian
Serbs will certainly be far more difficult than in the past.
Pressure has also been brought to bear through yet another
General Assembly resolution this year calling for the
Security Council to lift the arms embargo as it applies to the
Government of Bosnia, a resolution stronger than the one
adopted last year.
Consequent on the Bosnian Serb rejection of the
Contact Group's proposals we have a draft resolution
introduced by a member of the Contact Group also calling
for a lifting of the arms embargo as it applies to the Bosnian
Government, including the Bosnian Croats. Combined,
these measures are a clear reflection of mounting
international opinion against the intransigence of the
Bosnian Serbs in refusing to accept a solution that seems
more than fair.
In addition, international opinion has been hardened
by the confrontational pattern of events in Bosnia.
Designated safe areas remain almost uninhabitable human
ghettos incapable of virtually any type of self-sufficiency.
The threat of dwindling supplies is matched only by that of

3454th meeting
9 November 1994
the threat to life created by constant shelling and sniper
fire. This situation prevails even in the capital of Sarajevo,
where safety, access and supplies are minimal, and the
threat by the Serbs to resume the shelling of the city has
again become a reality. With the coming of winter, the
airport closed and the blue access road shut at will,
prospects for difficult times ahead are real indeed.
Nevertheless, aside from the resolutions calling for a
lifting of the arms embargo as it applies to the Bosnian
Government and the threat of tightening sanctions
against Yugoslavia, little has been done directly against
the Bosnian Serbs. It is understandable, in this light, that
the Bosnian Government should become disenchanted
with the pace of events and reliance upon the words and
actions of others and seek to make a more direct impact.
The result has been the widespread redressing of the
military imbalance forced upon them by Serbs throughout
this long, 31-month war. Oddly enough, it grew out of the
safe area of Bihac and has spread. The widely held notion
of Serb invincibility has withered in the face of that ageold military equalizer, lack of supplies, a situation the
Bosnians have faced throughout the conflict. The ability
of the Serbs to dictate the pace and direction of events
unilaterally has weakened, fortunately affording the
international community a genuine opportunity to force a
real solution.
Clearly, total victory through naked aggression and
the gun no longer appears possib le. The Council can
strengthen this reality and thus the logic of settlement by
lifting the arms embargo against the Government of
Bosnia as proposed in the draft resolution before us.
While some fear such a step now in the face of Bosnian
advances could panic the Serbs and provoke them, my
delegation feels that wild, unexpected behaviour is the
norm for the Serbs to panic the mediators, and in any case
would be less effective now. As a precaution, we support
the call for the Secretary-General to continue planning for
the orderly and safe deployment of UNPROFOR
personnel that might, as a consequence, become
necessary.
Another step my delegation would stress is to move
with all reasonable haste to expedite the work of the war
crimes Tribunal. Now that the situation in Bosnia is fluid
and the outcome less predictable, the perpetration of
criminal acts against humanity may, in fact, be
punished C a consideration upon which any would-be
violator must reflect. In such a case, the mere issuance of
an arrest warrant by a sitting tribunal would certainly act
as a deterrent.

67

Security Council
Forty-ninth year

The present draft resolution, with its built-in time
frame of six months before enactment, affords ample time
for renewed diplomatic efforts to find a peaceful solution.
Recent events indicate growing defections in the Serb
army, with more and more people ready to lay down their
arms in exchange for an ordinary life. There is evidence of
an increase in desertions from the so-called Serb Republic
and a weakening of will. At least among the general public,
"compromise" is the new buzz word. Some sort of deal is
increasingly seen as the only way.
If we were to strengthen the hand of the Government
of Bosnia now, we would only increase the sense of realism
the Serbs must eventually come to accept. The lifting of the
arms embargo must, therefore, be seen in the wider context
of hastening the peace process. Prolonging the impasse,
the agonies, the frustrations and hopelessness of one party
to the peace process definitely defeats the very basis of fair
play and undermines credibility.

3454th meeting
9 November 1994
The draft resolution my Government presented
raises questions both of principle and of pragmatism; the
questions of principle are more easily answered.
There are, after all, no grounds in justice or law for
denying the Government of Bosnia the right to defend
itself. Bosnia has not attacked its neighbours, supported
international terrorism or otherwise abused its
responsibilities as a sovereign Power. Bosnian leaders are
committed, moreover, to the principle of ethnic pluralism.
Indeed, I doubt that members of this Council would
consider imposing an arms embargo on Bosnia now if it
had not been placed on the former Yugoslavia three years
ago.
What, then, about the pragmatic questions?
What if the embargo is lifted and the Bosnian Serbs
retaliate against United Nations peace-keepers or launch
pre-emptive strikes?

The President: I shall now make a statement in my
capacity as representative of the United States.

What if fear of retaliation causes nations that have
contributed troops to UNPROFOR to withdraw?

As the last and final speaker, it is evident from this
debate that support for lifting the arms embargo against
Bosnia is broad and deeply felt.

What if an upsurge of violence jeopardizes the
humanitarian lifeline upon which Bosnians of all
nationalities now depend?

It is also true, as representatives from several nations
participating in UNPROFOR have pointed out, that lifting
the embargo would raise some hard, practical questions for
the United Nations and for those who care about the
people of Bosnia.

What if the Government of Serbia and Montenegro
re-enters the war?

It is no secret that my Government believes that
strong new measures are required to end the war. Last July,
the Contact Group proposed a territorial settlement that was
endorsed by this Council. At the time, the Contact Group
agreed that if one party alone refused to accept the plan,
that party would pay a high price for its refusal. Since then,
the Government of Bosnia has accepted the plan; so have
the Bosnian Croats; only the Bosnian Serbs have refused.
My Government has presented a draft resolution, the
focus of today's debate, that would fulfil the Contact
Group's commitment. It would lift the arms embargo now in
place against the Government of Bosnia, with
implementation in six months if the Bosnian Serbs do not
agree to a settlement by that time.

68

These are, indeed, hard questions. They are based
on fears about Bosnian Serb behaviour that are
well-grounded; they reflect the desire of all members to
see that United Nations peace-keepers are not harmed
and that their mandates are accomplished. Indeed, my
Government shares the appreciation for UNPROFOR's
humanitarian work expressed by other Council members.
But humanitarian goals can only be achieved over the
long-term if the Bosnian Serbs accept the just and
honourable peace they have spurned.
But a policy driven by fear has no future. Prudence
must not become paralysis. We saw after the market-place
massacre and the attack on Gorazde that the Bosnian
Serbs will fall back only when this Council steps forward
with something more than words.
So the real question before us is whether this
Council will at long last translate words into actions. For it
is only bold action that can provide the pressure
necessary to end this war. Let me remind my colleagues

Security Council
Forty-ninth year
on this Council that our finest moments and our greatest
successes have come when we have mustered the unity
and the determination to act boldly.
In other words, the biggest risk in Bosnia is that we
should allow the Bosnian Serbs to dictate what we can and
cannot do. If we succumb to their threats, we will erode the
credibility of the Contact Group; we will sow cynicism
among the parties in Bosnia that have agreed to a
settlement; and we will give a green light to further Bosnian
Serb transgressions. That will not reduce the risk to United
Nations peace-keepers in Bosnia; it will not enable relief
workers to perform their tasks; and it will not shorten the
war. It will, instead, invite more war, at greater intensity, on
an ever-broadening field of battle.
Under the resolution we have presented, arms would
not begin to flow to Bosnia legally for a period of six
months. During this time, we can limit through tighter
sanctions the capacity of the Bosnian Serbs to wage war;
limit their range of action through vigorous enforcement of
safe areas and exclusion zones; limit their prospects for
success by consolidating the confederation between the
Government and the Croats; and limit their diplomatic
options by maintaining unity among ourselves. Moreover,
the prospect that the embargo will be lifted if they continue
to say "no" should give the Bosnian Serbs a weighty new
reason to say "yes" to the territorial arrangements
proposed by the Contact Group.
Let us not forget that when we have acted boldly, as
in the case of the Sarajevo ultimatum, the Bosnian Serbs
talked a tough game, but in the end they complied. That
history must instruct us today.
Some suggest that lifting the arms embargo would
make it impossible for the United Nations to remain
impartial in Bosnia. But what does impartiality mean in the
context of Bosnia? Certainly, United Nations relief workers
should deliver humanitarian aid to civilians who need it,
regardless of ethnicity. Certainly, United Nations Security
Council resolutions should be enforced equitably.
Certainly, United Nations peace-keepers should stay within
their mandates. But impartiality does not require of this
Council that we treat equally those who have not acted
equally.
There are those who condemn Bosnia for its recent
attacks on Bosnian Serb forces in the central and western
parts of the country. My Government regrets all continued
fighting. But let us not confuse attacks made to recover
territory lost to aggression with aggression. Let us not

3454th meeting
9 November 1994
confuse the actions of a Government that has declared its
desire for peace with that of a faction unyielding in its
pursuit of war. The Government of Bosnia did not start
this war and is willing to end it. The Bosnian Serbs began
this war and are determined to prolong it. These
differences matter and they should be reflected in the
actions and attitudes of this Council.
The Bosnian Serbs have the option of living
securely and in peace with their countrymen. Despite the
bitterness of this war, much would become possible if
weapons were laid aside and energies turned to the hard
work of reconstruction. In this modern era, no people will
find comfort or a decent life in a bitter isolation. The
Bosnian Serbs have ample reason to accept peace, but
their leaders have refused to embrace peace. That will not
change if our approach does not change.
None of the options we face in Bosnia is without
risk. Our choices are imperfect. We can accommodate the
demands of the Bosnian Serbs and, in so doing, seek to
minimize immediate dangers. Or we can press harder in an
effort to end this war.
My Government is determined that this Council
proceed on a firm course. This debate and the General
Assembly vote last week indicate that a strong majority of
the membership of the United Nations supports lifting the
arms embargo against Bosnia. I have also heard strong
objections from many key Council members to the
concept of an automatic lifting of the arms embargo. They
have asked hard questions, some of which I hope were
answered in my statement.
But I have some hard questions of my own that this
Council must face as we pursue this resolution: How long
will the international community delude itself into thinking
that some diplomatic tinkering will transform Pale's firm
Ano@ into a Ayes@? How long can the Contact Group let the
Bosnian Serbs reject the just and honourable peace that
has been proposed? How long can we allow United
Nations troops C for all their good and noble
humanitarian purposes and achievements C to be used
also to protect the spoils of war by the enemies of peace,
to be used also as a reason why the Bosnian Serbs do not
pay a heavy price for violation of the exclusion zones?
How long are we to meet in this Chamber and let the
principled and eloquent calls of the representative from
Bosnia and Herzegovina for his people's right to
self-defence fall on deaf ears? Finally, I must ask my
fellow Council members: When will we decide what our
real purpose is? Are we waiting for Karadzic, waiting for

69

Security Council
Forty-ninth year
Godot, or waiting for some magic force to take on the
responsibility that only this Council can fulfil?
In closing, let me put the issue as simply as I can. We
must, after 30 months of war, force the Bosnian Serbs to
make a choice between a settlement they can live with and

3454th meeting
9 November 1994
consequences they cannot. That is the test the Council
now faces; that is the responsibility we together must
meet.
I resume my function as President of the Council.
There are no further names inscribed on the list of
speakers. The Security Council has thus concluded the
present stage of its consideration of the item on the
agenda. The Security Council will remain seized of the
matter.
The meeting rose at 5.15 p.m.

70
