S/2001/138

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
14 February 2001
English
Original: English/French

Letter dated 12 February 2001 from the Secretary-General
addressed to the President of the Security Council
I should first of all like to congratulate you on having organized an open
debate in the Security Council on peace-building, on the eve of the Fourth Highlevel United Nations-Regional Organizations Meeting which took place on 6 and 7
February 2001. I am pleased to inform you that a very productive exchange of views
took place at that Meeting on the subject of cooperation for peace-building.
We agreed on a number of principles to guide our future cooperation and
identified specific activities which we plan to undertake in this field. Those
activities are summarized in the attached document, entitled “Framework for
cooperation in peace-building”, which reflects my personal understanding, as
Chairman of the Meeting, of the various proposals that were presented (see annex I).
I also attach a copy of my concluding statement, covering the main points of the
discussion (see annex II), and a list of participants (see annex III).
Many participants placed emphasis on the fact that peace-building must be a
home-grown process, in which the role of the United Nations and regional
organizations is to support national endeavours. It was therefore decided that the
promotion of self-reliance should be the fundamental goal of all cooperative peacebuilding activities by the United Nations and regional organizations.
While focusing on the opportunities for future cooperation, our Meeting also
recognized that there are a number of constraints to effective peace-building
activities. In particular, it was noted that there is often a lack of political support by
the international community for long-term peace-building. In addition, the mandates
given to the United Nations and regional organizations frequently exceed their
capacities. Lastly, available resources are limited and are often drawn from the funds
provided by Member States for other activities. I believe that these are all areas in
which the Security Council could play an important role. It could address the issue
when it resumes its debates on this subject on 16 February 2001.
I should be grateful if you would bring the attached documents to the attention
of the members of the Security Council and I hope that they will support the results
of our Meeting. Lastly, I wish to thank you for the important contribution which you
made to the success of our Meeting.
(Signed) Kofi A. Annan

01-25067 (E)

140201

140201

S/2001/138

Annex I
Framework for cooperation in peace-building*
Chairman’s summary of the proposals presented at the Fourth
High-level United Nations-Regional Organizations Meeting,
New York, 6 and 7 February 2001

I. Guiding principles for cooperation in peace-building
• The promotion of self-reliance should be a fundamental goal of all cooperative
peace-building activities. Hence, peace-building must be a home-grown
process in which the role of the United Nations and regional organizations is
to support national endeavours.
• The aim of cooperation in the field of peace-building is to ensure speedy
operational response and optimum mobilization of resources — human,
technical and financial — in a mutually supportive effort geared to the priority
needs of the affected countries.
• Joint activities in the field of peace-building should be directed at preventing
the outbreak or recurrence of conflict, with the cooperation of the parties
concerned.
• Cooperation should be based on comparative advantages of the United
Nations and regional organizations so as to lead to complementarity of
efforts.
• Actions taken must be multidisciplinary in the widest sense and could
encompass five key areas of peace-building: negotiation and implementation
of peace agreements; security stabilization; good governance, democratization
and human rights; justice and reconciliation; and humanitarian relief and
sustainable development.
• Mobilization of international assistance should be undertaken in a
coordinated fashion so that it fills priority gaps and is complementary to the
country’s own efforts.
• Assistance in peace-building should be guided by needs rather than by
geographic preferences.
• Efforts must be made to ensure that peace-building is undertaken on the basis
of international legitimacy.

II. Possible cooperative activities
A.

Capacity-building
• Establish peace-building units in the United Nations system and regional
organizations and develop regular channels of communication on peacebuilding issues, including raising public awareness.
* This framework also applies to cooperation between the United Nations and participating
intergovernmental organizations.

2

S/2001/138

• Strengthen existing national and regional mechanisms for prevention,
conflict resolution and peace-building.
• Exchange lists of staff officers involved in peace-building activities by
country/region and functional areas.
• Visits of staff involved in peace-building at working level between the
different headquarters.
• Develop joint training of staff in all aspects of peace-building.
• Develop mechanisms and procedures for mutually supportive peace-building
operations.
• Exchange information on the peace-building capabilities of the United
Nations and regional organizations.
• Jointly examine ways to build links to civil society organizations (including
outreach to the public through the media and contacts with research
institutions).

B.

Strategic development
• Establish an information exchange mechanism for early warning, analysis
and better understanding of the root causes of conflict, and determine at which
point a particular situation is “ripe” for mutually supportive peace-building
action.
• Consider joint preliminary assessment missions to the field, wherever
possible.
• Conduct regular joint working group meetings, both at Headquarters and in
the field, to define the political objectives and key priority issues of a peacebuilding strategy.

C.

Operational interaction
• Establish focal points and consultative processes for the following
operational purposes:
• Ensure that peace settlements mediated by the United Nations and regional
organizations include commitments by the parties to the conflict to concerted
action in the key priority areas of peace-building. Such agreements should be
realistic in terms of their political objectives and financial implications.
• Mainstream a gender perspective, the protection of children and the rights
of individuals and minorities into peace agreements and peace-building
strategies. Considerations related to refugees as well as small arms, and
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration should also be fully
included.
• Ensure effective “division of labour” between agencies of the United Nations
and regional organizations involved in peace-building activities based on
comparative advantage.

3

S/2001/138

• Promote coordination of peace-building operations both at Headquarters
and field levels.
• Ensure wide dissemination at Headquarters and in the field of the agreements
reached at this and previous meetings.

D.

Monitoring
• Establish joint monitoring processes to monitor the efficiency of cooperation
(taking into account end of mission objectives).
• Establish repertories of best practices and lessons learned in the different
functional areas of peace-building.

E.

Mobilizing political will and resources
• Joint holding of pledging conferences (bringing together the United Nations,
regional organizations, donor countries, the Bretton Woods institutions etc.) to
mobilize expeditiously international political support and the essential
resource requirements of peace-building in an affected country.
• Explore the possibility of an international facility for financing quick startup peace-building projects or a standing peace-building trust fund.

III. Follow-up
• Undertake follow-up at the working level to develop the above possible
modalities for peace-building and further develop the 13 modalities for conflict
prevention jointly identified by the Third High-level United Nations-Regional
Organizations Meeting (July 1998). The first such meeting could be convened
by the United Nations before the end of 2001.
• Regional workshops could also be convened by interested regional
organizations to discuss specific regional dimensions of cooperation in conflict
prevention and peace-building.

4

S/2001/138

Annex II
Statement made by the Secretary-General at the concluding
session of the Fourth High-level United Nations-Regional
Organizations Meeting
I think you will all agree that we have had a very productive exchange of
views on the crucial subject of peace-building. Before we disperse, I would like to
highlight some of the main points of the discussion, which appeared to command a
broad measure of agreement:
• Peace-building is essentially a home-grown process, in which the role of the
United Nations, and of regional organizations, is to support national
endeavours.
• An effective peace-building strategy must address the root causes of conflict.
• Peace-building has a fundamentally political character. The different
components of a peace-building strategy need to contribute to the overall goal
of preventing the outbreak or recurrence of conflict.
• Peace-building must be seen as a comprehensive strategy, involving political,
social, developmental and humanitarian measures. The precise mix of
measures needs to be carefully tailored to each situation, and to involve a
broad range of national or international actors.
• Peace-building must include measures for promoting good governance, the
rule of law, democratization and human rights as key components of a
sustainable peace.
• The specific needs of women, and of vulnerable groups, such as children and
minorities, are a key component of any peace-building strategy.
• Quick-impact projects can play an important role in the early phases of a
peace-building operation.
• Peacekeeping operations should incorporate peace-building as an integral
component. Efforts should be made to ensure a smooth transition from
peacekeeping to long-term peace-building, particularly with regard to
demobilization, disarmament and reintegration, the training of civilian police,
and measures to prevent the spread of small arms and light weapons.
• Each organization must conduct its peace-building activities on the basis of its
own mandate so as to ensure the legitimacy of its actions.
• The United Nations and regional organizations must cooperate more closely in
sharing information in order to better analyse and understand the multifaceted
roots and dynamics of conflict.
• Ideally, all relevant actors in peace-building should come together early in the
negotiating phase of a peace agreement to ensure effective implementation and
to avoid duplication of efforts.
• We all need to be more aware of each other’s capabilities in this field in order
to ensure that our efforts complement each other.

5

S/2001/138

Our discussions also identified a number of obstacles to more effective peacebuilding. Often, for example, there is a lack of sustained political support by the
international community for long-term peace-building after the signing of a peace
agreement. In addition, the mandates given to the United Nations and regional
organizations frequently exceed their capacities. And the resources for peacebuilding are limited, often drawn from the same pool of funds provided by Member
States for other activities.
There is also a fundamental paradox inherent in peace-building. On the one
hand, effective peace-building requires the long-term engagement of the
international community. On the other hand, there is always the danger of making a
society permanently dependent on development assistance. That is why so many of
us stressed that peace-building needs to be a home-grown process, supported by the
international community but aimed ultimately at promoting national self-reliance.
At our last meeting, in 1998, we established a practical framework for
cooperation in the field of conflict prevention. This meeting has expanded that
framework to the complementary field of peace-building. We have also agreed to
bring these two efforts together in future follow-up activities.
I hope we have moved the international community another step forward in its
journey from a “culture of reaction” to a “culture of prevention”. And I hope that the
Security Council will be able to support the results of our meeting when it
reconvenes next week.
Our organizations have now had four meetings aimed at better cooperation and
partnership. My sense is that we are making important progress. Let us hope that the
next in this series of meetings is equally productive. And meanwhile, let us ensure
that there is effective follow-up to this one. Thank you for coming.

6

S/2001/138

Annex III
List of participants
Regional organizations*
Association of Southeast Asian Nations
Caribbean Community
Commonwealth of Independent States
Commonwealth Secretariat
Council of Europe
Council of the European Union
Economic Community of West African States
European Commission
International Organization of La Francophonie
League of Arab States
North Atlantic Treaty Organization
Organization of African Unity
Organization of American States
Organization of the Islamic Conference
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe
Pacific Islands Forum
Presidency of the Council of the European Union
Southern African Development Community
United Nations organs
President of the General Assembly
President of the Security Council
President of the Economic and Social Council
United Nations agencies
International Monetary Fund
Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights
Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees
United Nations Children’s Fund
United Nations Development Fund for Women
United Nations Development Programme
United Nations Environment Programme
United Nations Office at Geneva
United Nations Office at Vienna
World Bank
World Food Programme

* As well as participating intergovernmental organizations.

7

S/2001/138

Regional Commissions
Economic Commission for Africa
Economic Commission for Europe
Economic Commission for Latin America and the Caribbean
Economic and Social Commission for Asia and the Pacific
Economic and Social Commission for Western Asia
United Nations Secretariat
Department for Disarmament Affairs
Department of Economic and Social Affairs
Department of Peacekeeping Operations
Department of Political Affairs
Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs
Office of the Special Representative of the Secretary-General for Children and
Armed Conflict
Under-Secretary-General for special assignments in support of the SecretaryGeneral’s preventive and peacekeeping efforts

8
