S/PV.8226

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-third year

8226th meeting

Tuesday, 10 April 2018, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Meza-Cuadra . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Peru)

Members:

Bolivia (Plurinational State of). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Côte d’Ivoire . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Equatorial Guinea. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ethiopia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kazakhstan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kuwait. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Netherlands. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Poland . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Sweden . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Llorentty Solíz
Mr. Wu Haitao
Mr. Bieke
Mr. Ndong Mba
Mr. Alemu
Mr. Delattre
Mr. Umarov
Mr. Alotaibi
Mr. Van Oosterom
Mr. Radomski
Mr. Polyanskiy
Mr. Orrenius Skau
Mr. Hickey
Ms. Tachco

Agenda
The question concerning Haiti
Report of the Secretary-General on the United Nations Mission for Justice
Support in Haiti (S/2018/241)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

18-10068 (E)
*1810068*

S/PV.8226

The question concerning Haiti

The meeting was called to order at 10.10 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The question concerning Haiti
Report of the Secretary-General on the
United Nations Mission for Justice Support in
Haiti (S/2018/241)
The President (spoke in Spanish): In accordance
with rule 37 of the Council’s provisional rules of
procedure, I invite the representative of Haiti to
participate in this meeting.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

Members of the Council have before them document
S/2018/286, which contains the text of a draft resolution
submitted by the United States of America.
I wish to draw the attention of Council members to
document S/2018/241, which contains the report of the
Secretary-General on the United Nations Mission for
Justice Support in Haiti.
The Council is ready to proceed to the vote on the
draft resolution before it. I shall put the draft resolution
to the vote now.
A vote was taken by show of hands.
In favour:
Bolivia (Plurinational State of), Côte d’Ivoire,
Equatorial Guinea, Ethiopia, France, Kazakhstan,
Kuwait, Netherlands, Peru, Poland, Sweden, United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland,
United States of America
Against:
None
Abstaining:
China, Russian Federation
The President (spoke in Spanish): The draft
resolution received 13 votes in favour, none against and
2 abstentions. The draft resolution has been adopted as
resolution 2410 (2018).
I now give the floor to those members of the
Council who wish to make statements after the voting.
2/7

10/04/2018

Ms. Tachco (United States of America): Today’s
resolution 2410 (2018), renewing the mandate of the
United Nations Mission for Justice Support in Haiti
(MINUJUSTH) for another year, is about Haiti. It is
about the continuing progress the country has made
towards security and stability. It is about adapting
the United Nations peacekeeping mission there to the
political and security situation on the ground. It is
about helping Haiti to develop the capacity to take the
lead in providing its own security and strengthening its
own institutions.
While some members of the Council may have tried
to sow confusion about what is standard peacekeeping
language in a Security Council mandate, the fact
remains that we are here today in support of Haiti
and of MINUJUSTH. Time and again, the Council
has expressed its support for equipping peacekeeping
missions with what is needed to protect civilians
around the world, and today is no different. With this
resolution, the Council reaffirms its support for the
Government of Haiti, for MINUJUSTH and for their
close cooperation with the United Nations country team
and all of the United Nations agencies working to build
a stronger Haiti. This will be key as MINUJUSTH to
transition to a non-peacekeeping presence in October
of 2019.
Mr. Polyanskiy (Russian Federation) (spoke
in Russian): I would like to begin my statement in
explanation of vote with words of support for Haiti and
our hopes that we will see it sustainably stabilized as
soon as possible. I am not going to repeat what I said a
week ago on the subject (see S/PV.8220), but will recall
only that almost all the speakers on 3 April noted the
encouraging developments in the situation in Haiti and
mentioned the possibility of the peacekeeping mission’s
gradual withdrawal and transfer of authority to the
Government of Haiti. The latest report (S/2018/241)
of the Secretary-General on the activities of the
United Nations Mission for Justice Support in Haiti
(MINUJUSTH) contained similar sentiments that
were affirmed by the Under-Secretary-General for
Peacekeeping Operations, Mr. Jean-Pierre Lacroix,
after his visit to Haiti.
Nevertheless, during the work on the draft of
resolution 2410 (2018) extending the mandate of the
Mission, we were surprised to find that the authors had
decided to toughen a key provision of the document
that had remained unchanged since the peacekeeping
presence in Haiti began in 2004, which is the reference
18-10068

10/04/2018

The question concerning Haiti

to the procedure for the application of Chapter VII of
the Charter of the United Nations, which provides for
the use of sanctions and military force. For the past 14
years, the peacekeeping presence in the country operated
under Chapter VII year after year, but its application
was carefully limited to the specific tasks of ensuring
the physical security of the civilian population and the
peacekeepers themselves. It has been done that way
in other cases as well, for example in resolution 2386
(2017), on Abyei, which, by the way, was also initiated
by our American colleagues. The new Mission in Haiti
is focused on helping the Government to strengthen its
own capacity and to monitor human rights.
This year, despite all the discussions about the
speedy transfer of the Mission’s functions to the host
Government, several Council members decided to
up the pressure and did so in an inexplicable hurry,
presenting the draft in blue more than a week before the
expiry of the Mission’s mandate. Why did the authors
not use that time to hold a thorough discussion and
find an acceptable consensus? I would like to ask those
who supported this approach what has changed in the
human rights situation, in a country where for a long
time there has been no armed conflict, so that it has
suddenly become a threat to international peace and
security. Or is this another attempt to use the Security
Council to put pressure on a sovereign State? It looks
very like yet another effort to speculate on the subject
of human rights in one of the world’s most important
international forums, established exclusively to discuss
the most dangerous threats to international peace. There
can be no question that the situation in Haiti bears no
relation to that.
I would like to remind the Council that a week ago,
most of those States advocated strengthening Haitians’
sense of national responsibility and the importance
of the Mission’s cooperation with the Government.
But in fact the resolution ignores the position of Portau-Prince on this crucial issue, which is well known,
since the Security Council visited Haiti very recently.
We also cannot help noticing the increasingly critical
attitude to the United Nations Mission on the part of
the people of Haiti. That is an extremely worrying fact
that should be attended to as a matter of priority. We
believe that such approaches will not contribute to the
effectiveness of the Mission’s work. We are already
seeing corresponding signs that are cause for concern.
It is good that Under-Secretary-General Lacroix knows
about the misunderstandings between the Head of

S/PV. 8226

the Mission and the host country, as he alluded to in
his statement.
There is one other worrying issue. A number of
delegations that regularly and publicly express their full
support for the United Nations zero-tolerance policy for
sexual crimes have refused to help to implement it. The
result is that the resolution overlooks crimes in which
representatives of non-governmental organizations
accredited to the United Nations are involved, despite
the fact that Haitian society has desperately urged the
international community to focus on the problem. We
have heard no intelligible explanations for such double
standards. In this regard, we appeal to the Mission
leadership and the Secretariat to inform the Council
of known flagrant cases, for which the necessary
tools exist.
Since we believe that international support is
critical to Haiti at this very important stage, we did
not decide to block the resolution in its current form.
The Mission will continue, in strict accordance with its
mandate, to provide assistance to the host country in
upholding the rule of law and strengthening the capacity
of its law-enforcement bodies. However, for the reasons
I have stated, we cannot support the resolution as it
is written. We insist that invoking Chapter VII of the
Charter of the United Nations, if it is even applicable to
the situation in Haiti, should be contemplated only as a
last resort for issues of physical safety.
In conclusion, I would like to point out that we are
unfortunately witnesses to the fact that in their attempts
to put pressure on everyone involved for no reason,
some well-known Council members have once again
ruined another consensus vote, despite the fact that
there are already too few topics on which the Council
has a united position. This time, colleagues decided to
toughen their position on a country where the situation
is evolving more or less positively, the United Nations
Mission is functioning and there are hopes that it can be
gradually drawn down. There is no way we can agree
with that approach. As a result, the significance of
today’s decision is seriously undermined. Was it worth
it? It might have been better to agree on a consensusbased resolution rather than moving it up by a week.
But regardless of that, we want to express our support to
Port-au-Prince and affirm that Russia will continue to
work to ensure that the results of the Security Council’s
efforts will help to truly normalize the situation in Haiti
and strengthen its sovereignty and self-sufficiency.

18-100683/7

S/PV.8226

The question concerning Haiti

Mr. Llorentty Solíz (Bolivia) (spoke in Spanish):
Bolivia, as a country committed to its region but above
all in the interest of responsibility and transparency,
would like to explain its vote today. We voted in favour
of resolution 2410 (2018), but would like to highlight
specific elements that were not considered by the
United States delegation, as penholder, with regard
to the renewal of the mandate of the United Nations
Mission in Support of Justice in Haiti (MINUJUSTH).
Those elements have already been expressed by some
delegations, including my own.
That is why, the resolution today to renew the
mandate of MINUJUSTH has not been adopted
unanimously, which is cause for concern given that it
does not send the right message to the Republic of Haiti,
to the Mission and to the international community, in
general. MINUJUSTH requires the full support of
the Council in order to fulfil its mandate, and Haiti
requires the effective support in order to tackle its
impending challenges.
Moreover, it is worrying that penholder States are
overstepping their boundaries without considering
the positions and opinions of other members of the
Security Council, not to mention those of the host
country. The resolution provides that the Security
Council shall act in accordance with Chapter VII of the
Charter of the United Nations for the entire mandate of
MINUJUSTH. The main argument for that is that in last
year’s resolution 2350 (2017), the Security Council was
already acting in line with Chapter VII. The fifteenth
preambular paragraph of that resolution states:
“Acting under Chapter VII of the Charter of
the United Nations, as described in section 1 of
operative paragraph 7 of resolution 1542 (2004),
and with regards to operative paragraphs 5 to 14
that relate to the new mission,”
The human rights component is included in
paragraph 6. Nevertheless, the term “relate to” implies
that the Security Council acts under Chapter VII only
with regard to section 1 of operative paragraph 7 of
resolution 1542 (2004), included between operative
paragraphs 5 and 14, whereas section 1 of operative
paragraph 7 of resolution 1542 (2004) was only in
reference to a secure and stable environment, that is,
acting under Chapter VII of the Charter of the United
Nations with regard to section 1. It subsequently states
that the United Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti
4/7

10/04/2018

will enjoy the following mandate in a secure and
stable environment.
We have been told that the resolution is about Haiti.
During the June 2017 Security Council visit to Haiti, the
President of Haiti, members of the Haitian Parliament
and various representatives of civil society expressly
requested that the mandate be governed by Chapter
VI of the Charter of the United Nations because, in
their view, Haiti is certainly not a threat to regional or
international peace and security.
We are confident that, in order to build trust
between the United Nations and Haiti, at the very least
the language used in previous resolutions of the past 14
years should have been used. Finally, we are convinced
that the current language used in the adopted resolution
must not set a precedent for future missions. Obviously,
it is concerning that the reality on the ground is not
taken into account and that resolutions are put to a vote
with the knowledge that there is no consensus.
Mr. Wu Haitao (China) (spoke in Chinese): At
present, the United Nations Mission in Support of
Justice in Haiti (MINUJUSTH) should focus on helping
the Haitian Government to shoulder the responsibility
of maintaining national security and ultimately achieve
an orderly drawdown, in line with the national interests
of Haiti and countries in the region.
China believes that the Security Council has the
primary responsibility of maintaining international
peace and security. Currently, the overall situation in
Haiti is stable. The mandate of MINUJUSTH should
be clear and explicit, with a focus on helping Haiti
to address peace and security challenges, rather than
focusing too much on human rights in Haiti. The
members of the Council should have carried out patient
consultations on the draft resolution. When some
members of the Council had concerns about the draft
text, the relevant parties should not have railroaded a
vote. The resolution just adopted on does not fully take
into account the legitimate concerns of some members.
China regrets that and therefore voted in
abstention. China hopes that the members of the
Council will continue to remain united, make sure that
the MINUJUSTH implements the two-year drawdown
strategy smoothly and strive to promote stability and
development in Haiti.
Mr. Delattre (France) (spoke in French): France
welcomes the adoption of resolution 2410 (2018),
18-10068

10/04/2018

The question concerning Haiti

renewing the mandate of the United Nations Mission
in Support of Justice in Haiti (MINUJUSTH) for one
year and setting the stage for its withdrawal with
a view to a transition in October 2019. Until then,
MINUJUSTH will pursue its mandate, based on three
pillars: strengthening the Haitian National Police,
consolidating the rule of law and monitoring the human
rights situation. We regret that the Mission did not
receive the Council’s unanimous consent, despite the
fact that we all support the objective of a stable and
prosperous Haiti.
MINUJUSTH’s
tasks
regarding
the
professionalization of justice and the training of police
represent the foundations of long-term stability and the
necessary conditions for the economic development
of Haiti. We encourage the Haitian authorities to
take advantage of this United Nations tool in order
to consolidate the country’s stability and improve the
people’s well-being. The prospect of meeting an exit
strategy by October 2019 should not paralyse us or affect
the remarkable work of men and women currently on the
ground. The benchmarks identified by the SecretaryGeneral, including those on the protection of the rights
of Haitian citizens, are a compass for guiding the work
of MINUJUSTH and the Haitian authorities. It is now
incumbent upon the Haitian State to take ownership of
those objectives in order to ensure the enduring success
of its cooperation with the United Nations. Haiti can
count upon the full support of France in that endeavour.

S/PV. 8226

anchored in Haiti’s long-term development, security
and political priorities.
MINUJUSTH cannot deliver that alone. Haitian
ownership and delivery of important reforms are
critical to a positive future for the people of Haiti.
We therefore repeat our call on the Government of
Haiti, MINUJUSTH and the United Nations country
team to work closely together to ensure that the solid
foundations exist for long-term political stability.
Mr. Alemu (Ethiopia): We welcome the adoption
of resolution 2410 (2018) renewing the mandate of the
United Nations Mission for Justice Support in Haiti
(MINUJUSTH). It is unfortunate that the resolution
could not be adopted by consensus, no doubt for good
reason. We had hoped that some of the concerns expressed
on the draft text, including the issues with regard to
invoking Chapter VII, could have been addressed. We
believe that has implications for future discussions, and
that is why we conveyed our concerns to the penholder,
together with other like-minded countries.

Mr. Hickey (United Kingdom): The United
Kingdom welcomes the adoption of resolution 2410
(2018) today and the renewal of the mandate of the
United Nations Mission for Justice Support in Haiti
(MINUJUSTH) for a further 12 months. As the United
States has made clear, today’s vote is not a reflection
of MINUJUSTH or the Government of Haiti. As we
set out on Tuesday (see S/PV.8220), we are committed
to the development of Haiti and an integrated United
Nations country presence. Progress against the exit
strategy over the final 18 months of the Mission will
enable a smooth transfer of tasks from MINUJUSTH to
the United Nations country team and the Government
of Haiti.

Of course, it would have been much better if we
had been able to send a strong and unified message
in support of Haiti. Nonetheless, we all agree that
the establishment of the Mission was indeed very
important to consolidating peace by strengthening the
institutions of justice and the rule of law, as well as
supporting the institutional and operational capacity of
the Haitian National Police. The renewal of its mandate
will enable it to continue assisting the Government in
strengthening rule of law institutions. We appreciate
the initiatives and efforts being undertaken by the
Mission to build the capacities of the Haitian Police
in strategic and operational planning, criminal
intelligence, investigations, organized crime, crime
scene management, recruitment, training, gender
mainstreaming, crowd control, information technology,
communications,
logistics
and
infrastructure
maintenance. However, we note the challenges being
faced in the area of justice and correction and the
efforts being made by MINUJUSTH to address them,
as highlighted in the report of the Secretary-General
(S/2018/241).

We believe strongly that MINUJUSTH must have
the tools it needs to make that transition a success,
and that includes continued authorization under
Chapter VII to use all necessary means to carry out
its mandate. In addition, progress must be measured
against the Secretary-General’s benchmarks and

We understand that Haiti still continues to face
enormous challenges and vulnerabilities. We hope the
new partnership established between Haiti and the
United Nations with the establishment of MINUJUSTH
will lay a solid foundation for the long-term stability
and sustainable development of Haiti.

18-100685/7

S/PV.8226

The question concerning Haiti

Mr. Ndong Mba (Equatorial Guinea) (spoke
in Spanish): The Republic of Equatorial Guinea
expresses its satisfaction with the renewal of the
mandate for the United Nations Mission for Justice
Support in Haiti (MINUJUSTH) in order to ensure
the strengthening of its State institutions over the next
12 months of the mandate. It will provide support to
Haiti’s administrative, legal and legislative institutions,
strengthen the rule of law; and help to fight crime and
promote good governance.
However, we express our concern with regard to
several of the Chapter VII provisions that have been
included in resolution 2410 (2018). We would have
preferred that priority had been given to the spirit of
trust between the support Mission and the Government
of Haiti and also that any disagreements could have
been solved through dialogue. In that light, we would
have preferred that those provisions would have been
included under Chapter VI. However, given the urgent
need to renew the Mission’s mandate, the Republic of
Equatorial Guinea voted in favour.
Mr. Van Oosterom (Netherlands) Haiti has in
recent years embarked upon a remarkable journey of
positive change. The country has made great strides
towards a stable political and security situation. That is
of direct importance to the Kingdom of the Netherlands,
as three constituent countries of our Kingdom — Saint
Martin, Aruba and Curaçao — are in the Caribbean and
we have many Haitian citizens living in these countries.
In our view, Haiti should now seize this opportunity
to further build and strengthen its public institutions to
ensure the rule of law and respect for human rights.
The United Nations Mission for Justice Support in
Haiti (MINUJUSTH) was set up to support the Haitian
Government and people with this ambition. We welcome
the adoption of resolution 2410 (2018), which extends
the existing mandate of MINUJUSTH and enables the
Mission to continue its important work in integrated way.
We therefore regret that the resolution could ultimately
not count on the unanimous support of the Council. We
express the hope that Haiti, in close partnership with
the Mission, and involving women at all levels, can and
will build a solid foundation for longer-term political
stability, security and inclusive development.
Mr. Radomski (Poland): Poland welcomes the
adoption of resolution 2410 (2018) extending the mandate
of the United Nations Mission for Justice Support in
Haiti (MINUJUSTH). However, it is unfortunate that
6/7

10/04/2018

we were not able to maintain the good practice of having
an anonymous adoption of a resolution that technically
rolls over the mandate. Poland voted in favour of the
resolution, hoping for the unity of the Council.
Another division of the Council sends a negative
message to a place that needs positive signals now, as
it is right in the middle of the process of transition. It
is time not to point fingers, but rather to find a way to
avoid such a situation in the future for the sake of the
Council’s credibility and efficiency.
Let me conclude with expressing once again our
satisfaction with the progress made by the Haitian
Government and its people in building a better future
for their country. We believe that further presence of
MINUJUSTH will support those efforts.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I will now take
the floor in my national capacity.
Peru welcomes the adoption of resolution 2410
(2018), extending the mandate of the United Nations
Mission for Justice Support in Haiti (MINUJUSTH)
for an additional year and laying the foundation for
the transition towards a normalization of the United
Nations presence in the post-peacekeeping period. In
that regard, we place our trust in the important work
being carried out by the Mission in support of the
Haitian Government in strengthening the rule of law,
professionalizing the police force and monitoring the
human rights situation.
We also believe that efforts in those areas should
be aimed at achieving the objectives identified by the
Secretary-General, which establish a road map for
stability, security and prosperity in Haiti. Despite the
lack of unanimity on resolution 2410 (2018), which we
have just adopted, we feel it is important to uphold the
commitment that we know exists among all members
of the Council with regard to the need to continue
to support Haiti. We cannot lose sight of the fact
that the responsibility of the Council is larger than
the mandate established for this Mission. We must
contribute to building a dynamic relationship of mutual
trust between the Government of Haiti and the United
Nations in general.
I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.
I give the floor to the representative of Haiti.
18-10068

10/04/2018

The question concerning Haiti

Mr. Régis (Haiti) (spoke in French): I wish to thank
you, Mr. President, for having granted me an opportunity
to voice the views of my delegation following the
adoption of resolution 2410 (2018), concerning the
United Nations Mission for Justice Support in Haiti
(MINUJUSTH). The document appears to align with
the approach set out in the report of the SecretaryGeneral (S/2018/241), dated 20 March 2018, and with
his largely positive appraisal of the situation in Haiti in
recent months.
My delegation notes that the first key element
of the text is the one-year renewal of the mandate of
MINUJUSTH until 15 April 2019. The second element
is the gradual drawdown, over several stages, of the
presence of the United Nations police, beginning
15 October 2018 and ending in April 2019. The third
element is a referral to the exit strategy, which is to
be spread out over a two-year period, based on an
assessment report to be submitted to the Council by the
Secretary-General. The fourth element is the conduct of
a strategic assessment mission in February 2019 to set
the stage for the withdrawal of the Mission in the light
of the benchmarks that have been jointly set out. The
fifth element is the design of a transition plan, including
a United Nations presence in Haiti to be comprised of
country teams, various funds, programmes and agencies
of the United Nations, working in close cooperation
with the Haitian Government.
My delegation deplores, however, the fact that the
recommendations delivered through Member States of

S/PV. 8226

the Council were not taken into account, all the more so
given that the addressee of the resolution is the Haitian
Government. We see an example of that in the tenth
preambular paragraph, in the first operational provision
of the text and, more broadly speaking, in the reference
to Chapter VII of the Charter of the United Nations,
despite the unanimous view that MINUJUSTH is
a mission of support and technical assistance for the
national institutions responsible for upholding the rule
of law in Haiti.
The Haitian Government has had extensive
experience in cooperating with the United Nations in
general, and with the Security Council in particular.
Over the course of the months to come, and in the
operations and initiatives of MINUJUSTH in Haiti, my
delegation hopes to see the development of harmonious
relations with the Mission at all levels. To echo the
Under-Secretary-General for Peacekeeping Operations,
it is important to maintain a healthy relationship
with the public authorities and the population, based
on solidarity and mutual trust. In that regard, my
delegation welcomes the adoption of resolution 2410
(2018). However, it expresses reservations vis-à-vis the
preamble and the provisions that, although they did not
receive the necessary consensus, have been included
in the text. We are particularly concerned about the
reference to Chapter VII of the Charter.
The meeting rose at 10.45 a.m.

18-100687/7
