United Nations

A/RES/62/184

General Assembly

Distr.: General
31 January 2008

Sixty-second session
Agenda item 52 (a)

Resolution adopted by the General Assembly on 19 December 2007
[on the report of the Second Committee (A/62/417/Add.1)]

62/184. International trade and development
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 56/178 of 21 December 2001, 57/235 of 20 December
2002, 58/197 of 23 December 2003, 59/221 of 22 December 2004, 60/184 of
22 December 2005 and 61/186 of 20 December 2006 on international trade and
development, and recalling also the provisions of the United Nations Millennium
Declaration 1 pertaining to trade and related development issues, as well as the
outcomes of the International Conference on Financing for Development, 2 the World
Summit on Sustainable Development 3 and the 2005 World Summit Outcome, 4
0F

1F

2F

3F

Recalling also its resolution 60/265 of 30 June 2006 on follow-up to the
development outcome of the 2005 World Summit, including the Millennium
Development Goals and other internationally agreed development goals,
Reaffirming the value of multilateralism to the global trading system and the
commitment to achieving a universal, rule-based, open, non-discriminatory and
equitable multilateral trading system that contributes to growth, sustainable
development and employment generation in all sectors, and emphasizing that
bilateral and regional trading arrangements should contribute to the goals of the
multilateral trading system,
Stressing the importance of open, transparent, inclusive, democratic and more
orderly processes and procedures for the effective functioning of the multilateral
trading system, including in the decision-making process, so as to enable developing
countries to have their vital interests duly reflected in the outcome of trade
negotiations,

_______________
1

See resolution 55/2.
Report of the International Conference on Financing for Development, Monterrey, Mexico, 18-22 March
2002 (United Nations publication, Sales No. E.02.II.A.7), chap. I, resolution 1, annex.
3
Report of the World Summit on Sustainable Development, Johannesburg, South Africa, 26 August–
4 September 2002 (United Nations publication, Sales No. E.03.II.A.1 and corrigendum), chap. I, resolution
1, annex, and resolution 2, annex.
4
See resolution 60/1.
2

07-47481

A/RES/62/184

Reiterating that development concerns form an integral part of the Doha
Development Agenda, which places the needs and interests of developing and least
developed countries at the heart of the Doha Work Programme, 5
4F

Noting that agriculture lags behind the manufacturing sector in the process of
establishment of multilateral disciplines and in the reduction of tariff and non-tariff
barriers and that, since most of the world’s poor make their living from agriculture,
the livelihood and standards of living of many of them are seriously jeopardized by
the serious distortions in production and trade in agricultural products caused by the
high levels of export subsidies, trade-distorting domestic support and protectionism
by many developed countries,
Taking note of the report of the Trade and Development Board 6 as well as the
report of the Secretary-General, 7
5F

6F

1.
Expresses serious concern at the lack of substantial progress on the trade
negotiations of the World Trade Organization and considers it a serious setback for
the Doha Round, and calls upon the developed countries to demonstrate the
flexibility and political will necessary for breaking the current impasse in the
negotiations, and also calls upon all members of the World Trade Organization to
adhere to the development mandate of the Doha Ministerial Declaration,5 the
decision of the General Council of the World Trade Organization of 1 August 2004 8
and the Hong Kong Ministerial Declaration, 9 which places development at the heart
of the multilateral trading system;
7F

8F

2.
Stresses that in order for the Doha Round to be concluded satisfactorily,
the negotiations should result in the establishment of rules and disciplines in the
area of agriculture, adhering to the development mandate of the Doha Ministerial
Declaration, the decision of the General Council of the World Trade Organization of
1 August 2004 and the Hong Kong Ministerial Declaration;
Also stresses the need for negotiations of the World Trade Organization
3.
in non-agricultural market access to live up to the development mandate of the Doha
Ministerial Declaration, the decision of the General Council of the World Trade
Organization of 1 August 2004 and the Hong Kong Ministerial Declaration;
Further stresses the need for negotiations of the World Trade
4.
Organization to make substantial progress in all areas under the single undertaking
such as services, rules and trade facilitation so as to ensure that the development
concerns of developing countries are fully reflected in any outcome consistent with
the development mandate of the Doha Ministerial Declaration, the decision of the
General Council of the World Trade Organization of 1 August 2004 and the Hong
Kong Ministerial Declaration;
Underlines the fact that the increasing interdependence of national
5.
economies in a globalizing world and the emergence of rule-based regimes for
international economic relations have meant that the space for national economic
policy, that is, the scope for domestic policies, especially in the areas of trade,
_______________
5

See A/C.2/56/7, annex.
A/62/15 (Parts I-IV) and corrigenda. For the final text, see Official Records of the General Assembly,
Sixty-second Session, Supplement No. 15.
7
A/62/266.
8
World Trade Organization, document WT/L/579. Available from http://docsonline.wto.org.
9
World Trade Organization, document WT/MIN(05)/DEC. Available from http://docsonline.wto.org.
6

2

A/RES/62/184

investment and industrial development, is now often framed by international
disciplines, commitments and global market considerations, that it is for each
Government to evaluate the trade-off between the benefits of accepting international
rules and commitments and the constraints posed by the loss of policy space, and
that it is particularly important for developing countries that all countries take into
account the need for appropriate balance between national policy space and
international disciplines and commitments;
Expresses its deep concern at the imposition of laws and other forms of
6.
coercive economic measures including unilateral sanctions against developing
countries, which undermine international law and the rules of the World Trade
Organization, and also severely threaten the freedom of trade and investment;
Reaffirms the commitments made at the Fourth Ministerial Conference of
7.
the World Trade Organization5 and at the Third United Nations Conference on the
Least Developed Countries, 10 in this regard calls upon developed countries that have
not already done so to provide immediate predictable, duty-free and quota-free
market access on a lasting basis to all products originating from all least developed
countries by 2008, also calls upon developing countries that are in a position to do
so to extend duty-free and quota-free market access to exports of these countries,
and in this context reaffirms also the need to consider additional measures for
progressive improvement in market access for least developed countries, and
reaffirms further the need for members of the World Trade Organization to take
additional measures to provide effective market access both at the border and
otherwise, including simplified and transparent rules of origin so as to facilitate
exports from least developed countries;
9F

Also reaffirms the commitment to actively pursue the work programme of
8.
the World Trade Organization with respect to addressing the trade-related issues and
concerns affecting the fuller integration of countries with small, vulnerable
economies into the multilateral trading system in a manner commensurate with their
special circumstances and in support of their efforts towards sustainable
development, in accordance with paragraph 35 of the Doha Ministerial Declaration
and paragraph 21 of the Hong Kong Ministerial Declaration;
Recognizes the special problems and needs of the landlocked developing
9.
countries within a new global framework for transit transport cooperation for
landlocked and transit developing countries, calls, in this regard, for the full and
effective implementation of the Almaty Programme of Action, 11 and stresses the
need for the implementation of the São Paulo Consensus, 12 in particular
paragraphs 66 and 84 thereof, by the relevant international organizations and donors
in a multi-stakeholder approach;
10F

1F

10. Also recognizes the need to ensure that the comparative advantage of
developing countries is not undermined by any form of protectionism, including the
arbitrary and abusive use of non-tariff measures, non-trade barriers and other
standards to unfairly restrict the access of products of developing countries
particularly to developed countries’ markets, reaffirms, in this regard, that

_______________
10

See A/CONF.191/13.
Report of the International Ministerial Conference of Landlocked and Transit Developing Countries and
Donor Countries and International Financial and Development Institutions on Transit Transport
Cooperation, Almaty, Kazakhstan, 28 and 29 August 2003 (A/CONF.202/3), annex I.
12
TD/412, part II.
11

3

A/RES/62/184

developing countries should play an increasing role in the formulation of, inter alia,
safety, environment and health standards, and recognizes the need to facilitate the
increased and meaningful participation of the developing countries in the work of
relevant international standard-setting organizations;
11. Further recognizes that South-South trade should be enhanced and
further market access should continue to stimulate South-South trade;
12. Recognizes the role that a successful conclusion of the ongoing third
round of negotiations on the Global System of Trade Preferences among Developing
Countries can play in South-South trade;
13. Calls for accelerating the work on the development-related mandate
concerning the Agreement on Trade-related Aspects of Intellectual Property Rights 13
in the Doha Ministerial Declaration, especially on issues of making intellectual
property rules fully support the objectives of the Convention on Biological
Diversity; 14 and the issues related to the Agreement and public health afflicting
many developing countries, including the least developed countries, especially those
issues arising from the HIV/AIDS, tuberculosis, malaria and other epidemics;
12F

13F

14. Requests the Secretary-General to present in his report on the
implementation of the present resolution the options available with respect to
enhancing the role of the United Nations in accelerating the work on the
development agenda of the Agreement on Trade-related Aspects of Intellectual
Property Rights;
15. Calls for facilitating the accession of all developing countries that apply
for membership in the World Trade Organization, in particular the least developed
countries, as well as countries emerging from conflict that are least developed
countries, bearing in mind paragraph 21 of resolution 55/182 of 20 December 2000
and subsequent developments, and also calls for the effective and faithful
application of the World Trade Organization guidelines on accession by the least
developed countries;
16. Emphasizes the need for further work to foster greater coherence between
the multilateral trading system and the international financial system, and invites the
United Nations Conference on Trade and Development, in fulfilment of its mandate,
to undertake the relevant policy analysis in those areas and to operationalize such
work, including through its technical assistance activities;
17. Invites donors and beneficiary countries to implement the
recommendations of the Task Force on the Aid for Trade Initiative established by
the Director-General of the World Trade Organization, which aims to support
developing and least developed countries in building their supply and export
capacities, including infrastructure and institutions development, and the need to
increase their exports, and stresses in this regard the urgent need for its effective
operationalization with sufficient additional, non-conditional and predictable
funding;
18. Welcomes the effort being made for operationalization of the Enhanced
Integrated Framework for Trade-related Technical Assistance to Least Developed
Countries with increased additional, non-conditional and predictable financial
_______________
13
See Legal Instruments Embodying the Results of the Uruguay Round of Multilateral Trade Negotiations,
done at Marrakesh on 15 April 1994 (GATT secretariat publication, Sales No. GATT/1994-7).
14
United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 1760, No. 30619.

4

A/RES/62/184

resources to enhance the export and supply capacities of the least developed
countries, and urges the development partners to increase their contributions to the
Integrated Framework Trust Fund on a multi-year basis;
19. Reiterates the important role of the United Nations Conference on Trade
and Development as the focal point within the United Nations system for the
integrated treatment of trade and development and interrelated issues in the areas of
finance, technology, investment and sustainable development, and calls upon the
international community to work towards the strengthening of the Conference, to
enable it to enhance its contribution in its three major pillars, namely, consensusbuilding, research and policy analysis, and technical assistance, especially through
increased core resources of the Conference;
20. Welcomes the convening of the twelfth session of the United Nations
Conference on Trade and Development in Accra from 20 to 25 April 2008, and
looks forward to the discussion aimed at addressing the opportunities and challenges
of globalization for development, especially for developing countries;
21. Invites the United Nations Conference on Trade and Development, in
accordance with its mandate, to monitor and assess the evolution of the international
trading system and of trends in international trade from a development perspective,
and, in particular, to analyse issues of concern to developing countries, supporting
them in building capacities to establish their own negotiating priorities and
negotiate trade agreements, including under the Doha Work Programme;5
22. Reaffirms the fundamental role that competition law and policy can play
for sound economic development and the validity of the Set of Multilaterally Agreed
Equitable Principles and Rules for the Control of Restrictive Business Practices, 15 as
well as the important and useful role that the United Nations Conference on Trade
and Development plays in this field, and decides to convene in 2010, under the
auspices of the United Nations Conference on Trade and Development, a sixth
United Nations conference to review all aspects of the Set;
14F

23. Urges donors to provide the United Nations Conference on Trade and
Development with the increased resources necessary to deliver effective and
demand-driven assistance to developing countries, as well as to enhance their
contributions to the trust funds of the Integrated Framework for Trade-related
Technical Assistance to Least Developed Countries and the Joint Integrated
Technical Assistance Programme;
24. Requests the Secretary-General, in collaboration with the secretariat of
the United Nations Conference on Trade and Development, to submit to the General
Assembly at its sixty-third session a report on the implementation of the present
resolution and on developments in the multilateral trading system, under the
sub-item entitled “International trade and development” of the item entitled
“Macroeconomic policy questions”;
25. Also requests the Secretary-General to transmit the present resolution to
the Director-General of the World Trade Organization for circulation as an official
document of the World Trade Organization.
78th plenary meeting
19 December 2007
_______________
15

A/C.2/35/6, annex.

5
