S/PRST/2009/19

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
9 July 2009
Original: English

Statement by the President of the Security Council
At the 6158th meeting of the Security Council, held on 9 July 2009, in
connection with the Council’s consideration of the item entitled “The situation in
Somalia”, the President of the Security Council made the following statement on
behalf of the Council:
“The Security Council reiterates its previous resolutions and Presidential
Statements on Somalia, in particular its resolution 1872, which reaffirmed the
Djibouti Agreement as the basis for a resolution of the conflict in Somalia.
“The Security Council reiterates its support for the Djibouti Peace
Process outlined in the Transitional Federal Charter, which provides a
framework for reaching a lasting political solution in Somalia. The Security
Council reaffirms its support for the Transitional Federal Government as the
legitimate authority in Somalia under the Transitional Federal Charter and
notes the declaration on 22 June of a State of Emergency as a result of the
recent renewal in fighting led by al-Shabaab and other violent opposition
groups, which constitutes an attempt to remove that legitimate authority by
force. The Security Council also reiterates its support for the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, Mr. Ahmedou Ould-Abdallah, for his
efforts towards advancing the political process in Somalia.
“The Security Council condemns the recent attacks on the Transitional
Federal Government and the civilian population by armed groups and foreign
fighters who undermine peace and stability in Somalia. The Security Council
reaffirms its demand of 15 May 2009 that violent opposition groups
immediately end their offensive, put down their arms, renounce violence and
join reconciliation efforts. The Security Council condemns the flow of foreign
fighters into Somalia.
“The Security Council deplores the loss of life in Somalia and the
deteriorating humanitarian situation, which has resulted in increased flows of
refugees and internally displaced persons, threatening stability in the region.
The Security Council calls on all parties to abide by their obligations under
international humanitarian law, in particular to respect the security of civilians,
humanitarian workers and AMISOM personnel.
“The Security Council reaffirms that Somalia’s long-term security rests
with the effective development by the TFG of the National Security Force and
the Somali Police Force, in the framework of the Djibouti Agreement and in

09-39871 (E) 090709

*0939871*

S/PRST/2009/19

line with a national security strategy, and urges the international community to
support the Somali security institutions, including through training and
equipping.
“The Security Council commends the contribution of the AMISOM to
lasting peace and stability in Somalia, expresses its continued appreciation for
the commitment of troops to AMISOM by the Governments of Uganda and
Burundi, and condemns any hostilities towards AMISOM. In this context the
Security Council welcomes the decision by the African Union Summit at Sirte
on 3 July to increase AMISOM’s strength to its mandated troop levels and its
call for AU member states to provide the necessary military and police
personnel.
“The Security Council takes note of the decision of the African Union
summit in Sirte, calling on the Council to impose sanctions against those,
including Eritrea, providing support to the armed groups engaged in
undermining peace and reconciliation in Somalia and regional stability. The
Security Council is deeply concerned in this regard and will consider
expeditiously what action to take against any party undermining the Djibouti
Peace Process, based on all available evidence including that submitted to the
Monitoring Group and the Committee established pursuant to SCR 751
(1992).”

2

09-39871
