24

General Assembly-Thirty-sixth Session

36/80.

Co-operation between the United Nations and
the Organization of African Unity

12 December 1975, 31/63 of 10 December 1976. 32/194
of 20 December 1977, 33/ l 7 of I O November 1978, 34/20
of 9 November 1979 and 35/ I 16 of IO December 1980.
Taking note of the letter dated 4 November 1981 from
the President of the Third United Nations Conference on
the Law of the Sea to the President of the General Assembly, 39 informing the latter of the decisions adopted by
the Conference regarding the holding of its eleventh session
from 8 March to 30 April 1982, the possibility of extending
the formal work of the Conference beyond that date, should
the formal decision-making stage have started, the meeting
of the Drafting Committee of the Conference from 18 January to 26 February 1982, the provision of facilities for the
Group of Seventy-seven to meet prior to the eleventh session, from 3 to 5 March 1982, and the arrangements for the
signature of the Final Act and the opening of the Convention
for signature,
Taking note also of the report of the Secretary-GeneraJ 40
regarding the establishment of a scholarship under the Hamilton Shirley Amerasinghe Fellowship on the Law of the
Sea, in recognition of the unique contribution made by the
late President of the Conference to the work of the
Conference,
Taking note further of the decision of the Conference
requesting the Secretary-General to continue the study on
the future functions of the Secretary-General under the draft
Convention and on the needs of countries, especially developing countries, for information, advice and assistance
under the new legal regime,
1. Approves the convening of the eleventh, final decision-making, session of the Third United Nations Conference on the Law of the Sea, in New York. for the period
from 8 March to 30 April 1982;
2. Authorizes the Conference to extend its work beyond
30 April 1982, in consultation with the Secretary-General,
exclusively for the purpose of completing its work. should
the formal stage of adoption of the Convention, of the text
of the draft resolution on the establishment of the Preparatory Commission, of the Final Act and of other pertinent
decisions have started and more time be needed to finish
the decision-making process;
3. Approves also the convening of the Drafting Committee of the Conference in New York from 18 January to
26 February 1982;
4. Recommends that the Secretary-General should provide the necessary facilities for informal consultations to
delegations participating in the Conference, in particular to
the members of the Group of Seventy-seven:
5. Requests the Secretary-General to consult the Government of Venezuela in order to arrange for the signature
of the Final Act and the opening of the Convention for
signature at Caracas in early September 1982;
6. Invites the Governments of States participating in the
Conference, as well as universities, philanthropic foundations and other interested national and international institutions and organizations, to contribute to the Hamilton
Shirley Amerasinghe Fellowship on the Law of the Sea in
the form recommended by the Secretary-General in his
report.
90th plenary meeting
9 December I 9R I

The General Assemb/_Y,
Having considered the report of the Secretary-General on
co-operation between the United Nations and the Organization of African Unity. 41
Recalling its previous resolutions on the promotion of cooperation between the United Nations and the Organization
of African Unity and the practical measures taken for their
implementation, in particular resolution 35/117 of 10 December 1980,
Taking note of the relevant resolutions, decisions and
declarations adopted by the Council of Ministers of the
Organization of African Unity at its thirty-seventh ordinary
session and by the Assembly of Heads of State and Government of that organization at its eighteenth ordinary session, which were held at Nairobi from 15 to 27 June I 981, 41
Considering the important statement made by the current
Chairman of the Assembly of Heads of State and Government of the Organization of African Unity before the General Assembly on 24 September 1981, 4 ~ particularly on
matters of concern to the two organizations,
Noting with satisfaction the continued co-operation between the United Nations and the Organization of African
Unity in areas of common interest,
Deeply conscious of the special needs of the newly independent African States, particularly with regard to the
consolidation of their national independence, their endeavours towards social and economic betterment and the adverse impact on their economies of the current international
economic situation,
Gravelv concerned about the adverse effect on African
economies of the current international economic situation,
Recalling in this connexion the Lagos Plan of Action for
the Implementation of the Monrovia Strategy for the Economic Development of Africa, adopted by the Assembly
of Heads of State and Government of the Organization of
African Unity at its second extraordinary session, held at
Lagos on 28 and 29 April 1980, 44
Recognizing the need for closer co-operation between the
Organization of African Unity and all specialized organs.
organizations and bodies of the United Nations system in
realizing the goals and objectives set forth in the Lagos Plan
of Action,
Convinced that the attendance at the International Conference on Assistance to Refugees in Africa, held at Geneva
on 9 and I O April 1981, bears evidence to the fact that the
Conference drew international public attention to the grave
situation and massive needs of African refugees, 45
Gravely concerned also at the need for special economic
and emergency assistance programmes for a number of
African States which face serious economic problems, in
particular problems of displaced persons, resulting from
natural or other disasters, to enable them to pursue effective
economic development,
Gravely concerned further at the deteriorating situation
in southern Africa arising from the continued domination
of the peoples of the area by the minority racist regime of
South Africa and conscious of the need to provide increased

'° Ibid., Thirtv-sixth Session. Annexes. agenda item 28. document .\
36/659.
40
A/36/697.

" A/36/317 and Add. I and 2.
"·' A/36/534. annexes I and II.
·" OJjicia! Records o(the Ge11aa! Anemhlv, Thirrv-si.,rh Session, Plenun Meelill!!,S. 11 th meeling, para,. 2-64. ·
"·' A/S-1 I 114, annex 1
.,, See A(l6i.1 ii,

II.

Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

assistance to the peoples of the region and to their liberation
movements in their struggle against colonialism, racial discrimination and apartheid,
Conscious of its responsibilities to provide economic,
material and humanitarian assistance to independent States
in southern Africa to help them to cope with the situation
caused by the acts of aggression committed against their
territories by the apartheid regime of South Africa,
Recognizing the importance of taking effective steps to
give the widest possible dissemination of information relating to the liberation struggle of the peoples of southern
Africa,
Recognizing the need for continuous liaison, exchange
of information at the secretariat level and technical co-operation on such matters as training and research between the
Organization of African Unity and the United Nations,
Having considered the report of the Secretary-General on
the meeting between representatives of the General Secretariat of the Organization of African Unity and the secretariats of the United Nations and other organizations of the
United Nations system, held at Geneva from 13 to 16 April
1981, 46
Notin_g with satisfaction the useful decisions and proposals which emerged from the Geneva meeting for enhancing
co-operation between the United Nations and the Organization of African Unity ,47
I. Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General on
co-operation between the United Nations and the Organization of African Unity 48 and commends his efforts in
strengthening such co-operation;
2. Notes with appreciation the increasing participation
of the Organization of African Unity in the work of the
United Nations and the specialized agencies and its constructive contribution to that work;
3 . . Comm~nds the continued _efforts of the Organization
of Afncan Umty to promote multtlateral co-operation among
African States and to find solutions to African problems of
vital importance to the international community and notes
with satisfaction the increased collaboration of various
United Nations agencies in support of those efforts;
4. Reiterates the determination of the United Nations
in co-operation with the Organization of African Unity, t~
intensify its efforts to eliminate colonialism, racial discrimination and apartheid in southern Africa;
5. Approves the decisions, recommendations, proposals
and arrangements contained in the conclusions of the Geneva meeting of representatives of the General Secretariat
of the Organization of African Unity and the secretariats of
the United Nations and other organizations of the United
Nations system; 47
6. Calls upon the competent organizations and bodies
of the United Nations system to give urgent consideration
to the vario~s recommendations and proposals contained in
the concl~s10ns of the _Geneva meeting with the objective
of enhancmg co-operation between the United Nations system and the Organization of African Unity;
. 7. Calls upon the competent organs, specialized agencies and other or~anizations of the United Nations system
t~ ensure tha~ thelf personnel and recruitment policies provide for the Just and equitable representation of Africa at
a~l levels at their respective headquarters and in their regional and field operations and to give due consideration
to the various suggestions and proposals in the relevant

46

A/36/3 I 7.

47

Ibid., sect. IV.

48

A/36/317 and Add. I and 2.

25

paragraphs of the conclusions and recommendations of the
meeting;
8. Recommends that the pertinent organs and organizations of the United Nations system should take into account the various recommendations and proposals of the
Geneva meeting in the fields of information, research and
training;
9. Requests the Secretary-General, in consultation with
the Secretary-General of the Organization of African Unity,
to arrange for the next meeting between representatives of
the General Secretariat of that organization and the secretariats of the United Nations and other organizations of the
United Nations system to be held at Rome in April 1982,
as called for in the conclusions of the meeting held at Nairobi
in June 1980;
10. Recognizes the importance of continued close association by the United Nations and the specialized agencies, where appropriate, with the efforts of the Organization
of African Unity to promote social and economic development and to advance intra-African co-operation in this
vital field;
11. Reaffirms the determination of the United Nations
to work closely with the Organization of African Unity
towards the establishment of the new international economic
order in accordance with the resolutions adopted by the
General Assembly and, in that regard, to take full account
of the Lagos Plan of Action for the Implementation of the
Monrovia Strategy for the Economic Development of Africa
in the implementation of the International Development
Strategy for the Third United Nations Development Decade; 49
12. Reiterates its appreciation to the Secretary-General
fu his efforts, on behalf of the international community,
to organize and mobilize special economic assistance programmes for African States experiencing grave economic
difficulties, in particular for newly independent African
States and the front-line States, to help them to cope with
the situation caused by the acts of aggression committed
against their territories by the apartheid regime of South
Africa;
13. Calls upon all Member States, regional and international organizations and organizations of the United
Nations system to participate actively in the implementation
of those special economic assistance programmes;
14. Requests the Secretary-General to keep the Organization of African Unity informed periodically of the response of the international community to those programmes
and to co-ordinate efforts with all similar programmes initiated by the Organization of African Unity;
15. Requests the Secretary-General and the organizatio~s. ?f the United _Nations system to ensure that adequate
f~c~ht1es shall ~ontmu~ to be made available for the provision of techmcal assistance to the General Secretariat of
the Organization of African Unity as required;
16. Requests the Secretary-General to continue to take
che necessary measures to strengthen co-operation at the
political, economic, cultural and administrative levels between the United Nations and the Organization of African
Unity in accordance with the relevant resolutions of the
Gener_al Assembly, particularly with regard to the provision
of assistance to the victims of colonialism and apartheid in
south~rn Africa,_ and in _this connexion draws once again the
attention of the mternat1onal community to the need to contrib_utt? to the Assistance Fund for the Struggle against Colomahsm and Apartheid established by the Organization of
African Unity;

'" Resolution 35/56. annex.

26

General Assembly-Thirty-sixth Session

17. Calls upon all Member States and organizations of
the United Nations system to increase theii assistance to the
African States affected by serious economic problems, in
particular problems of displaced ~r_sons, re~ulting fro~
natural or other disasters, by mob1hzmg special economic
and emergency assistance programmes;
18. Calls upon all Member States and regional and_ international organizations, in particular those ?f t?e Um~ed
Nations system, and non-governmental orgamzatlons to mcrease substantially their aid to refugees in Africa;
19. Requests the Department of Public Information of
the Secretariat and all the specialized agencies and other
organizations of the United Nations system to give wider
publicity and intensify the dissemination of information_ on
social and economic development matters concerning Africa;
20. Calls upon United Nations bodies, in particular the
Security Council, the Economic and Social Council, the
Special Committee on the Situation with regard to the Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples, the Special
Committee against Apartheid and the United Nations Council for Namibia, to continue to associate closely the Organization of African Unity with all their work concerning
Africa;
21. Urges the specialized agencies and the other organizations concerned within the United Nations system to
continue and expand their co-operation with the Organization of African Unity and, through it, their assistance to
the liberation movements recognized by that organization;
22. Requests the Secretary-General to submit to the
General Assembly at its thirty-seventh session a report on
the implementation of the present resolution and on the
development of co-operation between the Organization of
African Unity and the organizations concerned within the
United Nations system.
90th plenary meeting
9 December /98/

36/105. Question of the Comorian island of Mayotte
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 1514 (XV) of 14 December
1960, containing the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples, and 2621
(XXV) of 12 October 1970, containing the programme of
action for the full implementation of the Declaration,
Recalling also its previous resolutions, in particular resolutions 3161 (XXVIII) of 14 December 1973, 3291 (XXIX)
of 13 December 1974, 31/4 of 21 October 1976, 32/7 of
1 November 1977, 34/69 of 6 December 1979 and 35/43
of 28 November 1980, in which it, inter alia, affirmed the
unity and territorial integrity of the Comoros,
Recalling, in particular, its resolution 3385 (XXX) of 12
November 1975 on the admission of the Comoros to membership in the United Nations, in which it reaffirmed the
necessity of respecting the unity and territorial integrity of
the Comoro Archipelago, composed of the islands of Anjouan, Grande-Comore, Mayotte and Moheli,
Recalling further that, in accordance with the agreements
signed on 15 June 1973 between the Comoros and France
concerning the accession of the Comoros to independence,
the results of the referendum of 22 December 1974 were
to be considered on a global basis and not island by island,
Convinced that a just and lasting solution to the question
of Mayotte is to be found in respect for the sovereignty.
unity and territorial integrity of the Comoro Archipelago,

Taking note of the talks opened between the Government
of the lslamic Federal Republic of the Comoros and the
Government of the French Republic,
Taking note of the report of the Secretary-General, 50
Bearing in mind the decisions of the ~rganization _of
African Unity, the Movement of Non-Ahgned Countnes
and the Organization of the Islamic Conference concerning
this question,
I. Reaffirms the sovereignty of the Islamic Federal Republic of the Comoros over the island of Mayotte;
2. Invites the Government of France to honour the commitments entered into prior to the referendum on the selfdetermination of the Comoro Archipelago <'f 22 December
1974 concerning respect for the unity and territorial integrity
of the Comoros;
3. Also invites the Goven,ment of France to resume and
actively pursue the negotiations with the Government of the
Comoros with a view to ensuring the effective return of the
island of Mayotte to the Comoros as soon as possible;
4. Requests the Secretary-General of the United Nations
to follow developments concerning this question, in conjunction with the Secretary-General of the Organization of
African Unity, and to report thereon to the General Assembly at its thirty-seventh session;
5. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its
thirty-seventh session the item entitled "Question of the
Comorian island of Mayotte".
92nd plenary meeting
JO December 198/

36/120.

Question of Palestine
A

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 3376 (XXX) of 10 November
1975, 31120 of 24 November 1976, 32/40 A and B of 2
December 1977, 33128 A to C of 7 December 1978, 34/65
A and B of 29 November 1979, 34/65 C and D of 12
December 1979, ES-7 /2 of 29 July 1980 and 35/ 169 A to
E of 15 December 1980,
Having considered the report of the Committee on the
Exercise of the Inalienable Rights of the Palestinian People, 51
I. Expresses its appreciation to the Committee on the
Exercise of the Inalienable Rights of the Palestinian People
for its efforts in performing the tasks assigned to it by the
General Assembly;
2. Requests the Committee to keep the situation relating
to the question of Palestine under review and to report and
make suggestions to the General Assembly or the Security
Council, as appropriate;
3. Authorizes the Committee to continue to exert all
efforts to promote the implementation of its recommendations, to send delegations or representatives to international
conferences where such representation would be considered
by it to be appropriate, and to report thereon to the General
Assembly at its thirty-seventh session and thereafter;
4. Requests the United Nations Conciliation Commission for Palestine, established under General Assembly resolution 194 (III) of 11 December 1948, as well as other
United Nations bodies associated with the question of Palestine, to co-operate fully with the Committee and to make
available to it, at its request, the relevant information and
documentation which they have at their disposal;

'

0

N36/67I.
