S/PV.7815

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-first year

7815

th meeting
Thursday, 17 November 2016, 9 p.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Seck . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Senegal)

Members:

Angola. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Egypt. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Japan. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Malaysia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
New Zealand. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Spain. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ukraine. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Uruguay. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Gimolieca
Mr. Shen Bo
Mr. Moustafa
Mrs. Gueguen Mohsen
Mr. Akahori
Mrs. Adnin
Mr. Van Bohemen
Mr. Safronkov
Mr. Gasso Matoses
Mr. Yelchenko
Mr. Wilson
Ms. Power
Mrs. Carrión
Mr. Suárez Moreno

Agenda
The situation in the Middle East

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

16-39030 (E)
*1639030*

S/PV.7815

The situation in the Middle East

The meeting was called to order at 9 p.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in the Middle East
The President (spoke in French): The Security
Council will now begin its consideration of the item on
its agenda.
Members of the Council have before them document
S/2016/974, which contains the text of a draft resolution
submitted by the United States of America.
The Council is ready to proceed to the vote on the
draft resolution before it. I shall put the draft resolution
to the vote now.
A vote was taken by show of hands.
In favour:
Angola, China, Egypt, France, Japan, Malaysia,
New Zealand, Russian Federation, Senegal, Spain,
Ukraine, United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland, United States of America,
Uruguay and Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of)
The President (spoke in French): The draft
resolution received 15 votes in favour. The draft
resolution has been adopted unanimously as resolution
2319 (2016).
I now give the floor to those members of the Council
who wish to make statements after the vote.
Ms. Power (United States of America): I would like
to start by thanking Council members for the extension
that allowed us to work intensively over these last
couple weeks with the Russian Federation to secure the
text that we have just voted on unanimously today, and
I offer my sincere thanks for the spirit in which Russia
carried out these negotiations. The stakes on this matter
could not be higher.
The eyewitness accounts often start the same way.
Helicopters buzzing overhead. Barrel bombs shoved
out, only to land without an explosion. Leith Fares, a
first responder in Idlib, Syria, recalled at first feeling
relieved when one of these bombs did not detonate on
16 March 2015. “It is usually good news when there is
no explosion”, he said in an interview. But when Leith
went into the basement of a nearby home to search for
survivors, he said, “I felt short of breath, coughed and
2/7

17/11/2016

became dizzy. I could not even take two breaths”. In the
basement, six members of the Talib family sheltered,
with three children ages one, two and three. None had
visible wounds. But when the children arrived at the
local hospital, the doctor in charge recalled that “they
were foaming at the mouth, they were suffocating,
then their hearts stopped”. Their parents struggled to
breathe too before dying from the attack, along with
their 65-year-old grandmother.
Think about how it must feel to be suddenly
overwhelmed by the sharp smell of chlorine; to think
you have escaped death by bombing only to realize
you might die by asphyxiation; to wonder how to run
from a weapon that you cannot see that is enveloping
you on all sides. It is a suffering so gruesome that the
international community has resoundingly condemned
the use of chemical weapons and established a norm
against their use under any circumstances, as enshrined
in the Chemical Weapons Convention.
So the United States welcomes the Council’s
unanimous decision to extend the mandate of
the Joint Investigative Mechanism for another
year. The Mechanism is a vital tool for fighting
impunity — an independent group of experts with the
tools to tell us who is using chemical weapons in Syria,
after the Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical
Weapons Fact-Finding Mission has determined that
chemical weapons were used or were likely used.
The Mechanism’s findings are clear. Investigators
have concluded that the Al-Assad regime has used
chemical weapons against the Syrian people not just in
one attack, but in three confirmed attacks so far. That is
three confirmed attacks carried out by a Member State
of the United Nations; three attacks using weapons
that the world concluded decades ago should never
be used; three attacks that have caused Syrian men,
women and children to suffocate to death. And these
are just the attacks for which the Mechanism has to date
reached this conclusion. There is credible evidence of
many more chemical weapons attacks carried out by
the Al-Assad regime. The use of chemical weapons
by the Al-Assad regime is a clear violation of Syria’s
obligations under the Chemical Weapons Convention
and under resolution 2118 (2013).
The Mechanism has also confirmed the use of
chemical weapons by the Islamic State in Iraq and the
Levant (ISIL) in Marea. The United States condemns
this attack in the strongest terms, as well as all of
16-39030

17/11/2016

The situation in the Middle East

the horrific atrocities that ISIL has carried out and
continues to carry out against innocent civilians. This
is yet another reason this terrorist organization must
be defeated and it is one more reason why the United
States will continue to lead the efforts of a 67-member
coalition against this colossal threat to our collective
security. It underscores the need for the Council to
address the threat posed by non-State actors like ISIL
who have the capacity and the depravity to use chemical
weapons again.
Today’s resolution allows the Mechanism to
continue its work — work that, unfortunately, sadly, is
far from finished. The members of the Security Council
need the Mechanism to continue its investigation for
three main reasons.
First, the Mechanism is the only institution with
a mandate to identify those involved in the use of
chemicals as weapons. Until the Mechanism was
created, the Security Council received briefings in
the passive voice — hearing that chemical weapons
“were being used” in Syria, but never hearing which
parties were using them. It was, honestly, bizarre. If the
Council had failed to extend the Mechanism today, we
would have been wilfully blinding ourselves to learning
the truth about who is responsible for some of the most
deplorable crimes imaginable. We would not have been
able to uphold a norm against chemical weapons use if,
as a Council, we had decided we did not want to know
who was using chemical weapons in the first place.
Secondly, evidence suggests that the Mechanism is
in fact helping to dissuade actors from using chemical
weapons. This is really important. In the 19 months
before the Mechanism was established, there were more
than 120 allegations of chemical weapons attacks, but
in the 15 months after the Mechanism began its work
that number has dropped to approximately 35 alleged
attacks. Let us be clear — one chemical weapons
attack is one too many and is completely unacceptable
and worthy of our collective condemnation. We also
know that there are other likely causes, as the Syrian
regime has established a pattern of using chemical
weapons when it is struggling using conventional
means; Russia’s entry into the war in September 2015
has given Damascus a significant battlefield edge.
Perhaps that explains some of the drop in use. But
there is no question that perpetrators who know — as
they did before 7 August 2015 when the Mechanism
was authorized — that they would never be identified,
those perpetrators felt a greater sense of impunity than

S/PV.7815

they must feel now. Even if the Mechanism makes
only a small difference in keeping the parties from
using chemical weapons, it would save lives and help
safeguard a crucial global norm. That is well worth the
Council’s full and sustained support.
Thirdly and finally, there is so much investigative
work left for the Mechanism to complete. The
Mechanism has so far only been able to make attribution
in four of the nine cases that were initially selected
for investigation, and new potential cases continue to
emerge. For example, there were numerous reports
on 10 August and 6 September that Al-Assad regime
helicopters dropped barrel bombs with toxic chemicals
on neighbourhoods in eastern Aleppo, sickening dozens
of Syrians and killing at least five people. As long as the
parties to the conflict in Syria use chemical weapons
and as long as previous cases can still be investigated,
the Council needs to determine who was involved — and
we need the Joint Investigative Mechanism to do it.
But the Council’s responsibilities do not end once
we know the facts. We already know that the Al-Assad
regime and the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant were
involved in chemical attacks. The members of the Council
now need to work together to make sure that those who
use such gruesome weapons face consequences. There
are sharp differences in the Council when it comes to
the conflict in Syria; that is clear. But, the unanimous
renewal of the mandate reflects one important principle
that we share — our unequivocal collective opposition
to the use of chemical weapons. That principle led us
to adopt resolution 2118 (2013), requiring Syria, whose
regime had just carried out a horrific attack, killing at
least 1,400 people, to dismantle and destroy its chemical
weapons programme under international supervision.
That principle led us to create the Joint Investigative
Mechanism and to now extend the Mechanism, and it
is on the basis of that principle that we should continue
to act to hold parties accountable for using chemical
weapons against Syrian people.
There is very little in the history of the Syrian
conflict that the Security Council has been able to agree
upon. Chemical weapons are one such exception to the
general rule of Council division. The fact that we can
achieve agreement in that narrow but important domain
should motivate us. It should motivate us to work harder
to stop the slaughter of civilians by other means, and it
should motivate us to achieve the political solution that
has long eluded the people of Syria, who continue to be
attacked in a savage manner to this very day.

16-390303/7

S/PV.7815

The situation in the Middle East

Mr. Safronkov (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): I must touch upon events that preceded
today’s adoption of resolution 2319 (2016). I stress that
we are very concerned by the actions of a number of
States, seeking to shift consideration of the issue of the
competence of the Security Council to the forum of a
purely technical international mechanism in the sphere
of armaments and non-proliferation, the Organization
for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons (OPCW).
I am referring to the anti-Syrian decision of
11 November, pushed through the back door of the
OPCW Executive Council of the anti-Syrian decision
of 11 November, which will inevitably have a
negative impact, both on the integrity of the Chemical
Weapons Convention (CWC) and the prospects for its
universalization, as well as on the authority of OPCW.
All of that took place prior to substantive consideration
of the outcomes of the work in the last year of the Joint
Investigation Mechanism looking into cases of the use
of chemical weapons in Syria. The Council, which of
course created the Mechanism, is accountable to it. It is
hard to call that circumstance anything but disrespect
for the competencies of the Security Council.
The decision we have just adopted to extend the
mandate of the Joint Investigation Mechanism for a
year was the outcome of difficult, complex work with
the United States on the content of the resolution, and
the result of an extensive negotiating marathon between
the representatives of the United States and Russia.
The document, in view of our priorities of giving the
Mechanism mandate broader geographical scope and
a clear counter-terrorist direction, was far from selfevident, yet we agreed to adopt it because we also see
its strengths.
Russia’s sceptical position on the conclusions
presented in the Joint InvestigationMechanism’s
reports, particularly regarding the modalities of its
work, is well known. We intend to continue flagging the
technical, logistical, legal and procedural aspects of the
Mechanism’s activities. Without calling into question
the professionalism of the members of Ms. Gamba’s
team, we trust that they will continue to remember their
own responsibility and ensure impartial, objective work.
We call on the leadership and personnel of the Joint
Investigative Mechanism to not bend to what we expect
will be vast amounts of pressure from States guided
purely by their own geopolitical interests in the Middle
East. Our support of the Council’s decision to extend
the Mechanism’s mandate is dictated by the recognition
4/7

17/11/2016

of the acuteness of those increasing challenges, threats
and manifestations of chemical terrorism in Syria and
neighbouring Iraq, which, if not today or tomorrow,
could soon spill over into and beyond the Middle East.
Over the past two years, the Russian Federation
has repeatedly drawn the attention of the international
community to the abundant evidence of the use
of chemical weapons by terrorists and extremist
organizations. We have urged our colleagues in the
Council to respond appropriately to the resurgence of
chemical terrorism in the Middle East. Sadly, all of our
initiatives in that respect, including our corresponding
draft resolution with our Chinese partners, have been
repeatedly blocked. We see the result. Everyone,
even the Mechanism, recognizes that terrorists and
militants from the armed opposition in that conflicttorn region of the world are making active use of toxic
chemicals against Syrian and Iraqi Government troops
and peaceful civilians. The terrorists have developed
genuine military chemical capabilities, to the extent
that they have the technology to synthesize militarygrade poisonous substances such as sarin and mustard
gas. Former military chemists and foreign specialists
are involved in that work. Such facts are even confirmed
by the United States intelligence community.
The Mechanism needs to focus fully on the
chemical activities of non-State actors, in particular the
Islamic State, Jabhat Al-Nusra, the Harakat Nour al-Din
al-Zenki movement, Jaysh Al-Islam, Jaysh Al-Fatah
and other armed opposition groups operating in Syria
and adjacent countries — which has been highlighted
by Damascus in its statements to the Security Council
and the OPCW.
Today’s resolution gives the necessary mandate to
investigate those crimes. What we have on our hands
is international terrorism that has already acquired
a taste for using nuclear weapons, often with the
clearly provocative goal of politically discrediting
the Syrian Government. Sadly, once again today
we have heard anti-regime statements. The terrorist
threat has already acquired global proportions. We
once again call on Council members to set aside our
political differences and join forces as part of a broad
counter-terrorist coalition in order to eradicate this
devastating phenomenon.
Mr. Shen Bo (China): China welcomes the Security
Council’s unanimous adoption of resolution 2319 (2016).
Our position on the question of chemical weapons is
16-39030

17/11/2016

The situation in the Middle East

S/PV.7815

clear and consistent. We are firmly opposed to the use
of chemical weapons by any country, organization
individual in any circumstances.

the Mechanism unanimously last year, and it is up to
us, out of common agreement, to extend its existence,
which is more justified than ever.

China is deeply concerned about and strongly
condemns the use of chemical materials as weapons in
Syria. China has always called on the Joint Investigative
Mission of the Organization for the Prohibition of
Chemical Weapons and the United Nations to discharge
its duty in accordance with the mandate and in a fair,
objective and professional manner. Resolution 2319
(2016) contains many positive elements, including
that the Joint Implementation Mechanism, in its future
mandate, will give more attention to the use of chemical
weapons by non-State actors and will exchange more
information with Syria’s neighbouring countries.

It is also a strong signal sent to those responsible
for the use of chemical weapons in Syria. Their crimes
will continue to be clearly and rigorously established.
We are therefore responding to a requirement of justice
and, by ensuring the renewal of the Mechanism, we are
sending a message of deterrence to all parties involved
in the Syrian conflict. It is also an expression of the
recognition of the international community for the
remarkable work of the Mechanism.

China hopes that the Joint Investigative Mechanism
will, on the basis of the respect of the sovereignty of the
countries concerned, strengthen coordination with the
Syrian Government to thoroughly investigate the use of
chemical weapons so as to unveil the truth. China also
hopes that the Council will continue to keep the unity
we have seen here on the Syrian chemical-weapons issue
so as to play a positive role in the ultimate elimination
of chemical weapons in Syria and in the maintenance
of peace and security in the country, contribute to the
resolution of the Syrian conflict by political means
and help with the comprehensive, durable and proper
resolution of the situation in Syria.
Mrs. Gueguen Mohsen (France) (spoke in French):
France welcomes the unanimous adoption of resolution
2319 (2016), which makes it possible to renew the
mandate of the joint mechanism for the investigation
and attribution of the use of chemical weapons in Syria,
known as the Joint Investigative Mechanism, for one year.
This is a time of unity on the Syrian issue which
deserves to be welcomed and which, beyond our
divisions as to the resolution of the conflict, represents
a strong signal of our desire to together bring an end to
the use of chemical weapons in Syria.
Given the latest conclusions of the Joint Investigative
Mechanism , which are compelling, confirming the
use of chemical weapons by the Syrian regime and by
Da’esh, and while other cases of use of chemical agents
against the civilian population continue to be reported,
it is necessary to allow the Mechanism to continue its
work. The gravity of the facts established by the Joint
Investigative Mechanism could not leave any room for
political divisions. The Security Council established

The renewal of the Joint Investigative Mechanism,
the strengthening of its resources and the continuation
of its work are necessary. That much is clear, but our
action cannot stop there. We cannot tolerate the flagrant
violation of the universal standard of banning the use
of chemical weapons; otherwise, we would bear the
intolerable risk of trivializing such actions.
Given such a serious challenge and given this
violation of the non-proliferation regime, the Council
must take action. We must draw all the consequences
from the conclusions of the reports established by the
Mechanism, and we must ensure that these crimes
will be subject to judicial proceedings and sanctions.
As the French authorities have already said on many
occasions, France hopes that the Security Council will
be in a position to soon adopt a resolution to punish
those responsible for chemical attacks identified by the
Joint Investigative Mechanism.
Mr. Wilson (United Kingdom): The United
Kingdom welcomes the unanimous adoption of
resolution 2319 (2016) today, which renews the Joint
Investigative Mechanism for another year. I pay tribute
to Ms. Power for all her efforts and those of her team to
bring the Security Council together on such a vital issue.
I would also like to thank the members of the
Joint Investigative Mechanism for their tireless work,
which has so often been undertaken in very difficult
circumstances. We know without a doubt that the
Al-Assad regime and Da’esh used toxic chemicals as
weapons against civilians in Syria. Because of the Joint
Investigative Mechanism, we know that barrel bombs
loaded with chlorine were dropped by the regime on
unsuspecting men and women and children in Talmenes,
Sarmin and Qmenas, that sulfur mustard was used by
Da’esh against innocent people of Marea in August last

16-390305/7

S/PV.7815

The situation in the Middle East

year, and that those responsible for war crimes remain
free and unpunished to this day.
Tragically, there is even more work ahead for the
Joint Investigative Mechanism. Despite all our efforts
and despite the pledges made by the Syrian regime
to destroy all of its stockpiles, these barbaric acts
involving chemicals continue. At least four cases are
currently being investigated by the Organization for the
Prohibition of Chemical Weapons (OPCW), so today’s
renewal is sadly necessary, and it will allow the Joint
Investigative Mechanism to continue its vital work
attributing responsibilities for these latest attacks.
It is not enough to know, however, that chemical
attacks have occurred, nor is it enough to know who
carried them out. What we need now is justice — for the
people of Marea, for the people of Talmenes, Sarmin and
Qmenas — and with that justice, an end to the impunity
that surrounds the perpetrators of those horrific attacks.
The OPCW and the Joint Investigative Mechanism have
been clear. It is now time for the Security Council to step
up and do its part. The continued use of chemicals as
weapons is in clear contravention of international norms
and laws and in clear violation of numerous resolutions
of the Council. If their use does not constitute a threat
to international peace and security I do not really know
what does.
We therefore have to act. Today we have taken a
valuable first step. We have shown welcome unity. We
have shown that we can find common purpose on this
matter. Let us use this momentum in the coming weeks
and months to ensure that those responsible for the use
of these weapons finally face justice.
Mr. Yelchenko (Ukraine): We welcome the
unanimous adoption of resolution 2319 (2016),
which extends the mandate of the Joint Investigative
Mechanism for a one-year period.
Ukraine commends the Joint Investigative
Mechanism’s efforts aimed at executing its mandate
based on the principles of impartiality, objectivity
and independence. Its conclusions have proved the
importance of having the Mechanism available in
the future, since there are still many cases, including
some that took place in 2016, that should be thoroughly
investigated. We are also deeply concerned with the
continuous allegations of possible illegal possession,
movement and intention to use toxic substances as
chemical weapons in Syria.
6/7

17/11/2016

At the same time, the resolution envisages
additional tasks for the Joint Investigative Mechanism
in the future, in particular investigating the illegal
activity of non-State actors. We believe that this change
of focus for the Mechanism will not lead to overlooking
the primary part of its mandate pursuant to resolution
2235 (2015).
Removing the threat of any use of chemical
weapons in the Syrian Arab Republic is an essential
element in creating proper conditions for de-escalating
tensions on the ground, tackling extremism and
reaching a sustainable political solution to the crisis
in a broader context. The international community
must have full confidence that Syria has irreversibly
abandoned its chemical-weapons programme and
that those responsible for organizing and committing
horrible crimes using chemical weapons as a means of
warfare are held accountable.
Mr. Gasso Matoses (Spain) (spoke in Spanish):
Spain supported today the extension of the mandate of
the Joint Investigation Mechanism since it considers it
fundamental that the Mechanism continue carrying out
its work and that, as the Security Council decided in
previous resolutions, those responsible for the use of
chemical weapons in Syria be held accountable.
The work of the Mechanism is not yet over, and the
reality that we face is troubling. New allegations on the
use of chemical weapons keeping coming in, and Joint
Investigative Mechanism has already shown that it has
a deterrent effect that we need to preserve. Spain is
particularly pleased that the resolution we have adopted
today includes references to cooperation between the
Committee established pursuant to resolution 1540
(2004) and the Joint Investigation Mechanism. This is
logical since the 1540 (2004) Committee is a subsidiary
body of the Council that ensures that non-State actors
do not have access to or use nuclear, chemical or
biological weapons.
Moreover, I trust that this Mechanism will be given
adequate resources to carry out the work that we have
entrusted to it. I am particularly grateful for the efforts
of the United States Mission and the Russian Mission
for reaching consensus within the Council once more on
this occasion. The unity that the Council has once again
shown on this issue is a hopeful sign on which we must
build a united and robust Security Council response,
one that the citizens of Syria have been waiting for.
16-39030

17/11/2016

The situation in the Middle East

Mr. Akahori (Japan): Japan welcomes the
unanimous adoption of resolution 2319 (2016). The
resolution is particularly important given that, to our
deepest regret, additional allegations of chemical
weapons use in Syria have been continuously reported.
It is a grave challenge to the international norm of
prohibited chemical weapons. We need to firmly
uphold that norm. It is critically important in that
regard to uncover the whole picture of the alleged use of
chemical weapons in Syria and hold accountable those
who are responsible.
The Security Council is sending a strong and
clear message by renewing the mandate of the Joint
Investigative Mechanism to identify those who are
responsible for the use of chemical weapons in Syria.
Japan is ready to engage in a constructive manner to
enable the Mechanism to accomplish its work even
more effectively.
Mr. Moustafa (Egypt) (spoke in Arabic): Egypt
welcomes the adoption of resolution 2319 (2016) by
the Council, which extends the mandate of the Joint
Investigate Mechanism by an additional year. We
pay tribute to the professionalism shown by those
responsible for the Mechanism.
On many occasions we have reiterated the
importance of maintaining a high level of objectivity and
neutrality in order to hold accountable those responsible
for the alleged use of chemical weapons against
innocent civilians in Syria. It is important to determine
the facts concerning the perpetrators who have carried

S/PV.7815

out such crimes in recent years. Our commitment to
that path arises from the concern felt in Egypt and other
countries in the Middle East regarding the increase in
the capabilities of terrorists and non-State actors with
foreign support with respect to the manufacture and
use of chemical weapons. We are especially concerned
about those actors who have not been identified by
the Council within the framework of terrorist groups
working in Syria despite their well-known terrorist
background and records of odious crimes committed
against innocent Syrian people. In that framework, we
hope to strengthen the role of the Security Council and
the Joint Investigative Mechanism.
With respect to the fight against non-State actors
who take part in activities related to the use of chemical
weapons in Syria, the Security Council must be in a
position to determine how those activities are carried
out in order to halt the activities of such groups and
prevent their participation in future chemical weaponsrelated activities. The implementation of resolution
2319 (2016) regarding Da’esh, Jabhat al-Nusrah and
other terrorist groups, in the context of the issue of
chemical weapons in Syria, can be considered an
essential development within the framework of the
mandate of the Joint Investigative Mechanism.
We hope that the unity showed by the Council
in adopting resolution 2319 (2016) can serve as a
new impetus to resolve the crisis in Syria in all of its
aspects — military, political and humanitarian.
The meeting rose at 9.30 p.m.

16-390307/7
