S/PV.8578

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-fourth year

8578

th meeting
Thursday, 18 July 2019, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Meza-Cuadra . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Peru)

Members:

Belgium. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Côte d’Ivoire . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Dominican Republic. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Equatorial Guinea. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Germany . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Indonesia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kuwait. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Poland . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
South Africa . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Pecsteen de Buytswerve
Mr. Yao Shaojun
Mr. Ipo
Mr. Singer Weisinger
Mr. Ndong Mba
Mr. De Rivière
Mr. Heusgen
Mr. Djani
Mr. Alotaibi
Mr. Lewicki
Mr. Nebenzia
Mr. Mabhongo
Ms. Pierce
Mr. Hunter

Agenda
The situation in the Middle East

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

19-22247 (E)
*1922247*

S/PV.8578

The situation in the Middle East

The meeting was called to order at 10.05 a.m.

Before I turn to the facts on the ground, I would like to
add two elements of central and contextual importance.

Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in the Middle East
The President (spoke in Spanish): In accordance
with rule 37 of the Council’s provisional rules of
procedure, I invite the representative of Yemen to
participate in this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the following
briefers to participate in this meeting: Mr. Martin
Griffiths, Special Envoy of the Secretary-General
for Yemen; Mr. Mark Lowcock, Under-SecretaryGeneral for Humanitarian Affairs and Emergency
Relief Coordinator; and Mr. David Beasley, Executive
Director of the United Nations World Food Programme.
Mr. Griffiths is joining today’s meeting via videoteleconference from Amman.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I now give the floor to Mr. Griffiths.
Mr. Griffiths: I would like to thank you very much,
Mr. President, for the opportunity to brief the Council
on the latest developments in the Yemen peace process.
Since my most recent briefing to the Council
(see S/PV.8551), I have been privileged to meet with
ministers and senior officials engaged on Yemen in
many countries and many capitals. I have been reassured
in every case by their unanimous desire to see progress
towards a political solution, and to see it quickly. The
unanimity of the international community mirrors, of
course, the same unanimity we see and cherish in the
Council. In those visits and meetings, I was equally
impressed by a common appreciation of the primacy of
a political solution. All those with whom I spoke were
clear that progress in realizing the objectives of the
Stockholm Agreement, made in December, is crucial
to the chances of political negotiations to end the war.
Al-Hudaydah, of course, is at the epicentre of those
objectives. Our way forward, then, is clear and supported
by international consensus — to implement the
Al-Hudaydah agreement and, with that experience and
that record, engage the parties swiftly on a settlement,
the outlines of which, I think, are well known to all.
2/23

18/07/2019

The first and certainly the most important is the
dire and worsening humanitarian situation, about
which we will all hear from my colleagues, Mr. Mark
Lowcock and Mr. David Beasley. The second is the
frightening prospect of war in our region. In all of the
people I met, I found a strong desire to keep Yemen out
of any such conflict, should it transpire. This is a desire
I share deeply.
Last week, I had the privilege to meet President Hadi
Mansour, which was an opportunity for me to renew my
commitment to the cause we share — returning Yemen
to a peace defined by the resolutions of the Council,
including resolution 2216 (2015). In addition, just last
night, I returned from a visit to Sana’a, where I was
able to discuss my concerns with their leadership in
order to advance the implementation of the Stockholm
Agreement and the political process.
We are facing a crucial moment for the destiny of
this war. We need to think now together of the realities
and opportunities that define our chances of making a
move towards peace.
First, with regard to the redeployment of some
coalition forces in parts of Yemen, as senior coalition
officials have themselves confirmed, that act is intended
to place peace first at the centre of their efforts to
restore peace and stability in Yemen. This is a reminder
of the view already expressed that peace will come on
the back of promises made in Stockholm now becoming
promises kept in Yemen.
Secondly, Al-Hudaydah is, as I have said, central
as the gateway to the political process. It gives me
enormous pleasure to congratulate both parties, whose
meeting this week on a United Nations vessel, under the
leadership of my colleague, Lieutenant General Michael
Lollesgaard, was a notable success. The meeting was
held in — as Michael referred to it — open waters in
the Red Sea. The parties, meeting in close quarters
over two days — the first meeting in joint format since
February — agreed together the operational details of
all redeployment envisaged in our talks in Stockholm.
This is an important breakthrough and an encouraging
sign of progress.
Nevertheless, a major hurdle remains — agreement
on local security forces, in particular, as well as attention
to the issue of revenue and governance. Those issues
19-22247

18/07/2019

The situation in the Middle East

will require hard work, flexibility and a conviction,
as in the Stockholm Agreement, that any solution is a
temporary one, since a more permanent solution lies in
the comprehensive agreements to be negotiated by the
parties later. I shall redouble my efforts with the parties
in the coming weeks to reach an agreement to satisfy
both and I am calling on all the parties to muster the
needed political will to make this happen with all speed.
If I may, I would like to take this opportunity to
thank Lieutenant General Michael Lollesgaard for
his collegiality, perseverance and wisdom. Under his
leadership, the United Nations Mission to Support
the Hodeidah Agreement has served as a credible,
effective and impartial arbiter that has contributed very
significantly to the peace process.
Progress in Al-Hudaydah would allow the parties
to work together, whether on tripartite monitoring, the
collection of revenues or on common assessments of
possible ceasefire violations. My hope is that progress
in Al-Hudaydah will finally allow us to focus on the
political process, and I hope that we will see this before
the end of the summer. Yemen, indeed, as we have
observed before, has no time to waste.
Thirdly, in Taiz, we have noticed limited progress,
but progress nonetheless, in opening up Taiz to
civilian and humanitarian access. The first sign of that
hope — we have heard some reference to this in recent
meetings — will be the prospect of the opening of one
humanitarian crossing. We will be exploring with the
Taiz Committee, which was established in Sweden,
those opportunities in the coming days and how we can
benefit from them in order to ensure security, peace
and stability for a city that has been yearning for that
more than anything else for many years. I hope also
that Taiz can benefit from the support of local-led and
community initiatives to bridge the divides of war.
Women’s groups have a very distinguished history in
that activity in Taiz, and I hope we will all benefit from
their example.
There are, of course, remaining challenges. We were
all dismayed by last week’s announcement in Sana’a
of the imposition of death sentences on 30 prisoners.
The Secretary-General, as we all know, objects to the
death penalty in all circumstances. Their sentences are
now on appeal, and I have urged both due process and,
ultimately, clemency in the spirit of humanity.
I am also concerned that the political and security
landscape in Yemen, whether on the front lines or in

S/PV. 8578

other areas, is becoming increasingly fragmented. As
the war continues, there is a considerable risk that
there will be further tensions and that it will become
increasingly more difficult to reconcile those tensions
and to resolve them the longer this war continues.
There are also continuous acts of political and military
provocations that can hold back the peace process.
Although the Al-Hudaydah ceasefire broadly — and
remarkably —continues to hold, military operations,
as we have been frequently reminded, have continued
on several other front lines, as well as on Yemen’s
border with Saudi Arabia to the north. I am particularly
alarmed by the continued attacks by Ansar Allah on
civilian infrastructure in Saudi Arabia.
Yemen is near the front lines of a potential tragedy
arising from the tensions in the region. It is not in the
interest of Yemen to be dragged into a regional war. All
parties should desist from any actions that take Yemen
in that direction. We need to prevent this to reduce
regional tensions, to save lives and to give Yemen a
prospect for peace rather than an enlarged war. We have
to see de-escalation of violence now if those ambitions
are to be achieved.
Finally, I cannot help but hope that Yemen might be
nearing the end of its war. I realize I am often accused
of optimism, and I happily stand guilty of that charge.
However, it was not me but a very senior and very wise
official in the region who recently said that the war can
end this year. I take that as an instruction, and I hope
that today I have been able to share my views as to how
we can begin to meet that aspiration.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I thank
Mr. Griffiths for his briefing.
I now give the floor to Mr. Lowcock.
Mr. Lowcock: In resolution 2451 (2018) of December
2018, the Security Council offered unequivocal support
for the humanitarian relief operation in Yemen.
Specifically, the Council called for, first, respect for
international humanitarian law; secondly, unhindered
humanitarian access; and thirdly, more funding for the
United Nations response plan. The Council also noted
the link between ending the conflict and alleviating
people’s suffering. Unfortunately, the Council’s calls
have not been heeded.
As I said last month (see S/PV.8551), conditions for
most people in Yemen are getting worse, not better. And
if the current trajectory continues, we should all expect

19-222473/23

S/PV.8578

The situation in the Middle East

that they will continue to get worse. The fighting rages
on. Since June, 120,000 more people have fled their
homes, bringing total displacement this year to more
than 300,000 people, on top of the millions forced to
flee in earlier years.
We have seen renewed conflict in Al-Hudaydah
governorate, despite the governorate-wide ceasefire
agreed in Stockholm. Two weeks ago, artillery fire
and heavy clashes gripped several neighbourhoods
in Al-Hudaydah city, damaging private homes, an
abandoned hospital and other civilian sites. One
civilian was killed and four injured when shells hit a
local mosque. Seven children were injured in a separate
shelling incident. Conflict also flared south of the
city. In Al-Khawkha district, shelling struck a site
hosting displaced families, injuring three children and
destroying a water tank. In Ad Durayhimi, a civilian
was killed by a landmine, and in Al-Tuhayat, sniper fire
killed a child. And in May and June, war planes carried
out at least six air strikes across Al-Hudaydah.
As Martin Griffiths just said, hostilities in
Al-Hudaydah have now subsided again and relative
calm has returned, but violence continues elsewhere.
At the end of June, air strikes reportedly hit a private
home in Taiz, killing seven family members, including
four children. Shelling also struck an aid distribution
point in Taiz, killing four civilians and injuring two
more. In Al-Dhale’e, we continue to receive reports of
indiscriminate shelling affecting front-line villages.
And in Al-Bayda, clashes in Rada’a killed one civilian
and injured three last week, while shelling in another
area injured a civilian and damaged family homes.
There are many other examples from more than 30
active front lines across the country. Ansar Allah forces
have also continued drone and missile attacks on the
Kingdom of Saudi Arabia, which have killed and injured
civilians, as well as damaged civilian infrastructure.
Those attacks are reprehensible, and they are universally
condemned by the international community.
As Martin Griffiths said, urgent steps are needed to
de-escalate the violence. For months, I have called for a
nationwide ceasefire that would end fighting in Yemen
and attacks on neighbouring countries.
Let me turn now to progress on the Council’s call
for unhindered humanitarian access.
Ansar Allah-affiliated authorities in the north
continue to hinder humanitarian assistance in areas
4/23

18/07/2019

they control through bureaucratic impediments and
interference. The Council will hear shortly from David
Beasley about the difficult decisions that has forced on
the World Food Programme (WFP). But the obstacles
go far beyond WFP. In April and May, humanitarian
agencies reported 375 access incidents across the
country, some across Government-controlled areas,
but mostly in areas controlled by Ansar Allah. During
that time, Ansar Allah-affiliated authorities detained
more than 180 trucks carrying humanitarian cargo
and held them for an average of 36 days before they
were released.
Ansar Allah authorities also continue to delay a
United Nations technical assessment of the decaying
FSO SAFER oil tanker, which, as I have told the Council
many times before, threatens to spill up to 1.1 million
barrels of oil into the Red Sea. The United Nations
assessment team had planned to deploy to the tanker
next week, but the necessary permits remain pending
with the Ansar Allah authorities. Discussions to resolve
this as quickly as possible continue. I would like to note
that this is additionally frustrating when one recalls
that the same authorities wrote to the United Nations
early last year requesting assistance with the tanker and
promising to facilitate its work.
In Government-controlled areas, coalition forces
continue to impose bureaucratic requirements on
humanitarian agencies trying to travel up the west coast
from the south. That policy frequently delays assistance
for people in those areas. The Government is also
moving to introduce new regulations on commercial
fuel imports. Fuel is essential to power generators at
hospitals, to pump water and to run sanitation systems.
Any mechanism to regulate those imports risks
worsening the humanitarian situation.
Let me be clear that although access challenges are
pervasive, they are not stopping the world’s largest aid
operation. I cannot say the same of the third point in
the resolution, which is funding. At this time last year,
the humanitarian response plan was 60 per cent funded.
Substantial, flexible funding early in the year — mainly
from the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia and the United Arab
Emirates — allowed the aid operation to scale up across
all sectors at a critical time. That unquestionably saved
millions of lives.
At the High-Level Pledging Event for the
Humanitarian Crisis in Yemen, for this year’s
humanitarian response plan, which the Secretary19-22247

18/07/2019

The situation in the Middle East

General convened in February — six months
ago — donors pledged $2.6 billion. Twenty-seven
of the 40 donors who pledged have paid more than
75 per cent of their pledges, and 20 of those donors
have paid 100 per cent, and in some cases even more.
But those who made the largest pledges — Yemen’s
neighbours in the coalition — have so far paid only a
modest proportion of what they promised. As a result,
the response plan is currently just 34 per cent funded,
compared, as I said, to 60 per cent this time last year.
So what are the consequences of that?
Well, there are not yet major consequences for
emergency food aid led by the World Food Programme
(WFP), as David Beasley will detail. Even after
accounting for suspended programmes in Sana’a, WFP
is reaching more than 11 million people, which is more
than we have previously reported. But the situation is
different across the rest of the relief operation.
Last month, I told members of the Council that
support to medical facilities was being suspended
in some areas (see S/PV.8561). Suspensions are now
disrupting services of health facilities that serve
9 million people. Agencies are starting to suspend
some regular vaccination programmes targeting
13 million people, including 200,000 infants. Work on
30 new feeding centres in areas with the worst levels of
hunger has also been halted. Up to 60 existing centres
could close in the coming weeks, putting at least 7,000
malnourished children at immediate risk of death.
In Sana’a, a United Nations-supported treatment
plant that purifies water for agriculture has also started
to shut down. That means that up to 4 million people
could soon be eating vegetables irrigated with dirty
water, making them more likely to contract cholera.
In the next two months, United Nations agencies
expect to close 21 more key programmes. In August,
that could mean, for example, an end to shelter services
for more than 800,000 displaced people, as well as
an end to reproductive health services available to
1 million impoverished women. We already see the
impact of those cuts in the fight against cholera.
The Council will recall that, in 2017, more than
1 million suspected cases of cholera were reported.
Many experts called that the world’s worst-ever cholera
epidemic. Last year, with funding provided under the
United Nations response plan, humanitarian agencies
implemented a major country-wide campaign against
cholera. The effect was to reduce the number of cases

S/PV. 8578

to 380,000 for the whole year. That is, of course, still a
very high figure, but it is also a huge improvement over
2017, and it was achieved despite substantial further
degradation of water, sanitation and health facilities
caused by the war.
Those gains have now been lost. So far this year,
nearly 500,000 cases of cholera have been reported. We
have received reports so far of more than 700 deaths as
a result, including more than 200 children. The death
toll will surely grow.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I thank
Mr. Lowcock for his briefing.
I now give the floor to Mr. Beasley.
Mr. Beasley: I thank you, Sir, for the opportunity
to brief the Security Council today on the situation in
Yemen. I would also like to thank my colleagues Mark
Lowcock and Martin Griffiths for all their hard work
and updates.
When I briefed the Council about four weeks ago
(see S/PV.8551), I said that the World Food Programme
(WFP) was being prevented from feeding the hungriest
people in Yemen. We were being prevented from
operating independently, as we must, and much-needed
food was not, in fact, reaching the right people who
needed help. I ended my briefing by begging the Ansar
Allah leadership, in front of the world, to just let WFP
do what it does best — save lives. It is just that simple.
Because of the access challenges, food being
diverted away from intended beneficiaries and the lack
of accountability — and all the issues that I outlined
last month — WFP made the difficult decision to begin
a phased suspension of assistance in Yemen in late June.
The suspension started in Sana’a and affected 850,000
women, men, girls and boys. As I am a father, those
present can imagine how difficult a decision like that
is. Not a day has gone by when I have not thought of
the impact that suspending food assistance may have. I
must tell the people in city of Sana’a, and through all of
Yemen, that I am so sorry they are going through that.
But let me add that despite the suspension, we have
increased, as Mark Lowcock said, the number of people
who we have reached, from 10.6 million to 11.3 million,
and we are continuing to scale up. In fact, we expect
to reach over 12 million by the end of this month.
Following the suspension, we have also expanded our
nutrition programmes inside the city of Sana’a, where
the suspension is in place, to ensure that the most

19-222475/23

S/PV.8578

The situation in the Middle East

vulnerable children, pregnant women and nursing
mothers have the food that they need to survive.
I want to make it very, very clear to everyone that
the responsibility to stop malnutrition and hunger lies
first and foremost with those who are at war and not
with WFP, any of our partners or the United Nations.
We are in Yemen only for the sake of humanity, to offer
our assistance when warring parties cannot or will not
fulfil their responsibilities. We are not in it for us; we
are in it for the innocent people and victims of war
in Yemen.
No one will be happier than all of us at the World
Food Programme when we are no longer needed in
Yemen because there is no more hunger. But until that
time, when it comes to humanitarian assistance and
issues, let us leave the politics out of it and uphold
our obligations under international humanitarian law,
which that specifically protects neutral, impartial
and independent humanitarian action, including the
delivery of essential items, including food.
Despite all the difficulties that I outlined last
month, we have continued to engage in good faith. For
the sake of those who need our help the most in Yemen,
we have kept the lines of communication open. We have
offered dialogue at every level. We have had dozens
upon dozens of meetings and engagements with the
Ansar Allah authorities. We have listened to and heard
their concerns. We have explained our positions over
and over and over, and we have looked for common
ground. We have worked tirelessly to find solutions
to accommodate the concerns that were raised and
put forward workable proposals. That kind of work, as
members of the Council well know, is not always so
easy, but it is worth it.
While we have yet to sign an agreement, I must
say that we have made substantial progress in the
discussions. In fact, I want to read this one text message
to make sure that we did not get a signed agreement
in the past few minutes. The bottom line I have just
received is that we were negotiating all night long and,
as of this moment, we have an agreement in principle,
but it is not a signed agreement as of yet. A lot of
progress has however been made in that regard.
I want to thank Abdul-Malik Al-Houthi for his
leadership. I want to thank Martin Griffiths and
Resident Coordinator Lise Grande, who are on the
ground. It has been tough. There has been a great
deal of hard work taking place in the past few weeks
6/23

18/07/2019

and the past 24 hours. But we must find a definitive
solution. I believe that we will get there. I am hopeful
that we will. As I said a little earlier, I have just been
assured by this last-minute text message that they are
meeting as we speak. I was hoping that we would have
a signature before I got to this point in my briefing,
but we have not reached that signature. So the door is
still open. But once that is resolved, we are ready to
begin implementing the agreement immediately. We
will have food back on the streets in Sana’a in a matter
of just days. That is what the people of Yemen deserve
and demand of us.
While the agreement will help to ensure that the right
people get the food, it will also allow the accountability
framework required to start cash programmes. Cash
will help to stimulate the local economy and to stabilize
the rial, which will have a multiplier effect, bringing
benefits to everyone in Yemen, not only the 12 million
to whom we are providing assistance on a daily basis.
That means another 18 million people, who now get
their food through the market. The rial will stabilize.
It will help mothers to provide more food for children,
which will help us in so many ways, as Mark Lowcock
has alluded to.
But let me be extremely clear: if we do not reach an
agreement or if an agreement is reached and progress
is not made on implementation, because we have been
at this point before, we will find ourselves in the same
position in which we are today but probably worse. Let
us hope and pray that everyone, on all sides, will do
what is good for the people of Yemen. We will keep the
Council informed.
The suspension has been the headline story from
Yemen over the past month. But the real story has
been, and should continue to be, the humanitarian
catastrophe that continues to unfold in Yemen. Lives
are lost, livelihoods are gone and, for far too many,
the hope for a better future grows dimmer every day.
Approximately 30 million people live in Yemen, and
more than two thirds of them are food insecure. That
is 20 million people — boys, girls, men and women.
Ten million of them are severely food insecure. They
do not know where their next meal will come from as
they march towards starvation. Every day Yemenis are
making impossible choices just to survive. That is the
toll that conflict and war collect.
Even in the most difficult circumstances, WFP
continues to save lives, working with its other
19-22247

18/07/2019

The situation in the Middle East

humanitarian partners. As I have said before, we
have scaled up our operations and, even despite the
suspension, we have been able to increase the number
of beneficiaries to more than 11 million, hopefully
12 million by the end of this month. We hope to continue
to provide assistance.
Let me add that in December, we learned that
250,000 people in Yemen were facing catastrophic food
security conditions. That is as bad as it can get. We
tripled food assistance in the hardest-hit districts. It did
the job. In 29 of the 45 districts where we were able
to collect data, we can now confirm that none are in
the catastrophic phase anymore. While we have seen
those numbers go down, other numbers — for those
who have gone from insecure to more insecure to more
severe — are going up. The numbers are still bad and
they are getting worse. In general, we are just keeping
more and more people from death.
That is just one success story among many others. I
want to thank those that have been extremely generous,
such as the United States, the United Arab Emirates,
the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia, the United Kingdom and
others, in allowing us to achieve these objectives.
Let me recount another success story, because
there are so many bad stories. We know that the school
system has all but collapsed because of the war, but we
are doing our part to ensure that children still receive
an education. This year alone, we were able to provide
nutrition in schools for more than 700,000 children.
Those are meals that give parents a little extra comfort,
knowing that their children will get fed, in addition to
what we are able to provide them at home.
That keeps the children in school, and it is an
investment in the future of Yemen. At some point, when
the guns go silent, and Yemen rebuilds, it is those little
boys and girls who will turn Yemen into the country
that it deserves to be.
We are grateful to everyone for all the support of
the donors, many of whom are around this table today,
whose generosity enable us to do what we do. However,
donors must be even more generous because we need
more help. Many of our humanitarian partners are not
getting the assistance that they need. In order to keep
reaching the most vulnerable, we need $1.2 billion over
the next months. We are only 43 per cent funded at
the moment. Our partners also need more. WFP has a
critical role to play in the humanitarian response but if
our partners do not have the support that they need, it

S/PV. 8578

does not matter how much food we deliver — lives will
be lost.
I have a few requests today on behalf of the
teachers, doctors, nurses, mothers, fathers and, last but
not least, the little girls and boys, who just want to eat,
play and learn. We request Member States to continue
to be generous with their contributions. We ask that
those that have made pledges honour them.
But I must say that we are reaching the point where
no amount of money in the world will truly alleviate
the suffering of the Yemeni people. The people in
Yemen, the people at WFP and our partners do a heroic
job, working hard day and night, risking their lives in
order to make success stories and keep people alive.
But when war destroys everything — lives, livelihoods,
economies — there is only so much that we can do.
We are fast approaching those limits. Please, for the
Yemeni people, stop this war, find peaceful ways to
settle the differences and end the suffering. We cannot
give up. We owe the people of Yemen nothing less.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I thank
Mr. Beasley for his briefing.
I now give the floor to those Council members who
wish to make statements.
Ms. Pierce (United Kingdom): I would like to
thank our United Nations colleagues for their briefings
and once again to ask them to pass on our gratitude to
their teams on the ground, who are working tirelessly to
try and help the people of Yemen.
I wanted to start, if I may, by once again expressing
our full support for Special Envoy Martin Griffiths,
to welcome his recent meeting with President Hadi
Mansour and to reiterate that Mr. Griffiths has the
Council’s backing as he tries to advance the broader
Yemen political process. I am sure that all the other
members of the Council will wish to express their
support as well.
Something that Mr. Griffiths but also that
Under-Secretary-General Lowcock said put together,
juxtaposed, very aptly illustrates the dilemma of
Yemen. Martin Griffiths that the war can end this year
and Mark Lowcock said that there were 30 different
front lines. So, having something that is potentially
within reach, yet is so difficult to achieve on the ground,
I think that in its private session the Council should try
and think of ways that we can turn what is needed into
concrete actions. I must say that I do not think that the

19-222477/23

S/PV.8578

The situation in the Middle East

18/07/2019

answer lies solely with the Council. I believe that all
those Member States in the wider United Nations with
influence, particularly on the Houthis, need to bring
that influence to bear. It is so extremely frustrating
to hear the accounts from the World Food Programme
and the Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian
Affairs of what could be achieved but is held up. So I
hope that we can spend some time in private session
looking at action.

with resolution 2451 (2018) and facilitate unhindered
humanitarian access.

I think the first thing that we need is for the
parties, following the meeting of the Redeployment
Coordination Committee, to engage constructively with
General Lollesgaard and the Special Envoy in order to
finally get the outstanding negotiations completed so
that we can implement the first and second phases of the
Hudaydah Agreement. For the United Kingdom’s part,
we are happy to play whatever role we can in bringing
that about. There are five main issues that I want to
raise today. I think that we risk a perfect storm on the
ground of various of these strands not coming together.

If I may, I would also like to talk about the
economy. We heard a little bit about that, and what the
representative of the WFP said about the link between
food supplies and the stabilization of the currency is
obviously important, but I think that we want both
parties to be able to build on the revenue-sharing and
the salary-payment talks that have been started in
Amman. Neither side can be allowed to undermine the
economic elements of the Al-Hudaydah agreement. It
is key that this topic is not an add-on. From what we
heard today, it is obvious that it is a fundamental part of
being able to stabilize the situation. We therefore look
to progress to be made on those issues.

The first thing I would like to say relates to the
military dimension. I want to condemn the persistent
attacks by the Houthis on airports and infrastructure in
Saudi Arabia. It is vital that all parties avoid provocative
actions that could lead to escalation. Such actions
obviously undermine trust, and they risk threatening
undermining the political process. I also wanted to note
the reports of the Emirati starting their withdrawal
from Al-Hudaydah and say how welcome it is to see
efforts to de-escalate the conflict in Yemen.
I wanted to turn to the humanitarian access and the
situation relating to the WFP. I was going to be quite
critical, but I think that Mr. Beasley’s point about the
agreement having been reached on Sana’a — even if
it has not been signed — is obviously very welcome.
We do not want to do anything that might impede the
signature of that agreement, and I wish him good luck
on that over the coming days.
I remain concerned, however, that the underlying
fundamentals are not changing. As Mr. Lowcock said,
there is a risk of the situation escalating and that we are
taking three steps back for every two steps forward. I
do not think that we can take our eye off any of those
aspects because, as I said, they risk creating the perfect
storm, if we cannot start making more and faster
progress. The risk of cholera returning is horrific, and
we need to do everything that we can to stop that from
happening. Obviously, we want all the parties to comply
8/23

My third point involves funding disbursements — a
situation that I think is really shocking for what is the
worst humanitarian crisis that the United Nations has
dealt with in recent years. Funding of 43 per cent or
60 per cent is simply not enough. I would therefore like
to urge other donors to rapidly disburse their funds to
the United Nations-led appeal.

Finally, with regard to human rights, to echo what
Mr. Griffiths said about the reports — some of which
have come from Amnesty International — that the
Houthi Specialized Criminal Court has handed down
30 death sentences for political prisoners. We belong
to those States that condemn the death penalty in all
circumstances, but, in this particular case, given what
that might risk doing on the ground, I want to take
this opportunity to condemn Houthis — who are not
a legitimate Government — and urge them to revoke
those sentences immediately.
There are a number of actions that remain to be
taken — on the implementation the political process,
on unhindered food and humanitarian access, and
on tanker access, as mentioned by Mr. Lowcock. All
States Members of the United Nations with influence
need to use it, whether they are on or outside the
Council. We need an end to attacks on Saudi Arabia
and its neighbours. We need funding disbursements to
be done in full, as pledged. We need human rights to
be respected. I hope we can follow up on these areas in
private consultations.
Mr. Alotaibi (Kuwait) (spoke in Arabic): At
the outset, we thank Mr. Martin Griffiths, Mr. Mark
Lowcock and Mr. David Beasley for their briefings
today, and we express our full support for their efforts.
19-22247

18/07/2019

The situation in the Middle East

S/PV. 8578

As of today, seven months have elapsed since the
entry into force of the Stockholm Agreement, which
represents seven months of stalemate affecting the
three pillars of the Agreement despite the Security
Council’s commitment to moving the political solution
forward through United Nations-sponsored dialogue
expressed in its unanimous adoption of resolutions
2451 (2018) and 2452 (2019) among other developments,
including resolution 2481 (2018), which have all
reiterated the importance of the full implementation of
the Agreement. Nevertheless, despite the time elapsed,
we have not seen any constructive measures that would
help achieve its objectives.

for consultations focusing on comprehensive issues to
be resumed.

The unprecedented blockade of Taiz has brought
suffering to its men, women and children for over four
years, and no tangible action has been undertaken to
implement the statement of understanding on Taiz.
Other forms of suffering include that of the thousands
of Yemeni families who yearn for the release and return
of the imprisoned, detained and forcibly disappeared.
No progress has been made on the implementation of
the prisoner-exchange agreement. Despite numerous
meetings of the supervisory committee, many challenges
have hampered the agreement’s implementation,
thereby blocking the release of any prisoners, detainees,
abductees and forcibly disappeared persons.

With regard to the humanitarian situation, at the
previous meeting on this subject (see S/PV.8551),
Mr. David Beasley discussed permanent solutions
to the humanitarian situation. He cautioned that the
World Food Programme (WFP) might have to suspend
its activities in Sana’a, which is under Houthi control,
leading to the denial of humanitarian assistance
for some 850,000 people. As a result of ongoing
intransigence and the failure to respond to the WFP’s
rational, legitimate demands, that actually happened
on 20 June. Mr. Beasley called for an independent
beneficiary-identification using biometrics in order to
ensure that humanitarian assistance is not manipulated
or diverted again. We also welcome Mr. Beasley’s
remarks about an agreement with the Houthis to address
all the aforementioned problems.

With regard to the Al-Hudaydah agreement, whose
full implementation has humanitarian implications, it
too is based on agreements and understandings approved
by the Redeployment Coordination Committee (RCC)
at its multiple meetings, leading to an agreement to
undertake redeployment outside of Al-Hudaydah under
the supervision of the three members of the RCC.
In that regard, we welcome the fact that the RCC
has resumed its meetings following a five-month
suspension. Furthermore, we reiterate the importance
of these meetings for the full implementation of the
agreement. We should take into account the pivotal
role played by the tripartite verification and inspection
mechanism so as to allow the Yemeni Government
to exercise its sovereign role in monitoring and
redeploying in Al-Hudaydah.
We reiterate our firm position that there is no
military solution and endorse the Special Envoy’s
position that not only is a military de-escalation needed,
but more importantly, all the elements of the Stockholm
Agreement must be implemented, which is the best way

With regard to security developments, the State
of Kuwait strongly condemns continued attacks on
civilian and critical infrastructure in the Kingdom
of Saudi Arabia. We fully support the Kingdom and
all measures being taken to maintain its security and
territorial integrity. The Houthis’ relentless attacks
against Saudi territory are in blatant violation of
international humanitarian law and a clear threat to
regional security and stability, thereby justifying the
arms embargo provided for in the relevant Security
Council resolutions.

We also commend the positive role played by the
Yemeni Government, which continues to pay salaries
to public-sector employees and retirees. In addition, the
Yemeni Economic Committee is trying to facilitate fuel
shipments and access to the Red Sea Mills and open
routes for humanitarian assistance, notwithstanding
the major security challenges. We reiterate our call on
all parties to cooperate with relief and humanitarian
agencies, refrain from placing obstacles to their
movements and ensure the safety of personnel, who
deserve our appreciation for their tireless efforts
to provide humanitarian assistance despite the
harsh conditions.
In conclusion, we reiterate our call on all Yemeni
parties to fully implement the Stockholm Agreement
on the city of Al-Hudaydah and its three ports, the
prisoner-exchange agreement and the Taiz statement of
understanding, so as to complement the efforts of the
Special Envoy for Yemen aimed at reaching a political

19-222479/23

S/PV.8578

The situation in the Middle East

18/07/2019

solution underpinned by the three terms of reference,
namely, the Gulf Cooperation Council Initiative and
its Implementation Mechanism, the National Dialogue
Conference outcomes and all relevant Security Council
resolutions, including resolution 2216 (2015). The
goal is to end the crisis, preserve the sovereignty,
independence and territorial integrity of Yemen and
cease interference in the country’s internal affairs.

The United States expresses its disappointment
over recent reports that Houthi authorities sentenced
30 activists to death in Sana’a and reminds the Houthis
of their commitment to an exchange of prisoners and
detainees per the Stockholm Agreement. Tangible
progress on the exchange of prisoners would indicate
the seriousness of the parties to build confidence
towards an agreement to end the conflict.

Mr. Hunter (United States of America): I thank
our briefers for their remarks and the tireless efforts of
their teams.

As the sobering briefings today reminded us, the
humanitarian situation in Yemen is dire. The United
States remains seriously concerned about the increasing
risk of famine in Yemen, in particular, as we have
heard today, among vulnerable populations. We were
heartened to learn that the World Food Programme
(WFP) was able to salvage a portion of the wheat stored
at the Red Sea Mills, which it recently reached despite
obstacles placed by the Houthis. We commend the
WFP’s efforts in this regard.

Progress on the United Nations-led political process
is vital, but it faces obstacles from within Yemen and
from outside forces. The Security Council has seen
regional escalation by Iran, and we are alarmed about
the recent uptick in Houthi attacks, especially on Saudi
civilian airports. We must do everything we can to
prevent these attacks from undermining hard-earned
progress on the United Nations-led political track in
Yemen. We urge the parties to undertake de-escalatory
measures so as to show their commitment to a Yemeniled political resolution.
As part of that de-escalation, we call on the
Houthis to immediately cease unmanned aerial vehicle,
rocket and other attacks against their fellow citizens
and neighbours. Iran must cease supplying the Houthis
with the weapons and technology used in those attacks.
Since December, the Council has urged the Government
of Yemen and the Houthis to demonstrate their
commitment to a political settlement by taking goodfaith measures to de-escalate tensions and redeploy
from Al-Hudaydah, as agreed in Sweden.
We are encouraged by the progress at the recent
Redeployment Coordination Committee (RCC)
meeting and see it as proof of what can be achieved
when the parties work in good faith with Special
Envoy Martin Griffiths and RCC Chair Lieutenant
General Michael Lollesgaard. Yet harder work lies
ahead, as we have heard here today, and the parties
must make good on their commitments. That means
implementing redeployment and reaching consensus on
the contentious issues relating to local security forces,
while continuing to exercise restraint so that fighting
does not threaten the ceasefire. We welcome the recent
meeting between President Mansour Hadi Mansour and
Special Envoy Griffiths and we hope that this can pave
the way for further collaboration and towards finding a
political solution to the conflict.
10/23

We are also closely monitoring negotiations
between the WFP and the Houthis to enable the full
resumption of food aid. As long as the Houthis delay
their cooperation with the WFP, the Yemeni people
will continue to suffer. We hope for a resolution that
prioritizes the needs of vulnerable Yemenis and we
condemn Houthi efforts to undermine humanitarian
activities through the diversion of aid.
We must ensure that humanitarian assistance
continues to effectively reach the millions in need.
There is no excuse for the obstruction of United Nations
humanitarian assistance in Yemen. The United States
remains one of the largest humanitarian contributors
in the country. We join the call today for all donors to
step up assistance in Yemen and fulfil their financial
commitments pledged in Geneva in February.
The United States supports United Nations efforts
to uphold the integrity of its humanitarian assistance
programmes to ensure that life-saving aid directly
reaches those in need. Those who seek to defraud or
divert such assistance are in violation of internationally
recognized humanitarian principles and are directly and
intentionally contributing to Yemen’s dire humanitarian
crisis. We continue to encourage all parties to respect
the humanitarian principles of independence, neutrality
and impartiality to avoid creating more precarious
situations for vulnerable populations in Yemen.
Mr. De Riviere (France) (spoke in French): I
thank Special Envoy Griffiths, Under-SecretaryGeneral for Humanitarian Affairs Lowcock and World
19-22247

18/07/2019

The situation in the Middle East

Food Programme Executive Director Beasley for
their briefings.
First of all, I would like to strongly reaffirm
France’s full support for the efforts of Special Envoy
Martin Griffiths and Lieutenant General Lollesgaard. I
reiterate France’s full confidence in them.
As we have just heard, after weeks of deadlock,
the parties managed to meet again at the beginning
of the week within the Redeployment Coordination
Committee (RCC) and agree on the general principles
for implementing the first and second phases of
the Hudaydah agreement on the ground. This is an
encouraging step, and we welcome the resumption of
talks. However, that is only the first step. The parties
must now implement the agreed points quickly and
concretely and remain engaged in good faith within the
RCC and with the Special Envoy.
While we have just unanimously renewed the
mandate of the United Nations Mission to Support the
Hudaydah Agreement for six months (resolution 2481
(2019)), France reiterates its full support for the Mission.
Its presence on the ground is crucial for observing
and facilitating redeployment, as provided for under
resolution 2452 (2019), but also for enabling the parties
to rebuild trust. The increasing operationalization of
the force is a good thing, and we call on the United
Nations to continue to deploy its full capabilities on the
ground. It is the responsibility of the parties to ensure
their safety and free movement.
The efforts of the Special Envoy are all the more
important given the regional security situation, which
recently began to deteriorate. The current tensions in
the Gulf are extremely worrying. They could have an
impact on the situation in Yemen and the readiness
of the parties to move forward in their discussions
for the implementation of the Stockholm Agreement
and, beyond that, to find a political solution to the
current conflict.
France has been very clear: we strongly condemned
the most recent attacks perpetrated and claimed by the
Houthis, including those on the airport at Abha, which
have already resulted in one death and left dozens
wounded. These attacks are unacceptable and must
stop. We therefore call on all parties to refrain from
any escalation that could further destabilize the region
and jeopardize the implementation of the Stockholm
Agreement in all its dimensions and the resumption of
discussions for a peaceful solution. In this regard, the

S/PV. 8578

military redeployment announced by the authorities of
the United Arab Emirates, in particular in Al-Hudaydah,
could provide an opportunity for de-escalation. We
hope that this decision could be used to facilitate a
political solution to the crisis by all parties.
We remain very concerned about the continuing
deterioration of the humanitarian and security situation.
It is more essential than ever to protect civilians,
including women and children, as they are particularly
vulnerable. Nearly 2 million of them suffer from severe
acute malnutrition.
I wish to reiterate our full support for the
humanitarian actors and their efforts in this difficult
context. They too must be protected. Commercial and
humanitarian access, which must be guaranteed, has
been further hampered by the closure of the road between
Aden and Sana’a, but also by other obstructions, namely,
the Houthis, which is unacceptable at a time when, as
Mr. Beasley has just described it, the country is still at
risk of starvation. We therefore call on the parties to
make every effort to facilitate the implementation of
the humanitarian response plan and ensure that action
is taken in full respect of the principles of neutrality,
independence, impartiality and humanity.
I will conclude by emphasizing that we must
not lose sight of the fact that our collective goal is to
find a political solution to the current conflict. The
Stockholm Agreement is a first step in facilitating
the establishment of trust between the parties. That is
why achieving results in its implementation will help
contribute to the resumption of political discussions.
A military solution cannot and must not be an
option. Relaunching these discussions to reach a
comprehensive and inclusive political agreement,
taking into account the diversity of Yemeni actors,
including women and civil society representatives, is
the only real prospect for putting an end to the conflict
and the humanitarian crisis. The mobilization and unity
of the Security Council are our greatest asset when it
comes to moving forward on this difficult path, but it
is the only option for restoring the peace to which the
Yemeni people aspire.
Mr. Singer Weisinger (Dominican Republic)
(spoke in Spanish): We appreciate the briefings given
today. We took careful note of the explanations on the
implementation of the Stockholm Agreement, as well
as the troubling report on the humanitarian situation.

19-2224711/23

S/PV.8578

The situation in the Middle East

We strongly condemn all violent acts committed
by both parties to this conflict and we call for a
cessation of hostilities and provocations jeopardizing
the progress that has been made, especially with
regard to the ceasefire. In order to achieve this
objective, everyone — especially women and young
people — must participate.
Despite the fact that there have been continuous
confrontations in the Al-Hudaydah governorate, we
welcome the fact that an agreement has been reached
on the new mechanism for monitoring the ceasefire and
the military de-escalation. As Mr. Griffiths informed
us, it has also been agreed that committees will be
formed to supervise compliance with the ceasefire with
the participation of representatives from both parties,
as well as the United Nations.
Furthermore, as Mr. Lowcock pointed out, the
humanitarian situation remains catastrophic. Since the
beginning of the year, new cases of cholera continue
to be reported, with almost half a million people
affected by the disease. We therefore need a robust
and coordinated response from the relevant actors to
improve the living conditions of the most vulnerable,
especially children.
I would like to thank Mr. Beasley for his briefing,
in which he eloquently outlined the current situation
of the distribution of aid in some areas controlled
by Ansar Allah. We regret that there has had to be a
gradual suspension of assistance and we reiterate that,
in order for humanitarian action to be effective, it
must be provided in accordance with the principles of
humanity, neutrality, impartiality and independence.
Failure to comply with these principles puts the welfare
of the affected population at risk. Further, we cannot
allow hunger to become a weapon of war. We trust
that, through dialogue, commitments can be reached to
meet the people’s food needs. We hope that, based on
Mr. Beasley’s announcement today, it will be possible
to reach a signed agreement.
Moreover, we would like to draw attention to
the problem of landmines and improvised explosive
devices, which prevent humanitarian organizations
from reaching populations in need. Civilian areas must
urgently be cleared of mines and explosive devices, and
this demining must take place not only in residential
areas but also on agricultural land, so that people can
access their fields safely.
12/23

18/07/2019

We echo the concerns expressed by the Office of the
United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights
with regard to the imposition of the death penalty on 30
people, most of whom are academics and students, by a
Special Criminal Trial Court of de facto authorities in
Sana’a. The defendants must be guaranteed due process
and a fair trial, and any charges under political motives
must be dismissed.
Finally, the Security Council remains united in the
search for a political solution to the conflict in Yemen,
and we would like to reiterate our delegation’s steadfast
support for Mr. Griffiths in his tireless efforts to find
a solution. We call on the parties to the conflict to
participate in good faith in these negotiations and to
fulfil their commitments in the same spirit displayed in
Stockholm in December.
Mr. Mabhongo (South Africa): We thank all the
briefers for their detailed, informative and, indeed,
illuminating briefings this morning.
South Africa remains extremely concerned at the
serious humanitarian and security situation in Yemen.
The continued violence, including the attacks on Abha
International Airport, remains unacceptable and must
be condemned. South Africa firmly believes that, in
order to ensure a long-term solution to the crisis in
Yemen, it is necessary for all parties to commit to a
political process. With that in mind, we welcome the
progress made in the implementation of the Hudaydah
Agreement and the role played by the United Nations
Mission to Support the Hudaydah Agreement
(UNMHA).
We support the renewal of the UNMHA mandate
for an additional six months, which was unanimously
adopted by the Council on Monday (see S/PV.8572). We
therefore wish to encourage all parties — who, by signing
the Stockholm Agreement in the first place, have shown
their willingness to commit to its implementation — to
make every effort to fully implement all the elements of
the Agreement, namely, the ceasefire and redeployment
of forces, facilitation of the movement of humanitarian
aid and, lastly, a prisoner swap. South Africa therefore
calls on all parties to de-escalate the fighting in other
parts of the country and commit to a general ceasefire
to enable dialogue and inclusive peaceful negotiations.
We wish to reiterate that the success of the Stockholm
Agreement will require the sustained implementation
of confidence-building measures by both parties.
19-22247

18/07/2019

The situation in the Middle East

Mr. Lowcock’s briefing this morning was a painful
reminder of the dire humanitarian situation in Yemen.
My delegation therefore calls upon all parties to ensure
that the necessary humanitarian assistance is able to
safely reach the intended destinations without being
used as a tool to further fuel the conflict. In this regard,
we are concerned by the recent partial suspension of
food aid from the World Food Programme, the dire
implications of which were clearly articulated this
morning by Executive Director Beasley. We call for the
matter to be resolved in order for this aid to be resumed
for those in need. Any hindrance to the delivery of this
vital humanitarian aid only exacerbates the already
severe crisis.
In conclusion, we wish to reiterate that the only
sustainable resolution will be a negotiated, Yemeniled political process that is inclusive and fair and
puts the interests and well-being of all the citizens of
Yemen first.
Mr. Ipo (Côte d’Ivoire) (spoke in French): My
delegation congratulates Mr. Martin Griffiths, Special
Envoy of the Secretary-General for Yemen; Mr. Mark
Lowcock, Under-Secretary-General for Humanitarian
Affairs and Emergency Relief Coordinator; and
Mr. David Beasley, Executive Director of the United
Nations World Food Programme (WFP), for their
detailed briefings on the latest developments in Yemen.
As the Security Council extends the mandate of
the United Nations Mission to Support the Hodeidah
Agreement (UNMHA), my country notes with regret
that the peace process in Yemen has struggled to make
the expected progress in the implementation of the
relevant provisions of the Stockholm Agreement. Côte
d’Ivoire urges all Yemeni actors to seize the opportunity
of this mandate renewal to resolutely engage in dialogue,
as recommended by the Stockholm Agreement.
With regard to the Al-Hudaydah agreement,
my delegation believes that it is essential that all
parties scrupulously comply with the ceasefire and
pursue the redeployment of military forces, including
the withdrawal of the Houthis from the ports of
Al-Hudaydah, Saleef and Ras Isa, under the auspices
of the Redeployment Coordination Committee (RCC).
While contributing to the establishment of an
environment of trust, compliance with the ceasefire will
undoubtedly promote the full resumption of the WFP’s
activities and the deployment of the inspectors of the
United Nations Verification and Inspection Mechanism

S/PV. 8578

in Yemen, with a view to assisting port authorities in
increasing port capacities and generating resources.
My country also believes that it is urgent to implement
the provisions of the Stockholm Agreement relating to
the exchange of 15,000 prisoners and the memorandum
of understanding on the city of Taiz for the opening of
humanitarian corridors.
Despite the complexity of the current challenges,
my country reaffirms its conviction that a return to
lasting peace and stability in Yemen remains possible
through dialogue and courageous compromises among
all actors in the crisis. In that regard, my delegation
welcomes the ongoing mediation efforts of Mr. Martin
Griffiths that enabled the warring parties, on 15 July,
to commit themselves to honouring the ceasefire and
facilitating the redeployment of forces from the port
of Al-Hudaydah. My country calls on regional actors
to participate in constructive efforts to support the
ongoing mediation efforts and the commitment of the
Yemeni parties to achieving meaningful results.
After several years of conflict, Yemen is now a
devastated country where, according to United Nations
agencies, 24 million people face a humanitarian
emergency, 14 million suffer from food insecurity and
3.3 million are internally displaced. This situation is
all the more worrying for my country, as deliberate
and unacceptable obstacles to the delivery of food
aid are abundant and led to the partial suspension of
humanitarian aid on 20 June. We hope for a quick
conclusion of the agreement announced by Mr. Beasley
so that the WFP can fully resume its provision of aid to
affected populations.
My delegation therefore urgently appeals to the
Yemeni parties to refrain from any instrumentalization
and manipulation of humanitarian assistance, which
constitutes a serious violation of international
humanitarian law and resolution 2417 (2018). It also calls
on them to respect the obligation to protect civilians
and to put an end to the recruitment of child soldiers.
In conclusion, Côte d’Ivoire reaffirms its support
for the tireless efforts of Mr. Griffiths, Mr. Lowcock and
Mr. Beasley to reach a political settlement of the Yemeni
conflict and to mobilize the necessary resources to
mitigate the negative effects of the humanitarian crisis.
My country also commends the RCC and UNMHA
observation teams, led by Lieutenant General Michael
Lollesgaard, for their determination to create the

19-2224713/23

S/PV.8578

The situation in the Middle East

environment necessary to a definitive and sustainable
settlement of the crisis in Yemen.
Mr. Nebenzia (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We thank Special Envoy Martin Griffiths,
Under-Secretary-General Mark Lowcock and the
Executive Director of the World Food Programme,
David Beasley, for their comprehensive overview of the
military, political and humanitarian situations in the
Republic of Yemen.
We support the mediation efforts of Mr. Griffiths
and Lieutenant General Michael Lollesgaard, who are
striving to steer the parties to the Yemeni conflict to
acknowledge the futility of a military solution. We are
convinced that the implementation of the Stockholm
Agreements remains possible. In that connection,
we welcome the progress reached by the parties at
the joint meeting of the Redeployment Coordination
Committee, under the leadership of Lieutenant General
Lollesgaard, particularly with regard to the development
of confidence-building measures.
The completion of the redeployment of armed
forces from the ports of Al-Hudaydah, Saleef and Ras
Isa will undoubtedly help to unblock other aspects of
the Stockholm Agreement, including the exchange of
prisoners and the de-escalation of tensions in Taiz, and
will help spark discussions of the framework parameters
for a settlement.
We all voted to extend the mandate of the United
Nations Mission to Support the Hodeidah Agreement.
We are confident that the further deployment of an
international presence will facilitate the separation of
the conflicting parties in the city and promote the overall
stabilization of the situation in Yemen. However, we
should not expect instant results as the bulk of the work
lies ahead. Russia will continue to provide assistance to
United Nations mediation in Yemen, both in its national
capacity and as one of five permanent members of the
Security Council.
Mr. Lowcock and Mr. Beasley today painted a
discouraging picture of the situation in the Republic
of Yemen, which is experiencing one of the worst
humanitarian crises in the world. The crisis is structural
in nature. It has inflicted irreparable damage on the
population, economy and civilian infrastructure of
Yemen. Millions of Yemenis are starving, cannot access
needed medical services and supplies and are in dire
need of various types of assistance. The country is once
again in the grip of a cholera epidemic. The situation is
14/23

18/07/2019

deteriorating with each passing day and approaching a
point of no return. Providing humanitarian assistance
to Yemen should be a priority of our work and must
carried out on a non-discriminatory basis, regardless of
who controls any given area.
We once again call for a universal ceasefire,
ensuring unfettered humanitarian access to all regions
of the country and unconditional compliance with
the provisions of international humanitarian law.
All parties to the Yemeni conflict must immediately
stop launching indiscriminate strikes against civilian
facilities, abandon aggressive, provocative rhetoric and
show restraint.
In conclusion, we recall resolution 598 (1987), as
we so often do. The resolution tasked the SecretaryGeneral to develop an architecture of security and
confidence in the region in collaboration with the States
of the region. This architecture, bringing together all
key States of the region — the Persian Gulf countries
and Iran — would now only strengthen comprehensive
and indivisible security in this part of the globe but also
help resolve long-standing and new crises, including
the conflict in Yemen.
In that connection, our proposal to begin developing
a package of security- and confidence-building
measures for the Persian Gulf, and ultimately for the
entire Middle East, remains on the table and relevant.
We have said this repeatedly. This comprehensive
formula would help replace threats and confrontation
with dialogue and cooperation and improve the general
environment, which would, incidentally, contribute
significantly to the success of the Yemeni efforts under
the auspices of the United Nations.
Mr. Lewicki (Poland): At the outset, let me thank all
briefers for their comprehensive updates of the current
situation in Yemen. Let me also seize this opportunity
to renew Poland’s full and continued support for all
efforts of the Special Envoy Martin Griffiths, and to pay
our most heartfelt tribute to all brave United Nations
staff members, men and women, particularly those on
the ground, who are providing life-saving assistance to
Yemeni men, women and children.
Let me first address the situation in Al-Hudaydah.
We welcome the recent meeting of the Redeployment
Coordination Committee and we are encouraged by the
finalization of agreements on concepts of operations
for both phases of the mutual redeployment. In our
view, it is critical to preserve the ceasefire and to
19-22247

18/07/2019

The situation in the Middle East

expedite the implementation of the remaining stages of
the redeployment, in full cooperation with the United
Nations Mission to Support the Hodeidah Agreement
(UNMHA). We also encourage the parties to take
meaningful steps to ensure the full implementation of
all provisions of the Stockholm Agreement.
The ceasefire in Al-Hudaydah was intended to be
a confidence-building exercise designed to help pave
the way for the resumption of the political process. It
demonstrated that direct dialogue between the parties
is possible. But the Al-Hudaydah agreement itself will
not resolve the conflict and will not put an end to the
violence that has surged in other Yemeni governorates.
As Mark Lowcock highlighted, conflict and violence
continue in many places throughout the country.
We strongly believe that it is time to step up efforts
to find a comprehensive solution to the conflict through
the resumption of the political process, which should
be conducted in parallel with the implementation of
the Stockholm Agreement. Let me reiterate that we
strongly support the Special Envoy’s tireless efforts
in that regard and we call on all parties to engage
constructively with Mr. Griffiths, because as Mr. David
Beasley said, the reason that the United Nations and
the international community are providing assistance
in Yemen is because all parties engaged in the conflict
have failed in their responsibility to protect the civilian
population and to provide them with the conditions to
live in peace and security.
In that vein, we also urge the parties to refrain from
taking actions that threaten to undermine the United
Nations-led political process. Like other delegations,
we condemn all attacks on the territory of Saudi
Arabia, which pose a security threat to the Kingdom
and might have a negative impact on broader regional
stability. In that context, I wish to echo Martin Griffiths
in stressing that we should keep Yemen out from other
potential ongoing conflicts in the region.
Given the current fragile security environment, it
is crucial that the parties de-escalate tensions and show
utmost restraint. They must also meet their obligations
under international humanitarian and human rights law
and ensure the protection of civilians at all times. As
we keep stressing in this Chamber, complying with
international human rights and humanitarian law is not
a matter of choice; it is a matter of obligation under
international law.

S/PV. 8578

The protracted conflict in Yemen has created
conditions in which the survival of millions of Yemenis
depends entirely on the delivery of humanitarian aid. We
have just heard briefings by Mark Lowcock and David
Beasley in which they painted quite a bleak picture,
unfortunately. Allowing humanitarian assistance to
reach all the people in need is not a matter of choice;
again, it is the responsibility and obligation of the
parties to the conflict. Therefore, we urge them to allow
and facilitate the flow of humanitarian and commercial
imports, including in-country shipments of fuel, and to
ensure free, safe and unimpeded access for humanitarian
assistance and personnel to all parts of the country. All
bureaucratic restrictions imposed on the movement of
humanitarian convoys — and in that regard I wish to
refer to the intervention by David Beasley — as well as
any form of denial of humanitarian access, diversion of
resources or interference in humanitarian operations is
just unacceptable.
Let me also echo Ambassador Pierce’s intervention
in urging the Houthis to revoke the death sentences
they have imposed and in calling upon all parties to
comply with their obligations under international law,
in particular international human rights law.
In conclusion, I would like to take this opportunity
to express Poland’s full support for the work of all United
Nations agencies and their personnel in Yemen, as well
as to welcome the extension of the UNMHA mandate.
Mr. Ndong Mba (Equatorial Guinea) (spoke
in Spanish): We have listened very carefully to the
briefings just delivered by Mr. Martin Griffiths, Special
Envoy of the Secretary-General for Yemen; Mr. Mark
Lowcock, Under-Secretary-General for Humanitarian
Affairs; and Mr. David Beasley, Executive Director
of the World Food Programme. We thank them for
the detailed and valuable briefings they provided. We
reiterate our full support for the work being done by
Mr. Martin Griffiths, and encourage him to continue
with his noble mission for the well-being of the
Yemeni people.
As we meet once again today to analyse the conflict
in Yemen, which is now in its fifth year, Equatorial
Guinea would like to begin by expressing its praise and
full support for the good management of the United
Nations system and other international actors, the sole
objective of which is to put an end as soon as possible to
this situation, which has ensnared women and children
and the entire Yemeni civilian population.

19-2224715/23

S/PV.8578

The situation in the Middle East

18/07/2019

In late 2018, we were pleased to note the
good management of the mediation process led by
Mr. Griffiths, which led to the meeting in Sweden.
Taking past failures into account, we considered the
Yemeni parties’ agreement to meet, negotiate and reach
a consensus on the various aspects of the Stockholm
Agreement to be a success. We have always recognized
that important step, but the most important thing
now is for the leaders of the parties to ensure strict
compliance with those commitments and to cooperate
with the Special Envoy in good faith and cooperation.
Commitment to the political process and partnership
with the United Nations, through the Special Envoy,
are indeed essential to achieving the goals of peace,
stability and the improvement of the living conditions
of the population affected by the conflict.

that led to the suspension so that aid can be restored
and can continue to be distributed to the thousands of
people who need it. Although an agreement has not
been realized, we consider the ongoing negotiations
worthwhile and we praise the efforts of the World Food
Programme to reach that goal.

Despite the delays observed in the implementation
of the agreement, we welcomed some statements
made by the Special Envoy at the meeting in June (see
S/PV.8551), such as the ongoing reduction in violence
throughout Al-Hudaydah governorate in the six months
since the entry into force of the agreement and the
reduction by 68 per cent in the number of civilian
victims in the five months after the ceasefire. In the
same vein, we were pleased to note the constructive
collaboration in recent months of the warring parties
with the Redeployment Coordination Committee
in the plans for the first and second phases of the
redeployments. It is important for that collaboration to
lead them to the tripartite monitoring mechanism.

Finally, I would like to underscore the importance
of making progress on all the issues in question, which
deserve a sustainable solution in order to ensure the
possibility of a resumption of talks between the parties
on a comprehensive political solution. Moreover, we
reaffirm and reiterate our full support for the diplomatic
efforts of Special Envoy Griffiths, as well as the work
of the Under-Secretary-General for Humanitarian
Affairs, Mr. Lowcock, and the Executive Director of
the World Food Programme, Mr. Beasley, to alleviate
the suffering of the population and resolve the conflict
in Yemen.

Furthermore, our delegation calls on the parties
to immediately begin work on the other aspects of the
agreement, such as the implementation of the exchanges
of prisoners and detainees and the memorandum
of understanding on Taiz, which are equally
important in making progress towards achieving the
established objectives.
The Republic of Equatorial Guinea is extremely
concerned about the humanitarian crisis affecting
Yemen as a result of the conflict. The increase in food
insecurity, epidemics and the collapse of the health
system, as well as inflation and economic decline, have
contributed greatly to worsening this crisis.
Faced with this situation, we note with concern the
decision taken by the World Food Programme to partially
suspend the delivery of humanitarian assistance in the
country’s capital. We therefore encourage the authorities
of the warring parties to find a solution to the incidents
16/23

Similarly, we reiterate our concern about the
increase in fatalities in the rapidly spreading cholera
epidemic that has claimed thousands of human lives
since the outbreak began in the country. In that regard,
we urge all parties to facilitate humanitarian access to
the population in need of medicines and other services.
We further implore the parties to allow the displaced
persons throughout the country access to food, medical
care and shelter.

Mr. Yao Shaojun (China) (spoke in Chinese): I
would like to thank Special Envoy Griffiths, UnderSecretary-General Lowcock and Executive Director
Beasley for their briefings. China supports the efforts of
Special Envoy Griffiths to advance the political process
in Yemen and commends the United Nations and the
World Food Programme (WFP) for their unremitting
efforts to improve the humanitarian situation in
that country.
The Stockholm Agreement — an important
step towards the political settlement of the Yemeni
issue — should be implemented in earnest. With the
efforts of the international community and the Yemeni
parties, the ceasefire is largely holding in Al-Hudaydah
and the redeployment is making headway. Just recently,
the Yemeni parties participated in the first face-to-face
meeting of the Redeployment Coordination Committee
(RCC) since February and agreed on a mechanism
and new measures to reinforce the ceasefire and
de-escalation in Al-Hudaydah.
19-22247

18/07/2019

The situation in the Middle East

Under the good offices of the United Nations, the
Yemeni parties should continue to conduct dialogue and
consultations with a view to resolving such outstanding
issues as local security forces, relevant port revenues
and prisoner exchanges. The Special Envoy of the
Secretary-General, the United Nations Mission to
Support the Hodeidah Agreement (UNMHA) and the
RCC should strengthen dialogue and collaboration with
a view to forging synergies to promote the resolution of
the aforementioned issues.
The Council should continue to maintain unity
and provide support for the political process in Yemen.
China supports the adoption of resolution 2481 (2019),
which renewed the mandate of UNMHA for six months.
Since the deployment of the Mission, violent incidents
have decreased in Al-Hudaydah and the Mission’s
operations have been effective on the whole.
Given the complexity of the environment in
Al-Hudaydah, the Mission has to overcome security,
administrative and logistical difficulties. The Yemeni
parties should strengthen cooperation with the
United Nations to provide assistance and facilitate
the deployment of the Mission and its mandate
implementation. China supports UNMHA in continuing
to oversee the ceasefire and advance the redeployment
of forces and mine action operations, and commends
the work of the Mission and the dedication of its staff.
China support the Yemeni parties on the basis of
relevant Council resolutions, such as resolution 2216
(2015), the Gulf Cooperation Council Initiative and
its Implementation Mechanism and the outcome of
the comprehensive National Dialogue Conference
in returning to the track of dialogue for a political
settlement of the Yemeni issue. The sovereignty,
independence, unity and territorial integrity of Yemen
must be safeguarded.
Since countries of the region play an important role
on the Yemeni issue, China supports their enhanced
dialogue and cooperation with the United Nations to
create favourable conditions for the Yemeni parties
to ease tensions, enhance mutual trust and advance
the political process. China condemns all attacks on
civilians and civilian infrastructure.
Since the outbreak of the war in Yemen, the
Yemeni people have suffered from violence, hunger,
disease and displacement, among other threats. China
is deeply concerned about the humanitarian situation in
Yemen. The international community should increase

S/PV. 8578

its assistance, provide tailored support in cash and in
kind and honour its pledges in a timely manner. All
parties concerned should ensure humanitarian access
in Yemen so that humanitarian supplies can reach all
the people and areas in need of assistance.
China is closely following the food crisis in Yemen
and supports the work of the WFP to improve the
living conditions of the Yemeni people. China has also
provided multiple batches of humanitarian aid, such
as food and medicine, to Yemen through bilateral and
multilateral channels, and will continue to do its utmost
to help the Yemeni people address their shortages of
basic necessities, such as clothing, food, medicine and
health care.
Mr. Pecsteen de Buytswerve (Belgium) (spoke in
French): At the outset, I would like to thank Mr. Martin
Griffiths, Mr. Mark Lowcock and Mr. David Beasley
for their briefings.
We welcome the unanimous adoption of resolution
2481 (2019) on the renewal of the United Nations
Mission to Support the Hodeidah Agreement and call
on all actors to facilitate its full implementation within
a reasonable time frame.
We note with satisfaction the results of the latest
meeting of the Redeployment Coordination Committee
(RCC), held in Al-Hudaydah, including the agreements
on de-escalation and the concept of operations for
the first and second phases of the redeployment. We
call on all parties to fully implement the withdrawal
agreement, to respect the ceasefire in full and to resolve
the outstanding points of disagreement, including the
issue of local security forces. We continue to call on
all parties to implement the Stockholm Agreement in
its entirety, including the prisoner-exchange agreement
and the memorandum of understanding on Taiz.
Moreover, Belgium continues to encourage the
Special Envoy to continue to prepare the next steps
in the political process, which must be inclusive. The
Al-Hudaydah agreement is of particular importance to
the humanitarian situation, but the core of the conflict
requires a sustainable and inclusive political solution.
We reiterate our full support for the efforts of Special
Envoy Martin Griffiths.
Violence in the rest of the country continues,
exacerbating the lack of trust between the parties. In
addition, such violence has an impact on humanitarian
access. We call on all parties to cease hostilities

19-2224717/23

S/PV.8578

The situation in the Middle East

throughout the country. Belgium remains deeply
concerned over the high number of child victims,
particularly as a result of air strikes and ground fighting,
and urges all parties to take immediate measures to
protect children. Furthermore, we strongly condemn
the attacks with drones and missiles on civilian targets
in Saudi Arabia claimed by the Houthis. Those attacks
are unacceptable.
Efforts are needed to improve the humanitarian
situation, which remains catastrophic, as we have heard
once again this morning. We commend the humanitarian
agencies for their outstanding work, despite difficulties.
It is imperative for all parties to facilitate access for
humanitarian assistance and to respect international
humanitarian law. In particular, we strongly condemn
any misuse of humanitarian aid. Assistance must be
provided to those who need it. We are concerned that
the situation in Sana’a remains unresolved. As David
Beasley announced, we hope that an agreement will be
signed soon.
We note with concern the financial situation, as
described by Mark Lowcock. Belgium has paid its
contribution to the Yemen Humanitarian Fund and calls
on other contributors to do the same.
Lastly, it is crucial to continue to look into the
violations committed in the territory. We call on the
parties to respect their obligations and commitments
under international humanitarian law and international
human rights law. In that regard, Belgium is alarmed by
the imposition of the death penalty by the Houthis on
30 people in Sana’a. Those people are on the list for the
exchange of prisoners. The agreement on the prisoner
exchange must be implemented as soon as possible.
Mr. Djani (Indonesia): I would like first of all to
thank Mr. Martin Griffiths, Mr. Mark Lowcock and
Mr. David Beasley for their briefings. They may rest
assured of Indonesia’s full support in what they are
doing. In responding to the briefings, we would like to
underscore three important points.
First, we welcome the agreement reached at the
joint meeting of the Redeployment Coordination
Committee on new measures to reinforce the
ceasefire and concepts of operations for both phases
of redeployment. If implemented, the agreement will
help to further de-escalate tension in the area. It is also
another steppingstone towards the full implementation
of the Hudaydah Agreement. We certainly agree with
what Martin Griffiths mentioned regarding the fact
18/23

18/07/2019

that the Agreement is a gateway to a political process.
However, we should not forget that the end objective is
a comprehensive agreement. Hopefully, we will be able
to reach that as soon as possible. I remain optimistic
about the work of Mr. Griffiths in that regard.
We also continue to push for the implementation
of the Stockholm Agreement and the continuation of
efforts to find a comprehensive political solution to end
the conflict. In that regard, we reiterate our support
for the work being carried out by the Special Envoy
and General Lollesgaard, and we thank them for their
tireless efforts in the quest for a wider peace in Yemen.
Like others, we condemn any action or attacks that
would further escalate the conflict, including on critical
infrastructure in Saudi Arabia, which would threaten
security and stability in the region.
Secondly, Indonesia is deeply concerned about
the unwillingness of the Houthis to cooperate with the
World Food Programme (WFP), resulting in a partial
suspension of aid in some areas under the control of the
authorities. We fully understand that that is the path that
WFP must take to prevent the diversion of food from
some of the most vulnerable people in Yemen. We call
on the Houthis to cooperate with WFP and we reiterate
our support for the humanitarian efforts of the United
Nations, including WFP. We supported the appeal
of the WFP Executive Director, Mr. David Beasley.
Hopefully, the agreement will be signed as soon as
possible and implemented. I think that that is a very
important part of achieving success. I would like once
again to underline that humanitarian aid should not,
and cannot, be politicized. That is simply unacceptable.
Indonesia also notes Mark Lowcock’s legitimate
concerns about the funding issues. The commitments
made at the Geneva pledging conference are in urgent
need of being disbursed without delay. We will witness
a humanitarian catastrophe if the operation is left
unfunded. We heard what Mr. Lowcock said about
the suspension of medical services, food availability
and, of course, the closure of 21 more key programme,
which is quite alarming.
Thirdly, we welcome the mandate renewal of the
United Nations Mission to Support the Hudaydah
Agreement (UNMHA) for another six months and
the leadership of General Lollesgaard to navigate the
Mission. At this juncture, the Mission’s full deployment
is critical, not only to monitor the implementation of
the Hudaydah Agreement, but also, very important,
19-22247

18/07/2019

The situation in the Middle East

S/PV. 8578

to facilitate humanitarian assistance. We are glad that
since the establishment of UNMHA, there has been
an overall reduction in both violence and the number
of reported civilian casualties, alongside a growing
number of returnees to the area and greater economic
activity in Al-Hudaydah. In that connection, Indonesia
is honoured to be able to take part in the Mission, and
we stand ready to continue to contribute further to it.

I hope that Mr. Beasley will soon receive the right
text message, saying that it is now actually agreed and
that WFP can continue with full-fledged humanitarian
aid. I think that he took the right decision to cut the
aid because there were too many people benefiting
from the assistance that did not deserve to. At the same
time, it was absolutely right that those who are the most
vulnerable continue to receive support.

In conclusion, the crisis in Yemen will be
remembered as one of the biggest humanitarian crises
in the history of humankind. However, it could also
be remembered as the Council’s best success if we
continue to remain united and to support every effort to
find peace and to avert a future disaster.

I also echo Mr. Beasley’s plea for those who have
pledged humanitarian aid to implement it. Germany has
fulfilled its task. We have increased our pledge. But
we really appeal to those who have pledged, including
those from the region who have pledged large sums,
to implement. We have heard the figures and we just
cannot allow the humanitarian aid to stop.

Mr. Heusgen (Germany): Germany is also
concerned about the continuing military attacks. We
condemn in particular the attacks on Saudi Arabia and
the recent ones in general. It is very clear that for this
conflict, as for many others, there is no military solution.
We therefore support all the efforts of Martin Griffiths
to reach a political solution. We think that looking at all
the tactical steps that are necessary to implement the
Stockholm Agreement is the right approach to but most
important is to keep the strategic objective in mind,
that is, to make progress on the political process. It is a
question of political will. A solution can be found. The
elements are there. The puzzle must just be put together.
I would like to echo what Martin Griffiths and
the United Kingdom and Polish representatives said
regarding the death sentence imposed on 30 civilians.
I would urge the responsible Houthis to revoke those
unacceptable sentences. I would also like to echo what
Mr. Griffiths said with regard to General Lollesgaard.
His perseverance is truly remarkable and I congratulate
him on the success that he has had.
I thank Mr, Lowcock and Mr. Beasley for their
briefings and for their efforts. I particularly thank
their teams on the ground for what they are doing
under difficult circumstances. It is unacceptable that
humanitarian aid workers encounter the problems on
the ground that they are seeing at the moment. I think
Mark Lowcock said that it was ironic that some of those
who asked for humanitarian aid are now making it very
difficult for that aid to be delivered. Let me appeal to
all sides to adhere to international humanitarian law.
That is very clear and we can only recall and reiterate
it day after day.

In conclusion, let me express Germany’s support
for the work of Mr. Griffiths, Mr. Lowcock, Mr. Beasley
and General Lollesgaard. I ask that they do all they can
to end the worst humanitarian crisis of our time.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I shall now
make a statement in my capacity as the representative
of Peru.
We too would like to thank Mr. Griffiths,
Mr. Lowcock and Mr. Beasley for their important and
detailed presentations. We would like to express our
ongoing appreciation for their efforts in their respective
and complementary fields of action in bringing all
parties closer to an inclusive political solution to
the conflict in Yemen and in addressing the worst
humanitarian crisis in the world today.
Peru is following the developments in Yemen with
concern. While we welcome the recent preliminary
understandings at the technical level within the
Redeployment Coordination Committee, on which we
congratulate General Lollesgaard, we cannot fail to
emphasize the extremely fragile nature of the current
situation given the deep mistrust that still prevails
between the parties and the rigidity of their positions.
We believe that we are at a critical juncture, which
demands more than ever that the leaders of both parties
show concrete signs of genuine commitment and
political will that translate into tangible and expeditious
progress on crucial issues, such as the composition of
local security forces in Al-Hudaydah, the management
of revenue from commercial activity and the effective
implementation of the two phases envisaged in the
redeployment of the forces.

19-2224719/23

S/PV.8578

The situation in the Middle East

To that end, we stress the special responsibility of
those countries that are able to influence the warring
parties and that can and must do more to convince them
to moderate their positions, avoid further escalation,
strictly honour their obligations under international
humanitarian law and human rights law and ultimately
comply with what was agreed in Al-Hudaydah. We
emphasize that the international community, in
particular the Council, cannot tolerate further delays
with regard to those critical issues or provocative and
destabilizing actions, including by third countries,
that could lead to an escalation of the conflict in an
environment in which the devastating humanitarian
crisis looming over that country continues to deteriorate
on the ground.
The significant increase in the number of people in
need of assistance and protection today, the 3.3 million
displaced Yemenis and the ravages caused by the new
outbreak of cholera are scourges for which we must
all feel partially responsible. The work of the United
Nations and various non-governmental entities in
alleviating human suffering is commendable, but the
reality is that their capacities are being overwhelmed
by the scale of the tragedy.
As the Organization has pointed out, the struggle
to prevent famine is being lost in Yemen. In such
circumstances, it is regrettable that the quantity of
imports continues to fall short of requirements as
a result of the persistence of severe and inhumane
restrictions imposed on the ports of Al-Hudaydah and
Saleef, which have resulted in disappointing trade
flows in essential goods, such as food, medicine and
fuel. In that regard, we reaffirm that ports, airports
and roads must remain open and operational and that
humanitarian aid and the population’s access to it cannot
and must not be conditional on any military objective.
Moreover, humanitarian personnel must be able assist
the population in a safe and unrestricted manner.
We also encourage the countries that participated
in the pledging conference in February to disburse
their generous and critical contributions so that the
humanitarian response plan, which is crucial to filling
the gaps for the afflicted Yemeni population, can
resume its operations without impediment.
In conclusion, I stress the imperative that
Mr. Griffiths be able to continue to count on the
resolute support of the Council and the main actors
involved in the conflict in carrying out the complex
20/23

18/07/2019

task of persuading the parties to agree to an inclusive
political solution endorsed by the United Nations, in
full respect for the sovereignty, unity and territorial
integrity of Yemen.
I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.
I give the floor to the representative of Yemen.
Mr. Al-Saadi (Yemen) (spoke in Arabic): I
congratulate you, Sir, on assuming the presidency of
the Security Council for this month. I wish you and
your delegation every success.
From the outset, following the instructions of
Mr. Mansour Hadi Mansour, President of the Republic,
the Yemeni Government has demonstrated openness
and flexibility and made concessions and initiatives
to establish peace, end the coup d’état, restore State
institutions and alleviate the suffering of the Yemeni
people. Our Government has taken care to support the
efforts of the United Nations, represented by Special
Envoy Griffiths and Lieutenant General Lollesgaard,
Chair of the Redeployment Coordination Committee
(RCC) in order to implement the Stockholm Agreement
and to achieve a political settlement according to the
agreed terms of reference, namely, the Gulf Cooperation
Council Initiative, its Implementation Mechanism, the
outcome of the National Dialogue Conference and the
relevant Security Council resolutions, chief among
which is resolution 2216 (2015).
Our Government is committed to the full and
complete implementation of the Stockholm Agreement
for the release of prisoners and detainees and the lifting
of the siege on Taiz. We reject any attempt to manipulate
the interpretation of the Agreement to achieve other
ends or justify the practices and obstinacy of the
Houthi militias, which want to shirk their obligations
for achieving peace and are able to create obstacles
so that they can control Al-Hudaydah and its ports by
misleading the international community.
In that regard, the Yemeni Government stresses
the importance of implementing their redeployment in
accordance with what has been agreed, as well as the
tripartite Verification and Inspection Mechanism. Each
phase of redeployment must be accomplished before
the subsequent stage is initiated. The second stage of
redeployment must be implemented after establishing
the legal authority and security services in charge and
agreement has been reached on the mechanism for
19-22247

18/07/2019

The situation in the Middle East

the collection of revenues. We reject any unilateral
measure. We also reject the staged withdrawals of the
Houthis, which are a clear and established violation
of the Stockholm Agreement, as well as the relevant
Security Council resolutions. Those withdrawals do not
respect past agreements.
We stress the importance of opening crossing
points and facilitating the movement of United Nations
personnel in Al-Hudaydah. Such obstructionist
practices by the militias have led to the failure of
bilateral meetings in the city, which resulted in the latest
meeting of the RCC taking place in a United Nations
vessel off the coast in the Red Sea. Our Government
is working to correct the redeployment operation and
avoid the shortcomings we have seen in the past, namely,
during the first phase of redeployment. We will work in
accordance with the established agreements. We will
demine and fill the trenches in Al-Hudaydah, as well as
in the ports of Al-Hudaydah, Saleef and Ras Isa.
Unfortunately, confidence-building measures are
difficult to establish when the United Nations has failed
to exert pressure on the Houthis to open up crossing
points in Al-Hudaydah. It is difficult to undertake such
confidence-building measures when meetings have
been held in the middle of the sea.
Since the implementation of the Stockholm
Agreement, we have seen over the course of the past
eight months that no tangible progress has been made
to date, apart from what had already been announced
in terms of a unilateral withdrawal — a show that has
been staged by the militias. Following the Stockholm
Agreement, the militias have dug trenches, strengthened
their military positions, opened up new front lines and
fanned the flames of the humanitarian crisis. Rockets
and drones have been launched against the Yemeni
people and against civilian infrastructure, as well as
the friendly Kingdom of Saudi Arabia.
Since the Stockholm Agreement, the Houthi militias
have continued their military escalation, targeted cities
and violated international humanitarian law and human
rights law. They have launched drones and rockets
against the Yemeni people and the Kingdom of Saudi
Arabia. They have also targeted international maritime
navigation. For its part, the Iranian regime is supporting
those militias by providing them with arms and
military technology used in terrorist operations. That
demonstrates that there is a manifest will to perpetuate

S/PV. 8578

the war, derail the peace efforts and exacerbate the
humanitarian crisis.
A few weeks ago, we saw a Houthi militia
demonstration of their military arsenal. When we
compare what we saw during that demonstration
with what we saw in a demonstration by the Islamic
Revolutionary Guard Corps in 2019, there is proof
of the origin of the weapons used to kill the Yemeni
people and to target civilian structures in the Kingdom
of Saudi Arabia, as well as to threaten international
maritime navigation. That is a clear challenge for the
international community and a violation of Security
Council resolutions, in particular resolutions 2216
(2015) and 2140 (2014). Our Government calls on the
international community and the Council to fulfil their
responsibility to maintain regional and international
peace and security and take deterrent measures to
ensure that Iranian regime is held to account for its
actions, in particular perpetuating the war in Yemen
and providing weapons to the Houthi militia, thereby
jeopardizing the security and stability of the region, in
particular the security of Bab Al-Mandeb, one of the
most important trade passages in the world.
The situation in Yemen is not simply a humanitarian
crisis. The crisis is important, of course, but it is the
result rather than the cause of the situation. To remedy
the crisis, the international community must support
the peace efforts, based on the agreed parameters to put
an end to the coup d’état, restore the State institutions
and support our Government’s efforts. Our Government
fully plays its role by adopting plans and programmes to
address developments in every area. Our Government
is also leading the way in implementing reforms to
address challenges and adopting effective policies
to build the State’s institutions. We also work hard
to provide services, revive the economy, reinvigorate
construction and restore normal life. Ultimately, the
Yemeni Government is responsible for all Yemenis,
wherever they may be — in all governorates, without
exception. Our Government was recently able to
stabilize the national currency, while bolstering State
revenue, combating money-laundering and the illicit
trade in oil products and strengthening financial and
banking institutions, which, undoubtedly, reduced and
alleviated the humanitarian crisis.
The Houthi militias continue to divert and steal food
assistance, including from the World Food Programme
(WFP), and hinder humanitarian access. The Yemeni
Government declares that the Houthi militias are

19-2224721/23

S/PV.8578

The situation in the Middle East

responsible for the decision taken by the WFP on 20 June
to partially suspend its operations in the area under
militia control, in particular Sana’a. That decision will
affect 850,000 of the most vulnerable people, including
women and children. Houthi militias continue to block
and target food assistance. Militia heads are involved
in that practice, demonstrating contempt for morals
and international law. This constitutes a crime and a
clear violation of international laws and norms. The
international community has remained silent in the face
of such crimes and violations. Houthi militias continue
to starve the Yemeni people by stealing humanitarian
and food assistance provided by international
organizations and agencies. Customs barriers are being
set up against the trucks delivering aid in governorates
under militia control.
Houthi militias have prevented the entry of 88
vessels containing assistance and oil products. Seven
vessels have been attacked in the Red Sea. Three hundred
and eighty-eight trucks — some of which were carrying
medicines to combat malaria and cholera — have been
looted. Militias have also struck four relief trucks and
targeted WFP depots and storehouses and the Red Sea
Mills. They have burned thousands of tons of cereal,
which could have fed 3.7 million people. The militias
have detained employees of international organizations
and prevented them from visiting the affected areas
to assess the humanitarian situation. They manipulate
access permits, planned visits and the names of the
beneficiaries of assistance. That aid is diverted and then
sold on the black market. At times, local organizations
are set up and run by Houthi militia leaders in order to
monopolize aid distribution.
International personnel have been forced out
and local civil servants have also been detained.
Twenty employees of the French Agency for Technical
Cooperation and Development were detained and
prevented from leaving the Bani Qais directorate and
Hajjah governorate. Their passports were confiscated
for a week. The Yemeni Government calls on the
international community and the Security Council to
condemn the violations committed by Houthi militias,
put pressure on them to lift all barriers they have imposed
on humanitarian agencies and allow the United Nations,
in particular the World Food Programme, to play its full
role and uphold its noble humanitarian responsibility
in Yemen. Our Government stresses and affirms that
we will continue to provide all necessary support to
facilitate the delivery of that humanitarian assistance.
22/23

18/07/2019

Houthi militias have imposed death sentences
on 30 activists and academics, after kidnapping and
subjecting them to physical and psychological torture
over many years. We call on the Office of the United
Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights and
the Secretary-General to intervene and do all in their
power to revoke those unjust sentences, handed down
by a court that has no authority or legality and uses
justice as a tool to oppress those who oppose it. The
trials and death sentences, which are extrajudicial, are
not in favour of citizens on the lists of the prisoner
exchange programme under the Stockholm Agreement.
Such unlawful acts are being carried out by illegal
armed groups that have no authority to hand down such
sentences. Pressure must be exerted on the militias to
force them to release all detainees, prisoners, people
under house arrest, disappeared persons and those who
are imprisoned by the militias.
Houthi militias also impose taxes on schools under
their control. Many of the schools that are unable to pay
those taxes have closed their doors, which increases
the suffering of children who no longer have access to
education and are caught up in the conflict. Furthermore,
the heads of the militias have opened holiday camps.
They force parents to send their children between the
ages of 6 and 16 to the camps so that they can brainwash
them with sectarian ideas to encourage them to go to
the front lines. That is a violation of the rights of the
child and a methodological destruction of the present
and the future of those children.
Before I conclude, I would like to say that Houthi
militias continue to target civilians, including women
and children. I listened to Mr. Lowcock’s briefing. I
would have liked to hear him talk about the children
and the women who have been targeted by snipers,
which is a practice used by the armed militias. A
nine-year-old child was targeted at his home by a
Houthi sniper two days ago. Gratitude and tributes
have been expressed and made to people on Council
sanctions lists who are the perpetrators of violations
against the Yemeni people. Those same persons are
responsible for bureaucratic obstacles. Following the
Council’s meetings, those people then send messages
to say that they agree to the various provisions, simply
so that they can dodge responsibility in the eyes of the
Council. The humanitarian crisis in Yemen is far more
important than politicization.
The President (spoke in Spanish): There are no
more names inscribed on the list of speakers.
19-22247

18/07/2019

The situation in the Middle East

I now invite Council members to informal
consultations to continue our discussion on the subject.

S/PV. 8578

The meeting rose at 12.10 p.m.

19-2224723/23
