United Nations

r

y^

GENERAL
ASSEMBLY

' O V

1205th

PLENARY MEETING

9. / '196^

(Closing meeting)
Thursday, 27 June 1963,
at 10.30 a.m.

Official Records
FOURTH SPECIAL SESSION

CONTENTS

Page

Agenda item 3:
Appointment of the Credentials Committee
(concluded)
Report of the Credentials Committee

IS

Agenda item 7:
Consideration of the financial situation of the
Organization in the light of the report of the
Working Group on the Examination of the
Administrative and Budgetary Procedures
of the United Nations

17

Completion of the work of the fourth special
session

26

Agenda item 2:
Minute of silent prayer or meditation

26

Closing of the session

26

NEW YORK

5432], during the Committee's discussion of the cre­
dentials of delegations to the fourth special session of
the General Assembly the Soviet delegation opposed
the approval of the credentials of the persons who un­
lawfully call themselves the representatives of China
in the United Nations.
6. These justified objections were supported in the
Committee by the representatives of Guinea and Indo­
nesia and, in principle, by the representative of Ni­
geria. However, as a result of the position taken by
the representative of the United States, the Committee
did not adopt the proposal to regard the credentials of
those persons as invalid.
7. The USSR delegation reiterates here its emphatic
protest against the approval of the credentials of the
group of persons still trying to pass as representatives
of China.
8. The right to represent the great Chinese people in
the United Nations and in its organs belongs exclusively
to a delegation appointed by the Central People's Gov­
ernment of the People's Republic of China, which is
the sole heritor of the rights and obligations of China,
one of the founders of the United Nations.

President: M r . M u h a m m a d Z A F R U L L A K H A N
(Pakistan).

9. The absurdity, the harmfulness, the great danger
of the continued attempts of the United States to foist
upon the United Nations as representatives of the
Chinese people those whom the Chinese people them­
selves have forever driven from their soil is becom­
ing more obvious.

AGENDA ITEM 3
Appointment of the Credentials Committee (concluded)*

REPORT OF THE CREDENTIALS COMMITTEE
(A/5432)

10. The Chinese people, who are working actively
towards a radiant socialist future and representing a
great force in the world, must be legally represented
in our Organization.

1. Mr. BITSIOS (Greece), Rapporteur of the Creden­
tials Committee (translated from French): I have the
honour to present to the General Assembly the report
of the Credentials Committee [A/5432], The Com­
mittee met on 5 June 1963. In accordance with the
decision taken by the General Assembly at its 1203rd
meeting, on 14 May 1963, the Credentials Committee
consisted of the representatives of the same Member
States which had served on the Committee during the
seventeenth regular session.

11. History is inexorable. No matter how stubbornly
the United States insists on its position, which is
illegal and contrary to the Charter, the People's Re­
public of China will inevitably take its place in the
United Nations. The sooner this happens the better.

2. The Committee had before it the memorandum by
the Secretary-General on the credentials of represen­
tatives to the fourth special session of the General
Assembly.

12. The continued exclusion of the great Chinese
people from participation in the work of the United
Nations can only lower, and is in fact lowering, the
Organization's effectiveness.

3. Paragraphs 4-18 of our report contain an account
of the debate in the Conjmittee and summarize the
statements which were made.

13. The expulsion of the followers of Chiang Kai-shek
and the restoration of the lawful rights of the People's
Republic of China, a country with a population of 650
million people, are important conditions which must
be met if the United Nations is to become a fully effec­
tive instrument for the maintenance of world peace and
universal security.

4. Paragraph 19 sets forth the conclusions of the de­
bate, namely that the Committee has found the creden­
tials of all representatives in order and recommends
that the General Assembly should approve its report.

14. In view of the fact that the report of the Creden­
tials Committee contains completely unacceptable pro­
posals regarding the representation of China in the
United Nations and that the recommendations in this
part of the report are in glaring contradiction with
the provisions of the Charter as well as with rule 27

5. Mr. MOROZOV (Union of Soviet Socialist Re­
publics) (translated from Russian): As can be seen
from the report of the Credentials Committee [A/
•Resumed from the 1203rd meeting.

15

A/PV.1205

16

General Assembly — Fourth Special Session — Plenary Meetings

of the General Assembly's rules of procedure, the
Soviet delegation emphatically opposes this part of
the Committee's report and accordingly cannot sup­
port the proposal for approval of the report.
15. Mr. HSUEH (China): My delegation supports the
report of the Credentials Committee [A/5432] and will
vote in favour of it. We have just heard a slanderous
statement made by the Soviet delegation concerning
the representation of China. The Soviet statement is
no surprise. Indeed, it has no significance unless it
indicates the importance which the Soviet Union at­
taches to the presence of my delegation in the United
Nations as an impediment to Soviet designs.
16. The Soviet Union is well aware of the fact that as
long as my Government stands in Taiwan as a rallying
point of Chinese freedom, the political conquest of the
Chinese people cannot be completed according to the
plans of international communism. The Soviet Union
must also feel that the presence of my delegation in
the United Nations constitutes an obvious frustration
in its attempt to subvert the world Organization into
an instrument of Soviet policy. Let me make this very
clear. My delegation certainly represents no commu­
nists, Marxists, Leninists or revisionists. But my
delegation does represent China which is one of the
founding Members of the United Nations.
17. The credentials of my delegation are issued by
the only legitimate Government of China which is
established under the Constitution freely adopted by
all the people of China.
18. Mr. PLIMPTON (United States of America): The
United States fully supports the validity of the creden­
tials of the representatives of the Government of the
Republic of China. Those credentials are completely
in accord with rule 27 of the rules of procedure. The
General Assembly has consistently upheld the right of
the Government of the Republic of China, a founding
Member State of this Organization, to represent the
Republic of China in the United Nations. The creden­
tials of this delegation are fully in order, and we sub­
mit that the report of the Credentials Committee is
proper and should be approved.
19. Mr. BARRINGTON (Burma): As is well known,
my Government recognizes the Central People's Gov­
ernment of the People's Republic of China as the
legitimate Government of China and therefore as the
only authority competent to accredit a Chinese dele­
gation to the United Nations. Consequently, my dele­
gation is unable to accept the recommendation of the
Credentials Committee in so far as the Chinese cre­
dentials are concerned. Our approval of the Commit­
tee's report is therefore subject to this reservation.
20. Mr. KOIRALA (Nepal): The position of my dele­
gation regarding the credentials of the representative
of China and the representative of Hungary has been
expressed more than once in this Assembly. His
Majesty's Government of Nepal recognizes the Gov­
ernment of the People's Republic of China as the
legitimate Government entitled to represent China in
the United Nations. My delegation has worked con­
tinuously to get this legitimate recognition approved
by the Assembly, and will continue to do so. My dele­
gation recognizes the credentials of Hungary as ade­
quate and satisfactory. My country maintains diplo­
matic relations with the Government of Hungary, and
sees no reason why the credentials of the duly ac­
credited representatives of that Government to this
Assembly be doubted. With these two reservations,

my delegation will vote for the report of the Creden­
tials Committee.
21. Mr. ILIC (Yugoslavia): The Yugoslav delegation
will vote in favour of the report of the Credentials
Committee, with the reservation that its position con­
cerning the question of the representation of China
in the United Nations Organization remains unchanged.
22. Mr. LEWANDOWSKI (Poland): The fiction of
Chinese representation, existing for the past thirteen
years in the United Nations as the result of United
States pressures, is a humiliating phenomenon and
undermines the authority of our Organization. We
have said many times before, and we repeat it now,
that every day of further deferment of the final and
postive solution of this question does a disservice to
the prestige of the United Nations, prevents a settle­
ment of urgent international problems and hinders
the harmonious development of economic andpolitical
co-operation.
23. In the opinion of the Polish delegation, the cre­
dentials of those ghostly figures at present occupying
the seat of the Chinese People's Republic in the United
Nations can, by no means, be recognized as valid, as
suggested in the report submitted by the Credentials
Committee. We hope that it is the last decision of this
kind, for it is nothing less than an expression of a
policy which impairs the interests of the United Na­
tions, and is in flagrant violation of the elementary
principles of international law. For these reasons, we
are unable to support the report of the Credentials
Committee.
24. Mr. Mohamed RIAD (United Arab Republic): It is
well known that my Government recognizes the Cen­
tral People's Government of the People's Republic
of China as the legal Government representing China
and the people of China. My delegation should like it
to be known and be on record that the only represen­
tatives of China should be those designated by the Gov­
ernment of the People's Republic of China. Therefore,
with this reservation, my delegation will approve the
report of the Credentials Committee.
25. Mr. NONG KIMNY (Cambodia) (translated from
French): In voting for the report of the Credentials
Committee, the Cambodian delegation wishes to make
the following reservation: so far as we are concerned,
the Government of the People's Republic of China is
the Only legal Government of China. Our position has
long been known, and we shall work for the restoration
of the People's Republic of China to its place in this
Assembly.
26. My Government has also recognized the Hungarian
Government, and it is subject to these two reservations
that we shall vote for the report of the Credentials
Committee.
27. Mr. DIALLO Telli (Guinea) (translated from
French): In the Credentials Committee, the Guinean
delegation stated clearly and unequivocally the posi­
tion which the Government of Guinea has consistently
held regarding representation of the Hungarian and
Chinese Governments in the United Nations since 1958.
28. The Government of Guinea maintains normal
diplomatic, commercial, economic and cultural rela­
tions with these two Governments.
29. In the case of Hungary, quite apart from the
specific status of the relations between the Republic
of Guinea and the Hungarian Government, we have
been happy to note the improvement in relations be­

1205th meeting — 27 June 1963
tween the Hungarian Government and certain Govern­
ments whose position has hitherto blocked normal
recognition of the Hungarian delegation in the Assem­
bly. We regret, therefore, that these encouraging
signs, noted by all during recent sessions, have failed
to materialize and that this problem, which must be
satisfactorily solved in a manner compatible with the
sovereign rights of the Hungarian people, has not been
settled once for all at this special session.
30. Our hope, on this specific point, is that as a re­
sult of the visit that the Secretary-General is prepar­
ing to pay to Hungary this problem, which is one of
the barriers, one of the obstacles, to the establishment
of a proper climate of co-operation in this Assembly,
will not come before the latter at its eighteenth session.
31. As regards the problem of the representation of
China, our position is well known. We submit that we
are guided, not by the interest of the Chinese Govern­
ment, but primarily by the interest of the United Na­
tions; we think that the United Nations is losing more
than the Chinese Government as a result of the para­
doxical situation which obtains today with respect to
this question. We expect favourable developments on
this problem, too, and I am happy to state, on the
morrow of the historic Conference of Addis Ababa,-L/
that independent and united Africa has decided to
adopt, on all such points which were not discussed
as separate items, a position of non-alignment or, in
other words, a position which may not correspond to
that of a given State but which Africa considers just.
32r Subject to these two express reservations, con­
cerning the representation of Hungary and the repre­
sentation of the People's Republic of China, the Guinean
delegation will vote in favour of the report as a whole.
33. Mr. PAZHWAK (Afghanistan): My Government
recognizes the Government of the Central People's
Republic of China as the only legitimate government
of that country to be represented here in the United
Nations. Therefore, our approval of the recommenda­
tion of the Credentials Committee in this Assembly
should be considered, subject to this reservation.
34. Mr. SOSROWARDOJO (Indonesia): In the course
of the meeting of the Credentials Committee, the dele­
gation of Indonesia unequivocally stated its views on
the question of the credentials of the representatives
of the Republic of China. Indonesia has recognized
the Government of the People's Republic of China
since 1950 and has since established diplomatic rela­
tions with that country. It recognizes that Government
as the sole Government representing the peoples of
China.
35. With regard to the matter of the credentials of
the delegation of Hungary, my delegation has stated
its views and is ready to support the credentials of
this delegation to this session.
36. With these reservations, the delegation of Indo­
nesia is in favour of and supports the report of the
Credentials Committee.
37. Mr. ROUSSEAU (Mali) (translated from French):
My delegation will vote in favour of the report of the
Credentials Committee, but with the most express
reservations as to the acceptance of the credentials
of the representatives of Chiang Kai-shek. The Gov­
ernment of Mali recognizes only the People's Re1/ Conference of African Heads of State and Government, 22-25 May
1963.

17

public of China, which it hopes will take its rightful
place in the United Nations as soon as possible.
38. My country maintains the best of relations with
the Republic of Hungary; it believes that the creden­
tials of the Hungarian representatives are in order
and that there will be no further need to consider this
so-called problem in the future.
39. Mr. TARAZI (Syria) (translated from French):
Approval of the report of the Credentials Committee
by my delegation does not signify that we approve the
paragraph which deals with the representation of the
People's Republic of China. My Government has recog­
nized the People's Republic of China and maintains
normal and friendly diplomatic relations with it.
40. I make the same reservation with respect to the
representation of Hungary at this special session. Con­
sequently, approval of the report by the delegation of
the Syrian Arab Republic in no way constitutes a vote
in favour of the two paragraphs relating to these two
points,
41. Mr. ADEEL (Sudan): The position of the Sudan
Government regarding the proper representation of
China in the United Nations, which is clear on the
record, remains unchanged. Subject to that reserva­
tion, my delegation will vote in favour of the report
of the Credentials Committee.
42. Our position regarding the proper representation
of Hungary also remains unchanged. My Government
has diplomatic, economic and cultural relations with
the People's Republic of Hungary and we hold that the
credentials submitted by the Hungarian delegation are
in order and should be supported.
43. The PRESIDENT: I shall now put to the vote the
draft resolution recommended by the Credentials
Committee in its report [A/5432, para. 21J.
The draft resolution was adopted by87 votes to none,
with 10 abstentions.
44. The PRESIDENT: The reservations will, of
course, appear in the official records of this meeting.
AGENDA ITEM 7
Consideration of the financial situation of the Organization
in the light of the report of the Working Group on the Ex­
amination of the Administrative and Budgetary Procedures
of the United Nations

45. Mr. QUAO (Ghana), Rapporteur of the Fifth Com­
mittee: I have the honour to present to the General
Assembly the report of the Fifth Committee [A/5438].
46. The report, brief as it is, does not, in my view,
call for any lengthy introduction. Following established
practice, and in accordance with the wishes of the
Fifth Committee, I have dispensed with the summary
of the positions taken and the views expressed by
various delegations which participated in the discus­
sions at the 984th to 1005th meetings held between
15 May and 26 June 1963. All these have, of course,
been fully covered inofficial records of the Committee.
47. The first part of this report contains summaries
of four reports discussed by the Committee, namely,
(a) report of the Working Group on the Examination
of the Administrative and Budgetary Procedures of the
United Nations [A/5407 and Corr.l] and related papers
[A/AC.113/1-27]; (b) the report of the SecretaryGeneral on the United Nations positions andprospects

18

General Assembly — Fourth Special Session — Plenary Meetings

[A/C.5/974]; (c) the report of the Secretary-General
on the cost estimates for 1963 for the United Nations
Operation in the Congo (ONUC) [A/5416], and the re­
lated report of the Advisory Committee on Adminis­
trative and Budgetary Questions [A/5421]; and (d) the
report of the Secretary-General on the cost estimates
for 1963 for the United Nations Emergency Force
(UNEF) [A/5187], and the related report of the Advi­
sory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary
Questions [A/5274].
48. The record of the draft resolutions and the voting
can be found in paragraphs 13~to 16 of the report. The
recommendations of the Fifth Committee are to be
found in paragraph 17. Since all these draft resolutions
were overwhelmingly adopted by the Committee, I
would recommend them to the General Assembly for
its favourable action.
Pursuant to rule 68 of the rules of procedure, it
was decided not to discuss the report of the Fifth
Committee.
49. The PRESIDENT: In accordance with the decision
under rule 68 of the rules of procedure, interventions
will be limited to explanations of vote.
50. Mr. HOUAISS (Brazil): In this explanation of vote,
the Brazilian delegation wishes to place on record the
following:
51. First, the seven resolutions approved by the
Fifth Committee, which will shortly be brought to our
consideration in this meeting, represent a substantial
step towards the definition of the guide-lines which
will preside over the establishment of future peace­
keeping operations. Nevertheless, if an agreement on
the establishment of either a permanent special for­
mula or of a special scale of assessment for the shar­
ing of the expenses of future peace-keeping operations
is not reached during the nineteenth session of the
General Assembly, Brazil reserves its right not to
accept in the future the provisional and adhoc solution
adopted for the second part of 1963, and will insist on
obtaining a less onerous share for all developing Mem­
ber States.
52. Secondly, Brazil, therefore, gives utmost impor­
tance to the resolution on principles that will serve
as guide-lines for the sharing of the expenses of
future peace-keeping operations. Brazil believes that
the present step forward will be of real use to the
United Nations as a whole when, as a mathematical
expression of these principles, the General Assembly
adopts the special method for sharing the expenses
requested in operative paragraph 2 (a) of draft reso­
lution VII in the report of the Fifth Committee [A/
5438], This special method, I repeat,can consist either
of a special formula or of a special scale for any
future peace-keeping operations.
53. Thirdly, in votinginfavourofthesaidresolutions,
the Brazilian delegation has not changed its traditional
stand on the general problem of peace-keeping opera­
tions. In our view, the Security Council is the organ
of the United Nations with the primary responsibility
for the maintenance of international peace and security
and, this being so, it is the primary, but not exclusive,
organ to decide on the establishment of any peace­
keeping operation. If, in trying to establish a peace­
keeping operation that is deemed necessary by the
Member States, the Security Council finds itself im­
mobilized, then the General Assembly will decide on
the establishment of the said peace-keepingoperation.

54. Fourthly, the establishment of a special method
for sharing the expenses of peace-keeping operations
is, accordingly, the element that will crown the ra­
tionalization of the process that we are about to insti­
tutionalize, for this special method—either in the form
of a special formula or of a special scale—will make
it possible for the United Nations to make rapid deci­
sions, without confronting Member States with the
almost impossible task, as experience has proved, of
agreeing, in good time, on an ad hoc scale of assess­
ment for the annual budget of each peace-keeping
operation.
55. Lastly, the Brazilian delegation, as a member
of the Working Group on the Examination of the Ad­
ministrative and Budgetary Procedures of the United
Nations, has done its best towards reaching the broad
consensus that is' seen in this special session. And
in the same manner it will do its best towards reach­
ing a fuller consensus on all questions concerning
peace-keeping operations and, in particular, on the
establishment of a special method for sharing the ex­
penses of peace-keeping operations.
56. Mr. FEDORENKO (Union of Soviet Socialist Re­
publics) (translated from Russian): The Soviet dele­
gation wishes to explain why in its view the draft
resolutions submitted by the Fifth Committee to the
General Assembly [A/5438, para. 17, draft resolutions
I-VII] are unacceptable.
57. Under the terms of the United Nations Charter,
questions relating to action for the maintenance of
international peace and security, including measures
taken on the basis of Articles 43, 48 and 50 of the
Charter, and related financial matters may be dealt
with only by the Security Council, the organ which,
according to Article 24 of the Charter, bears primary
responsibility for the maintenance of international
peace and security.
58. The exclusive right of the Security Council to
take decisions in such matters is confirmed by
Article 11 Of the Charter, which states that "Any such
question on which action is necessary shall be referred
to the Security Council by the General Assembly ...".
59. Now, not only did consideration of the questions
dealt with in the draft resolutions now before the As­
sembly take place without the authorization of the
Security Council, but these questions had not even been
brought before the Council. The decision to consider
them was taken by an unauthorized body, the General
Assembly, under the pressure of the Western Powers,
in defiance of the Charter and in circumvention of the
Security Council.
60. Moreover, the actual debate on these questions
also took place, not in the Security Council, as should
have been the case under the Charter, but in the Gen­
eral Assembly, which, infringing the Charter, again
exceeded its authority by encroaching upon the exclu­
sive rights of the Security Council.
61. Finally, in violation of the Charter, and in par­
ticular of Article 11, resolutions have been submitted
to the General Assembly which under the Charter only
the Security Council may adopt.
62. Since all seven of the draft resolutions which the
Fifth Committee has submitted to the General Assem­
bly are in this respect a direct product of the Western
Powers' policy to vitiate the United Nations Charter
and circumvent the Security Council in the crucial

1205th meeting — 27 June 1963
matter of the maintenance of international peace and
security, the Soviet delegation will vote against them.
63. It is completely obvious, for example, that in the
draft resolutions dealing with the financing of the
United Nations operations in the Congo and the Middle
East from 1 July to 31 December 1963 [draft resolu­
tions II and III], the true intention behind the proposed
decision to continue the Special and ad hoc Accounts
for the operations and the recommendations regarding
the specific ways of financing these operations is to
legalize the continuation of these operations without
having recourse to the Security Council.
64. But as we know, the Security Council, the only
body entitled to take decisions on questions connected
with the maintenance of international peace and secu­
rity, took no decision to continue these operations for
this particular or any other period of time.
65. What is more, as regards the operations of
United Nations troops in the Congo, one of the perma­
nent members ofthe Security Council,the Soviet Union,
in a letter dated 2 March 1963 from its Permanent
Representative to- the United Nations addressed to
the Secretary-General,-^/ reiterated its position that
United Nations troops should be removed from the
Congo without delay. It is also well known that not only
the Soviet Union, but another permanent member of
the Security Council, France, considers the continued
financing of the United Nations operations in the Congo
to be illegal. Considering, furthermore, that the place
of the People's Republic of China in the Security Coun­
cil is illegally occupied by someone else, we see that
the only proponents of a continuation of the operations
of United Nations troops in the Congo are the AngloSaxon countries, the United States and the United King­
dom, that is to say, a minority ofthe permanent mem­
bers of the Security Council.
66. To pretend in these circumstances that the Secu­
rity Council agrees to what is being done in disregard
of its exclusive competence is something which only
one bent on contravening the United Nations Charter
can do.
67. Further, it is clear from the draft resolution
[draft resolution IV] dealing with the so-called payment
of arrears in respect of contributions to the operations
of United Nations troops in the Congo and the Middle
East that some people still entertain the hope that the
States which comply strictly with the Charter and re­
fuse to recognize illegal decisions may yet yield to
pressure and submit to imposed decisions of this sort.
The Soviet delegation wishes to emphasize in this
regard that such expectations are entirely illusory.
68. The Soviet Union has consistently taken the view
that the operations of the United Nations troops in the
Congo and the Middle East do not impose any financial
obligations on States Members of the United Nations,
both because these operations are not in accordance
with the terms of the United Nations Charter and be­
cause the expenses involved in these operations are
not expenses within the meaning of Article 17, para­
graph 2 of the Charter.
69. The operations of United Nations troops in the
Congo and the Middle East were provoked by the
aggressive actions of the colonial Powers. Both oper­
ations, and especially the United Nations operation in
the Congo, have become long-drawn-out affairs and
U See Official Records of the Security Council. Eighteenth Year, Sup­
plement for January, February and March 1963, document S/5249.

19

have put the Organization to considerable expense
solely through the fault of the colonial Powers and
their confederates, whose aims have nothing whatever
to do with the maintenance of international peace and
security. In this regard the Soviet delegation reiterates
its position that the only just and acceptable solution
of the probiem would be that those same Powers
should also assume the entire material responsibility..
for the United Nations operations in the Congo and
the Middle East.
70. We cannot sacrifice principles, share responsi­
bility with the aggressors, pay for them, pay for
Belgium, for instance, which, finding support for its
aggression in the Congo from "kindred spirits" and
direct accomplices among the Western Powers, has
become so far emboldened as to demand $5 million
from the United Nations in "compensation" solely for
the military equipment at the Kamina, Kitona and
Banana bases, which everyone knows the Belgian colo­
nialists used in their aggression against the Republic
of the Congo.
71. The Soviet Union does not intend to pay because
the foreign companies in the Congo have deliberately
prolonged the United Nations operation for reasons
of profit. From the official accounts published by the
Union Minifere we know the fabulous profits it has
made from the sufferings of the Congolese people. In
only two years, from 1960 to 1962, the assets of the
Union Minifere rose from 12,300 to 19,600 million
Belgian francs, or by 59 per cent.
72. The Soviet Union does not intend to pay because
the imperialist Powers have used the United Nations
operation in the Congo for the purposes of a cynical
reallocation of "spheres of influence" in the Congo
behind the backs of the Congolese people. The British
company Tanganyika Concessions, for instance, in the
same period between 1960 and 1962, squeezed out Bel­
gian capital and took full control of the affairs of the
Union Minifere. It is no secret that this nominally pri­
vate British company is tied to the United Kingdom
Government by an agreement under which the Govern­
ment has reserved for itself a priority option for
the purchase of the company's shares.
73. For the same reasons the Soviet delegation also
finds totally unacceptable the draft resolution [draft
resolution V] concerning the extension of the period
of subscription to the so-called United Nations bond
issue, since it is manifestly contrary to the Charter
and has the purpose of saving the faces and protecting
the pockets of the aggressors and their accomplices.
As has been announced, from 1963 onwards the Soviet
Union will not pay that part of its contribution to the
regular budget of the United Nations which is intended
for the payment of the interest on or principal of the
bonds.
74. As to the draft resolution [draft resolution I]
dealing with the so-called general principles for the
financing of some abstract future United Nations
peace-keeping operations, the Soviet delegation has
already pointed out that this move is nothing but an
attempt to provide for the usurping of the Security
Council's exclusive rights in the future as well,
where United Nations peace-keeping operations are
concerned.
75. Contrary to the Charter, this draft resolution
provides that the financial arrangements for peace­
keeping operations are to be established, not by the

r

20

General Assembly — Fourth Special Session — Plenary Meetings

Security Council, but by the General Assembly, abody
which is not entitled to decide such matters.
76. What is more, this draft resolution plainly en­
croaches on the provisions of Chapter VII of the Char­
ter, which" lays down thaf only the"S6Curity .Council
may adopt decisions concerning the employment of
the armed forces of Members of the United Nations.
These Charter provisions are simply ignored in the
draft resolution, and the door is opened to attempts
to usurp the rights of the Security Council in this
regard also.
77. Indeed, what remains in this draft resolution of
the special and primary responsibility of the Security
Council for the maintenance of international peace
and security? To use the frank language of the docu­
ment, only "the special responsibilities of the perma­
nent members of the Security Council ... in connexion
with their contributions to the financing of peace and
security operations". In other words, what emerges
is, to put it mildly, a highly paradoxical picture: on
the one hand an attempt is made to usurp the powers
of the Security Council, and above all of its permanent
members, with regard to the adoption of decisions in
these matters, while on the other hand special respon­
sibilities are placed upon these very members with
respect to financial obligations.
78. The result of this attempt to sit on two stools at
once can be seen clearly from another provision of
this draft resolution. All that remains of the provision
concerning the material responsibility of the aggressor
as it was suggested, for instance, in the Working Group
of twenty-one members by the delegations of the United
Arab Republic, Nigeria and Cameroon is the very
nebulous formula that where circumstances warrant
—and the question who is to determine whether cir­
cumstances warrant or not is left unsettled—special
consideration should be given to the situation of a State
which is the victim of aggression. However, neither
the words "aggressor" and "aggression" nor even the
words "victim of aggression" are to be found anywhere
in the draft resolution, which clearly also makes
matters easier for the aggressor and harder for the
victim.
79. It is appropriate to remind those who have found
it possible to support such a "compromise" that it is
not the Soviet Union, of course, that will have to bear
the consequences of such "flexible" wording. It is well
known that the representatives of the United States
and the United Kingdom, who already enjoy, to put it
mildly, a very dubious reputation as far as military
operations on behalf of the United Nations are con­
cerned, were the ones who hastened to explain in the
Fifth Committee that even in the future operations
of this kind should not be "complicated" by such
things as establishing the responsibility of the aggres­
sor, for this in their view "may raise serious prac­
tical problems".
80. With regard to the draft resolution [draft reso­
lution VI] concerning the establishment of a so-called
"peace fund", one can say that like the draft resolution
on so-called "general principles" mentioned above, it
shows that, for all the importance of the question of
the dangerous actions of the colonial Powers against
Egypt in 1956 and against the Congo, this is undoubtedly
a matter of more serious, far-reaching and dangerous
consequence than the outcome of these questions. The
draft resolution in question would also lead to the es­
tablishment of a kind of material basis which would

make matters easier for those who wished to by-pass
the Security Council in taking decisions connected
with peace-keeping operations on behalf of the United
Nations.
81. In this connexion, the attempt by the represen­
tatives of the Western Powers to explain now the
reasons for sending United Nations troops to the Congo
in 1960 invites attention. Disregarding well-known
United Nations documents on the dispatch of these
troops to the Congo in connexion with the aggression
of the Belgian colonialists, the United States has put
forward a new version of the matter which is clearly
colonialist in spirit. In January this year, the Assistant
Secretary of State of the United States, Mr. Cleveland,
stated the following, and these are his very words:
"First, in July 1960, when mutiny broke out in the
armed forces of the Congo, when law and order broke
down, when the Government was unable to gain con­
trol of the situation, ... there was a clear threat to
international peace in that huge new nation in the
heart of tropical Africa."
82. Regarding the Belgian aggressors, Mr.Cleveland
confirmed, as if in passing, that "the Belgians did
return [to the Congo]—with paratroops—to protect
their nationals".
83. The representatives of the State Department of
the United States say in only a rather veiled manner
what is spoken of quite openly in the Western Press
today. The Washington Post, for example, said on
2 June 1963 that "the hard fact must be faced that the
Congolese have tried and failed to govern themselves".
84. The most unseemly role in this inglorious field,
as is well known, is played by the not unfamiliar Sena­
tor Ellender, who persists, over United States televi­
sion and by other methods, in spreading his propaganda
of misanthropy and racist ravings about the inability
of Negroes to govern themselves. He cynically cites
the shameful history of colonialism as showing that
"it is always the whites who are responsible for any
progress made in Africa".
85. The Western Powers subscribe to essentially the
same thesis when they attempt today to revise in a
light favourable to them the reasons for the dispatch
of United Nations troops to the Congo in 1960, making
out that the troops were sent there because the Gov­
ernment of the Congo showed itself incapable of con­
trolling the situation in the country.
86. If one goes deeper, these are not of course merely
exercises in the interpretation of history to the liking
of the colonialists. They are an open attempt to estab­
lish the need to send troops in the name of the United
Nations, but in the interests of the colonialists, to any
young State which they proclaim to be incapable of
governing itself.
87. The Soviet delegation will also vote against the
draft resolution on the continuation of the Working
Group on the Examination of the Administrative and
Budgetary Procedures of the United Nations [draft
resolution VII], for we consider that it is contrary to
the spirit and letter of the United Nations- Charter
that any United Nations organ not empowered to do so
should illegally undertake the examination of ques­
tions within the exclusive competence of the Security
Council.
88. On the basis of the argument put forward the
Soviet delegation is authorized to state the following:

1205th meeting — 27 June 1963
(a) Any decisions which, contrary to the United Na­
tions Charter and in disregard of the exclusive com­
petence of the Security Council, are designed to make
it compulsory for States Members of the United Na­
tions to share the costs of financing the United Nations
Emergency Force in the Middle East and the United
Nations Operation in the Congo, if adopted by the
present session of the General Assembly, can have no
binding legal force for States Members of the^United' J
Natlonsr"
"
•(b) It is just and lawful to place all material respon­
sibility with regard to the operations already mentioned
upon the Powers which are to blame for th& situationwhich has arisen in the Congo and those guilty of
aggression in the Middle East.

91. The situation with which the United Nations is
faced today is not a financial crisis for the Organiza­
tion but merely the financial expression of the political
failure which the colonial Powers have already en­
countered in their violations of the United Nations
Charter, and an augury of the still greater failure
which inevitably awaits the colonial Powers if they
continue to follow the path of suppression of national
liberation movements and the path of violation of the
United Nations Charter.

(d) Questions relating to the method of financing the
operations of armed forces acting on behalf of the;.
United Nations may in the future be decided in each
specific case, in accordance with the United Nations
Charter, only by the Security Council.

(f) The Soviet Union is participating and is ready
to participate further in technical assistance by send­
ing Soviet experts, supplying Soviet equipment and so
forth, but we do not intend to pay for the delivery of
materials and the missions of experts from other
countries,- and in particular the United States of
America. In 1963, the Soviet Union will pay its share
of the $6.4 million, that is to say a little more than
$1.1 million; however, it will pay not in foreign but
in Soviet currency. These funds for technical assist­
ance can be used to pay for Soviet experts, Soviet
equipment, and so forth.
89. The Soviet delegation considers it necessary to
stress as strongly as possible that in its practical
activities the Soviet Unibn will continue to adhere in
the future to a position of strict observance of the
United Nations Charter and the lofty principles of our
Organization, Attempts to put pressure on the Soviet
Union in order to force it to reconcile itself to the
violation of basic provisions of the United Nations
Charter, a policy of blackmail and threats against us,
never could and never can end in anything but failure.
90. Explaining how unjustifiable were the attempts
of certain States to impose unlawful decisions on the
Soviet Union through the voting machinery of the
United Nations General Assembly, N. S. Khrushchev,
the head of the Soviet Government, said in his speech
of 7 October 1960:

"The principle of a majority, which you set at
two-thirds in deciding controversial questions, is
entirely acceptable within a country, when internal
questions are being settled—political, economic and
other. But here we are dealing with a complex inter­
national question. This question is being decided by
the countries belonging to the United Nations. This
is not a parliament, but an international forum
created to decide questions in such a way that the
decision will not harm a single Member State of this
forum.
" . . . Consequently, you should not abuseyour tem­
porary majority in the United Nations so as to im, pose your decisions on the minority, because, I
repeat, this is not a parliament. Here we discuss
not the internal problems of this or that country,
but international problems, respecting the sove­
reignty of each country and the principle of non­
interference in the affairs of other States. This must
be borne in mind and taken as a starting point. Then
a just solution to the problem will be found.n

(c) From 1963 onwards, the Soviet Union will not
pgy that "part of its contribution to the regular budget
of the United Nations which is intended for the payjnent of interest on the principle of the so-called
United Nations bonds issued to cover the costs of the
operations in the Middle East and the Congo, since a
requirement to these costs is contrary to the United
Nations Charter.

(e) From 1963 onwards, the Soviet Union will not
make any contributions to cover the following items
of ^expenditure in, the regular budget of the United
Nations, where funds are allocated for measures taken
in violation of the Charter or taken unnecessarily: the
United Nations Commission for theUnification and Re­
habilitation of Korea; the Memorial Cemetery in Korea;
the United Nations Truce Supervision Organization
in Palestine and the so-called United Nations Field
Service.

21

1

92. Mr. KPONVI (Togo) (translated from French):
Two days ago, when the Fifth Committee voted on the
various draft resolutions before it, the Togolese dele­
gation stated that at that stage it could not take part
in the voting. We are now glad to announce that we
are prepared to support the draft resolutions which
the Committee has recommended to the General
Assembly.
93. Our little country is one of the smallest; never­
theless, we wish by this gesture, symbolically and in
token of our good faith, to make our modest contribu­
tion to the strengthening of the United Nations, to the
development of an international community that is
more cohesive, more dynamic, indeed more enter­
prising and more effectively dedicated to the rights
and well-being of man, as well as to the defence and
safeguarding of international peace and the security
of all Member States; in short, an organization which
truly seeks a better world.
94. Although the Togolese delegation may have certain
reservations with regard to operative paragraph 1 (e)
of draft resolution I concerning general principles to
serve as guidelines for the sharing of the costs of
future peace-keeping operations, it will vote in favour,
of the seven draft resolutions contained in the report
-of the Fifth Committee'[A/5438, para. 17]. In so doing,
"the Togolese delegation wishes once again to affirm
before the entire world assembled here the ardent
faith of the Government and people of Togo in the
principles and ideals of the United Nations Charter,
our devotion to those principles and ideals, and our
solid confidence in the Organization itself.
95. Mr. BARROS-CONTI (Peru) (translated from
Spanish): My delegation wishes to state the position
of the Government of Peru on the vote which is about
to be taken in the Assembly and, at the same time,
to explain its votes in the Fifth Committee [1004th

22

General Assembly — Fourth Special Session — Plenary Meetings

meeting], where it cast two votes in favour and ab­
stained five times.

of principle by a policy that would not be likely to
divide the General Assembly on this issue.

96. With regard to its abstentions on draft resolu­
tions II and III [A/5438, para. 17], which relate to the
costs of the United Nations Emergency Force and of
the United Nations Operation in the Congo, my dele­
gation wishes to point out that, in once again abstain­
ing today, it will simply be maintaining its traditionally
established position.

105. This suggestion did not meet with the reaction
that I expected in the Committee—but I stress "in the
Committee", because it was.favoured by the majority
of'delegations outside the Committee room."The re­
sult of the procedure which followed is quite clear to
us now, and we shall be voting on these draft resolu­
tions"knowing, unfortunately, that we are not as un­
animous as we should have been and as, in the view
of my delegation, we could have been.

97. The Government of Peru is not in favour of con-';
tinuing indefinitely to increase the financial obligation^
of Member States, many of which, like my own coun­
try, experience serious difficulties in assuming special
economic burdens.
98. On the other hand, the Peruvian delegation has
pleasure in announcing that it will now vote for draft
resolution IV instead of abstaining, for until this
morning we had no instructions from our Government
which, as it does every year at this time, is now pre­
paring the national budget and making provision for
the payment of its arrears in the estimates for the
coming year.
99. The Government of Peru therefore favours the
idea of arranging facilities for payment by instalment,
in accordance with agreements to be reached with the
Secretary-General. My delegation is also pleased to
announce that it will vote in favour of the other three
draft resolutions.
100. Mr. PAZHWAK (Afghanistan): My delegation will
vote for all the draft resolutions recommended to the
General Assembly in the report of the Fifth Com­
mittee [A/5438] except for draft resol ut ionlV_dealing
with the question of the payment of arrears, on which
it will abstain. - 101. While we fully respect the spirit of compromise
which resulted in the recommendation of these draft
resolutions by the Fifth Committee, and while we
have already expressed our complete readiness to
meet all of our obligations correctly and justly agreed
upon in the United Nations, our votes for these
draft resolutions carry with them certain strong
reservations.
102. It is noteworthy that the spirit of keeping the
United Nations financially active is strong among the
small Members of the Organization, of which my coun­
try is one, owing to our deep faith in the Organization.
103. The Fifth Committee has recommended the adop­
tion of a series of draft resolutions which, according
to the expressed views of the sponsors would not lead
to a final solution even of the financial difficulties of
the United Nations, while certain strongpolitical diffi­
culties would be created, which would have to be over­
come by the Organization in the future. We regret that
the Fifth Committee, while recognizing the political
controversies as the main obstacle in the way of a
solution of the financial problems, failed to take a
more practical and realistic approach to this question.
104. In this connexion, the Afghan delegation sug­
gested that, before the recommendation by the Fifth
Committee of any draft resolutions which might not
secure unanimous approval, the Secretary-General
should be requested to undertake certain negotiations,
upon the request of all Member States and with their
co-operation, between the parties directly involved in
the political controversies, in an attempt to replace
the imposition of rigid public positions on questions

106. As I said, while we support these draft resolu­
tions and will meet all our obligations, my abstention
from the vote on one of them will be for no other
reason but that this draft resolution in particular has
highly important political and legal implications which
we do not think,in their present form, will be entirely
in the interest of the work of the Organization in the
future. It does not mean that my delegation does not
fully support the idea of the payment of arrears.
107. On other points I shall not take up the time of
the General Assembly except to say that the reserva­
tions made in the Committee by the developing coun­
tries from Asia, Africa and Latin America are reser­
vations which are shared by my delegation, particularly
on the mattet of general principles, the only difference
being that our reservations should be accepted by
representatives in the light of our statement in the
Fifth Committee.
108. Mr. PALAR (Indonesia): My delegation will vote
in favour of all the draft resolutions that have been
submitted to the General Assembly, fully conscious of
the fact that these draft resolutions are based mainly
on General Assembly resolution 377 (V), Uniting for
peace, which was adopted in the Assembly years ago
by an overwhelming majority. My delegation, however,
is equally aware of the fact that those delegations
which disagree with the Uniting for peace resolution
base their arguments on certain Chapters and Articles
of the Charter which actually have the same legal
force as the Uniting for peace resolution. We believe
that the Assembly is also aware of the fact that these
Chapters and Articles are based on the principle of
unanimity among the big Powers, which, in our opinion,
is only a polite euphemism for the ugly fact that those
Powers have the power to frustrate any action taken
by the Security Council for peace-keeping activities.
These Powers have the military power to frustrate
any action that could be taken by the Security Council.
This is a very important fact and makes the situation
dangerous, because one of the countries which, at the
inception of the United Nations, was given the veto
power has broadened in military power.
109. In my opinion, we can only adopt these draft
resolutions in the hope that very soon—even at the
eighteenth session of the General Assembly—efforts
will be made to bridge the gap that exists among the
veto Powers on the question of peace-keeping opera­
tions. My delegation will support any action which, we
hope, may be initiated at the regular session of the
Assembly this year, to bridge the gap between the veto
Powers on the question of peace-keeping operations.
If such efforts are not made, we believe that we shall
be faced with a most dangerous situation in our time.
110. The PRESIDENT: The General Assembly will
proceed to vote on the seven draft resolutions in the
report of the Fifth Committee [A/5438, para. 17], I
now put to the vote draft resolution I.

1205th meeting — 27 June 1963

23

Draft resolution I was adopted by 92 votes to 11,
with 3 abstentions,

gary, Mongolia, Poland, Romania, Ukrainian Soviet
Socialist Republic, Union of Soviet Socialist Republics.

111; The PRESIDENT: The Assembly will now vote
on draft resolution II. A roll-call vote has been
requested.

Abstaining: Yemen, Yugoslavia, Algeria, Belgium,
Chad, Iraq, Jordan, Kuwait, Madagascar, Mali, Peru,
Portugal, Saudi Arabia, Syria, United Arab Republic.

A vote was taken by roll-call.
The Netherlands, having been drawn by lot by the
President, was called upon to vote first.
In favour: Netherlands, New Zealand, Nicaragua,
Niger, Nigeria, Norway, Pakistan, Panama, Paraguay,
Philippines, Rwanda, Senegal, Sierra Leone, Somalia,
Sweden, Tanganyika, Thailand, Togo, Trinidad and
Tobago, Tunisia, Turkey, Uganda, United Kingdom of
Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United States of
America, Upper Volta, Uruguay, Venezuela, Yugo­
slavia, Afghanistan, Argentina, Australia, Austria,
Bolivia, Brazil, Burma, Cambodia, Cameroon, Canada,
Central African Republic, Ceylon, Chad, Chile,China,
Colombia, Congo (Brazzaville), Congo (Leopoldville),
Costa Rica, Cyprus, Dahomey, Denmark, Dominican
Republic, Ecuador, El Salvador, Ethiopia, Federation
of Malaya, Finland, Gabon, Ghana, Greece, Guatemala,
Honduras, Iceland, India, Indonesia, Iran, Ireland,
Israel, Italy, Ivory Coast, Jamaica, Japan, Laos,
Lebanon, Liberia, Libya, Luxembourg, Madagascar,
Mauritania, Mexico, Nepal.
/
V
v
•*
Against: Poland, Romania, Ukrainian Soviet Socialist
Republic, Union of Soviet Socialist Republics^Albania,^.
Bulgaria? Byelorussian Soviet Socialist Republic,
Cuba5; Czechoslovakia/ Hungary .'"Mongolia!
Abstaining: Peru, Portugal, Saudi Arabia, Sudan,
Syria, United Arab Republic .Yemen, Algeria, Belgium,
Burundi, France, Guinea, Iraq, Jordan, Kuwait, Mali.
Draft resolution II was adopted by 80 votes to 11,
with 16 abstentions.*
112. The PRESIDENT: The Assembly will now vote
on draft resolution III. A roll-call vote has been
requested.
A vote was taken by roll-call.
Yemen, having been drawn by lot by the President,

was called upon to vote first.

In favour: Afghanistan, Argentina, Australia, Aus­
tria, Bolivia, Brazil, Burma, Burundi, Cambodia,
Cameroon, Canada, Central African Republic,Ceylon,
Chile, China, Colombia, Congo (Brazzaville), Congo
(Leopoldville), Costa Rica, Cyprus, Dahomey, Den­
mark, Dominican Republic, Ecuador, El Salvador,
Ethiopia, Federation of Malaya, Finland, Gabon, Ghana,
Greece, Guatemala, Guinea, Honduras, Iceland, India,
Indonesia, Iran, Ireland, Israel, Italy, Ivory Coast,
Jamaica, Japan, Laos, Lebanon, Liberia, Libya,
Luxembourg, Mauritania, Mexico, Nepal, Netherlands,
New Zealand, Nicaragua, Niger, Nigeria, Norway,
Pakistan, Panama, Paraguay, Philippines, Rwanda,
Senegal, Sierra Leone, Somalia, Sudan, Sweden, Tan­
ganyika, Thailand, Togo, Trinidad and Tobago, Tunisia,
Turkey, Uganda, United Kingdom of Great Britain and
• Northern Ireland, United States of America, Upper
Volta, Uruguay, Venezuela.

Draft resolution III was adopted by 80 votes to 12,
with IS abstentions.** "
113. The PRESIDENT: I now put to the vote draft
resolution IV. A roll-call vote has been requested.
A vote was taken by roll-call.
Trinidad and Tobago having been drawn by lot by
the President, was called upon to vote first.
In favour: Trinidad and Tobago, Tunisia, Turkey,
Uganda, United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern
Ireland, United States of America, Upper Volta,
Uruguay, Venezuela, Argentina, Australia, Austria,
Bolivia, Brazil, Burma, Burundi, Cambodia, Came­
roon, Canada, Central African Republic, Ceylon, Chile,
China, Colombia, Congo (Brazzaville), Congo (Leo­
poldville), Costa Rica, Cyprus, Dahomey, Denmark,
Dominican Republic, Ecuador, El Salvador, Ethiopia,
Federation of Malaya, Finland, Gabon, Ghana, Greece,
Guatemala, Guinea, Honduras, Iceland, India, In­
donesia, Iran, Ireland, Israel, Italy, Ivory Coast,
Jamaica, Japan, Laos, Lebanon, Liberia, Libya,
Luxembourg, Mauritania, Mexico,Nepal, Netherlands,
New Zealand, Nicaragua, Niger, Nigeria, Norway,
Pakistan, Panama, Paraguay, Peru, Philippines,
Rwanda, Senegal, Sierra Leone, Somalia, Sweden,
Tanganyika, Thailand, Togo.
Against: Ukrainian Soviet Socialist Republic, Union
of Soviet Socialist Republics, Albania, Bulgaria, Bye­
lorussian Soviet Socialist Republic, Cuba, Czechoslo­
vakia, France, Hungary, Mongolia, Poland, Romania.
Abstaining: United Arab Republic, Yemen, Yugo­
slavia, Afghanistan, Algeria, Belgium, Chad, Iraq,
Jordan, Kuwait, Madagascar, Mali, Portugal, Saudi
Arabia, Spain, Sudan, Syria.
Draft resolution IV was adopted by 79 votes to 12,
with 17 abstentions.~**
~
114. The PRESIDENT: I now put to the vote draft
resolution V.
Draft resolution V was adopted by 93 votes to 12,
with 4 abstentions.
115. The PRESIDENT: I put to the vote draft reso­
lution VI.
Draft resolution VI was adopted by 91 votes to 12,
with 2 abstentions.
116. The PRESIDENT: I now put to the vote draft
resolution VII.
Draft resolution VII was adopted by 95 votes to 12,
with 2 abstentions.

Against: Albania, Bulgaria, Byelorussian Soviet So­
cialist Republic, Cuba, Czechoslovakia, France, Hun­

117. Mr. LEWANDOWSKI (Poland): The Polish dele­
gation voted against the resolutions on financing UNEF
and ONUC operations, both for the period ending
30 June 1963, and until 31 December 1963, as well as
on similar extension of the sale of United Nations
bonds, for the following reasons.

•The representative of Morocco, who was absent at the time of voting,
subsequently indicated to the Secretariat that, had he been present, he
would have abstained.

••The representative of Morocco, who wasabsentat the time of voting,
subsequently indicated to the Secretariat that, had he been present, he
would have voted in favour.

24

General Assembly — Fourth Special Session — Plenary Meetings

118. First, sharing of the costs of these operations,
directly or through the bonds, would amount to their
support, even more explicit than the consenting vote.
This we could not do. While UNEF originated in the
circumvention of the Security Council, the ONUC
operation was implemented in complete disregard of
the decisions of that Council. Tragic consequences
followed, for which we refuse to share responsibility.
We are also disturbed by the further extension of the
military operation in the Congo, lest the presence of
the United Nations Force be used by powerful foreign
monopolies to establish and secure the permanency
of their control over the riches of that country, in
defiance of the wishes of its people.
119. Secondly, to have all Members of the United
Nations share the financial burden of both operations
as a normal expense of the Organization would mean
to put a premium on those who violated the Charter,
and particularly Article 2, paragraph 4. This, in
turn, would give an incentive to the future use of
force. If one accepts the fact that UNEF was estab­
lished as the result of the aggression against Egypt
in 1956, and that it is maintained to prevent similar
attack, then the States guilty of a breach of the peace
and of continuous threats in the area should pay for
the expenses of that force.
120. The same is true for ONUC. The offender should
not profit, and the offended should not be punished
when the issue arises as to how to finance actions
resulting from an offence.
121. My delegation had to cast its negative vote also
on resolutions dealing respectively with financing of
the future operations and continuation of the Working
Group Here are the reasons.
122. First, contrary to the Charter, and expressly
to its Article 10, these proposals would provide that
a recommendation of the General Assembly on a mili­
tary operation or any action of the same nature as
those defined in Chapter VII have binding force on
Member States, regardless of their attitude toward
such operation or action. Furthermore, the proposals
provide that a Member State has to support any future
operation through obligatory participation in the re­
sulting financial burden. Surely, no one could expect
my Government, or any other, to forego so easily its
sovereign rights and to revise its obligations arising
from signing of the Charter, without proper executive
and legislative procedure as provided for in the United
Nations and national constitutions. Even actions legally
approved by the Security Council can be financed only
by special agreement negotiated with the members and
subject to ratification in accordance with their respec­
tive constitutional processes. The full text of these
provisions can be found in Article 43, and we have
witnessed fairly recently such procedures in action.
123. Secondly, we understand that for many, and
especially the smaller countries, the transfer of the
Security Council powers to the General Assembly is
particularly attractive. We also share their concern
about the special influence which the colonial Powers
still have in the Council. But, even if it were possible
to do so, this could not guarantee without proper safe­
guards that the decisions of the majority, even when
inspired by most rightful policies, would not be under­
mined or subverted by the forces alien to United Na­
tions ideas, as was the case in the Congo. We believe
that such safeguards are provided for in Chapter VII
of the Charter.

124. Thirdly, Poland recognizes the collective re­
sponsibility for the maintenance of peace, but we are
strongly opposed to the concept of collective responsi­
bility for acts of aggression and for the results they
produce. As we have done inthepast,we shall support
in the future only those operations that will lead to
the defence and to the strengthening of the independ­
ence of countries, of the freedom of their peoples to
do what they wish in their political, economic and
social life. We will oppose and will not pay for any
actions in the past and in the future which run counter
to these aims and to the constitutional processes of
the United Nations.
125. Similar reasons guided us in voting against the
resolution proposing the establishment of the socalled peace fund. It was significant for us that the
authors of this proposal were ready to depart even
more from the Charter than they were originally
when, in the text finally presented, they decided to
omit any reference to the obligations and responsi­
bilities resting with the Security Council.
126. Before closing, I wish to state that my Govern­
ment will not feel bound by any and all resolutions
approved today by the General Assembly. We consider
them as not having any legal force, irrespective of
the intentions and sincerity of many who supported
them.
127. At a moment like this the Members of the As­
sembly owe themselves particular frankness. I submit
that no one in this hall would claim that by approving
these resolutions the General Assembly has solved
any problems. I am sure that the great majority would
agree, that the General Assembly has added a number
of new and more difficult ones to the already over­
burdened agenda of the Organization. Many delegations
in the Fifth Committee and in this hall expressed
numerous objections and reservations to the reso­
lutions and stated that they voted for them for the sake
of regional or political unity. It is, of course, their
sovereign right to do so. One wonders, however, what
would have been the results were it not for the emo­
tions and pressure of haste which accompanied the
last stages of this session. I am sure that all those
who have reservations arising from legal andpolitical
principles and from the desire to strengthen the United
Nations could create an impressive unity and majority
in defence of the Charter.
128. It is not for the first time that the voice of my
delegation calling for reason, objectivity and adherence
to the Charter does not meet with an immediate ma­
jority response. We experienced that in 1960 and in
the following years when callingfor resolute measures
to end the Katanga secession and foreign intervention
in the Congo. There have been similar experiences
in the past. And yet, sooner or later, we meet again in
agreement with those who wish to strengthen our Or­
ganization through dedicated observance of the Char­
ter, for no one has succeeded as yet in devising a
better instrument for peaceful international relations
in the present divided world. All the difficulties and
weaknesses of the United Nations reflect not the short­
comings of its constitution but are the results of too
many departures frOm its letter and spirit.
129. Permit me to express, therefore, the sincere
hope that when the dust settles and when objectivity
and reason replace emotion and prestige we shall
meet with many on the ground which today, for various
reasons, they chose to avoid.

1205th meeting — 27 June 1963
130. Mr. MALALASEKERA (Ceylon): I have asked
for your permission, Mr. President, to make a very
brief statement to express the views of my delegation
on the achievements of this special session. I believe
that our most important achievement is that we have
supplied our Secretary-General, U Thant, with the
financial means for continuing the operations of the
Organization, and his own remarkable work for peace,
through the final six months of 1963. I know that the
representatives who voted for the appropriations did
so for varying reasons and with different reservations.
However, they all did so with the common, strong
conviction that the constructive decisions and impor­
tant initiatives which U Thant has taken on behalf of
peace in his comparatively brief tenure of office
deserved unconditional support. Now we have given
him that support.
131. Apart from this achievement, all else will be a
matter of dispute, especially among the commentators.
And here I would venture to say that what we have
failed to achieve is perhaps more constructive than
what we have in fact achieved. We failed, for instance,
to devise a final formula and a unanimous agreement
on ways and means of implementing the peace-keeping
machinery which falls to this Organization; and that
we failed to do so is indeed, in our view, fortunate.
For had we succumbed to final and irrevocable deci­
sions on definitive principles in an atmosphere of
discord, we might perhaps have split, and even
wrecked, this world Organization. In this case, to have
left the door wide open for further negotiations and
further considerations was better, in our view, than
to have locked the door and thrown away the key. The
various resolutions adopted to continue the work of
the Working Group, to continue to seek further solu­
tions in the hope that the chasms which now divide us
may be closed, these are also achievements worthy
of record. My delegation hopes that these delibera­
tions preceding the regular Assembly will enable the
eighteenth session to achieve an accord of all Mem­
bers on ways to implement the peace. We must always
remember that real peace cannot be a solution by the
majority. Even the smallest minority dissenter breaks
that indivisibility which is the true measure of a sound
and constructive peace.
132. Mr. President, as this is my final statement
before this body prior to my departure for duties else­
where, may I crave the indulgence of my fellow repre­
sentatives to express a few personal words.
133. In the brief period that I have had the privilege
of serving here I have made many friends. I have also
learned many lessons about international co-operation.
Of these lessons, to my mind, the most important one
is that the United Nations is not, as it is often said,
the last hope for peace; it is the first hope, and per­
haps even the sole hope. We are aware of various
regional organizations, especially the military organi­
zations which assert their claim to being the first
hope. The extravagant budgets never put them under
the label of near-bankruptcy which has plagued the
United Nations. But these military organizations are
falling apart before our very eyes.
134. The nuclear bombs which are also invoked as
the first defence line of peace certainly bring no
peace, nor peace of mind, to anybody, and least of all
to those who possess the nuclear bombs. But here we
have the United Nations, with no armies, no bombs
and almost no money, and it still towers above all
pretentious rival organizations. The explanation for

25

this paradox, to us, is eloquently simple. There is no
force in the world, be it a military alliance or the
most destructive magic weapon, which can equal the
sum of the force of the collective effort for peace
established here through this universal authority. The
magnitude of this force, in which all the peoples of
the world are represented not only physically and
politically, but even more so morally and spiritually,
is something beyond all calculation.
135. Because the United Nations, its family and its
Charter, its hopes and its aspirations are the sole
embodiment of this incalculable force, it remains, I
say, the first, last and sole hope for universal peace.
This is its unfathomable potential. This is the true
nature of power in our time.
136. The second lesson that I have learned is that
the peoples of the world are the chief and unfailing
supporters of this Organization, that they want the
Organization to have the strength to bring their hopes
and prayers for a peaceful world to complete fruition.
137. The third lesson I have learned is that now we
have gone beyond the stage when the United Nations
has to solicit the support of peoples and nations, as it
did in its first years. Today, on the other hand, the
United Nations could well reverse the admonition to
be outward-looking, it could become inward-looking,
it could search its own inner soul. And when it does
so, at that moment of introspection, it will be seen
that it is within itself that the United Nations must
seek and find the support and the strength it must
have for the task that lies before it. The United Na­
tions itself must purge those divisions which now
bedevil it: the big-Power divisions; the ideological
divisions; and now, unhappily, the divisions between
the three peace-keeping organs, the General Assembly,
the Security Council and the Office of the SecretaryGeneral.
138. It is not in the dogma of false nationalism, in the
fallacies of extremist movements, in the heresies of
gun-toting alliances, nor in the scepticisms of peoples,
where lie the main obstaclestoourlabours.lt is with­
in ourselves that these obstacles exist. This is the
situation with which we are faced, and this is the situa­
tion which must be changed.
139. What representative here would be brave enough
to go back to his country and tell his people that the
United Nations cannot function because of rivalry for
power among the peace-keeping organs ? No one can
do that. The General Assembly, the Security Council
and the Secretariat must not be permitted to become
involved in the brawlings of an unhappy family. The
needs of the time and the majesty of the panoramic
vista of the future that spreads itself before us require
that these three organs—the General Assembly, the
Security Council and the Secretariat—must form a
solid phalanx in the cause of peace and human happi­
ness. To effect this consolidation is the task that
awaits this Organization after this session is adjourned.
140. May I say that I have learned another great
lesson, and that is the scope and the greatness of the
man who has presided over this twin-session of ours.
My highest tribute goes to you, Mr. President, as a
shining example of men who have come here and
laboured hard, day and night, to render their best
services in the cause of the world Organization.
Mr. President, I wish you every success andhappiness
in your endeavours. Iwishyouallpeaceand prosperity
in all your enterprises.

General Assembly — Fourth Special Session — Plenary Meetings

26

Completion of the work of the Fourth Special Session

141. The PRESIDENT: That concludes the business
of the fourth special session of the General Assembly.
142. Before I close the session, I wish to thank the
Chairman, Mr. Adebo of Nigeria, and the members
of the Working Group for their diligent and construc­
tive work. Their efforts greatly facilitated the work
of the Fifth Committee. The Assembly knows how
hard the Fifth Committee itself has worked, and I am
certain Members would wish me to express to the
Chairman of that Committee, Mr. Bannier of the
Netherlands, to its Rapporteur, Mr. Quao of Ghana,
and to its other officers, as well as to its entire mem­
bership, the appreciation and gratitude of the Assem­
bly for the work they have done.
143. I should like also to express my appreciation
to the Vice-Presidents, who kindly agreed to stand by
during my absence, in particular to Mr. Zeaof Colom­
bia, who presided at the 1204th plenary meeting. I am
sure I speak on behalf of the whole Assembly in ex­
pressing appreciation to the Secretary-General, to
the Under-Secretary for General Assembly Affairs,
to the Controller and to all the members of the Secre­
tariat for their assistance in the conduct of the fourth
special session.
144. I have on my own behalf to offer an apology to
the Assembly. As Members are aware, I was com­
pelled to be absent during the latter half of the delib­

Litho in U.N.

erations of the Fifth Committee. My absence was due
to a very strong moral obligation which I had under­
taken well in advance of the session of the Assembly
and which I could not, at that stage, evade without the
risk of causing considerable inconvenience to Govern­
ments of States who had very kindly extended certain
invitations to me. I am aware that there has been
some speculation on the cause of my absence. I wish
only to state that a great part of that speculation was
entirely wide of the mark.
145. I have also to thank my colleagues and to ex­
press to them my deep gratitude for their continued
confidence and their complete co-operation with me
and with the Secretariat officials during the fourth
special session.
AGENDA ITEM 2
Minute of silent prayer or meditation

146. The PRESIDENT: I now invite the Members to
stand and observe one minute of silent prayer or
meditation.
The representatives stood in silence.
Closing of the session

147. The PRESIDENT: I declare closed the fourth
special session of the General Assembly.
The meeting rose at 12.35 p.m.

77005—March 1964-2,225
