S/PV.7094

United Nations

asdf

Security Council

Provisional

Sixty-ninth year

7094th meeting

Monday, 13 January 2014, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Prince Zeid Ra’ad Zeid Al-Hussein . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

(Jordan)

Members:

Argentina . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Australia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Chad . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Chile . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Lithuania. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Luxembourg . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Nigeria . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Republic of Korea . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Rwanda . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . . 
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mrs. Perceval
Ms. King
Mr. Cherif
Mr. Errázuriz
Mr. Liu Jieyi
Mr. Araud
Ms. Murmokaitė
Ms. Lucas
Mr. Sarki
Mr. Oh Joon
Mr. Churkin
Mr. Gasana
Sir Mark Lyall Grant
Ms. Power

Agenda
The situation concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo
Report of the Secretary-General on the United Nations Organization
Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo (S/2013/757)
Report of the Secretary-General on the implementation of the Peace, Security
and Cooperation Framework for the Democratic Republic of the Congo and the
region (S/2013/773)

14-20508 (E)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-506.

*1420508*

S/PV.7094

The situation concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo

The meeting was called to order at 10.10 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation concerning the Democratic Republic
of the Congo
Report of the Secretary-General on the
United Nations Organization Stabilization
Mission in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo (S/2013/757)
Report of the Secretary-General on the
implementation of the Peace, Security and
Cooperation Framework for the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and the region
(S/2013/773)
The President (spoke in Arabic): In accordance
with rule 39 of the Security Council’s provisional
rules of procedure, I invite Mr. Martin Kobler, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and Head of the
United Nations Organization Stabilization Mission in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo, to participate
in this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite Mrs. Mary
Robinson, Special Envoy of the Secretary-General for
the Great Lakes Region of Africa, to participate in this
meeting.
On behalf of the Council, I welcome Mrs. Robinson,
who is joining today’s meeting via video-teleconference
from Kinshasa.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I wish to draw the attention of Council members to
document S/2013/757, which contains the report of the
Secretary-General on the United Nations Organization
Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo.
I also wish to draw the attention of Council
members to document S/2013/773, which contains the
report of the Secretary-General on the implementation
of the Peace, Security and Cooperation Framework for
the Democratic Republic of the Congo and the Region.
I now give the floor to Mr. Kobler.

2/8

13/01/2014

Mr. Kobler: I would like to express, at the outset,
my sincere congratulations to Jordan for taking up
the presidency of the Security Council for the month
of January. At the same time, I would like to extend
my best wishes to all the new members of the Security
Council and, to those who celebrate the birthday of the
Prophet, my deepest respects today.
(spoke in French)
It was just a month ago that I briefed the Security
Council on the most recent political and military
developments in the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
which demonstrates the Council’s deep interest in the
United Nations Organization Stabilization Mission
in the Democratic People’s Republic of the Congo
(MONUSCO). Today I will share with the Council an
overview of the latest developments in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and the outlook for 2014.
Previously, I spoke in the future tense, but now I
can speak in the present and even the past tense. The
Kampala dialogue has been concluded in Nairobi.
The Forces armées de la République démocratique
du Congo, supported by the MONUSCO Intervention
Brigade, are conducting operations directed against
the armed groups. The Government of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo has adopted its disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration plan and, at this very
moment, MONUSCO is being fully deployed towards
the east to bolster its civil presence in the conflictaffected areas. Naturally, much remains to be done, but
there can be no doubt that we are making progress.
(spoke in English)
Nevertheless, we have to add a word of caution
here. After the security incidents of 30 December,
the spirit of optimism following the conclusion of
the national dialogue, the defeat of the Mouvement
du 23 mars (M-23) and President Kabila’s tour of the
east, have given way somewhat to a sense of fragility.
It is therefore more important than ever that we stay
committed to preventing a rollback of what has been
achieved.
The year 2013 was marked by three significant
milestones: the signature of the Peace, Security and
Cooperation Framework agreement; the adoption of
resolution 2098 (2013), which created the MONUSCO
Intervention Brigade, with a robust mandate; and the
unwavering international cohesion exemplified by the
team of Special Envoys.

14-20508

13/01/2014

The situation concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo

Allow me to highlight the relentless efforts of
the Special Envoy of the Secretary-General, Mary
Robinson. Together with the Special Envoys of the
African Union, the European Union and the United
States, she has created a positive dynamic and brought
together all the key stakeholders towards open and
continuous dialogue for durable peace and sustainable
stability. We are cooperating in an exemplarily close
way.
The year 2013 also marked important
accomplishments for MONUSCO. We have been able to
conduct more robust military operations. We have made
it clear that there would be no cohabitation with armed
groups — any of them. Our position is clear. We are
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo not to react,
but to act; we are there not to deter, but to prevent; and
not only do we keep the peace, but we must also make
peace a long-term reality. With the Force Intervention
Brigade and our unmanned aerial vehicles, all armed
groups are aware now that we have the will and means
to take robust action at any time. In the coming weeks,
we will finalize the review of our military deployment
across eastern Democratic Republic of the Congo. We
will then have a more flexible Force. We need it to
be more agile and ready to deploy when it is needed
and where civilians are threatened. That is the Force’s
new paradigm. Our rules of engagement are clear. Our
mandate is clear. Our determination is clear.
After the military defeat of the M-23, it now is
important to implement the Nairobi declarations. There
are credible reports that the military recruitment of the
M-23 did not cease after the Nairobi declarations were
signed. There are also credible reports of emerging M-23
activities in Ituri in north-eastern Congo. I call upon the
Government of the Democratic Republic of the Congo
to implement the Nairobi declarations and expedite the
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration (DDR)
of M-23 ex-combatants. At the same time, I call upon the
Governments of Uganda and Rwanda to do everything
possible to prevent M-23 elements from sheltering or
training troops on their territory. We should tolerate not
a military re-emergence of the M-23.
In full support of the Congolese Government and
to fulfil its mandated responsibilities, MONUSCO has
reoriented and streamlined its priorities along three
main axes: security and protection, the stabilization of
conflict affected areas and the implementation of the
Peace, Security and Cooperation Framework for the

S/PV.7094

Democratic Republic of the Congo and the Region. I
will now talk along those three lines.
First, with regard to security and protection, the
presence of armed groups is still strong — too strong.
We need to keep the momentum. First operations
against the Forces démocratiques de libération
du Rwanda (FDLR) have cleared some positions.
Further operations are being shaped. Operations can
be successful, however, only if done jointly with the
Congolese army. I encourage the Congolese forces to do
more and to intensify the joint planning and execution
of operations against the FDLR. However, remaining
realistic, it will be difficult to eliminate the FDLR
completely by military actions alone. Through military
pressure, the FDLR must be left with no choice but to
come out of the bush. Its leadership must be left with
no choice other than to surrender. Its racist ideology
must be left with no choice than to disappear. That is
the clear message for 2014, the year we commemorate
the twentieth anniversary of the genocide in Rwanda.
The Allied Democratic Forces (ADF) still terrorizes
civilians in Ituri and north-eastern Democratic
Republic of the Congo. For example, on 13 December in
an ADF-controlled area, 21 bodies, including those of
eight babies, very young children and pregnant women,
were found dead, mutilated and some beheaded. Three
of the children were reportedly raped before being
murdered. I visited ADF-controlled areas during the
past few days. ADF continues to spread terror and
horror. On 23 December, it attacked Congolese forces
in Kamango and Ituri near the Ugandan border. With
the help of the Force Intervention Brigade, order could
be restored. Military actions against the ADF are
expected soon.
In 2013, 151 children, including babies caught in
cross-fire and primary school students summarily
executed, were killed or maimed as a result of conflictrelated violence; 206 underage girls were documented
by MONUSCO as having been raped by parties
to the conflict. That is only the tip of the iceberg.
Their childhood is destroyed; their future is brutally
burdened. We cannot and should not remain silent and
passive. That is the very reason the Council sent us to
the Democratic Republic of the Congo.
After the security incidents of 30 December in
Kinshasa and Lubumbashi, renewed abuses of human
rights in Ituri and Katanga were recorded as having
been committed both by armed groups and by national

14-205083/8

S/PV.7094

The situation concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo

security forces. There is zero tolerance in particular
for sexual violence and violence against children in
conflict. We must stand side by side with the Congolese
authorities and the Congolese people to ensure that all
the perpetrators are held accountable and brought to
justice. I am encouraged by the fact that the amnesty
law submitted to Parliament, as promised in Nairobi,
will exempt the perpetrators of gross human rights
violations from amnesty.
I am glad to announce that, at a Cabinet meeting
held on 26 December, the Congolese Government
adopted the third national plan for DDR. It also
introduced an amnesty law to Parliament, paving the
way for the return of ex-combatants having taken
refuge abroad. However, I appeal to the Government
to expedite the implementation of its DDR plan so as to
allow those combatants who have laid down their arms
to reintegrate into civilian life. As demonstrated in the
past months, our strategy remains that of neutralizing
the threat by our military presence, on the one hand,
and stimulating voluntary disarmament, on the other.
In the meantime, around 8,000 combatants
have surrendered. That is a good development
and we encourage defections. Those who have
surrendered — plus the M-23 ex-combatants in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, Uganda and
Rwanda — have to be reintegrated into society. The
DDR process, however, is still much too slow.
Secondly, force is not the only solution. The
civilian component of the Mission is stepping up. The
stabilization of areas liberated from the control of armed
groups is essential. Our new stabilization support plan
has been presented to the Government and to all our
international partners. That guiding framework brings
the Government, MONUSCO, United Nations agencies
and non-governmental organizations together. I call
upon all Member States to support the implementation
of the stabilization strategy by funding stabilization
programmes, including the islands of stability. To that
end, the islands of stability are not just a concept. They
are areas in which men and women can go to their
fields and to the market without fearing being robbed,
raped or kidnapped. But, let us be frank — they are
not yet territories in which children go to school, the
police offer reliable protection, the administration fully
functions and women can give birth without risks.
The islands of stability need the full redeployment
of regularly paid civil servants, security and law

4/8

13/01/2014

enforcement agents, social and medical service
providers in order to resume the delivery of basic public
administration and services to the population. They
need lasting engagement in order not only to briefly
restore but to permanently consolidate State authority
in those areas. The United Nations cannot and should
not replace State functions. We need the firm and
lasting commitment of the Congolese authorities.
Thirdly, in line with the country’s national
commitments, 2014 must be a year of continued reform.
I welcome President Kabila’s address to the nation in
which he reiterated that security sector reform must
remain the priority of priorities. The Congolese army
and defence reform will be achieved only through a
change in mindset and mentality.
Peace in eastern Democratic Republic of the Congo
can be durable only if the root causes of the conflict
are addressed. The restitution of State authority
alone is not enough. Only regional cooperation and
good governance will provide the peace dividend the
population is expecting.
Let me mention one important priority for 2014.
Legalizing and regulating the current exploitation and
trade of conflict minerals will substantially increase
State revenues and will allow the Government to
dispose of greater means to govern. The challenge will
be to successfully introduce a system of validation
of child-labour-free and conflict-free minerals in
accordance with international standards. Congo’s
natural wealth will thereby help finance the economic
and social challenges of the country. Obviously, that has
to be done in partnership with the Governments of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and of neighbouring
States, and the private sector, and with the assistance of
the international community.
As I outlined at the outset, democratic institutions
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo remain fragile.
On 30 December 2013, a group of attackers mounted
a coordinated assault on the buildings of the national
radio and television, the Ministry of Defence and the
airport in Kinshasa. Simultaneous attacks occurred
in Kindu and Lubumbashi. Those were clear warning
shots to expedite reforms, including on the rule of law,
good governance and decentralization, and to nominate
the new Government as announced.
On the electoral front, the national budget, which
is currently being debated in Parliament, is intended
to finance the Independent National Electoral

14-20508

13/01/2014

The situation concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo

Commission, in the amount of $260 million, of which
$40 million is to come from external sources. At the
end of 2014, the local elections should kick start the
electoral cycle culminating with the presidential
elections of 2016.
Peace and prosperity go hand in hand. Turning
Goma into an economic hub could be a first step in the
right direction. Upgrading its airport and improving
road infrastructure will prove to be a decisive turning
point for fostering an environment conducive to trade
and economic cooperation. That will benefit the
population of the entire region. We have submitted
proposals to the donor community, and I will continue
to lobby for them.
Improved and better integrated regional cooperation
is a key element for successful and durable peace. It
starts with cooperation among the leaders in the region.
That is why I travel regularly to Kampala and Kigali.
I was there just last week. I leave it to my partner in
peace, Mary Robinson, to elaborate further on that.
The demonstration in Goma on 10 January, during
which United Nations vehicles were hijacked by
demonstrators, revealed that much still has to be done
to restore confidence across borders. MONUSCO and
I clearly dissociate ourselves from any racist or ethnic
undertones of that demonstration.
In order to meet the challenges of 2014, MONUSCO
needs to adapt. The mandate the Council gave us clearly
directs us to bundle our strengths where they are most
needed. In Kinshasa, a leaner Mission headquarters
will provide a more efficient and focused platform for
cooperation at the national level with the Congolese
Government, United Nations country team members
and other national and international partners.
As I address the Council, MONUSCO staff are
being redeployed where they are most needed, in the
areas affected by armed conflict in the east. Before
July, two thirds of our substantive staff will be active
in the Mission’s operations in the eastern part of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo.
The east needs more civil affairs officers, human
rights experts, police officers, political analysts and
engineers — not to win a war, but to win a lasting
peace. In the western provinces, antenna offices will
exercise reduced monitoring and reporting functions,
ensuring MONUSCO’s presence throughout the whole
Democratic Republic of the Congo, while intending

S/PV.7094

to transfer a large part of programmatic tasks and
responsibilities to the country team.
The transfer of tasks and responsibilities is a
strategic aspect of our reconfiguration. MONUSCO
cannot alone make the journey to peace a comprehensive
and lasting success. Together, as one United Nations,
and with our national and international partners, we
can.
(spoke in French)
It remains only for me to thank you, Sir, and the
entire staff of the United Nations for the commitment
they show daily, their tireless determination to work,
even in trying conditions, towards lasting peace in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo. In particular, I
should like to express my great gratitude for the work
and commitment of the United Nations Volunteers,
who represent more than one third of the international
personnel of MONUSCO, its energy and beating heart.
(spoke in English)
I thank the Council once again for its continued support.
The President (spoke in Arabic): I thank Mr. Kobler
for his briefing.
I now give the floor to Mrs. Robinson.
Mrs. Robinson: May I begin by wishing the
Security Council a very happy and fruitful new year.
May I also join in welcoming the new members of the
Council.
I am honoured to address the Council today from
Kinshasa, where I am holding meetings with the senior
leadership of the country with the view to advancing the
implementation of the Peace, Security and Cooperation
Framework for the Democratic Republic of the Congo
and the Region. I am meeting with President Kabila
later this afternoon, so I may indeed have to slip away
a little early from this meeting. I apologize for that but
trust that the Council will understand.
My last briefing to the Council, on 11 December
2013, took place in the aftermath of the military defeat
of the Mouvement du 23 mars (M-23) and preceded
the successful conclusion of the Kampala process,
with the signing by President Museveni and President
Joyce Banda, in Kampala, which I had predicted would
happen on 12 December.
The reality today is that the positive atmosphere
that then prevailed has vanished, as Martin Kobler

14-205085/8

S/PV.7094

The situation concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo

has outlined. The region is going through a period
of renewed turbulence. On 25 December, the Allied
Democratic Forces rebel group attacked the town of
Kamango, an attack during which more than 50 people
were killed. On 30 December, the Forces armées de la
République démocratique du Congo repelled a series
of coordinated attacks in Kinshasa, Lubumbashi and
Kindu, leading to the death of more than 100 people.
My colleague has outlined that in more detail. In the
meantime, as Council members will be aware, the crisis
has continued in Central African Republic and fighting
erupted in South Sudan between the Government forces
and the rebels loyal to former Vice-President Riek
Machar.
As we approach the first anniversary of its signing,
and despite the fragility of the situation in the region,
the Peace, Security and Cooperation Framework
remains our best hope for achieving sustainable peace,
security, cooperation and development in the Great
Lakes region. However, it is essential that the pace of
its implementation be increased in order to maximize
its impact.
In the past year, the signatories of the Peace,
Security and Cooperation Framework achieved some
progress in putting instruments and tools in place for
its implementation. In the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, the national oversight mechanism, established
by President Kabila to oversee the implementation of
the national commitments, is functioning and requires
further strengthening. In addition, a national dialogue
involving the majority of political parties was held and
a monitoring committee, co-chaired by the Presidents
of the two chambers of the National Assembly, was
put in place to follow up on the implementation of its
outcome. Despite the military defeat of the M-23, the
Kampala process between the Government and the
M-23 rebel groups reached a political conclusion, which
was vital to securing a good future.
At the regional level, the Technical Support
Committee was established in May. It worked to develop
regional benchmarks, which were adopted by the Heads
of State during the second meeting of regional oversight
mechanism in September in New York. On 8 and
9 January, the Technical Support Committee concluded
the formulation of an action plan, including 15 priority
activities, which will be submitted for adoption to the
next meeting of the regional oversight mechanism,
scheduled for 30 January in Addis Ababa, during the
African Union Summit.

6/8

13/01/2014

The development of the plan of action is structured
around the seven regional commitments and the
associated benchmarks endorsed by the regional
oversight mechanism in September 2013. For each
commitment and under each regional benchmark,
there is a matrix that includes a list of activities to be
undertaken prior to September 2014. Clearly, ownership
will be taken of the process, there is a commitment to
action and there is a willingness to be monitored and
made accountable for that action, which I believe is
solid progress.
While all the achievements that I have just
mentioned are important steps, it is now essential that
the signatories focus strictly on the implementation of
national and regional commitments in order to generate
the required peace dividends and effect the promised
changes in the Great Lakes region.
At the national level, efforts to reform the security
sector should be significantly increased and accelerated.
This would be essential for the expansion of State
authority, particularly in eastern Democratic Republic
of the Congo. Another key priority is, as Martin Kobler
has said, the swift implementation of an effective
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration (DDR)
programme to disarm and reintegrate the former
combatants of the M-23, including those who are in
Uganda and Rwanda, and all the other fighters who
have voluntarily surrendered. A prolonged presence
of those ex-combatants in cantonment areas without
reintegration could persuade some of them to return to
an armed group, so time is of the essence.
Should the Parliament of the Democratic Republic
of the Congo adopt the amnesty law, as is profoundly
hoped, the urgency to deal with the DDR caseloads
would become more pressing. Furthermore, it would
be crucial for the Independent National Electoral
Commission to deliver timely and credible local
elections at the end of this year. I had a good meeting
with Abbot Apollinaire Malu Malu Muholongu and
members of the Commission this morning, in which I
encouraged more clarity on the electoral timetable and
the budgetary provisions.
While these commitments are to be implemented
under the leadership and ownership of the Government
of the Democratic Republic of the Congo, it is clear
that the process would require the support of donors
who have already expressed their readiness to
engage the authorities. During my current visit to the

14-20508

13/01/2014

The situation concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo

Democratic Republic of the Congo, I have encouraged
the Government to designate as early as possible an
interlocutor to interact and work with the international
partners, including with a view to developing a mutual
accountability mechanism.
I have also encouraged the Government to align the
roles and responsibilities of the monitoring committee
on national consultations with that of the national
oversight mechanism to create greater coherence
between those structures and avoid possible duplication
of efforts. Furthermore, I insisted on the need to closely
incorporate civil society into the implementation
process of the national commitments, particularly by
utilizing the existing consultative mechanism provided
as part of the national oversight mechanism.
At the regional level, signatory countries must also
begin implementing their commitments. It is now the
moment to work towards achieving further economic
integration, including by agreeing to implement crossborder economic initiatives, which would benefit the
entire region. The World Bank has agreed to fund
several regional projects in support of such efforts. In
this regard, I also plan to organize, together with the
International Conference on the Great Lakes Region
(ICGLR), a regional private sector investment forum
in the first half of 2014. The forum will seek to build
on ongoing initiatives to increase opportunities for
investment and job creation in the Great Lakes region.
Concrete confidence-building steps will have to
be taken by the countries of the region, in particular
by making sure that none are harbouring individuals
responsible for grave human rights violations, giving
any kind of support or assistance to armed groups or
interfering in the affairs of a neighbouring country. As
my partner in peace Martin Kobler has indicated, there
is worrying evidence that these commitments are not
yet being fully implemented by Rwanda and Uganda.
Increased dialogue among the leaders of the region
also needs take place. In this regard, it is my intention
to help establish a mediated dialogue among relevant
Governments and stakeholders through which some of
the difficult issues can be discussed. It is the concrete
implementation of national commitments in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and commitments at
the regional level that would lead to sustainable peace
in the region, and this cannot wait any longer.
Following the conclusion of my visit in Kinshasa,
I will travel to Luanda tomorrow morning to attend

S/PV.7094

the summit of Heads of State of the International
Conference on the Great Lakes Region. While there,
I will have an opportunity to brief the ICGLR member
States, most of which are signatories of the Peace,
Security and Cooperation Framework, on the plan of
action that they would be asked to adopt in a couple of
weeks time at regional oversight mechanism meeting
in Addis Ababa. I will reiterate to the ministers and
Heads of State the message that I have conveyed to the
Council today — it is time to tackle the tough decisions
that would actually make a difference.
In just over two weeks, the regional oversight
mechanism will meet for the third time. The meeting
will take place on 30 January in Addis Ababa, on the
margins of the African Union Summit. The Heads of
State are expected to review and adopt the plan of action
for the implementation of the regional commitments.
They are also expected to welcome Kenya and the
Sudan as new signatories to the Framework. Finally,
they will discuss my proposal to hold a private sector
investment forum for the Great Lakes region in the first
half of the year.
On the margins of the Summit, I will launch the
Great Lakes women’s platform. The launch is planned
to take place at the ministerial segment of the African
Union Summit in Addis Ababa. With the platform, I
hope to help empower women in the region to ensure
effective monitoring and advocacy of the Peace,
Security and Cooperation Framework — at both the
regional level and that of the Democratic Republic of
the Congo — and the implementation of regional and
national plans of action, under resolution 1325 (2000),
to combat violence against women, support women
affected by violence, and ensure women’s livelihoods,
development and access to clean energy at the local
level.
Let me conclude by reiterating that the Peace,
Security and Cooperation Framework for the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and the Region
is at an important juncture. Almost one year after it
was signed, it continues to hold promise for peace
and stability in the region. However, what is most
important for meaningful progress is the immediate
implementation of all commitments at the national and
regional levels in order to bring about concrete peace
dividends and lasting improvements in the lives of
the people of the region. I look to the members of the
Security Council to continue their strong support to the
Peace, Security and Cooperation Framework and their

14-205087/8

S/PV.7094

The situation concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo

encouragement to all signatories to fully implement
their commitments.
The President (spoke in
Mrs. Robinson for her briefing.

8/8

Arabic):

I

thank

13/01/2014

I now invite Council members to informal
consultations to continue our discussion on the subject.
The meeting rose at 10.40 a.m.

14-20508
