49

Resolutions adopted on the reporta oí the Third Committee

Considering that the large number of amendments
submitted to the draft Declaration at the forty-first
session of the Economic and Social Council and the
twenty-first session of the General Assembly and the
increased membership of the Commission on the Status
of Women justify a re-examination of the text of the
draft Declaration by the Commission,
Having been unable at the twenty-first session to give
adequate consideration to the draft Declaration and the
proposed amendments thereto,
l. Requests the Economic and Social Council to
invite the Commission on the Status of Women to review the text of the draft Declaration on the Elimination of Discrimination against Women at its twentieth
session in 1967, bearing in mind the amendments which
have been submitted9 and taking into account the observations of Governments and also the discussions at
the nineteenth session of the Commission on the Status
of Women, at the forty-first session of the Economic
and Social Council and at the twenty-first session of
the General Assembly;
2. Decides that the draft Declaration on the Elimination of Discrimination against W ornen should be given
high priority at its twenty-second session.
1495th plenary meeting,
16 December 1966.
2200 (XXI). lnternational Covenant on Econo1D1c, Social and Cultural Rights, lnternational Covenant on Civil and Political
Rights and Optional Protocol to the lnternational Covenant on Civil and Political
Rights
A
The General Assembly,
Considering that one of the purposes of the United
Nations, as stated in Articles 1 and SS of the Charter,
is to promote universal respect for, and observance of,
human rights and fundamental freedoms for ali without
distinction as to race, sex, language or religion,
C onsidering that in Article 56 of the Charter ali
Members of the United Nations have pledged themselves to take joint and separate action in co-operation
with the Organization for the achievement of that purpose,
Recalling the proclamation by the General Assembly on 10 December 1948 of the Universal Declaration
of Human Rights as a common standard of achievement for all peoples and all nations,
H aving considered since its ninth session the draft
Intemational Covenants on Human Rights prepared
by the Commission on Human Rights and transmitted
to it by Economic and Social Council resolution 545 B
(XVIII) of 29 July 1954, and having completed the
elaboration of the Covenants at its twenty-first session,
l. Adopts and opens for signature, ratification and
accession the following international instruments, the
texts of which are annexed to the present resolution:
(a) The Intemational Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights ;
( b) The International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights;
11 A/6349, annex II, A/C.3/L.1341/Rev.1, A/C.3L.1383/Rev.1,
A/C.3/L.1384-1386, A/C.3/L.1400 and Corr.l, A/C.3/L.1401,
A/C.3/L.1403, and A/C.3/L.1406.

(e) The Optional Protocol to the International
Covenant on Civil and Political Rights ;
2. Expresses the hope that the Covenants and the
Optional Protocol will be signed and ratified or acceded to without delay and come into force at an early
date;
3. Requests the Secretary-General to submit to the
General Assembly at its future sessions reports concerning the state of ratifications of the Covenants and
of the Optional Protocol which the Assembly will consider as a separate agenda ítem.
1496th plenary meeting,
16 December 1966.
ANNEX
lnternational Cm,enant on Economic, Social and Cultural
Right11
Pl!.EAMBLE

The States Parties to the present Covenant,
Considering that, in accordance with the principies proclaimed
in the Charter of the United Nations, recognition of the inherent
dignity and of the equal and inalienable rights of all members
of the human family is the foundation of freedom, justice and
peace in the world,
Recogni&ing that these rights derive from the inherent
dignity of the human person,
Recognizing that, in accordance with the Universal Declaration of Human Rights, the ideal of free human beings enjoying
freedom from fear and want can only be achieved if conditions
are created whereby everyone may enjoy bis economic, social
and cultural rights, as well as his civil and political rights,
Considering the obligation of States under the Charter of
the United Nations to promote universal respect for, and
observance of, human rights and freedoms,
Realizing that the individual, having duties to other individuals and to the community to which he belongs, is under
a responsibility to strive for the promotion and observance of
the rights reoognized in the present Covenant,
Agree upon the following articles :
PART

I

Article 1
l. All peoples have the right of self-determination. By
virtue of that right they freely determine ,'their political status
and freely pursue their economic, social and cultural development
2. All peoples may, for their own ends, freely dispose of
their natural wealth and resources without prejudice to any
obligations arising out of international economic co-operation.
based upon the principie of mutual benefit, and international
law. In no case may a people be deprived of its own means
of subsistence.
3. The States Parties to the present Covenant, includi~
those having responsibility for the administration of NonSelf-Governing and Trust Territories, shall promote the
realization of the right of self-determination, and shall respect
that right, in conformity with the provisions of the Charter
of the United Nations.
PART

II

Article 2
l. Each State Party to the present Covenant undertakes
to take steps, individually and through international assistance
and co-operation, especially economic and technical, to the
maximum of its available resources, with a view to achieving
progressively the full realization of the rights recognized in
the present Covenant by ali appropriate means, including
particularly the adoption of legislative measures.
2. The States Parties to the present Covenant undertake
to guarantee that the rights enunciated in the present Covenant

50

General As1embly-Twenty-fir1t Session

will be exercised without discrimination of any kind as to
race, colour, sex, language, religion, political or other opinion,
national or social origin, property, birth or other status.
3. Developing countries, with due regard to human rights
and their national economy, may determine to what extent they
would guarantee the economic rights recognized in the present
Covenant to non-nationals.

Article 3
The States Parties to the present Covenant undertake to
ensure the equal right of men and women to the enjoyment of
all economic, social and cultural rights set forth in the present
Covenant.
Article 4
The States Parties to the present Covenant recognize that,
in the enjoyment- of those rights provided by the State in
conformity with the present Covenant, the State may subject
such rights only to such limitations as are determined by law
only in so far as this may be compatible with the nature of
these rights and solely for the purpose of promoting the
general welfare in a democratic society.
Article 5
l. N othing in the present Covenant may be interpreted as
implying for any State, group or person any right to engage
in any activity or to perform any act aimed at the destruction
of any of the rights or freedoms recognized herein, or at
their limitation to a greater extent than is provided for in
the present Covenant.
2. No restriction upon or derogation from any of the
fundamental human rights recognized or existing in any country
in virtue of law, conventions, regulations or custom shall
be admitted on the pretext that the present Covenant does
not recognize such rights or that it recognizes them to a
lesser extent.
PART

III

Article 6
l. The States Parties to the present Covenant recognize
the right to work, which inc!udes the right of everyone to
the opportunity to gain his living by work which he freely
chooses or accepts, and will take appropriate steps to safeguard
this right.
2. The steps to be taken by a State Party to the present
Covenant to achieve the full realization of this right shall
include technical and vocational guidance and training programmes, policies and techniques to 'l.chieve steady economic,
social and cultural development and full and productive employment under conditions safeguarding fundamental political
and economic freedoms to the individual.
Article 7
The States Parties to the present Covenant recognize the
right of everyone to the enjoyment of just and favourable
conditions of work which ensure, in particular:
(a) Remuneration which provides all workers, as a mínimum,
with:
(i) Fair wages and equal renumeration for work of equal
value without distinction of any kind, in particular
women being guaranteed conditions of work not inferior
to those enjoyed by men, with equal pay for equal work;
(ii) A decent living for themselves and their families in

accordance with the provisions of the present Covenant ;
( b) Safe and healthy working conditions ;
(e) Equal opportunity for everyone to be promoted in bis
employment to an appropriate higher level, subject to no considcrations other than those of seniority and competence;
(d) Rest, leisure and reasonable lim1tation of working hours
and periodic holidays with pay, as well as remuneration for
public holidays.

Article 8
l. The States Parties to the present Covenant unde.takc to
ensure:
(a) The right of everyone to form trade unions and join
the trade union of his choice, subject only to the rules of thc
organization concerned, for the promotion and protection of
bis economic · and social interests. No restrictions may be
placed on the exercise of this right other than those prescribed
by law and which are necessary in a democratic society in thc
interests of national security or public order or for thc
protection of the rights and freedoms of others;
( b) The right of trade unions to establish national federations or confederations and the right of the latter to form
or join international trade-union organizations;
(e) The right of trade unions to function freely subject
to no limitations other than those prescribed by law and
which are necessary in a democratic society in the interests
of national security or public order or for the protection of
the rights and freedoms of others;
(d) The right to strike, provided that it is exercised in
conformity with the laws of the particular country.
2. This article shall not prevent the imposition of lawful
restrictions on the exercise of these rights by members of the
armed forces or of the police or of the administration of thc
State.
3. Nothing in this article shall authorize States Parties to
the International Labour Organisation Convention of 1948 concerning Freedom of Association and Protection of the Right
to Organi7.t' to take legislative measures which would prejudicc,
or apply the law in such a manner as would prejudice, the
guarantees provided for in that Convention.

Article 9
The States Parties to the present Covenant recognize the
right of everyone to social security, including social insurance.
Article 10
The States Parties to the present Covenant recognize that:
l. The widest possible protection and assistance should be
accorded to the family, which is the natural and fundamental
group unit of society, particularly for its establishment and
while it is responsible for the care and education of dependent
children. Marriage must be entered into with the free consent
of the intending spouses.
2. Special protection should be accorded to mothers during
a reasonable period before and after childbirth. During such
period working mothers should be accorded paid leave or leave
with adequate social security benefits.
3. Special measures of protection and assistance should be
taken on behalf of ali children and young persons without
any discrimination for reasons of parentage or other conditions.
Children and young persons should be protected from economic
and social exploitation. Their employment in work harmful
to their morals or health or dangerous to life or likely to
hamper their normal development should be punishable by
law. States should also set age limits below which the paid
employment of child labour should be prohibited and punishable
by law.
Article 11
l. The States Parties to the present Covenant recognize
the right of everyone to an adequate standard of living for
himself and his family, including adequate food, clothing and
housing, and to the continuous improvement of living conditions. The States Parties will take appropriate steps to ensure
the realization of this right, recognizing to this effect the
essential importance of international co-operation based on
free consent.
2. The States Parties to the present Covenant, recognizing
the fundamental right of everyone to be free from hunger,
shall take, individually and through international co-operation,
the measures, including specific programmes, which are needed:
(a) To improve methods of production, conservation and
distribution of food by making full use of technical and

51

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

scientific knowledge, by dissemina.ting knowledge of the
principies of nutrition a.nd by developing or reforming agrarian
systems in such a. way as to achieve the most efficient development and utilization of natural resources;
( b) Taking into account the problems of both food-importing
and food-exporting countries, to ensure an equitable distribution of world food supplies in relation to need.

Article 12
l. The States Parties to the present Covenant recognize
tite right of everyone to the enjoyment of the highest attainable standard of physical and mental health.
2. The steps to be taken by the States Parties to the present
Covenant to achieve the full realization of this right shall
include those necessary for :
(a) The provision for the reduction of the stillbirth-rate
and of infant mortality and for the healthy development of
the child;
( b) The improvement of all aspects of environmental and
industrial hygiene;
(e) The prevention, treatment and control of epidemic,
endemic, occupational and other diseases;
(d) The creation of conditions which would assure to all
medical service and medical attention in the event of sickness.
Article 13·
l. The States Parties to the present Covenant recognize the
right of everyone to education. They agree that education
shall be directed to the full development of the human personality and the sense of its dignity, and shall strengthen the
respect for human rights and fundamental freedoms. They
further agree that education shall enable ali persons to
participa.te effectively in a free society, promote understanding,
tolerance and friendship among ali nations and ali racial, ethnic
or religious groups, and further the activities of tite United
Nations for the maintenance of peace.
2. The States Parties to the present Covenant recognize
that, with a view to achieving the full realization of this right:
(a) Primary education shall be compulsory and available
free to ali;
(b) Secondary education in its different forms, including
technical and vocational secondary education, shall be made
generally available and accessible to ali by every appropriate
means, and in particular by the progressive introduction of
free education;
(e) Higher education shall be made equally accessible to
all, on th~ basis of capacity, by every appropriate means, and
in particular by the progressive introduction of free education;
(d) Fundamental education shall be encouraged or intensified as far as possible for those persons who have not
received or completed the whole period of their primary
education;
(e) The development of a system of schools at all levels
shall be actively pursued, an adequate fellowship system shall
be established, and the material conditions of teaching staff
shall be continuously improved.
3. The States Parties to the present Covenant undertake to
ha.ve respect for the liberty of parents and, when applicable, legal
guardia.ns to choose for their children schools, other than those
established by the public authorities, which conform to such
minimum educational standards as may be laid down or approved by the State and to ensure the religious and moral
education of their children in conformity with their own
convictions.
4. No part of this article shall be construed so as to interfere with the liberty of individuals and bodies to establish
and direct educational institutions, subject always to the observance of the principies set forth in paragraph 1 of this
article and to the requirement t!:iat the education given in
such institutions shall conform to such mínimum standards as
may be laid down by tite State.

Article 14
Each State Party to the present Covenant which, at tite
time of becoming a Party, has not been able to secure in its
rnetropolitan territory or other territories under its jurisdiction compulsory primary education, free of charge, undertakes,
within two years, to work out and adopt a detailed plan of
action for the progressive implementation, within a rea.sonable
number of years, to be fixed in the plan, of the principie of
compulsory education free of charge for all.
Article 15
l. The States Parties to the present Covenant recognize
the right of everyone:
(a) To take part in cultural life;
(b) To enjoy the benefits of scientific progress and its
applications;
(e) To benefit from the protection of the moral and material
interests resulting from any scientific, literary or artistic
production of which he is the author.
2. The steps to be taken by the States Parties to the
present Covenant to achieve the full realization of this right
shall include those necessary for the conservation, the development and the diffusion of science and culture.
3. The States Parties to the present Covenant undertake
to respect the freedom indispensable for scientific research
and creative activity.
4. The States Parties to the present Covenant recognize
the benefits to be derived from the encouragement and developrnent of international contacts and co-operation in the scientific
and cultural fields.
PART

IV

Article 16
l. The States Parties to the present Covenant undertake to
submit in conformity with this part of the Covenant reports on
the rneasures which they have adoptetl and the progress made in
achieving the observance of the rights recognized herein.
2. (a) All reports shall be submitted to the SecretaryGeneral of the United Nations, who shall transmit copies
to the Economic and Social Council for consideration in accordancc with the provisions of the present Covenant;
(b) The Secretary-General of the United Nations shall also
transmit to the specialized agencies copies of the reports, or
any relevant parts therefrom, from States Parties to the present
Covenant which are also members of these specialized agencies
in so far as these reports, or parts therefrom, relate to any
matters which fall within the responsibilities of the said
agencies in accordance with their constitutional instruments.
Article 17
l. The States Parties to the present Covenant shall furnish
their reports in stages, in accordance with a programme to be
established by the Economic and Social Council within one
year of the entry into force of the present Covenant after
consultation with the States Parties and the specialized
agencies :::oncerned.
2. Reports rnay indica.te factors and difficulties affecting
the degrec of fulfilment of obligations under the present
Covenant.
3. Where relevant information has previously been furnished
to the United Nations or to any specialized agency by any
State Party to the present Covenant, it will not be necessary
to reproduce that inforrnation, but a precise reference to the
inforrnation so furnished will suffice.

Article 18
Pursuant to its responsibilities under the Charter of the
United Nations in the field of human rights and fundamental
freedorns, the Economic and Social Council may make arrangements with the specialized agencies in respect of their reporting to it on the progress made in achieving the observance
of the provisions of the present Covenant falling within the
scope of their activities. These reports may include particulars

General A11embly-Twenty-fint Sea■ion

52

of decisions and recommendations on such implementation
adopted by their competent organs.

Article 19
The Economic and Social Council may transmit to the
Commission on Human Rights for study and general recommendation or, as appropriate, for information the reports
concerning human rights submitted by States in accordance
with articles 16 and 17, and those concerning human rights
submitted by the specialized agencies in accordance with
article 18.

Article 20
The States Parties to the present Covenant and the
specialized agencies concerned may submit comments to the
Economic and Social Council on any general recommendation
under article 19 or reference to such general recommendation
in any report of the Commission on Human Rights or any
documentation referred to therein.
Article 21
The Econorrilc and Social Council may submit from time
to time to the General Assembly reports with recommendations of a general nature and a summary of the information
received from the States Parties to the present Covenant and
the specialized agencies on the measures taken and the progress
made in achieving general observance of the rights recognized
in the present Covenant.
Article 22
The Economic and Social Council may bring to the attention of other organs of the United Nations, their subsidiary
organs and specialized agencies concerned with furnishing
technical assistance any matters arising out of the reports
referred to in this part of the present Covenant which may
assist such bodies in deciding, each within its field of competence, on the advisability of international measures likely
to contribute to the effective progressive implementation of the
present Covenant.

Article 23
The States Parties to the present Covenant agree that international action for the achievement of the rights recognized
in the present Covenant includes such methods as the conclusion
of conventions, the adoption of recommendations, the furnishing
of technical assistance and the holding of regional meetings and
technical meetings for the purpose of consultation and study
organized in conjunction with the Governments concerned.

Article 24
N othing in the present Covenant shall be interpreted as
impairing the provisions of the Charter of the United Nations
and of the constitutions of the specialized agencies which
define the respective responsibilities of the various organs
of the United Nations and of the specialized agencies in
regard to the matters dealt with in the present Covenant.

Article 25
N othing in the present Covenant shall be interpreted as
impairing the inherent right of ali peoples to enjoy and utilize
fully and freely their natural wealth and resources.
PART

V

Article 26
l. The present Covenant is open for signature by any
State Member of the United Nations or member of any of
its specialized agencies, by any State Party to the Statute of
the International Court of Justice, and by any other State
which has been invited by the General Assembly of the United
Nations to become a party to the present Covenant.
2. The present Covenant is subject to ratification. Instruments
of ratification shall be deposited with the Secretary-General
of the United Nations.

3. The present Covenant shall be open to accession by any
State referred to in paragraph 1 of this article.
4. Accession shall be effected by the deposit of an instrum.ent
of accession with the Secretary-General of the United Nations.
5. The Secretary-General of the United Nations shall inform
all States which have signed the present Covenant or acceded
to it of the deposit of each instrument of ratification or
access1on.

Article 27
l. The present Covenant shall enter into force three months
after the date of the deposit with the Secretary-General of
the United Nations of the thirty-fifth instrument of ratification
or instrument of accession.
2. F or each State ratifying the present Covenant or acceding to it after the deposit of the thirty-fifth instrument of
ratification or instrument of accession, the present Covenant
shall enter into force three months after the date of the deposit
of its own instrument of ratification or instrument of accession.
Article 28
The prov1s1ons of the present Covenant shall extend to ali
parts of federal States without any limitations or exceptions.
Article 29
l. Any State Party to the present Covenant may propase
an amendment and file it with the Secretary-General of the
United Nations. The Secretary-General shall thereupon communicate any proposed amendments to the States Parties to
the present Covenant with a request that they notify him
whether they favour a conference of States Parties for the
purpose of considering and voting upon the proposals. In
the event that at least one third of the States Parties favoura
such a conference, the Secretary-General shall convene thc
conference under the auspices of the United Nations. Any
amendment adopted by a majority of the States Parties present
and voting at the conference shall be submitted to the General
Assembly of the United Nations for approval.
2. Amendments shall come into force whcn they have beco
approved by the General Assembly of the United Nations ;i.nd
accepted by a two-thirds majority of the States Parties to
the present Covenant in accordance with their respective
constitutional processes.
3. When amendments come into force they shall be binding
on those States Parties which have accepted them, other
States Parties still being bound by the provisions of the
present Covenant and any earlier amendment which they
have accepted.
Article 30
Irrespective of the notifications made under article 26,
paragraph 5, the Secretary-General of the United Nations
shall inform ali States referred to in paragraph 1 of the same
article of the following particulars :
(a) Signatures, ratifications and accessions under article 26;
( b) The date of the entry into force of the present Covenant
under article 'Zl and the date of the entry into force of any
amendments under article ~Article 31
l. The present Covenant, of which the Chinese, English,
French, Russian and Spanish texts are equaliy authentic, shali
be deposited in the archives of the United Nations.
2. The Secretary-General of the United Nations shall
transmit certified copies of the present Covenant to ali States
referred to in article 26.
lnternational Covenant on Ci11il and Political Right11
PREAMBLE

The States Parties to the present Covenant,
C<>nsidering that, in accordance with the principies proclaimed

in the Charter of the United Nations, recognition of the
inherent dignity and of the equal and inalienable rights of all

53

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

members of the human family is the foundation of freedom,
justice and peace in the world,
Recognizing that these rights derive from the inherent
dignity of the human person,
Recognizing that, in accordance with the Universal Declaration of Human Rights, the ideal of free human beings enjoying
civil and political freedom and freedom from fear and want
can only be achieved if conditions are created whereby
everyone may enioy his civil and political rights, as well as
his economic, social and cultural rights,
Considering the obligation of States under the Charter
úÍ the United N ations to promote universal respect for,
and observance of, human rights and freedoms,
Realizing that the individual, having duties to other individuals and to the community to which he belongs, is under
a responsibility to strive for the promotion and observance of
the rights recognized in the present Covenant,

Agree upan the following articles:
PART

2. No derogation from articles 6, 7, 8 (paragraphs 1 and
2), 11, 15, 16 and 18 ¡nay be made under this provision.
3. Any State Party to the present Covenant availing itself
of the right of derogation shall immediately inform the other
States Parties to the present Covenant, through the intermediary of the Secretary-General of the United Nations,
of the provisions from which it has derogated and of thc
reasons by which it was actuated. A further communication
shall be made, through the same intermediary, on the date on
which it terminates such derogation.

I

Article 1
l. Ali peoples have the right of self-determination. By virtue
of that right they freely determine their political status and
freely pursue their economic, social and cultural development.
2. Ali peoples may, for their own ends, freely dispose of
their natural wealth and resources without prejudice to any
obligations arising out of international economic co-operation,
based upan the principie of mutual benefit, and international
law. In no case may a people be deprived of its own means
of subsistence.
3. The States Parties to the present Covenant, including
those having respansibility for the administration of NonSelf-Governing and Trust Territories, shall promote the realization of the right of self-determination, and shall respect that
right, in conformity with the provisions of the Charter of the
United Nations.
PART

Article 4
l. In time of public emergency which threatens the life
of the nation and the existence of which is officially proclaimed,
the States Parties to the present Covenant may take measures
derogating from their obligations under the present Covenant
to the extent strictly required by the exigencies of the situation, provided that such measures are not inconsistent with their
other obligations under international law and do not involvc
discrimination solely on the ground of race, colour, sex,
language, religion or social origin.

II

Article 2
l. Each State Party to the present Covenant undertakes to
respect and to ensure to all individuals within its territory
and subject to its jurisdiction the rights recognized in the
present Covenant, without distinction of any kind, such as
race, colour, sex, language, religion, palitical or other opinion,
national or social origin, property, birth or other status.

2. Where not already provided for by existing legislative or
other measures, each State Party to the present Covenant
undertakes to t:.ke the necessary steps, in accordance with
its constitutional processes and with the provisions of the
present Covenant, to adopt such legislative or other measures
as may be necessary to give effect to the rights recognized
in the present Covenant.

Article S
l. Nuthing in the present Covenant may be interpreted as
implying for any State, group or person any right to engage
in any activity or perform any act aimed at the destruction
of any of the rights and freedoms recognized herein or at
their limitation to a greater extent than is provided for in
the present Covenant.
2. There shall be no restriction upan or derogation from
any of the fundamental human rights recognized or existing
in any State Party to the present Covenant pursuant to law,
conventions, regulations or custom on the pretext that thc
present Covenant <loes not recognize such rights or that it
recognizes them to a lesser extent.
PART

III

Article 6
l. Every human being has the inherent right to life. This
right shall be protected by law. No one shall be arbitrarily
deprived of his life.

2. In countries which have not abolished the death penalty,
sentence of death may be impased only for the most serious
crimes in accordance with the law in force at the time of the
commission of the crime and not contrary to the provisions
of the present Covenant and to the Convention on the Prevention and Punishment of the Crime of Genocide. This penalty
can only be carried out pursuant to a final judgement rendered
by a competent court.

3. Each State Party to the present Covenant undertakes :

3. When deprivation of life constitutes the crime of genocide,
it is understood that nothing in this article shall authorize
any State Party to the present Covenant to derogate in any
way from any obligation assumed under the provisions of
the Convention on the Prevention and Punishment of the
Crime of Genocide.

(a) To ensure that any person whose rights or freedoms as
herein recognized are violated shall have an effective remedy,
notwithstanding that the violation has been committed by
persons acting in an official capacity;

4. Anyone sentenced to death shall have the right to seek
pardon or commutation of the sentence. Amnesty, pardon or
commutation of the sentence of death may be granted in ali
cases.

(b) To ensure that any person claiming such a remedy
shall have his right thereto determined by competent judicial,
administrative or legislative authorities, or by any other competent authority provided for by the legal system of the State,
and to develop thc possibilities of judicial remedy;

S. Sentence of death shall not be impased for crimes committed by persons below eighteen years of age and shall not
be carried out on pregnant women.

(e) To ensure that the competent authorities shall enforce

such remedies when granted.

6. N othing in this article shall be invoked to delay or to
prevent the abolition of capital punishment by any State
Party to the present Covenant.

Article 3

Article 7

The States Parties to the present Covenant undertake to
ensure the equal right of men and women to the enjoyment
of ali civil and palitical rights set forth in the present
Covenant.

No one shall be subj ected to torture or to cruel, inhuman
or degrading treatment or punishment. In particular, no one
shall be subjected without his free consent to medica! or
scientific experimentation.

General Assembly-Twenty-first Session

54
Articl-e 8

l. No one shall be held in slavery; slavery and the slavetrade in all their forms shall be prohibited.
2. No one shall be held in servitude.
3. (a) No one shall be required to perform forced or
compulsory labour ;
(b) Paragraph 3 (a) shall not be held to preclude, in countries where imprisonment with hard labour may be imposed
as a punishment for a crime, the performance of hard labour
in pursuance of a sentence to such punishment by a competent
court;
(e) For the purpose of this paragraph the term "forced
or compulsory labour" shall not include:
(i) Any work or service, not referred to in sub-paragraph
( b), normally required of a person who is under
detention in consequence of a lawful order of a court,
or of a person during conditional release from such
detention;
(ii) Any service of a military character and, in countries
where conscientious objection is recognized, any national
service required by law of conscientious objectors;
(iii) Any service exacted in cases of emergency or calamity
threatening the life or well-being of the community;
(iv) Any work or service which forros part of normal civil
obligations.
Article 9
l. Everyone has the right to liberty and security of person.
No one shall be subjected to arbitrary arrest or detention.
No one shall be deprived of his liberty except on such grounds
and in accordance with such procedure as are established by law.
2. Anyone who is arrested shall be informed, at the time of
arrest, of the reasons for bis arrest and shall be promptly
informed of any charges against him.
3. Anyone arrested or detained on a criminal charge shall
be brought promptly before a judge or other officer authorized
by law to exercise judicial power and shall be entitled to tria!
within a reasonable time or to release. lt shall not be the
general rule that persons awaiting tria! shall be detained in
custody, but release may be subject to guarantees to appear
for tria!, at any other stage of the judicial proceedings, and,
should occasion arise, for execution of the iudgement.
4. Anyone who is deprived of his liberty by arrest or
detention shall be entitled to take proceedings before a court,
in order that that court may decide without delay on the
lawfulness of bis detention and order bis release if the
detention is not lawful.
5. Anyone who has been the victim of unlawful arrest or
detention shall have an enforceable right to compensation.
Article 10

1. Ali persons deprived of their liberty shatl be treated
with humanity and with respect for the inherent dignity of
the human person.
2. (a) Accused persons shall, save in exceptional circumstances, be segregated from convicted persons and shall be
subject t» separate treatment appropriate to their status as
unconvicted persons ;
(b) Accused juvenile persons shall be separated from adults
and brought as speedily as possible for adjudication.
3. Tbe penitentiary system shalt comprise treatment of
prisoners the essential aim of wbích shall be their reformation and social rehabilitation. Juvenile offenders shall be
segregated from adults and be accorded treatment appropriate
to their age and legal status.
Article 11

No one shall be imprisoned merely on the ground of inability
to fulfil a contractual obligation.
Article 12
l. Everyone lawfully within the territory of a State shall,
within that territory, have tbe right to liberty of movement
and freedom to choose his residence.

2. Everyone shall be free to leave any country, including
bis own.
3. The above-mentioned rights shall not be subject to any
restrictions except those which are provided by law, are
necessary to protect national security, public order (ordrt
public), public health or morals or the rights and freedoms of
others, and are consistent with the other rights recognized in
the present Covenant.
4. No one shall be arbitrarily deprived of the rigbt to enter
bis own ~ountry.

Article 13
An alien lawfully in the territory of a State Party to the
present Covenant may be expelled therefrom only in pursuance
of a decision reacbed in accordance with law and shall, except
where compelling reasons of national security otherwise require,
be allowed to submit the reasons against bis expulsion and to
have bis case reviewed by, and be represented for the purpose
before, the competent authority or a person or perso111
especially designated by the competent authority.
Article 14
l. All persons shall be egua! before the courts and tribunals.

In the determination of any criminal charge against him, or
of bis rights and obligations in a suit at law, everyone shall
be entitled to a fair and public hearing by a competent, independent and impartial tribunal established by law. Tbe
Press and the public may be excluded from ali or part of a
tria! for reasons of morals, public order (ordre public) or
national security in a democratic society, or when the interest
of the private lives of the parties so requires, or to the extent
strictly necessary in the opinion of the court in special circumstances where publicity would prejudice tbe interests of justice;
but any judgement rendered in a criminal case or in a suit
at law shall be made public except where the interest of juvenile
persons otherwise requires or tbe proceedings concem matrimonial disputes or the guardianship of children.
2. Everyone charged with a criminal offence shall have the
right to be presumed innocent until preved guilty accordin¡
to law.
3. In the determination of any criminal charge against him,
everyone shall be entitled to the following minimum guarantees,
in full equality :
(a) To be informed promptly and in detail in a language
wbich he understands of the nature and cause of the charge
against him ;
(b) To have adequate time and facilities for the preparation of bis defence and to communicate with counsel of bis
own choosing ;
(e) To be tried witbout undue delay;
(d) To be tried in bis presence, and to defend himsetf in
person or through legal assistance of bis own choosing; to
be informed, if he does not have legal assistance, of this
right; and to have legal assistance assigned to him, in any
case where the interests of justice so require, and without
payment by bim in any such case if he does not have sufficient
means to pay for it ;
(e) To examine, or have examined, the witnesses against
him and to obtain tbe attendance and examination of witnesses
on bis behalf under tbe same conditions as witnesses against him;
(f) To have the free assistance of an interpreter if he
cannot understand or speak the language used in court;
(g) Not to be compelled to testify against himself or to
confess guilt.
4. In the case of juvenile persons, the procedure shall be
such as will take account of their age and the desirability of
promoting their rehabilitation.
S. Everyone convicted of a crime shall have the right to his
conviction and sentence being reviewed by a higher tribunal
according to law.
6. When a person has by a final decision been convicted of
a criminal offence and when subsequently bis conviction has
been reversed or he has been pardoned on the ground that a
new or newly discovered fact shows conclusively that there

Resolutions adopted on the reporte of the Third Committee

has been a miscarriage of justice, the person who has suffered
punishment as a result of such conviction shall be compensated
according to law, unless it is proved that the non-disclosure. of
the unknown fact in time is wholly .:ir partly attributable to h1m.
7. No one shall be liable to be tried or punished again for
an offence for which he has already been finally convicted or
acguitted in accordance with the law and penal procedure of
each country.

Article 15
l. No one shall be held guilty of any criminal offence on
account of any act or omission which did not constitute a
criminal offence, under national or international law, at the
time when it was committed. Nor shall a heavier penalty be
imoosed than the one that was applicable at the time when
th~ criminal offence was committed. If, subseguent to the
commission of the offence, provision is made by law for the
imposition of a lighter penalty, the offender shall benefit
thereby.
2. Nothing in this article shall prejudice the tria) and
punishment of any person for any act or omission which, at
the time when it was committed, was criminal according to
the general principies of law recognized by the community
of nations.
Article 16
Everyone shall have the right to recognition everywhere
as a persor, befare the law.

Article 17
l. No one shall be subjected to arbitrary or unlawful interference with his privacy, family, home or correspondence,
nor to unlawful attacks on his honour and reputation.
2. Everyone has the right to the protection of the law
against such interference or attacks.

Article 18
l. Everyone shall have the right to freedom of thought,
conscience and religion. This right shall include freedom
to have or to adopt a religion or belief of his choice, and
freedom, either individually or in community with others and in
public or private, to manifest his religion or belief in worship,
observance, practice and teaching.

2. No one shall be subject to coercion which would impair
bis freedom to have or to adopt a religion or belief of his
choice.
3. Freedom to manifest one's religion or beliefs may be
subject only to such limitations as are prescribed by law
and are necessary to protect public safety, order, health, or
morals or the fundamental rights and freedoms of others.
4. The States Parties to the present Covenant undertake
to have respect for the liberty of parents and, when applicable,
legal guardians to ensure the religious and moral education
of their children in conformity with their own convictions.

Article 19
l. Everyone shall have the right to hold opinions without
interference.

2. Everyone shall have the right to freedom of expression;
this right shall include freedom to seek, receive and impart
information and ideas of ali kinds, regardless of frontiers,
either orally, in writing or in print, in the form of art, or
through any other media of his choice.
3. The exercise of the rights provided for in paragraph 2 of
this article carries with it special duties and responsibilities.
It may therefore be subject to certain restrictions, but these
shall only be such as are provided by law and are necessary:
(a) For respect of the rights or reputations of others;
(b) Fo:- the protection of national security or of public order

(ordre public), or of public health or morals.

55

Article 20
l. Any propaganda for war shall be prohibited by law.
2. Any advocacy oí national, racial or religious hatred that
constitutes incitement to discrimination, hostility or violence
shall be prohibited by law.

Article 21
The right of peaceful assembly shall be recognized. No
restrictions may be placed on the exercise oí this right other
than those imposed in conformity with_ the law and which
are necessary in a democratic society in the interests of
national security or public saíety, public arder (ordre p11blic),
the protection oí public health or morals or the protection of
the rights and fr'!edoms oí others.
Article 22
l. Everyone shall have the right to freedom of assocíation
with others, including the right to form and join trade unions
for the protection of his interests.
2. No restricüons may be placed on the exercise of this
right other than those which are prescribed by law and which
are necessary in a democratic society in the interests of national security or public saíety, public arder (ordre public),
the protection oí public health or morals or the protection of
the rights and freedoms of others. This article shall not prevent the imposition of lawful restrictions on members of the
armed forces and of the police in their exercise of this right.
3. Nothing in this article shall authorize States Parties to
the lnternational Labour Organisation Convention of 1948 concerning Freedom of Association and Protecüon oí the Right
to Organize to take legislative measures which would prejudice,. 01· to apply the law in such a manner as to prejudice,
the guarantees provided for in that Convention.

Article 23
l. The family is the natural and fundamental group unit of
society and is entitled to protection by society and the State.
2. The right of men and women of marriageable age to
marry and to found a family shall be recognized.
3. No marriage shall be entered into without the free and
full consent of the intending spouses.
4. States Parties to the present Covenant shall take appropriate steps to ensure eguality of rights and responsibilities of
spouses as to marriage, during marriage and at its dissolution.
In the case of dissolution, provision shall be made for the
necessary protection of any children.
Article 24
l. Every child shall have, without any discrimination as to
race, colour, sex, language, religion, national or social origin,
property or birth, the right to such measures of protection as
are reguired by his status as a minor, on the part of his family,
society and the State.
2. Every child shall be registered immediately after birth
and shall have a name.
3. Every child has the right to acguire a nationality.

Article 25
Every citizen shall have the right and the opportunity, without any of the distinctions mentioned in article 2 and without
unreasonable restrictions :
(a) To take part in the conduct of ,public affairs, directly or
through freely chosen representatives;
(b) To vote and to be elected at genuine periodic elections
which shall be by universal and egua) suffrage and shall be held
by secret ballot, guaranteeing the free expression of the will
o f the electors ;
(e) To have access, on general terma of ~uality, to public
service in his country.
Article 26
All persons are equal befare the law and are entitled without
any discrimination to the egua! protection of the law. In thi1

56

General As1embly-Twenty-fint Se11ion

respect, the law shall prohibit any discrimination and guarantee
to all persons equal and effective protection against discrimination on any ground such as race, colour, sex, language, religion,
political or other opinion, national or social origin, property,
birth or other status.

Article 27
In those States in which ethnic, religious or linguistic
minorities exist, persons belonging to such minorities shall not
be denied the right, in community with the other members of
their group, to enjoy their own culture, to profess and practice their own religion, or to use their own language.
PART

IV

Article 28
l. There shall be established a Human Rights Committee
(hereafter referred to in the ,present Cqvenant as the Committee). lt shall consist of eighteen members and shall carry
out the functions hereinafter provided.
2. The Committee shall be composed of nationals of the
States Parties to the present Covenant who shall be persons of
high moral character and recognized competence in the field of
human rights, consideration being given to the usefulness of
the participation of oome persons having legal experience.
3. The membets of the Committee shall be elected and shall
serve in their .personal capacity.

Articl.e 29
l. The members of the Committee shall be elected by secret
ballot from a list of persons possessing the qualifications prescribed in article 28 and nominated for the purpose by the
State Parties to the present Covenant.
2. Each State Party to the present Covenant may nominate
not more than two persons. These ,persons shall be nationals
of the nominating State.
3. A person shall be eligible for renomination.

.

Article30
l. The initial election shall be held no later than six months
after the date of the entry into force of the present Covenant.
2. At least four months before the date of each election to
the Committee, other than an election to fill a vacancy declared
in accordance with article 34, the Secretary-General of the
United Nations shall address a written invitation to the States
Parties to ,the present Covenant to submit their nominations tor
membership of the Committee within three months.
3. The Secretary-General of the United Nations shall prepare a list in alphabetical order of ali the persons thus nominated, with an indication of the States Parties which have
nominated them, and shall submit it to the States Parties to
the present Covenant no later than one II1-0nth before the date
of each election.
4. Elections of the members of the Committee shall be held
at a meeting of the States Parties to the present Covenant
convened by the Secretary-General of the United Nations at
the Headquarters of the United Nations. At that meeting, for
which two thirds of the States Parties to the present Covenant
shall constitute a quorum, the persons elected to the Committee
shall be those nominees who obtain the largest number of votes
and an absolute majority of the votes of the representatives of
Statcs Parties present and voting.

Article 31
l. The Committee may not include more than one national
of the same State.
2. In the election of the Committee, consideration shall be
given to equitable geographical distribution of membership
and to the representation of the different forms of civilization
and of the princtpal legal systems.

renominated. However, the terms of nine of the members
elected at the first electi-on shall expire at the end of two
years; immediately after the first election, the names of thesc
nine members shall be chosen by lot by the Chairman of the
meeting referred to in article 30, paragraph 4.
2. Elections at the expiry of office shall be held in accordance with the preceding articles of this part of the present
Covenant.

Article 33
l. If, in the unanimous opinion of the other members, a
member of the Committee has ceased to carry out his functions
for any cause other than absence of a temporary character,
the Chairman of the Committee shall notify the SecretaryGeneral of the United Nations, who shall then declare the
seat of that member to be vacant.
2. In the event of the death or the resignation of a membcr
of the Committee, the Chairman shall immediately notify the
Secretary-General of the United Nations, who shall declare the
seat vacant from the date of death or the date -0n which thc
resi.gnation takes effect.

Article 34
l. When a vacancy is declared in accordancc with article 33
and if the term oí office of the member to be replaced docs not
expire within six months of the declaration of the vacancy, thc
Secretary-General of the United Nations shall notify each of
the States Parties to the present Covenant, which may within
two months submit nominations in accordance with articlc 29
for the purpose of filling the vacancy.
2. The Secretary-General o{ the United Nations shall prepare a list in alphabetical order of the persons thus nominatcd
and shall submit it to the States Parties to the present Covenant. The election to fill the vacancy shall then take place
in accordance with the relevant provisions of this part of thc
present Covenant.
3. A mem:ber of the Committee elected to fill a vacancy declared in accordance with article 33 shall hold office for the
remainder of the term of the member who vacated the seat on
the Comrnittee under the provisions of that article.

¿frticle 35
The members of the Committee shall, with the approval of
the General Assembly of the United Nations, receive emoluments from United Nations resources on such terms and conditions as the General Asscmbly may decide, having regard to
the importance of the Committee's responsibilities.

Article 36
The Secretary-General of the United Nations shall providc
the necessary staff and facilities for the effective performance
of the functions of the Committee under the present Govenant.

Article 37
l. The Secretary-General of the United Nations shall oonvene the initial meeting of the Committee at the Headquarters
of the United Nations.
2. After its initial meeting, the Committee shall meet at
such times as shall be provided in its rules of procedure.
3. The Comrnittee shall normally meet at the Headquarters
of the United Nations or at the United Nations Office at
Geneva.

Article 38
Every member of the Committee shall, before taking up his
duties, make a solemn declaration in open committee that he will
perform his functions impartially and conscientiously.

Article 39

Article 32

l. The Gommittee shall elect its officers for a term of two
years. They may be re-elected.

l. The members of the Committee shall be elected for a
tcrm of four years. They shall be eligible for re-election if

2. The Committee shall establish its own rules of procedurc,
but these rules shall provide, inter alia, that :

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

(a) Twelve members shall constitute a quorum:
(b) Decisions of the Committee shall be made hy a majority
vote of the members present.

Article 40
l. The States Parties to the present Covenant undertake to
submit reports on the measures they have adopted which give
effect to the rights recognized herein and on the progress
made in the enjoyment of those rights:
(a) Within one year of the entry into force of the present
Covenant for the States Parties concerned ;
(b) Thereafter whenever the Committee !>O requests.
2. Ali reports shall be submitted to the Secretary-General
of the United Nations, who shall transmit them to the Committee for consideration. Reports shall indicate the factors and
difficulties, if any, affecting the implementation of the present
Covenant.
3. The Secretary-General of the United Nations may, after
consultation with the Committee, transmit to the specialized
agencies concerned copies of such parts of the reports as may
fall within their field of competence.
4. The Committee shall study the reports submitted by
the States Parties to the present Covenant. It shall transmit
its reports, and such general comments as it may consider
appropriate, to the States Parties. The Committee may also
transmit to the Economic and Social Council these comments
along · with the copies of the reports it has received from
States Parties to the present Covenant.
S. The States Parties to the present Covenant may submit to
the Committee observations on any comments that may be made
in accordance with paragraph 4 of this article.

57

(f) In any matter referred to it, the Committee may ca11
upon the States Parties concerned, referred to in sub-paragraph
(b), to supply any relevant information.
(g) The States Parties concerned, referred to in sub-paragraph ( b), shall have the right to be represented when the
matter is being considered in the Committee and to make submissions orally and/or in wt"iting.
(h) The Committee shall, within twelve months after the
date oí receipt of notice under sub-paragraph ( b), submit a
report:
(i) If a solution within the terms of sub-paragraph (e) is
reached, the Committee shall confine its _report to a
brief statement of the facts and of the solut1on reached;
(ii) If a solution within the terms of sub-paragraph (e) is
not reached, the Committee shall confine its report to
a brief statement of tbe facts; the writtcn suhmissions
and record of the oral submisions made by the States
Parties concerned shall be attached to the report.
In every matter, the report shall be communicated to the
States Parties concerned.
2. The provisions of this article shall come into force when
ten States Parties to the present Covenant have made declarations under paragraph 1 of this article. Such declarations shall
be deposited by the States Parties with the Secretary-General
of the United Nations, who shall transmit copies thereof to the
other States Parties. A declaration may be withdrawn at any
time by notification to the Secretary-General. Such a withdrawal shall not prejudice the consideration of any matter
which is the subject of a communication already transmitted
under this article; no further communication by any State
Party shall be received after the notification of withdrawal of
the declaration has been received by the Secretary-General, unless the State Party concemed has made a new declaration.

Article 41
l. A State Party to the present Covenant may at any time
declare under this article that it recognizes the competence of
the Committee to receive and consider communications to the
effect that a State Party claims that another State Party is
not fulfilling its obligations under the present Covenant. Communications under this article may be received and considered
only if submitted by a State Party which has made a declaration recognizing in regard to itself the competence of the
Committee. No communication shall be received by the Committee if it concems a State Party which has not made such
a declaration. Communications received under this article shall
be dealt with in accordance with the following procedure :
(a) If a State Party to the present Covenant considers that
another State Party is not giving effect to the provisions of
the present Covenant, it may, by written communication, bring
the matter to the attention of that State Party. Within three
months after the receipt of the communication, the receiving
State shall afford the State which sent the communication an
explanation or any other statement in writing clarifying the matter, which should include, to the extent possible and pertinent,
reference to domestic ~rocedures and remedies taken, pending, or available in the matter.
(b) If the matter is not adjusted to the satisfaction of both
States Parties concerned within six tnonths after the receipt by
the receiving State of the initial communication, either State
shall have the right to refer the matter to the Committee, by
notice given to the Committee and to the other State.
(e) The Committee shall <leal with a matter referred to it
only after it has ascertained that ali available domestic remedies
have been invoked and exhausted in the matter, in conformity
with the generally recognized principies of intemational law.
This shall not be the rule where the application of the remedies
is unreasonably prolonged.

Article 42
l. (a) If a matter referred to the Committee in accordance
with article 41 is not resolved to the satisfaction of the States
Partes concerned, the Committee may, with the prior consent
of the States Parties concerned, appoint an ad hoc Conciliation
Commission (hereinafter referred to as the Commission). The
good offices of the Commission shall be made available to the
States Parties concerned with a view to an amicable solution
of the matter oo the basis of respect for the present Covenant;
( b) The Commission shall consist of five persons acceptable
to the States Parties concerned. If the States Parties concerned
fail to reach agreement within three months on all or part of
the composition of the Commission, the members of the Commission concerning whom no agreement has been reached shall
be elected by secret ballot by a two-thirds maiority vote of the
Committee from among its members.
2. The members of the Commission shall serve in their
personal capacity. They shall not be nationals of the States
Parties concerned, or of a State not party to the present Covenant, or of a State Party which has not made a declaration
under article 41.
3. The Commission shall elect its own Chairman and
adopt its own rules of procedure.
4. The meetings of the Commission shall normally be held
at the Headquarters of the United Nations or at the United
Nations Office at Geneva. However, they may be held at such
other convenient places as the Commission may determine in
consultation with the Secretary-General of the United Nations
and the States Parties concerned.
5. The secretariat provided in accordance with article 36
shall also service the commissions appointed under this article.

(ti) The Conimittee shall hold closed meetings when examining communications under this article.

6. The information received and collated by the Committee
shall be made available to the Commission and the Commission
may call upon the States Parties concerned to supply any other
relevant information.

(e) Subiect to the provisions of sub-paragraph (e), the
Committee shall make available its good offices to the States
Parties concerned with a view to a friendly solution of the
matter on the basis of respect for human rights and fundamental freedoms as recognized in the present Covenant.

7. When the Commission has fully considered the matter,
but in any event not later than twelve months after having
been seized of the matter, it shall submit to the Chairman of
the Committee a report for communication to the States Parties concerned :

General Assembly-Twenty-:6.rst Se1Bion
(a) If the Commission is unable to complete its consideration of the matter within twelve months, it shall confine its
report to a brief statement of the status of its consideration
of the matter;
( b) If an arnicable solution to the matter on the basis of respect for human rights as recognized in the present Covenant
is reached, the Cornmission shall confine its report to a brief
statement of the facts and of the solution reached;
(e) If a solution within the terms of sub-paragraph (b)
is not reached, the Commission's report shal! embody its findings on all questions of fact re~evan: to the 1ssues b~t'Y:~n the
States Parties concerned, and 1ts v1ews on the poss1b1ht1es of
an amicable solution of the matter. This report shall also contain the written submissions and a record af the oral submissions
made by the States Parties concerned;
(d) If the Commission's report is submitted u_nd:r subparagraph (e), the States Parties concern~d shall, w1t~m three
months of the receipt of the report, notlfy the Chairman af
the Committee whether or not they accept the contents of the
report of the Commission.
8. The pravisions of this article are without prejudice to the
responsibilities of the Committee under article 41.
9. The States Parties concerned shall share equally all the
expenses of the members of the Commission in accordance with
estimates to be provided by the Secretary-General of the
United Nations.
10. The Secretary-General of the United Nations shall be
empowered to pay the expenses of the members of the Commission, if necessary, before reimbursement by the Stat~s
Parties concerned, in accordance with paragraph 9 of th1s
article.

cialized agencies, by any State Party to the Statute of the
lnternational Court of Justice, and by any other State which
has been invited by the General Assembly of the United Nations to become a party to the present Covenant.
2. The present Covenant is subject to ratification. Instruments of ratification shall be deposited with the SecretaryGeneral of the United Nations.
3. The present Covenant shall be open to accession by any
State referred to in paragraph 1 of this article.
4. Accession shall be effected by the deposit of an instrument of accession with the Secretary-General of the United
Nations.
S. The Secretary-General of the United Nations shall inform
ali States which have signed this Covenant or acceded to it
of the deposit of each instrument of ratification or accession.

Article 43
The members of the Committee, and of the ad hoc conciliation commissions which may be appointed under article 42,
shall be entitled to the facilities, privileges and immunities of
experts on mission for the United Nations as laid down in
the relevant sections of the Convention on the Privileges and
Immunities of the United Nations.

Article 51
l. Any State Party to the present Covenant may propose
an amendment and file it with the Secretary-General of the
United Nations. The Secretary-General of the United Nations
shall thereupon communicate any proposed amendments to the
States Parties to the present Covenant with a request that they
notify him whether they favour a conference of States Parties
for the purpose of considering and voting upon the proposals.
In the event that at least one third of the States Parties
favours such a conference, the Secretary-General shall convene the conference under the auspices of the United Nations.
Any amendment adopted by a rnajority of the States Parties
present and voting at the conference shall be submitted to the
General Assembly of the United Nations for approval.
2. Amendments shall come into force when they have been
approved by the General Assembly of the United Nations and
acce.pted by a two-thirds majority of the States Parties to the
present Covenant in accordance with their respective constitutional processes.
3. When amendments come into force, they shall be binding
on those States Parties which have accepted them, other States
Parties still being bound by the provisions of the present
Covenant and any earlier amendment which they have accepted.

Article 44
The provisions for the implementation of the prcsent Covenant shall apply without pre_iudice to the procedures prescribed
in the field of human rights by or under the constituent instruments and the conventions of the United Nations and of the
specialized agencies and shall not prevent the States Parties
to the present Covenant from having recourse to other procedures for settling a dispute in accordance with general or
special international agreements in force between thern.
Articlr 45

The Cornmittee shall subrnit to the General Assembly of the
United Nations, through the Economic and Social Council, an
annual report on its activities.
PART V

Articlc 46
N othing in the present Covenant shall be interpreted as impairing the provisions of the Charter of the United Nations
and of the constitutions of the specialized agencies which define the respective responsibilities of the various organs of the
United Nations and of the specialized agencies in regard to
the matters dealt within the present Covenant.
Article 47
Nothing in the present Covenant shall be interpreted as
impairing the inherent right of ali peoples to enjoy aad utilize
fully and freely their natural wealth and resources.
PART

VI

A,ticle 48
l. The present Covenant is open for signature by any State
Member of the United Nations or mernber of any of its spe-

Article 49
l. The present Covenant shall enter into force three months
after the date of the deposit with the Secretary-General of
the United Nations of the thirty-fifth inst,rurnent of ratification
or instrument of accession.
2. For each State ratifying the present Covenant or acceding
to it after the deposit of the thirty-fi fth instrument of ratification or instrument of accession, the present Covenant shall
enter into force three months after the date of the deposit of
its own instrument of ratification or instrument of accession.
Article 50
The prov1S1ons of the present Covenant shall extend to all
parts of federal States without any limitations or exceptions.

Article 52
lrrespective of the notifications made under article 48, paragraph S, the Secretary-General of the United Nations shall
info~m ali States referred to in paragraph 1 of the same
article of the following particulars:
(a) Signatures, ratifications and accessions under article 48;
(b) The date of the entry into force of the present Covenant
under article 49 and the date of the entry into force of any
amendments under article 51.

Article 53
l. The pr~sent Covenant, of which the Chinese, English,
French, Russ1an and Spanish texts are equally authentic, shall
be deposited in the archives of the United Nations.

2. The Secretary-General of the United Nations shall
transmit certified c•opies of the present Covenant to all States
referred to in article 48.

Resolutions adopted on the reporta of the Third Committee

Optional Protocol to the lnternational Cm,enant on Ci11il
and Political Righu

The States Parties to the present Protocol,
Consideri11g that in order further to achieve the purposes of
the Covenant on Civil and Political Rights (hereinafter referred to as the Covenant) and the implementation of its
provisions it would be appropriate to enable the Human
Rights Committee set up in part IV of the Covenant (hereinafter referred to as the Committee) to receive and consider,
as provided in the present Protocol, communications from
individuals claiming to be victims of violations of any of the
rights set forth in the Covenant,
H ave agreed as follows :

Article 1
A State Party to the Covenant that becomes a party to the
present Protocol recognizes the competence of the Committee
to receive and consider communications from individuals subject to its jurisdiction who claim to be victims of a violation
by that State Party of any of the rights set forth in the
Covenant. No communication shall be received by the Committee if it concerns a State Party to the Covenant which is
not a party to the present Protocol.
Article 2
Subject to the provisions of article 1, individuals who claim
that any of their rights enumerated in the Covenant have been
violated and who have exhausted ali available domestic remedies
may submit a written communication to the Committee for
consideration.
Article 3
The Committee shall consider inadmissible any communication under the present Protocol which is anonymous, or which
it considers to be an abuse of the right of submission of such
communications or to be incompatible with the ,provisions of
the Covenant.
Article 4
l. Subject to the provisions of article 3, the Committee
shall bring any communications submitted to it under the
present Protocol to the attention of the State Party to the
present Protocol alleged to be violating any provision of
the Covenant.
2. Within six months, the rece1vmg State shall submit to
the Committee written explanations or statements clarifying
the matter and the remedy, if any, that may have been taken
by that State.

Article 5
l. The Committee shall consider communications received
under the present Protocol in the light of ali written information made available to it by the individual and by the State
Party concerned.
2. The Committee shall not consider any communication
from an individual unless it has ascertained that:
(a) The same matter is not being examined under another
procedure of international investigation or settlement;
( b) The individual has exhausted ali available domestic
remedies.

This shall not be the rule where the application of the remedies
is unreasonably prolonged.
3. The Committee shall hold closed meetings when examining
communications under the present Protocol.
4. The Committee shall forward its views to the State
Party concerned and to the individual.

Article 6
The Committee shall include in its annual report under
article 45 of the Covenant a summary of its activities under
the present Protocol.

Article 7
Pending the achievement of the objectives of resolution
1514 (XV) adopted by the General Assembly of the United

59

Nations ,on 14 December 1960 concerning the Declaration on
the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and
Peoples, the provisions of the present Protocol shall in no way
limit the right of petition granted to these peoples by the
Charter of the United Nations and other international conventions and instruments under the United Nations and its
specialized agencies.

Article 8
l. The present Protocol is open for signature by any State
which has signed the Covenant.
2. The present Protocol is subject to ratification by any
State which has ratified or acceded to the Covenant. Instruments of ratification shall be deposited with the SecretaryGeneral of the United Nations.
3. The present Protocol shall be open to accession by any
State which has ratified or acceded to the Covenant.
4. Accession shall be effected by the deposit of an instrument of accession with the Secretary-General of the United
Nations.
5. The Secretary-General of the United Nations shall inform
ali States which have signed the present Protocol or acceded
to it of the deposit of each instrument of ratification or
accession.
Article 9
l. Subject to the entry into force of the Covenant, thc
present Protocol shall enter into force three months after thc
date of the deposit with the Secretary-General of the United
Nations of the tenth instrument of ratification or instrument
of accession.
2. For each State ratifying the present Protocol or acceding
to it after the deposit of the tenth instrument of ratification
or instrument of accession, the ,present Protocol shall enter
into force three months after the date of the deposit of its
own instrument of ratification or instrument of accession.
Article 10
The provisions of the present Protocol shall extend to all
parts of federal States without any limitations or exceptions.
Article 11
l. Any State Party to the present Protocol may propose
an amendment and file it with the Secretary-General of the
United Nations. The Secretary-General shall thereupon communicate any proposed amendments to the States Parties to
the present Protocol with a request that they notify him
whether they favour a conference of States Parties for the
purpose of considering and voting upon the proposal. In thc
event that at least one third of the States Parties favours such
a conference, the Secretary-General shall convene the conference under the auspices of the United Nations. Any amendment adopted by a majority of the States Parties present and
voting at the conference shall be submitted to the General
Assembly of the United Nations for approval.
2. Amendments shall come into force when they have been
approved by the General Assembly of the United Nations and
accepted by a two-thirds majority of the States Parties to
the present Protocol in accordance with their respective
constitutional processes.
3. When amendments come into force, they shall be binding
on those States Parties which have accepted them, other States
Parties still being bound by the provisions of the present
Protocol and any earlier amendment which they have accepted.

Article 12
l. Any State Party may denounce the present Protocol at
any time by written notification addressed to the SecretaryGeneral of the United Nations. Denunciation shall take effect
three months after the date of receipt of the notification by
the Secretary-General.
2. Denunciation shall be without prejudice to the continued
application of the provisions of the present Protocol to any
communication submitted under article 2 before the effective
date of denunciation.

General A.11emhly-Twenty-firat Se11ion

60

Article 13
lrrespective of the notifications made under article 8, paragraph S, of the present Protocol, the Secretary-General of
the United Nations shall inform ali States referred to in
article 48, paragraph 1, of the Covenant of the following
particulars :
(a) Signatures, ratificatio11s and accessions under article 8;
(b) The date of the entry into force of the present Protocol
under article 9 and the date of the entry into force of any
amendments under article 11;
(e) Denunciations under article 12.

Article 14
l. The present Pr_otocol, of which the Ghinese, English,
French, Russian and Spanish texts are equally authentic, shall
be deposited in the archives of the United Nations.
2. The Secretary-General of the United Nations shall
transmit certified copies of the present Protoool to all States
referred to in article 48 of the Covenant.

B
The General Assembly,
Considering that the text of the International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights, the text
of the International Covenant on Civil and Poli.tical
Rights and the text of the Optional Protocol to the
International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights
should be made known throughout the world,
l. Requests the Governments of States and ;iongovernmental organizations to publicize the text of
these instruments as widely as possible, using every
meaos at their disposal, including all the appropriate
media of information ;
2. Requests the Secretary-General to ensure the immediate and wide circulation of these instruments and,
to that end, to publish and distribute the text .thereof.
1496th plenary meeting,
16 December 1966.

e
The General Assembly,
Considering the advisability of the proposals for the
establishment of national commissions on human rights
or the designation of other appropriate institutions to
perform certain functions pertaining to the observance
of the International Covenant on Civil and Political
Rights and the International Covenant on Economic,
Social and Cultural Rights,
1. Invites the Economic and Social Council to request the Commission on Human Rights to examine
the question in all its aspects and to report, through
the Council, to the General Assembly;
2. Requests the Secretary-General to invite Member
States to submit their comments on the question, in
order that the Commission on Human Rights may
take these comments into account when considering
the proposals.
1496th plenary meeting,
16 December 1966.

2214 (XXI). United Nations Cbildren's Fund
The General Assembly,
Taking the opportunity of the twentieth anniversary
of the United Nations Children's Fund to congratulate
Governments, organizations and individuals on their

support of and partnership with the Fund in its two
decades of significant contribution to the well-being of
children throughout the world and to international
solidarity,
Recognizing the value of aid from the United Nations
Children's Fund in helping developing countries accelerate and improve the operation of services benefiting children,
N oting with approval that the United N ations Children's Fund is helping Governments, as part of their
national development plans and programmes, not only
to protect their children and young people, but to ensurc
that they receive a suitable preparation for making their
contribution to the economic and social progress of their
countries,
W elcoming the fact that the training of national personnel in services benefiting children is now one of
the major features of aid from the United Nations
Children's Fund,
Commending the continued close co-operation between
the United N ations Children's Fund and .the Department of Economic and Social Affairs of the United
Nations Secretariat and the relevant technical and other
agencies in the United Nations family,
Deeply concerned, however, at the magnitude of the
unmet needs of children and youth in the developing
countries and the ever-increasing demands on the resources of the United Nations Children's Fund,
N oting with approval the support in the Economic
and Social Council and the Executive Board of ,the
United Nations Children's Fund for an income goal
of $50 million to be reached by the end of 1969, at
the clase of the United Nations Development Decade,
l. Endorses the activities and objectives of the
United Nations Children's Fund;
2. Urges Governments to increase their contributions to the United Nations Children's Fund and calls
upon supporting organizations, groups and individuals
to intensify their efforts so that the new income goal
may be reached ;
3. Recommends that Governments should includ.e
projects to meet the needs of children and youth in
their over-all development plans.
1498th plenary meeting,
19 December 1966.

2215 (XXI). World social situation
The General Assembly,
Reatfirming the solemn undertaking embodied in the
Charter of the United Nations to promote economic
and social progress and better standards of life in la.rger
freedom,
Recalling its resolutions 1916 (XVIII) of 5 December 1963 and 2035 (XX) of 7 December 1965,
N oting again with deep concern that, despite past
efforts, the world social situation is far from satisfactory,
N oting that progress in the achievement of the goals
and objectives set for the United Nations Development
Decade has been disappointingly slow,
Recognizing the importance of concerted practica!
action in the social field for attaining the goals of the
United Nations Development Decade,
