A/RES/70/71

United Nations

Distr.: General
11 December 2015

General Assembly
Seventieth session
Agenda item 101

Resolution adopted by the General Assembly on 7 December 2015
[on the report of the First Committee (A/70/464)]

70/71.

Convention on Prohibitions or Restrictions on
the Use of Certain Conventional Weapons Which
May Be Deemed to Be Excessively Injurious or
to Have Indiscriminate Effects

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 69/79 of 2 December 2014,
Recalling with satisfaction the adoption and entry into force of the Convention
on Prohibitions or Restrictions on the Use of Certain Conventional Weapons Which
May Be Deemed to Be Excessively Injurious or to Have Indiscriminate Effects1 and
its amended article 1,2 the Protocol on Non-Detectable Fragments (Protocol I),1 the
Protocol on Prohibitions or Restrictions on the Use of Mines, Booby Traps and
Other Devices (Protocol II)1 and its amended version,3 the Protocol on Prohibitions
or Restrictions on the Use of Incendiary Weapons (Protocol III),1 the Protocol on
Blinding Laser Weapons (Protocol IV)4 and the Protocol on Explosive Remnants of
War (Protocol V),5
Noting the results of the 2014 Meeting of the High Contracting Parties to the
Convention, held in Geneva on 13 and 14 November 2014,
Welcoming the results of the Sixteenth Annual Conference of the High
Contracting Parties to Amended Protocol II, held in Geneva on 12 November 2014,
Welcoming also the results of the Eighth Conference of the High Contracting
Parties to Protocol V, held in Geneva on 10 and 11 November 2014,
Recalling the role played by the International Committee of the Red Cross in
the elaboration of the Convention and the Protocols thereto, and welcoming the
particular efforts of various international, non-governmental and other organizations

_______________
1

United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 1342, No. 22495.
Ibid., vol. 2260, No. 22495.
3
Ibid., vol. 2048, No. 22495.
4
Ibid., vol. 2024, No. 22495.
5
Ibid., vol. 2399, No. 22495.
2

15-16825 (E)

*1516825*

Please recycle

A/RES/70/71

Convention on Prohibitions or Restrictions on the Use of Certain Conventional Weapons
Which May Be Deemed to Be Excessively Injurious or to Have Indiscriminate Effects

in raising awareness of the humanitarian consequences of various categories of
conventional weapons which may be deemed to be excessively injurious or to have
indiscriminate effects,
Calls upon all States that have not yet done so to take all measures to
1.
become parties, as soon as possible, to the Convention on Prohibitions or Restrictions
on the Use of Certain Conventional Weapons Which May Be Deemed to Be
Excessively Injurious or to Have Indiscriminate Effects1 and the Protocols thereto,
as amended, with a view to achieving the widest possible adherence to these
instruments at an early date and so as to ultimately achieve their universality;
Calls upon all States parties to the Convention that have not yet done so
2.
to express their consent to be bound by the Protocols to the Convention and the
amendment extending the scope of the Convention and the Protocols thereto to
include armed conflicts of a non-international character;
Emphasizes the importance of the universalization of the Protocol on
3.
Explosive Remnants of War (Protocol V);5
4.
Welcomes the additional ratifications and acceptances of or accessions to
the Convention, as well as the consents to be bound by the Protocols thereto;
Acknowledges the continued efforts of the Secretary-General, as depositary
5.
of the Convention and the Protocols thereto, the Chair of the Meeting of the High
Contracting Parties to the Convention, the President of the Eighth Conference of the
High Contracting Parties to Protocol V and the President of the Sixteenth Annual
Conference of the High Contracting Parties to Amended Protocol II, on behalf of the
High Contracting Parties, to achieve the goal of universality;
Recalls the following decisions by the Fourth Review Conference of the
6.
High Contracting Parties to the Convention:
(a) The adoption of an accelerated plan of action to promote universality of
the Convention and the Protocols thereto;
(b) The adoption of actions to enhance the implementation of the compliance
mechanism for the Convention and the Protocols thereto;
(c) The continuation of the Sponsorship Programme within the framework of
the Convention;
and, with recognition of the value and importance of the Sponsorship Programme,
encourages States to contribute to it;
7.
Welcomes the commitment by States parties to continue to contribute to
the further development of international humanitarian law and in this context to
keep under review both the development of new weapons and uses of weapons,
which may have indiscriminate effects or cause unnecessary suffering;
Notes with satisfaction the decision of the 2014 Meeting of the High
8.
Contracting Parties to the Convention to convene in 2015 a five-day informal
meeting of experts to discuss the questions related to emerging technologies in the
area of lethal autonomous weapons systems, and welcomes the informal discussions
held from 13 to 17 April 2015 in that regard, and takes note of the comprehensive
report of the Chair;
Welcomes the commitment of States parties to Protocol V to the effective
9.
and efficient implementation of the Protocol and the implementation of the
decisions of the First and Second Conferences of the High Contracting Parties to the
Protocol establishing a comprehensive framework for the exchange of information
and cooperation;
2/3

Convention on Prohibitions or Restrictions on the Use of Certain Conventional Weapons
Which May Be Deemed to Be Excessively Injurious or to Have Indiscriminate Effects

A/RES/70/71

10. Notes that, in conformity with article 8 of the Convention, conferences
may be convened to examine amendments to the Convention or to any of the
Protocols thereto, to examine additional protocols concerning other categories of
conventional weapons not covered by existing Protocols or to review the scope and
application of the Convention and the Protocols thereto and to examine any
proposed amendments or additional protocols;
11. Acknowledges the work of the Implementation Support Unit within the
Geneva Branch of the Office for Disarmament Affairs of the Secretariat, which was
established following a decision by the 2009 Meeting of the High Contracting
Parties to the Convention;
12. Stresses the importance of transparent and inclusive preparation for the
Fifth Review Conference of the High Contracting Parties to the Convention, to be
held in 2016;
13. Requests the Secretary-General to render the assistance necessary and to
provide such services as may be required for annual conferences and expert
meetings of the High Contracting Parties to the Convention and of the High
Contracting Parties to Amended Protocol II and Protocol V, as well as for any
continuation of the work after the meetings;
14. Also requests the Secretary-General, in his capacity as depositary of the
Convention and the Protocols thereto, to continue to inform the General Assembly
periodically, by electronic means, of ratifications and acceptances of and accessions
to the Convention, its amended article 1 and the Protocols;
15. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its seventy-first session
the item entitled “Convention on Prohibitions or Restrictions on the Use of Certain
Conventional Weapons Which May Be Deemed to Be Excessively Injurious or to
Have Indiscriminate Effects”.
67th plenary meeting
7 December 2015

3/3
