40

- - - - · - · · ----- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -

General Assembly-Forty-second Session

Emphasizing the obligation of States, under customary
international law, not to intervene in the interna) alfairs of
other States,
l. Urgently calls for full and immediate compliance
with the Judgment of the International Court of Justice of
27 June 1986 in the case of "Military and Paramilitary
Activities in and against Nicaragua" in confarmity with
the relevant provisions of the Charter of the United Nations;
2. Requests the Secretary-General to keep the General
Assembly informed on the implementation of this resolution;
3. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its
forty-third session the item entitled "Judgment of the International Court of Justice of 27 June 1986 concerning
military and paramilitary activities in and against Nicaragua: need far immediate compliance".
68th plenary meeting
12 November 1987

42/19.

Question of the Falkland Islands (Malvinas) 62

The General Assembly,
Having considered the question of the Falkland Islands
(Malvinas) and having received the report of the Secretary-General, 63
Aware of the interest of the international community in
the peaceful and definitive settlement by the Governments
of Argentina and the United Kingdom of Great Britain
and Northern Ireland of ali their dilferences, in accordance with the Charter of the United Nations,
Taking note of the interest repeatedly expressed by both
parties in normalizing their relations,
Convinced that such purpose would be facilitated by a
global negotiation between both Governments that will allow them to rebuild mutual confidence on a salid basis and
to resolve the pending problems, including all aspects on
the future of the Falkland Islands (Malvinas),
1. Reiterates its request to the Governments of Argenntina and the United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland to initiate negotiations with a view to
finding the means to resolve peacefully and definitively the
problems pending between both countries, including ali
aspects on the future of the Falkland Islands (Malvinas),
in accordance with the Charter of the United Nations;
2. Requests the Secretary-General to continue his
renewed mission of good offices in arder to assist the parties in complying with the request made in paragraph l
above, and to take the necessary measures to that end;
3. Requests the Secretary-General to submit to the
General Assembly at its farty-third session a report on the
progress made in the implementation of the present resolution;
4. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its
farty-third session the item entitled "Question ofthe Falkland Islands (Malvinas)".
72nd plenary meeting
17 November 1987

62 See also sect. I, f"ootnote 10, and sect. X.B.6, decision 42/410.
63 A/42/732.

42/20.

Law of the sea

The General Assembly,
Reaffirming its resolutions 37 /66 of 3 December 1982,
38/59 A of 14 December 1983, 39/73 of 13 December
1984, 40/63 of 10 December 1985 and 41/34 of 5 November 1986, regarding the law of the sea,
Recognizing that, as stated in the third preambular paragraph ofthe United Nations Convention on the Law ofthe
Sea, 48 the problems of ocean space are closely interrelated
and need to be considered as a whole,
Convinced that it is important to safeguard the unified
character of the Convention and related resolutions
adopted therewith and to refrain from any action to apply
their provisions selectively, in a manner inconsistent with
their object and purpose,
Emphasizing the need far States to ensure consistent application of the Convention, as well as the need far harmonization of national legislation with the provisions of
the Convention,
Considering that, in its resolution 2749 (XXV) of
17 December 1970, it proclaimed that the sea-bed and
ocean floor, and the subsoil thereof, beyond the limits of
national jurisdiction, as well as the resources of the area,
are the common heritage of mankind,
Recalling that the Convention provides the régime to be
applied to the Area and its resources,
Emphasizing that no State should undermine the Convention and related resolutions of the Third United Nations Conference on the Law of the Sea,
Recognizing also the need far co-operation in the early
and elfective implementation by the Preparatory Commission far the International Sea-Bed Authority and far the
International Tribunal far the Law of the Sea of resolution II of the Third United Nations Conference on the
Law of the Sea, 64
Noting with satisfaction the progress made in the work of
the Preparatory Commission since its inception, including
the registration oflndia as a pioneer investor in the mining
of the sea-bed and ocean floor and subsoil thereof, beyond
the limits of national jurisdiction,
Noting the decision of the Preparatory Commission to
convene its General Committee from 7 to 18 December
1987 for the purpose of considering the applications of
France, Japan and the Union ofSoviet Socialist Republics
for registration as pioneer investors,
Noting also that the Preparatory Commission has decided to hold its sixth regular session at Kingston from
14 March to 8 April 1988 and that it will decide upon the
summer meeting far 1988 during its next session, 65
Noting further the increasing needs of countries, especially developing countries, far infarmation, advice and
assistance in the implementation of the Convention and in
their developmental process far the full realization of the
benefits of the comprehensive legal régime established by
the Convention,
Recognizing that the Convention encompasses ali uses
and resources of the sea and that ali related activities
within the United Nations system need to be implemented
in a manner consistent with it,

64 Official Records of 1he Third United Nations Conference on the Law
ofthe Sea, vol. XVII (United Nations publication, Sales No. E.84.V.3),
document A/CONF.62/121, annex J.
b\ See A/42/688, para. 132.
