A

UNITED
NATIONS

General Assembly

Distr.
GENERAL
A/RES/49/68
21 December 1994

Forty-ninth session
Agenda item 55
RESOLUTION ADOPTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY
[on the report of the First Committee (A/49/692)]
49/68.

The role of science and technology in the
context of international security,
disarmament and other related fields

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 47/44 of 9 December 1992 and 48/67 of 16
December 1993,
Taking note of the report of the Disarmament Commission on its 1994
substantive session, 1/ in particular on the work of Working Group II on
agenda item 5, entitled "The role of science and technology in the context of
international security, disarmament and other related fields", 2/
Recognizing that science and technology per se are deemed to be neutral,
that scientific and technological developments can have both civilian and
military applications and that progress in science and technology for civilian
applications needs to be maintained and encouraged,
Mindful that the application of science and technology relevant to
weapons of mass destruction, as well as to conventional weapons, should not
lead to excessive and destabilizing accumulation of arms through quantitative
build-up or qualitative improvements of arms which threaten international
peace and security,
__________
1/
Official Records of the General Assembly, Forty-ninth Session,
Supplement No. 42 (A/49/42).
2/

Ibid., para. 22.

94-60195
/...

A/RES/49/68
Page 2

Recognizing that progress in the application of science and technology
contributes substantially to the implementation of arms control and
disarmament agreements in the fields of, inter alia, weapons disposal,
military conversion and verification,
Cognizant that international transfers of high-technology products,
services and know-how for peaceful purposes are important for the economic and
social development of States,
Recalling that norms and guidelines for the transfer of high technology
with military applications should take into account legitimate requirements
for the maintenance of international peace and security, while ensuring that
they do not deny access to high-technology products, services and know-how for
peaceful purposes,
Mindful that cooperation in this field among supplier and recipient
States should be enhanced by a firm common commitment to preventing transfers
of high technology with military applications for exclusively peaceful
purposes from being diverted to non-peaceful uses, and that such cooperation
should be based on clearly defined and balanced rights and obligations,
appropriate measures of transparency and verification, equity and fairness and
predictability of incentives and benefits,
1.
Affirms that scientific and technological achievements should be
used for the benefit of all mankind to promote the sustainable economic and
social development of all States and to safeguard international security, and
that international cooperation in the use of science and technology through
the transfer and exchange of technological know-how for peaceful purposes
should be promoted;
2.
Invites Member States to undertake additional efforts to apply
science and technology for disarmament-related purposes and to make
disarmament-related technologies available to interested States;
3.
Recommends that Member States adopt and implement national
measures, consistent with international law, regulating the transfer of high
technology with military applications in order to seek to ensure that such
transfers do not undermine international peace and security and that access is
not denied to high-technology products, services and know-how for peaceful
purposes;
4.
Also invites Member States to widen multilateral dialogue, seeking
universally acceptable norms and guidelines that would regulate international
transfers of high technology with military applications;
5.
Encourages the United Nations to contribute, within existing
mandates, to promoting the application of science and technology for peaceful
purposes;
6.
Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its fiftieth
session the item entitled "The role of science and technology in the context
of international security, disarmament and other related fields".
90th plenary meeting
15 December 1994
