SECURITY COUNCIL
OFFICIAL

RECORDS

THIRTY-SIXTH

YEAR

2266”’

MEETING:

NEW

19 MARCH

1981

YORK

CONTENTS
Puge

Provisional agenda (SIAgenda/2266) .,,I,,..,,.,.......,...,.............

1

Expression of welcome to the new representative of Panama.. . . . .‘, . . . . . . . .

1

Adoption of the agenda . . . . . . . . . . . ..I.................................*

1

The situation in the Middle East:
Letter dated 3 March 1981 from the Charge d’affaires a.i. of the Permanent
Mission of Lebanon to the United Nations addressed to the President of
the Security Council (S/14391);
Special report of the Secretary-General on the United Nations Interim Force
in Lebanon (S/14407) . . . . . . . . ..I.....I.I.I.I..........,,...II....~~

1

S/PV .2266

NOTE
Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined with figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United
Nations document.
Documents of the Security Council (symbol S/ , , .) are normally published in
quarterly Sapple~tc~/u of the Officicrl He~rk qf rlrr Scwrrity
Cororcil.
The date
of the document indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which information about it is given.
The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a
system adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Hesolutiorts
rurd
Dccisiom
of I/W Srcrwity
Council.
The new system, which has been applied
retroactively to resolutions adopted before 1 January 1965, became fully operative
on that date.

2266th MEETING
Held in New York on Thursday, 19 March 1981, at 9 pm.
Sperlal report of the Secretary-General on the Uulted
Nations lnterhn Force in Lebanon (S/14407)

Prc~ri&rr/: Mr. Peter FLORlN
(German Democratic Republic).
PI.PSCIII:The representatives of the following States:
China, France, German Democratic Republic, Ireland,
Japan, Mexico, Niger, Panama, Philippines, Spain,
Tunisia, Uganda, Union of Soviet Socialist Republics,
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland,
United States of America.

2. The PRESIDENT
(irf/rr/~~c’/ct/io,r
fkm
Rw
In accordance with the decisions taken at the
2265th meeting, I invite the representative of Lebanon
to take a place at the Council table and the represcntative of Israel to take the place reserved for him at the
side of the Council chamber.

sicor):

Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/2266)
1, Adoption of the agenda
2. The situation in the Middle East:
Letter dated 3 March 1981 from the Charge
d’affaires a-i. of the Permanent Mission of
Lebanon to the United Nations addressed
to the President of the Security Council
(s/14391);
Special report of the Secretary-General on the
United Nations Interim Force in Lebanon
(S/14407)

iZxpres.slon of welcome to the new representative
of Panama

’

1, The PRESIDENT fifrtc~rprc~rnfiort ,fhrr Ku.ssictrrl:
At the outset of this meeting, I should like, on behalf
of all the members of the S&urity Council, to extend
a welcome to the new representative of Panama on the
Council, Mr. Carlos Ozores Typaldos, who is with
us today for the first time. We all look forward to
working with him in tl1e harmonious and co-operative
spirit demonstrated by his predecessor, Minister foi
Foreign Affairs Illueca, and assure him of our pleasure
in having him among us.
Adoption of the agenda

The situation in the Middle East:
Lcttcr dated 3 March 1981 from the Charm! d’afhires a.i. of the Permanent Mission of LeGnon to
the United Nations addressed to the President of
the Security Council (S/14391);

3. The PRESIDENT (i/rrc~rprP/ctric,II jk~w Hussicur):
Taking account of an earlier complaint by the Government of Lebanon, which is already being considered by the Security Council, and of the report
submitted by the Secretary-General on 16 March 1981
which we have before us, 1 have been authorized, as
President of the Security Council, to make the following statement on behalf of its members:
“The members of the Security Council are deeply
shocked and outraged at the report received about
the repeated attacks on the United Nations Interim
Force in Lebanon and the continuing killings of
peace-keeping soldiers in southern Lebanon.
“These renewed barbaric acts against a peacekeeping force are a direct defiance of the authority
of the Security Council and a challenge to the mission of the United Nations in maintaining international peace and security which cannot be toleratcd.
“Tl1e Council condemns these outrageous actions
by the so-called t/c.firc,ro forces which have caused
the death and iliury of Force personnel present in
Lebanon under international mandate. In strongly
condemning these latest outrageous acts of the socalled tle,ftrc~o forces, the Council calls on all those
who share in tl1e responsibility for this tense situation
to put an end to any act which might increase the
threat to international peace and security and to put
an end to military assistance to any forces which
interfere with the Force in the exercise of its mandate.
“The Council addresses a serious warning to all
the forces responsible for these dangerous acts vio-

lating the sovereignty and territorial integrity oFLebpreventing the full deployment of the Force,
including the deployment of the Lebanese armed
forces in the area, and severely hampering UNIFIL
in the fulfihnent of the mandate as expressed in Security Council resolution 425 (1978). which states:
ulon,

” ‘lirkirrg IIOW of the letters from the Permanent
Representative of Lebanon [.S//26UOtr/rt/ S//2606
(t/‘/5 N& 17 rClrock 10781 and from the Permanent
Representative of Israel [S//2607 crf’ 17 Mu&r
IY781,

‘* ‘HmGg
/WWY/ the statements of the Permanent Representatives of Lebanon and Israel
[207/.x1 mvhgj,

” ‘Grtr~/.v ~~~I~Yww/ at the deterioration of the
situation in the Middle East and its consequences
to the maintenance of international peace,
” ‘Cowimw/
that the present situation impedes
theachievement ofajust peace in the Middle East,
*’ ’ 1, C&Y for strict respect for the territorial
integrity, sovereignty and political independence
of Lebanon within its internationally recognized
boundaries:
‘* ‘2. Calls I,~Jo,~Israel immediately to cease
its military action against Lebanese territorial
integrity and withdraw forthwith its forces from
all Lebanese territory;

” ‘3. Ikc&/c~s, in the light of the request of the
Govermnent of Lebanon, to establish immediately
under its authority a United Nations interim force
for southern L,ebanon for the purpose of Cmfirming the withdrawal of Israeli forces, restoring
international peace and security and assisting the
Government of Lebanon in ensuring the return
of its effective authority in the area, the force to be
composed of personnel drawn from Member
States;
” ‘4. I<c~c/rrcsrsthe Secretary-General to report
to the Council within twenty-four hours on the
implementation of the present resolution,’
“The Council emphasizes that it is essential that
UNIFIL receive the full co-operation of all parties
to enable it to carry out its mandate in the entire
area of operations up to the internationally recognized boundaries, thus contributing to full implementation of resolution 425 (1978).
“The Council calls for the immediate release of
Lebanese military personnel and of all those persons
who were kidnapped by the so-called & fkc’toforces
during the recent hostilities.
“The Council extends its sympathy and deep-felt
condolences to the Government of the Federal Republic of Nigeria and the families of the victims.
“The Council also commends the valiant action
and the courage, under the most adverse circumstances, of the commanders and soldiers of the Force
and expresses full support for their efforts.”
