SECURITY COUNCIL
OFFICIAL RECORDS

NEW YORK

CONTENTS
Page

Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/l823) . . :. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

1

Adoption of the agenda . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

1

The situation in Namibia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

1

S/PV. 1823

-.

.__
‘._

.

__.

.NOTE
Symbols of United Nations .documents are composed of capital letters cornbined with figirres: Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United
Nations document.
Documents~of the Security Council (symbol S/ . . .) are normally published in
quarterly Supplemeng of the Official Records of the Security Council. The date
of the document indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which information about it is given.
._
The resolu.tioris of the Security~.Council, numbered in accordance with a
system adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Resolutions- and
Decisions of the Security Council. The new system, which has been applied
retroactively to resolutions adopted before 1 January 1%5, became fully operative
on that date.

.
__

_

.

.

._

--

-.

_

-.:.

.

.

.

. _..

._

_

_

.

-

-.

1823rd MEETING
Held in New York on Friday, 30 May 1975, at 3,30 p.m.
,.
President: Mr..Shridath S. RAMPHAL

(Guyana).

3 . The PRESIDENT: I have also received a letter,
dated 29 May 1975, from the President of the United
Nations Council for Namibia. It reads as follows:

Present: The representatives of the following States:
Byelorussian Soviet Socialist Republic, China, Costa
Rica, France, Guyana, Iraq, Italy, Japan, Mauritania,
Sweden, Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland,
United Republic of Cameroon, United. Republic of
Tanzania and United States of America.

“Taking into account its special responsibilities
for the international Territory of Namibia as set.forth
in General Assembly-resolutions; the United Nations
Council for Namibia wishes to participate in the
forthcoming meeting of the Security Council on the
question ofNamibia. The Council-will be represented
by- the following delegation: Mr; Banda (Zambia),
President of the United Nations Council for Namibia;
Mr. S. A. Karim (Bangladesh); Mr. Petri6 (Yugoslavia); Mr. Fonseca Martinez (Colombia), and
Mr. Talvitie (Finland).*’

Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/l823)
1.

Adoption of the agenda

2. The situation in Namibia
The meeting was.called to order at 4.20 p.m.
-

4; It may be recalled that on previous occasions
when it was considering the situation in Namibia,
the Council extended invitations to representatives of
~&United Nations Council for Namibia, in particular
at its 1811th meeting .on 17 December 1974, at its
1756th meeting on 10 December 1973 and at its 1656th
meeting on 31 July 1972. Accordingly I propose that
the Council extend an.invitation, pursuant to rule 39
of its rules of. procedure, to the President and the
members of the delegation’ of the United .Nations
Council. for Namibia. As there. is no objection, I
take it that the Council agrees with my proposal.
I. therefore invite .the .President and the members of
the delegation of the United Nations Council for
Namibia to take placesat the-Council table.

Adoption
_ of the
. agenda

The agenda ias. adopted.
The situation in Namibia
1 . The PRESIDENT: I have received from the representatives of Burundi, Ghana, India, Liberia, Nigeria,
Senegal, Somalia and Zambia letters containing
requests that their respective delegations be invited,
in accordance with the relevant provisions of the
Charter and rule 37 of the Security Council’s provisional rules of procedure, to participate in the debate.
Accordingly I propose, in -conformity with the usual
practice and with the consent of the Council, to invite
the aforementioned representatives to participate in
our discussion without the right to vote.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Banda
(President of the United Natioris Council for Namibia)
and the members of the- delegation took places at
the Coun,cif table.

2. In view of the very limited number of seats
-available around the Council table, I am obliged
regretfully to resort to the usual practice followed on
such occasions, and request the representatives of the
aforementioned delegations kindly to take the places
reserved for them at the side of the Council chamber.
It is understood, naturally, that I shall invite them to
.take places at the Council table when they wish to
address the Council.

5. The PRESIDENT: I also wish to inform members
of. the Council that I have received a letter, dated
30 May 1975, from the representatives of Mauritania,
the United Republic of Cameroon and the United
Republic of Tanzania [S/11705], -which contains a
request that the ‘Security Council extend an invitation under rule 39 of the provisional rules to Mr. Sam
Nujoma, President of the South West Africa People’s
Organization (SWAPO), and his delegation. If I hear no
objection, I shall take it that the Council is agreeable
to extending the.invitation under rule 39 of the rules,
as requested.
-. .
_ _

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Ndabaniwe
(Burundi), Mr. Boaten (Ghana), Mr. Jaipal (India),
Mr. Dennis (LibPria), Mr. Ogbu (Nigeria),. Mr. -Fall
(Senegal), Mr.. Hussein (Somalip) and Mr. hfwaanga
(Zambia) took the places reserved for them at the
side of the Council chamber.

It wtis so decided. -

.-.

1
..

.

to us by the General Assembly. The Charter of the
United Nations confers upon this august body special
powers which no other organ of the United Nations
enjoys.

6. The PRESIDENT: I shall invite Mr. Nujoma at
the appropriate moment to address the Council.
7. The PRESIDENT: It will be recalled that when
the Security Council last considered the situation
in Namibia [1811rh meeting], in December 1974, it
adopted resolution 366 (1974) by which it decided,
among other things, to meet on or before 30 May
1975 for the purpose of reviewing South Africa’s
compliance with the terms of that resolution. The
text of resolution 366 (1974) was transmitted by the
Secretary-General to the Minister of Foreign Affairs
of South Africa immediately upon its adoption by the
Security Council. In reply the Minister of Foreign
Affairs of South Africa addressed a letter &ted
27 May 1975 [see S/11701] to the Secretary-General.
This communication was transmitted to me by the
Secretary-General.

1 3 . We are assembled here today to consider whether
or not the South African Government has complied
with the terms of Security Council resolution 366
(1974), and particularly with paragraphs 3 and 4.
Paragraph 3 calls for a solemn declaration by South
Africa that it will comply with United Nations resolutions, particularly with regard to respect for the territorial integrity of Namibia. Paragraph 4 calls upon
South Africa to take steps to withdraw from Namibia.
1 4 . No doubt all the members of the Security Council
have seen and studied the letter from the South African
Minister of Foreign Affairs, addressed to the SecretaryGeneral [ibid.]. This is South Africa’s formal reply
to resolution 366 (1974). The members of the Security
Council will have seen the reproduction of part of the
statement made by the Prime Minister of South
Africa in Windhoek, Namibia, on 20 May 1975.

8. The first speaker is the President of the United
Nations Council for Namibia, on whom I now call.
9. Mr. BANDA (President of the United Nations
Council for Namibia): First of all, on behalf of the
delegation of the United Nations Council for Namibia,
I wish to express our great pleasure at seeing you,
Mr. President, preside over this meeting of the Security
Council. We are pleased that you are doing so for
two reasons. First, you represent Guyana, a member
of the Council for Namibia and a country which has
in every practical way possible demonstrated its
strong commitment to the cause of the Namibian
people. In fact, Guyana has taken this cause and that
of the total liberation of southern Africa as its own.
Secondly, you personally, Mr. President, are very
familiar with the question of Namibia and have long
been identified as a friend and active supporter of
the struggling masses of that country. In this regard
we recall with particular satisfaction your distinguished
presidency of the Council for Namibia during 1974,
a year of great accomplishments.

15. We in the Council for Namibia have carefully
studied both the letter of the Minister of Foreign
Affiars of South Africa and the extracts from the statement of his Prime Minister. It is of course for
the Council to draw appropriate conclusions from its
own careful study of the two texts which, I must
hasten to add, are in the same vein. But we in the
Council for Namibia were anxious not to misinterpret
the message from South Africa. Since it seemed to
us that the relevant part of the statement of the
Prime Minister of South Africa delivered in Windhoek
was couched in ambiguous terms-and this is true
also of the letter from the Minister of Foreign
A&ix-s-we immediately sought clarification on two
cardinal points at a press conference I gave 23 May
1975; first, on the meaning of the term “territorial
integrity” of Namibia, with which South Africa says
it agrees, and, secondly, on whether the pronouncement that South Africa does not claim an inch of
Namibian territory means it is willing to withdraw.
The necessity of our asking those questions would
not have arisen if the South African authorities had
been categorical and unequivocal in declaring their
position. Indeed, that is what was expected of them.

10. We realize that this is your last day as President of the Security Council. That would be reason
for sadness on our part if it were not for the fact
that we believe strongly that the end result of this
debate will be influenced not only by the conduct
of this particular meeting but also by the thorough
and protracted preparations you made for it.

16. On 27 May the South African Minister of
Foreign Affairs referred to my press conference in
New York and issued a press release in Cape Town,
in which he attempted to give some clarification.
He stated, with regard to territorial integrity, that that
was just one of the options open to the Namibian
people. With regard to withdrawal, he stated that it
would be highly irresponsible of his Government to
withdraw without considering the wishes of the peoples
concerned-‘ ‘peoples’*, the plural form of the world,
I must add.

11. With your kind permission I should also like
to thank the members of the Security Council for the
courtesy they have done the Council for Namibia in
allowing my delegation .to be the first to speak. This
is a fitting recognition by the Security Council of the
special responsibility of the Council for Namibia.
1 2 . Conscious of our special responsibility, we take
this debate of the Security Council very seriously.
We know that the Security Council, more than any
other organ of the United Nations, has the power
to assist us to assume fully all the duties entrusted

17. I have given the Council the foregoing brief
account of the attempts of the Council for Namibia
2

21. South Africa also claims to be fostering better
understanding among “all the peoples” of Namibia.
In this connexion it cites the adoption of a motion
by the so-called Legislative Assembly in Windhoek
on 21 March 1975, supporting endeavours by its
“Executive
Committee” to promote good human
relations, peaceful coexistence and human dignity
among all the inhabitants of the Territory and
requesting it-that is, the Executive Commiteee-to
give attention to measures and practices standing
in the way of the advancement of good relations
between black and white. Cited also in this regard
is the repeal on 9 April 1975 of “various proclamations” long in force in the Territory on grounds that
either they were obsolete or that they embodied
restrictive or discriminatory aspects.

to seek clarification from South Africa on its position
with regard to Namibia in the hope that this additional
information will facilitate your own reading of the position of that country regarding Namibia. As I said
earlier, the Security Council will, of course, draw its
own conclusions. We in the Council for Namibia
have concluded, after a patient analysis of the statements from South Africa-including attempts to seek
clarification-that South Africa has in fact rejected
paragraphs 3 and 4 of Security Council resolution
366 (1974).
1 8 . It is to us strange logic indeed that South Africa
should reject any special role for SWAPO, yet at the
same time express a willingness to hold discussions
with the Secretary-General, with the President of the
Council for Namibia-whom, in characteristic apartheid fashion, they call “African Chairman*‘, as if there
were a European Chairman of the same Counciland with the Special Commiteee on Namibia of the
Organization of African Unity (OAU).

22. First, the very use of the word “peoples”
is not compatible with any genuine spirit or endeavour
in this connexion, in our opinion, for this very term is
divisive and smacks of a refusal to recognize and
treat human beings purely as such, without regard
to their race or colour. Secondly, we in the Council
for Namibia know that the so-called attempts being
made are nothing more than window dressing. They
relate only to what is called petty apartheid. But
the issues involved are more fundamental than
allowing blacks and whites to sit on the same benches
in parks or to go to the same hotels. The black
people of Namibia are not asking for favours from
the whites. They are demanding their birthright.
Such manceuvres by South Africa only demonstrate
a lack of seriousness on its part to find a peaceful
solution to the problem of Namibia. It is also a false
and dangerous illusion, for the problem cannot be
resolved in this manner.

19. In other words, South Africa is willing to deal
with the United Nations and the OAU over Namibia.
But it is a fact-and South Africa knows this-that both
the United Nations and the OAU recognize SWAP0
as the authentic and only representative of the people
of Namibia. In view of the identity of views between
SWAP0 and the two organizations, one fails to see
how its exclusion from any contacts with South Africa
over Namibia by the United Nations and the OAU
would make any difference in regard to the questions
that have to be settled. The substantive question,
therefore, remains whether or not South Africa is ready
and willing to accept the position of the United Nations
over Namibia, which is also SWAPO’s, and to enter
into meaningful discussions for peaceful change.

23. We have been told that South Africa continues
to occupy Namibia because the people of that Territory
so wish. This, too, cannot be a serious argument.
We see absolutely no justification for any such claim;
for the people of Namibia have never at any time
been given the opportunity to choose their own govemment. As is well known, South Africa has continued
to foster its policy of Bantustans in Namibia. The
so-called elections which have taken place have never
been on a national scale. They have been confined
to Bantustans and, because of their very nature and
purpose, they have been boycotted by the political
parties.

20. By trying to discriminate against SWAPO, South
Africa is conveniently avoiding the basic issues, which
are the self-determination, independence and territorial
integrity of Namibia; and by so doing, it is strengthening the position of the so-called true leaders,
who in fact agree with it on the policy of apartheid
and Bantustans. Indeed, we note with amusement
that, in expressing its willingness to discuss with the
United Nations and the OAU, South Africa stresses
that, in the event of any discussions taking place,
it would wish to invite the so-called “true leaders’*
of Namibia to participate. These so-called “true
leaders” are what we in the United Nations have
always regarded as stooges and puppets of the South
African apartheid machinery. We maintain that they
do not at all represent the true aspirations of the
people of Namibia. Quite obviously there is a dispute
between us and South Africa as to who the true
leaders of the people of Namibia are. So, if South
Africa would prefer SWAP0 to be excluded from the
discussions, what justification has it for suggesting
that we should talk to the so-called “true leaders”
of the Namibian people whom we do not recognize
as such?

24. If the South African Government would genuinely
like the people of Namibia to determine their future,
as it claims, it should immediately allow normal
political activities to take place in the country,
release all political prisoners and declare an unconditional amnesty for all political exiles to return
home. It should also agree to a United Nations
supervised national election in Namibia. There can
be. no valid reason for the rejection by South Africa
of United Nations supervision of such an election.
Fair play in the election can only be guaranteed in
3

this way. If South Africa has nothing to hide, this
surely should not be a cpntentious point. South
Africa h_as, therefore; yet to demonstrate its willingness
to see peaceful change .in Namibia. It cti do. this
by agreeing to the foregoing.

has to do with the credibility of the Security Council
now and in the future.
28. For its part, the Council for Namibia .stands
ready to co-operate with the Security Council in
every way possible. We remain available for any consuhafions that you, Mr. President, and the members
i>f the Security Council may wish to hold with us.

25. We have been told that. sudden South African
withdrawal from Namibia would. result in chaos in
that country. We need not be reminded of this, for
it is exactly the possibility of chaos that we want to.
prevent. The process of decolonizatioti demands that
there be an orderly‘ transfer of power.. Indeed, to
cite recent examples, this has been- the case in the
ex-Portuguese Territories. Whether or not this will
happen in Namibia is entirely up to South Africa
itself. It could make .it happen by solemnly declaring
its intention to withdraw from Namibia and then
agreeing to co-operate with the United Nations
Council for Namibia to ensure a smooth withdrawal.

29.. By way of concluding, I wish to reiterate the
position of the Council for Namibia which I have
attempted to make clear in this statement. In summary,
as far as the Council for Namibia is concerned, South
Africa must do the folIowing: first, declare its
unequivocal acceptance of selfdetermination and
independence for Namibia; secondly ) accept the territorial integrity of Namibia and prescribe a sol&on
that will retain the unity of the Teti~ory as a whole;
thirdly, allow SWAP0 total political freedom of
-movement so as to enable that organization to
demonstrate that its support does not lie merely
within the Ovambo tribe, as is alleged, but that it lies
in the whole country; fourthly, immediately and
totally abandon all aspects of the extension of
aparrheid in Namibia, including its police brutality;
fifthly; implement with integrity and honour the decision to give independence to Namibia, aiid titit grudgingly so, for this could only result in the loss of
the good will of the world; sixthly, accept the United
Nations role to ensure a fair national election in that
Territory.

26. The manner in which South Africa is conducting
itself in this situation can indeed- only result in
chaos; for the people.of Namibia, all peaceful efforts
having failed, will fulfil ‘their obligation to liberate
their country through the only means left to them,
that is, armed struggle. If, therefore, South Africa
p+%ts in its refusal td co-operate with the. United
Nati&;’ we are- -bound -tii tit&s an intensified
armed struggle by the people of Namibia, under the
leadership of SWAPO. In this conneiion, it should
be pointed out in all candour that the map of southern
Africa is no longer the time. Positive changes have
taken place, and the situation cannot be reversed.
The inevitable, namely the independence of Namibia,
is bound to come. The only question is whether it
comes through violence or through peaceful means.
Recent events in Indo-China testify to this fact. So
it should be understood by South Africa that when’
the international community encourages peaceful
change, it is not doing so from a position of weakness.
It is only a genuine attempt to avoid, if possible,
the unnecessary loss of life. In this connexion, South
Africa would be well advised to regard
--i the Council
for Namibia as’s positiiie ‘fait& in. the sltu&i%I

30. As far as we in the Council for Namibia are
concerned, our willingness to resolve the question of
Namibia will depend on South Africa’s willingness to
discuss with us on the basis of the foregoing statements.
31. .The PRESIDENT: The next meaker is ;he remesentative of Somalia, whom I inviie to take a seat at
the Council table and to make his statement.
32. Mr. HUSSEIN (Somalia): Mr. President, on
behalf of the current Chairman of the OAU MajorGenerai Mohamed Sitid Barre, Preside& of the Supreme -Revolutionary Council of the Somali
Democratic Republic, I am particularly happy to see
you holding the oflice of President of the Security
Council for the current month. Your skill and long
experience in the- international forums of the world
make you especially suited for the leadership of these
deliberations of the Council. My delegation’s regard
for .you is matched by the friendship with which our
two countries have developed as fellow members ofthe non-aligned group of countries.

27. As I mentioned earlier, the Council for N&bia
attaches great importance .to this meeting of the
Security Council, and we shall anxiously await its
results. Our interest in the results stems mainly from
-the knowledge that the Council -adopted resolution
366 (1974) unanimously. - By deciding to cdnsider
further measures that might be taken in the absence
of South African compliance with the provisions of
that resolution, the Security Council no doubt
envisaged those measures within its competence
which can compel South Africa to withdraw from
Namibia. Since South Africa has not complied with
the provisions of resolution 366 (1974), at. least in
the judgement of the Council for Namibia, the Security
Couficil & under obligation to act decisively and,
we hope, with the same unanimity with ivhich it
adopted the said resolution; for the issue at hand also
-

33. I am very-grateful to you and to the members of
the Council for the opportunity to take part in this
debate on the question of Namibia. My Government
has long been concerned about the inability of the
United Nations to end the unjust, racist and ilIega1
administration of the Territory by South Africa.
Somalia’s chairmanship of the OAU for 1975 gives
4

my Government an added- sense of its responsiiity
to participate in the debate on this ..most. crucial
stage of the Namibian question--;t question which is
of great importance and concern to the OAU.
:.._
,. ^..
34. The Namibian problem ,has been with the United
Nations for far too long, so that not only the-security
Council but the whole international community is
looking forward to a speedy and just solution. This,
of course, has always depended on the attitude of the
South African Government, with which the United
Nations has been exceedingly patient over the years.
South Africa has had every opportunity. to act in
accordance with its responsibilities as a Member
State and to give an unequivocal response to the
United Nations resolutions on Namibia. As we know,
its attitude in the past has always been one of contempt
for international law.
I

38.. In the third paragraph of. its letter [ibid.]
in reply to resolution 366 (1974), the Government of
Pretoria promises to the people of the Territory that
it:
_..
.---.
“is free to.campaign for and propagate any constitutional ‘-changes it likes and to participate without
hindrance in any .peaceable political activities,
including the election of representatives to the
proposed conference on the constitutional future of
the Territory;.provided only that they do so within
the requirements of law and order.”
The conditional phrase “requirements of law and
order” is itself enough to throw a shadow of doubt
-since. we- all know the repressive, brutal and discriminatory character of those laws under which the
people.of the Territory are required to operate.

.

35. We have studied carefully both the communication of 27 May from. the South African Minister
of Foreign Affairs to the Secretary-General and the:
annexed extracts from Mr. Vorster’s Windhoek speech
of 20 May [ibid.], which together constitute the South
African Government’s reply to Security Council
resolution 366 (1974). Comparing the.contents of that
document with our expectations, we cannot hide. our
disappointment. We must, therefore, express- our
serious reservations on .a number 6f fundamental
questions.
38. -The South Africai~ reply ignores the political
and constitutional framework that has been solidly
established by the international community to provide
the best guarantee that the legitimate aspirations of
the Naniibian people ,will be fully, freely. and peacefully achieved. South Africa’s present position cannot,
in our view, be considered satisfactory -when it
denies that the United Nations has the right to
exercise supervision over Namibia. If Mr. Vorster
can ignore General Assembly resolution 2145 (XXI),
which terminated South Africa’s mandate, or the
various Security Council resolutions which reinforced
the assumption of responsibility .for the Territory
by the United Nations, the members of the .Council
certainly cannot, and should not, ignore their
.existence.
37. Mr. Vorster also continues to ignore the findings
of the International Court of Justice, which stated
in patagtaph 133 of its Advisory Opinion that “the
continued presence of South Africa in Namibia being
illegal, South Africa is under obligation to withdraw
its administration from Namibia immediately and
thus put an end to its occupation of the Territory”.r
The members of the Security Council all hold, I
am sure, the highest regard and respect for the
decisions of the International Court of Justice. They
will recall, too, that the advisory opinion required
all States, under Article 25 of the Charter, to support
the United Nations in securing the withdrawal of
the South African administration from Namibia.

39. It is pertinent to remind ourselves that the sole
purpose of the. decisions of the United Nations and
.of the International Court of Justice with regard to
Namibia is to .help the people. of the. Territory to
.achieve its independence, -since the- South African
illegal administration not only failed to carry out its
basic .obligations in that. regard but also imposed its
uniquely inhuman form of racism on the people of that
Territory.
40. In our -view; there r:has. been rro fundamental
change in this situation. Resolution 366( 1974), to which
South Africa has now responded negatively, was
framed in the context of the major decisions of the
General Assembly, the Security Council and the
International Court of Justice. It had the unanimous
support of the Security Council, including the support
of the five permanent members. The resolution
demanded more than a statement offering no concrete
evidence of a clear break with past and present
policies. These policies, which still remain, have the
effect of making Namibia a South African province;
they subject the Namibian people to .apartheid;
through the monstrous Bantustan policy, which
~&t&tnt.s to a. fragmentation of the- Territory,- they
inhibit the development of ,the kid of political and
economic unity necessary for independent statehood,
and they stifle the free expression of the political,
social and economic aspirations of the people.
41. All we .have to go on is :a vague statement of
intent without any evidence of fundamental changes in
the present system which controls every aspect of
the lives of the people of Namibia. The Pretoria
regime has spared no effort in trying to convince
-the Council and the international community about the
economic and social progress supposedly made in that
Territory. It boasts of a sizeable number of nurses
and other menial workers. It goes without saying
that the training of .such nurses and other menial
workers was predicted on the luxurious living of the
white settlers. We all know, for exemple, that the sole
purpose behind the training of black nurses is for

them to serve white mothers as baby-sitters and
nannies. The regime’s own statistical &ta embodied
in the document show glaringly after 50 solid years the
absence of a single graduate of higher education
among the indigenous inhabitants.

Assembly as the legitimate representative of the
Namibian people-all have as their goal the liberation
of Namibia from South African subjugation.
47. Mr. Vorster has mentioned discussions on
progress towards independence which might take
place between the President of the Council for Namibia
and the Special Committee of the OAU, on the one
hand, and, on the other, the so-called “real leaders” of
the Territory. As I have just noted, the General
Assembly has already recognized the real leaders of
the people of Namibia, and they are not the traditional clients of the South African administration whom
Mr. Vorster would like to put forward. With regard
to the proposed discussions, it is pertinent to note
that the terms of operation of the OAU Special
Committee are to make contact, if need be, solely
on ways and means of transferring power to the
Namibian people. Mr. Vorster’s new approach is still
very far away from the requirements of the intemational community for that transfer of power.

42. Even granting that, as claimed, there have been
investments in services such as railways, roads, telephones, telegraph and radio installations, the question
must be, “for whose benefits were these services
created?” Definitely not for the benefit of the nonwhite people-at least not directly.
43. Furthermore, no programme for withdrawal
has been presented or is projected. The operative
phrases are such as “as soon as possible” or “in the
near future”. Most deceptive of all is the statement
that “it is clearly for the people themselves to decide
at what pace they wish to move”; a statement which
takes no account of the effects of the neglect and
oppression of the past 50 years.
44. The Government of Pretoria is attempting to
disguise its real intentions in a display of ambiguities
and vague statements. Many of us in this room have
come from countries which have long struggled with
foreign domination and we know very well the game
of political chess which South Africa is now trying
to play.

48. It is easy to discern when good faith with regard
to the decolonization process is present or absent.
The Portuguese Government has recently shown great
openness, a willingness to act on the basis of United
Nations principles and resolutions, and to co-operate
closely with the leaders of the independence movements, and the clear intent of withdrawal. Good faith
was present there, as demonstrated by Portugal.
There are no comparable attitudes on the part of the
South African Government.

45. We are very much afraid that the reality beneath
the statement of the Minister of Foreign Affairs consists
of political manipulation by the illegal South African
administration which will continue to impose a
Bantustan framework on the proposed constitutional
developments; which is still using its oppressive
weight to slow down the pace of progress towards
independence while claiming non-interference; and
which is still trying to make maximum use of a minority
group of carefully chosen tribal eiders who depend on
the illegal administration’s payroll.

49. The purpose of describing our serious reservations on South Africa’s reply to resolution 366 (1974)
is not to oppose through rancour or prejudice. Our
overwhelming concern is for justice and freedom for
the people of Namibia. We fear that the desire to
end a long drawn-out and seemingly intractable
problem might lead to the belief that what is
only a change in form is really a change in substance.

46. One cannot help but have doubt about the good
faith of the South African Government when
Mr. Vorster goes so far as to claim that South
Africa does not occupy that Territory but is there
at the request of its peoples. This statement makes
a mockery of past history and present facts. South
Africa was given the mandate over what was then
South West Africa at a time when colonial peoples
were not consulted about such arrangements. As we
know, South Africa was the only Government to refuse
to hand over its mandate to the United Nations
Trusteeship System under which the Namibian people
would have achieved independence a long time ago.
The majority of the Namibian people today would
certainly prefer to be relieved of apartheid and the
forced migrant labour system which are the most
obvious fruits of South Africa’s illegal administration.
Furthermore, the majority of the nationalist political
parties, and the largest political party--SWAPO,
which is recognized by the OAU and the General

50. We feel it our duty to emphasize three incontrovertible facts. First, South Africa has unequivocally
reaffirmed its position of non-compliance with United
Nations resolutions on Namibia and with the findings
of the International Court. Secondly, it remains clear
that the United Nations goal of enabling the people
of Namibia to exercise their inalienable right freely
and peacefully will only be achieved by the withdrawal of South Africa from the Territory. Thirdly,
the adoption of resolution 366 (1974) was considered
by the international community as the culmination
of the long effort of the United Nations to an
equitable solution to the question of Namibia.
5 1. Both the interests of the people of the Territory
and the authority and credibility of the United Nations
will be ill-served if yet another ultimatum -to South
Africa proves tp be as empty and as futile as others
have been in the past. We maintain that the Security
Council has arrived at its moment of truth with regard
6

to the question of Namibia ‘and that it must now
consider what further effective measures it should take,
in accordance with the relevant chapters of the
Charter, to deliver the people of that Territory from
the tyranny and oppression of South Africa’s illegal
occupation.

Territory’s established international status constitutes a grave threat to international peace and
security.‘*
The Security Council, in its resolution 264 (1969):
“Considers that the continued presence of South
Africa in Namibia is illegal and contrary to ihe
principles of the Charter and the previous.decisions
of the United Nations and is detrimental to the
interests of the population of the Territory and those
of the international community.‘*

52. The PRESIDENT: The next speaker is the representative of Burundi, whom I invite to take a place
at the Council table and to make his statement.
53. Mr. NDABANIWE (Burundi) (interpretation
from French): Mr. President, on behalf of the Group
of African States which I represent and on behalf of
the delegation of my country of which I am head,
it is my pleasure to congratulate you most warmly
on your accession to the presidency of the Security
Council. We all know that Guyana, which you so
brilliantly represent, is profoundly devoted to the
noble ideals of peace, freedom and justice to which
our respective countries and the international
community as a whole attach great importance.
Those who have had an opportunity to know you
have discovered and admired in you a man of wisdom,
competence, and devotion, one who is perfectly
familiar with the major problems of our times. I am
convinced that you will acquit yourself of your heavy
responsibilities with success and dignity, to the honour
of your dear country and of the Security Council,
to the great satisfaction of peoples that love peace
and justice and for the greater well-being of the
Namibian people.

Quite recently, the Security Council adopted resolution 366 (1974), in which it invited the Government
of South Africa to make a solemn declaration addressed
to the Security Council that it would in future comply
with the resolutions and decisions of the United
Nations and the advisory opinion handed down by the
International Court of Justice in regard to Namibia.’
The resolution also called on South Africa to recognize
and respect the territorial integrity and unity of
Namibia.
57. Far from complying with the will of the Council,
the South African regime limited itself to addressing
to the Secretary-General a letter which betrayed its
bad faith with regard to the question of Namibia,
as well as the scorn it has always shown for the
United Nations.
58. We totally reject the contents of the letter from
the South African Government, for the following
reasons. First, South Africa once again refuses to
withdraw from Namibia. Secondly, South Africa
does not recognize that the United Nations has the
right to administer the Territory of Namibia, in
accordance with the relevant General Assembly resolutions. Thirdly, South Africa ignores SWAPO, which
we regard as the true representative and the legitimate
spokesman of the Namibian people. Fourthly, South
Africa does not respect the territorial integrity of
Namibia since it continues to refer to national groups
inhabiting Namibian territory and has not renounced
its policy of Bantustans.

54. The Security Council is meeting once again to
consider the situation which has been created in
Namibia as a result of the occupation of that country
by the racist regime in South Africa. The position
of the United Nations and its principal organs in
regard to Namibia is known and clear.
55. The General Assembly, in its resolution 2145
(XXI), proclaimed at its 21st session the inalienable
right of the Namibian people to freedom, independence and self-determination., It put an end.to South
Africa’s Mandate over Namibia in the same resolution and placed that country under the direct responsibility of the United Nations. It has always insisted
on respect for the territorial integrity of the Territory
of Namibia.

59. Thus, South Africa continues to occupy a
Territory which since 1966 has been under the direct
responsibility of the United Nations. It has committed
and continues to commit an act of aggression against
Namibia and its people. Confronted by that situation,
the Security Council has the duty to take all the
effective measures necessary to restore peace and
justice to Namibia.

56. In recalling resolution 2145 (XXI), my sole
purpose is to remind the Security Council of the
special obligations incumbent on the United Nations
with regard to the Territory of Namibia. Other resoiutions which have been adopted since then follow
exactly the same direction; At its twenty-second
session, the General Assembly adopted resolution 2372
(XXII), which declares that it

60. In those circumstances, and to fulfil the expectations of the Namibian people, we ask the Security
Council to take the following measures without delay:
first, reject the letter, dated 27 May 1975, to the
Secretary-General from the Minister for Foreign
Affairs of the South African regime [ibid.] and regard
it as null and void; secondly, state that the con-

“Considers that the continued foreign occupation
of Namibia by South Africa in defiance of the
relevant United Nations resolutions and of the
7

tinued occupation of Namibia by’ South Africa is an
act of aggression-as the GeneraI Assembly has
dready stated-and a threat to the peace of that
part of Africa,. and take the appropriate measures
in conformity with Article 39, Chapter VII, of the
Charter of the United Nations; thirdly, take aI1 the
steps necessary to enable the United Nations Council
for Namibia to discharge its responsibilities within the
Territory of Namibia..

66. Turning now .to the burning problem of South
Africa’s occupation of our country; I wish to state
that, true to its imperialistic aims, the racist minority
regime of South Africa has once again refused to
comply with the terms of Security Council resolution 366 (1974). It is quite obvious that the speech
made on 20 May in Windhoek by the South African
Prime Minister, John Vorster, was nothing more than
a reiteration of South Africa’s determination to go
ahead with the imposition of Bantustans on the
Namibian people so as to ensure: the domination and
economic exploitation of Namibia. After a careful
examination of the text of South Africa’s, reply,
which contains extracts of Vorster’s Wmdhoek speech,
we have come to the obvious conclusion that there is
nothing bignificantIy new in the so-called reply.

:

61. The patience.of the Namibian people has limits.
And I think that the patience of the Security Council
has limits too. The eyes of the peace-loving and
freedom-loving peoples in general, and the people of
Namibia in particular, are iumed towards the Security
Council ‘at this decisive moment. I trust that it wiIl
not dash their legitimate hopes.

67. For instance, on the fundamenta1 and salient
issues of the right of the Hamibian people to selfdetermination and independence, as we11 as the
inviolability of Namibia’s territorial integrity, Vorster
has not in our opinion taken any. new position that
we can consider positive. On the contrary, Vorster
is trying to play diplomatic tricks in his Windhoek
speech. For instance, in paragraph 3 of that speech’
he says:

62. The PRESIDENT: Members-of the Council will
recall that at the beginning of this’ meeting it was
decided, in accordance with the request made by the
representatives of Mauritania, the. United Republic
of Cameroon and the United Republic of Tanzania
[sl/r705], to extend an invitation under rule 39 of
the provisionaI rules of procedure to Mr. Sam Nujoma,
President of SWAPO, and his delegation. In accordance with that decision I now invite Mr. Nujoma and
his delegation to take places at the Council table in
order that Mr. Nujoma may address the Council.

“in substance we’*-that is, the South African
Government-“ are iri agreement with. the most
important aspects of the points of view which are’
put in the United Nations. As far as the OAU.is
concerned, in principle, and bearing in mind what 1.
have already said, we have no quarrel with their
points of view concerning self-determination, independence and the maintenance. of the territorial
integrity of the Territory.” [see S/f 1701. ]
.68. However, if we examine’ subparagraph U, of
paragraph 2, which immediately precedes the passage
I have just quoted, we find that Vorster’s supposed
agreement with the OAU and the United Nations
concerning self-determination, independence and the
maintenance of the territorial integrity of Namibia
is coupIed with a Cunning insistence on what Vdrster
calls open options for each of the “population groups”
to choose its own future..

63. Mr. NUJOMA: I wish on behalf of SWAP0
and the Namibian people to express our sincere
gratitude for .this important opportunity accorded to
our movement to state the opinion of the oppressed
people of Namibia.
64. I should like first of aI1 to congratulate you,
Mr. President,. on your assumption of the presidency of the Security CounciI for this month. SWAP0
is -particularly gratified to see you, an outstanding
son of Guyana, presiding over this important meeting
of the CounciI. We are gratified because we recaUE
that it was Guyana which presided over’ the United
Nations Council for Namibia during a session at
which the Council put the Namibian cause in the most.
forceful and able manner before this august body of
the United Nations.

69.. Throughout the entire speech Vorster quite
consciously avoided using the word “people”,
except when he was citing the OAU, or the United
Nations positions. He is still insisting on his divisive
and imperialistic notions of “population. groups”,
“peoples” and “nations” of the Territory. In that
subparagraph v), Vorster, in reference to the position
X
of the United Nations on Namibia, says:

65. -We recall also, Mr. President, that upon a kind
invitation extended to our movement by your Govemment, a SWAP0 delegation, headed by me, visited
your beautiful cooperative Republic. We recall also
that your country has alwaysidentified itself with the
liberation struggles of the colon&d and oppressed
peoples of southern Africa. That identification has
helped to foster. a,bond of afiinity and brotherly cooperation between the peopIe of Guyana and the
peoples- of Africa, Thus we are honoured to address
this highest organ of the’united Nations under your
presidency, Sir.. ^
.

_.

.

z “A further point which is in&ted upon is that
the Territory should not be split up in accordance
with the policy of uparrheid and that it should ’
become independent as one State, unless the inhabi- :
tants should freely choose otherwise.” [lbidj
8

Here we see a cynical and cunning distortion of the
position of the OAU and the Unite2 Nations. Neither
the United Nations nor the OAU has ever incited
any of Namibia’s ethnic groupings to opt for
secession.
70. That distortion is intended to justify South.
Africa’s imperialist design to continue with its policy,
which is aimed at dividing our country under the
pretext that even the United Nations and the OAU
do endorse the notion of “open options’* for each
of the “population groups” to choose its own future,
which in plain language means the right of each ethnic
group to secede from Namibia.
71. The Bantustan type of self-determination and
independence thus remains the main strategy by which
the division of Namibia is to be accomplished.
Vorster is still committed to this Bantustan policy,
This commitment became even more clear when he
referred to the so-cahed invitation to SWAP0 to
participate in the recent bogus election in the northern
part of Namibia. He cited this insult to SWAP0 as
evidence of South Africa’s wihingness to allow all
political groups to “participate without hindrance
in the peaceful political activities in the process leading
to self-determination”. Thus, in Vorster’s opinion,
the process leading to selfdetermination is nothing
other than the Bantustan programme. It is here that
we can see the very aim of the South African -Government, nameIy,the completion of the Bantustanization
of the country, after which Namibia will be reduced
to a hopelessly weak confederation of. “ethnic
nations’ * . That is the type of Namibia South Africa
is seeking to impose on us, a Namibia which racist
South Africa can continue to dominate and exploit.
That type of Namibia SWAP0 rejects.
..
72. SWAP0 remains unmoved and.unimpresskd by
Vorster’s latest.diplomatic gimmicks. We see Vorster’s
speech. for what it really is, namely, another attempt
to play for time and to prevent the Security Council
from taking any concrete. measures against the..racist
minority regime’s illegal occupation of our country.
73. In order to show the extent to which South
.Africa is; in fact, entrenching and consolid&ng its
repressive rule in Namibia, I should like to give a
list of actions which the occupying tigime.has ‘taken
in its campaign to prevent the Namibian people from
advancing towards self-determination and genuine
nationai independence.’
.
74. One of these actions was the imposition of
Bantustan elections in both the Ovambo and the
Rehoboth Coloured “homelands”. Those fraudulent
elections were held in January and April of this year
respectively. In both cases the bogus elections were
staged with one aim in view-that is, to mislead the
world into thinking that the people of Namibia are
supporting Pretoria’s Bantustan policy. Not surprisingly, in both cases the puppets were proclaimed

to have “won” the elections. As everyone now knows,
Pretoria claimed a 55 per cent poll at the end of the
five-day-long election period in northern Namibia.
With respect to the Rehoboth election, the Rehoboth
Volks party, which is the only group, critical of, the
South African Government, was “defeated”. The
point is that the so-called victories of the puppet
groups are well contrived victories that should mislead.
nobody into thinking that the Namibian people
really want Bantustans.
‘.
75. We need to ask this question: what .miracle
had taken place in northern Namibia, that the people
who, for instance,. had rejected the Bantush policy
by more than 97 per cent could so dramatically
change their minds as. to endorse that same policy
by 55 per cent within a short period of only 18 months?
76. The,vswer is that Pretoria had called the election
with a clear decision to conduct it under conditions
of coercion and brutal repression.. Welldocumented
evidence is now available as to how the pressure
was applied to the people so that they would vote
55 per cent for the puppet Bantustan administmtionl
Detailed information has come from our cadres
inside Namibia and from Namibian churchmen such
as Bishop Auala and Bishop Dumeni, and it is worth
enumerating.
77. During the first week of January this year, the
puppet administration in the northern region ordered
all the civil servants, such as clerks and assistant
inspectors connected with the so-called Department
of Education ‘and Culture, to be vote-takers, regardless of whether they wanted to or not. This same
order was applied to the civil servants in ah other
departments of the Bantustan administration. Whoever
attempted to refuse that order was immediately
threatened with the loss of his or her job. Thus
on the ground of pure and simple economic pressure
the entire civil service’ was forced to help the racist
oppressors and their puppets to conduct the fraudu!ent‘_
election.
I
.
.
.L
78. On 10 January the. leading puppet chief in -the
region, Filemon Elifas; set the tone of the repression
which was to characteriie the entire,election period.
He warned, over the’Fh¶ Radio Ovambo, that all the
people must go to the polls to choose “their true
leaders” or else they would face painful consequences..
He warned, furthermore, that “all agitators”, that is
to say, SWAP0 members, would be dealt with
severely. In the meantime, two of .SWAPO’s top
leaders in the area, Comrades Skinny Hilundwa and
Sam Shiute, were biaten. up’ by the South African
police and put into gaol on. the eve of the .electiou
in order to undermine the.‘SWAPO call to the people
to resist the police.-pressure and intimidation.
.’
.,
79. On 13 January, that is, the first day of the elecg
tion, only a very few people bothered to go to the
so-called polling booths. On 14 January the election
9_ . . . ._.

_

had still failed to produce the results which South
Africa and its puppets wanted. The figures were
particularly low in the southern and central regions,
where some 60,000 northern-recmited contract
workers are employed. The following figures for the
first two days illustrate the extent to which the
people had intended to stay away from the fraduient
election.

card-a card which is rejected by the people of
Namibia since it is devised to suit Bantustans. Every
man whose card lacked this mark was told that he
would not be recruited. Those already in employment
were told to make sure that their card got the election
mark during the period 13 to 17 January; otherwise
they would never be allowed to keep their jobs.
Some reluctantly complied with this, since, as they
said, no other option was left open to them. Of
course, many chose to go to their homes without
voting and thus cut themselves off from a livelihood.

80. In Windhoek and the mines in its vicinity only
30 people voted, and all of them were civil servants.
At the town of Aus only 2 people voted; at Bethanie
only 2 people voted; at Luderitz Bay only one person
voted; at Keetmanshoob only one person voted; at
Oranjemund, with its 5,000 northern-recruited contract
workers, no one voted; at Walvis Bay, with its
6,000 northern-recruited contract workers, only
27 voted, and all were civil servants; at Tsumeb,
with its 5,000 northern-recruited contract workers,
only 14 people voted, and the majority were civil
servants. In the northern region itself 12,008 people
were reported to have voted by this second day of the
election. In the face of that obvious atmosphere of
boycott, the South African Government and its
puppets began to step up their repressive measures
to force the people to go to the so-called polls
to vote.

84. Another way of forcing Namibians in the north
to vote was to use pressure in the issuing of permits
and other travelling documents. At the permit offices
in the area people who wanted to visit central and
southern Namibia were simply told that no pass
would be issued unless the applicant had put a cross
on the ballot .paper. A government clerk would ask
any applicant for a pass, in the following way: “Did
you vote?” If he got a negative reply he would
then say: “I am sorry, I cannot issue. you with a
pass”. These clerks were of course under obligation
to vote. Things got so bad that people like Eiifas
Kamanya, William Lithete and Augustus Eiago, to
mention but a few, were forced to resign, while
Ms. Marta Nandjaya was dismissed for supporting
or aiding SWAP0 during this period.

81. The first obvious thing was the degree to which
the army was enlarged. Many armoured vehicles and
infantry reinforcements made their appearance in
Ovamboiand to assist during the election. The white
staff was considerably enlarged as well, with whites
from all parts of Namibia and South Africa,
including even hospital officials. The police were
warned to be on the ready. The 116 polling booths
were frenquentiy visited by helicopters which circled
around them and by the security police, the
Ovamboiand tribal police and the army. All evidence
of the physical power of the South African State
was displayed to intimidate the people. It was gainst
this background that the election took place and with
the assurance of the Chief Minister of Ovamboland,
Filemon Elifas: “Nobody will be intimidated. Do not
be afraid to vote, since you are under protection
from the Government. Go to the polls.” The radio
kept hammering that assurance. Jamming of the
SWAP0 broadcasts from Zambia and the United
Republic of Tanzania was even stronger than usual.

85. Apparently that was not enough. Government
officials, chiefs and headmen told the people that they
would suffer a great deal if they refused to go to the
polls; such people would be excluded from all medical
services, and no hospital would treat them. It was
also made clear that all aid to such people from the
Government would be withdrawn.
86. Chiefs travelled throughout the region telling
their subjects of the punishments they would impose
on anyone who dared not to vote. Mention can be
made here of the fact that the chiefs proclaimed that
nobody would be allowed to cultivate any maize
or other grain without having marked the ballot paper.
This was a very serious threat, considering the fact
that Ovamboland is farming country and that the
peasants depend solely on their agriculture for bread,
maize and millet. People were forced out of their
homes and escorted to the polls. Many people were
taken from their fields, where they were busy
cultivating, to go and vote.

82. The labour recruitment bureau at Oiuno was
approached, and approximately 2,000 to 3,000 men
who sought recruitment for work in the south were
told that they would never be recruited unless they
voted. “Vote and work; otherwise starve*‘, they were
told. For a man whose sole source of income was the
meagre wage at the farms or mines, there was really
no choice. They rushed to the local labour recruiting
centre, where a polling booth was erected.

87. It was such pressure and intimidation which were
the driving forces behind the so-called election and
what effected the “55 per cent success” about which
we have been told. One other obvious evidence of
South Africa’s effort to entrench and consolidate its
occupation- in Namibia is the continuing build-up
of the South African armed forces in Namibia. Pretoria
has been not only reinforcing its forces in Namibia
but also setting up new military bases in different
parts of the country. For instance, new bases have
been set up at Gobabis, near the Botswana-Namibia

83. After the voting, a special “election mark”
was made on the reverse side of each man’s identity
10

border; at Ommo and Ohanguerra, near the NamiiiaAngola frontier; and at Nkongo, in the north-eastern
part of Namibia. Mention must also be made of the
recent expansion of the base at Grootfontein, in central
Namibia. This expansion is intended to accommodate
the new reinforcements in the country. Some of
those reinforcements are coming apparently from
South Africa’s lost buffer zones in southern Africa.

I have dealt at length with the procedures and tactics
according to which elections have been conducted
under the South African regime’s supervision. And,
as I have sought to show, the result was already
predetermined, even before the people went to the
polls.
90. We shall never accept any proposal for elections
under South Africa’s terroristic occupation forces.
We reiterate our position firmly and categorically
that the United Nations is the legal authority over
Namibia and must supervise any elections in Namibia
when conditions are ripe for this. Any suggestion to
the contrary is unacceptable to us, and we urge the
international community in general, and the United
Nations in particular, to continue to insist with us
in this regard.

88. To this long list of measures being taken to
consolidate Pretoria’s grip on Namibia must be added
the sinister plan to bring together a collection of
stooges from. the Bantustans and other reactionary
elements to hold so-called multiracial constitutional
talks. All those measures are contrary to the
resolutions of the Security Council, all of which
demand the immediate and unconditional withdrawal
of South Africa’s illegal occupation. The cold-blooded
shooting of Namibian workers by the South African
police on 23 April in Windhoek is a further indication of South Africa’s determination to impose its
repressive laws upon the Namibian people.

91. Today is the deadline of the resolution of the
Council [resolution 366 (1974)] which demanded a
solemn declaration from South Africa about that
regime’s intention to withdraw from Namibia. In our
judgement, South Africa has not complied. On the
contrary, South Africa’s illegal occupation is still in
force. Therefore, a heavy responsibility rests upon the
shoulders of the members of the Council, for it was
the Council which declared that it would meet on this
day, 30 May 1975, to take appropriate measures
under the Charter. The world is now awaiting
firm action from the Council.

89. In summary: first, Vorster’s speech is unacceptable to us; secondly, we do not see the need for
a fact-finding mission to visit Namibia on another
guided tour; thirdly, Bantustans and pass laws, whether
or not they are referred to as “influx control”,
are machinery for controlling the free movement of
the people. As such, they are, for us, intact; fourthly,
Bantustanization, as we have seen from the foregoing
elaboration, is being pursued with unrelenting vigour;
fifthly, the country is being militarized more than
ever before; sixthly, there are talks about having
elections in Namibia. We should like to make it
absolutely clear that SWAPO, as a democratic organization, is not opposed to any democratic elections.

The meeting rose at 6 p.m.
Notes
’ Legal Consequences for States of the Continued Presence of
South Africa in Namibia (South West Aftica) notwithstanding
Security Council Resolution 276 (1970). Advisory Opinion, I.CJ.
Reports 1971. p. 16.

11

,

_’
.

. _

.!
:

.

.

.

.. _

:
.

.

:

.

.
.

HOW TO OBTAIN UNITED NATlONS PU3LlCATlONS
United Nations pubtic~tions may be obtained from bookstores and distributors throughout the
world. Consult your tcx&store or write to: United Nations, Sales Section. New York or Cscneva.
CO-

SE PROCURER LES PUBLICATIONS DES NATIONS UNIES

Les publications des Nations Unies sent en ventc dam Ies librairia et ks agences d@ositaires du
mof~de cnticr. Informez-vous auprts de votrc libraire ou adressez-vous h : Nations Unies, Section
des vtntes. New York ou Ckdve.
KAH HOJXY’XHTb H3&lHHfI

OPI-AHE1 3AULIB OI;‘6EAS¶HEHHhIX

HAUNH

HauxR IO-0 KyIIRTb B KABXRHbIX MaI-&
JHH~X II aI%ziTcnax so Bcex paRoHax mApa HaBoAHTe CapaBIce 06 WsxaIARX
nanest x~mrmom maramaie rum akmmre no anpecy : Opraan3asssx 06’beCrH~exwrx
HaqMt, Cexqssf~ no npoztaxce HSABARR. HLGO-tlopn W=A Xeaesa.
%iLTJVlREfl

~pl-U%laaHB

‘,@be&BHeXMblX

B

COMO CONSECUIR PUBLICACIONES DE WS NACIONES UIUIDAS
Las pubtiiciones de las ivaciones Unidas &.n en wnta en libretias y casts distribuidoras m
ta& panes dcr mnndo. Con&e a su librero o dirijase a: Naciones Unidas, Sxcicjn de Ventas,
NUCM~ York o Ginebra.

Iitbo in United Nations, New York

00300

82-61202~0ctobe.r

1983-2,200
