UNITED NATIONS

SECUR TU COUNCIL
OFFICIAL

RECORDS

NEW YORK

CONTENTS
Page

Provisional
Adoption

agenda (S/Agenda/2206)

. . . . . , . . . , . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . +. . . . .

1

of the agenda . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . , . . . . . . , . , . , , . , . . . . , . . . . . . . . . . . . .

The question of the exercise by the Palestinian people of its inalienable rights:
Letter dated 6 March 1980 from the Acting Chairman of the Committee on
the Exercise of the Inalienable Rights of the Palestinian People addressed
to the President of the Security Council (S/13832);
Letter dated 24 March 1980 from the Chairman of the Committee on the
Exercise of the Inalienable Rights of the Palestinian People addressed to
the President of the Security Council (S/13855) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

SjPV.2206

NOTE
Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined with figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United
Nations document.
Documents of the Security Council (symbol S/ . . .) are normally published in
quarterly Supplements
of the Officlinl Records qf the Security Cormd.
The date
of the document indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which information about it is given.
The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a
system adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Resolutions
and
Decisions
of the Security
Council.
The new system, which has been applied
retroactively to resolutions adopted before 1January 1965,became fully operative
on that date.

2206th MEETING
Held in New York on Thursday, 3 April 1980, at 4 p.m.
Presidenr: Mr. Potirio MUfiOZ LED0 (Mexico).
Present: The representatives of the following States:
Bangladesh, China, France, German Democratic
Republic, Jamaica, Mexico, Niger, Norway, Philippines, Portugal, Tunisia, Union of Soviet Socialist
Republics, United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland, United States of America, Zambia.
Provisional

agenda (S/Agenda/2206)

1. Adoption of the agenda
2. The question of the exercise by the Palestinian
people of its inalienable rights:
Letter dated 6 March 1980 from the Acting
Chairman of the Committee on the Exercise
of the Inalienable Rights of the Palestinian
People addressed to the President of the
Security Council (S/13832);
Letter dated 24 March 1980from the Chairman
of the Committee on the Exercise of the
Inalienable Rights of the Palestinian People
addressed to the President of the Security
Council (S/13855)
The meeting

was called lo order at 4.40 p.m.
Adoption of the agenda

The agenda was adopted.
The question of the exercise by the Palestinian people
of its inalienable rights:
Letter dated 6 March 1980 from the Acting Chairman
of the Committee on the Exercise of the Inalienable Rights of the Palestinian People addressed to
the President of the Security Council (S/13832);
Letter dated 24 March 1980 from the Chairman of
the Committee on the Exercise of the Inalienable
Rights of the Palestinian Pebple addressed to the
President of the Security Council (S/13855)

1. The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Spanish):
In accordance with the decisions taken at previous
meetings [2204th and 2205rh meetings], I invite the
representatives of Algeria, Egypt, India, Iraq, Israel,
Jordan, Lebanon, the Syrian Arab Republic and
Yugoslavia to participate in the discussion without the
right to vote and I invite the Chairman of the Committee on tht Exercise of the Inalienable Rights of the
Palestinian People and the representative of the Pal-

estine Liberation Organization (PLO) to take places
at the Council table.
At the invitation of the President, Mr. Beaaoui
(Algeria), Mr. Abdel Meguid (Egypt), Mr. 8. C. Mishra
(India), Mr. BajI (Iraq), Mr. Blum (Israel}, Mr. Nuseibeh (Jordan), Mr. T&i
(Lebanon), Mr. Mansouri
(Syrian Arab Republic) and Mr. Kornatina (Yugoslavia) took the places reserved for them at the side
of the Council chamber and Mr. Kane (Chairman of
the Committee
on the Exercise of the Inalienable
Rights of the Palestinian
People) and Mr. Terzi
(Palestine Liberation
Organization)
took places at
the Council table.

2. Mr. ESSAAFI (Tunisia) (interpretation
frur,!
Mr. President, it gives us great pleasure to
see you presiding over such an important debate of the
Council and we are convinced that your wisdom and
diligence, as well as your statesmanlike and diplomatic
skills, will assist us in making progress on the crucial
question of the rights of the Palestinian people, a
question which has once again been brought to the
attention of the Council.

French):

3. I should also like to pay a fraternal tribute to your
predecessor, Ambassador Mills of Jamaica, and
express to him our esteem for his devotion and his
tireless efforts in the fulfilment of his responsibilities,
and for his diplomatic qualities, which he demonstrated in March in presiding over a debate where the
logic of events led him to bring to the attention of the
Council two questions which are politically and organically linked: the situation in the occupied Arab territories and the inalienable rights of the Pqlestinian
people.
4. I should like right away to express our profound
concern at the situation currently prevailing in the
occupied Palestinian territory. On the one hand we
see the Council apparently confining itself! to a waitand-see approach, and on the other hand we have a
military occupation that is speedily and before our
very eyes laying the foundations of annexation. Therefore the decisive importance of the time element car:
be seen, and why not only the neighbouring States but
also the non-aligned countries as a whole are anxious
to resist the speedy evolution of such a situation and
to replace it by broadly based and effective international action.
5. Rarely has such a crucial question, affecting the
fate of a whole people and region the strategic im-

10. Indeed we cannot recognize the existence of the
Palestinian people and at the same time deny it the
rights enjoyed by all other peoples or simply agree
that it has interests only when, as is said, “they are
legitimate”. The existence of a people is linked to the
existence of natural fundamental rights; those are the
rights that the Palestinian people is determined to
acquire. That is the very essence of the statement
made in the Council by the representative of the PLO
on 31 March [220&h meeting].

portance of which is decisive for international peace
and security, come up against so much inaction, so
much impotence and so many false starts, at the very
time that it has actually been the subject of numerous
debates in the Council.
6. The recognition of the rights of the Palestinian
people should not be allowed to fall prey to the calculations or compromises involved in any kind of
indirect strategy. The absoluteness of this need is
dictated both by our conscience and by our sense of
responsibility. Anyone who would endeavour to
subordinate it to external considerations is certainly
thinking of using it for his own ends, Tunisia will
never lend itself to such an exercise. In our view this
debate is necessary for more than one reason.

11. In fact, two arguments or rather two speeches
on peace were presented to the Council on that day.
The Council is capable of discerning in those speeches
which elements are in keeping with law, with the principles of the Charter and with the will of the United
Nations. We should like to highlight three particular
points.

7. Do we really need to have a war before the Council can measure up to its responsibilities and raise its
thinking to the level and scope of the tragedy which
is constantly sowing death and terror throughout the
region? As long ago as June 1976the recommendations
of the Committee on the Exercise of the Inalienabie
Rights of the Palestinian People were transmitted to
the Council for it to approve them and to use them as
a basis for the solution of the Palestinian question.
In spite of the appeals of the Committee and the various
resolutions of the General Assembly, including the very
latest, resolution 34/65 A, which was adopted on
29 November 1979, the Council has done nothing. The
hesitation of certain of its members is all the more
unjustified as these recommendations are all based on
resolutions adopted both by the General Assembly and
by the Council itself.

12. First, can one possibly claim today to be striving
to resolve the Middle East problem, while at the same
time one denies the existence of the Palestinians as
a people and as an indispensable partner in the negotiations? Should this elementary fact, which is conceded by everyone, really constitute a problem?
Denial of it or the attempt to identify the Palestinian
problem solely and exclusively with its refugee aspect
stems from confusion, if not actual blindness, which
the Council is in duty bound to dispel. For our part,
we believe that such an attitude constitutes the
essential obstacle to conceiving peace.
13. Secondly, it is certainly admissible in all negotiations to challenge any part or the whole of one’s
adversary’s argument, provided that one’s intention to
negotiate is clear from the substance of one’s challenge
and from one’s attitude. But surely it is not admissible
simply to deny the adversary or to reduce him to
the level of a terrorist in order to make it easier to
avoid the necessity of negotiating. How otherwise
can we interpret the diatribes that have as their target
the representative of the Palestinian people, the PLO,
when an elementary quest for peace would obviously
involve bringing precisely that partner into the negotiations? Thus, the state,ment of the representative
of Israel testifies not only to an inability to conceive
of peace but also to the actual refusal even to speak
the language ,of peace. We believe that that statement
actually expresses more directly a refusal to countenance peace.

8. With regard tq the substance of the problem-that
is, a comprehensive and definitive settlement of the
Palestinian question-we
subscribe to the recommendations of the Committee, which contain four
fundamental principles, recalled by the Chairman of the
Committee, Ambassador Kane, as follows: first, the
question of Palestine is at the very heart of the Middle
East problem; hence no just and lasting solution is
possible without taking fully into account the legitimate aspirations of the Palestinian people; secondly,
the itialienable rights of the Palestinian people must be
fully exercised; thirdly, the Palestine Liberation
Organization must participate on an equal footing with
the other parties in all conferences and negotiations on
the Middle East; fourthly, the acquisition of territory
by force is inadmissible, and there is an obligation
flowing therefrom for Israel to withdraw totally and
rapidly from all territory occupied in that way,
including Jerusalem.

14. Thirdly, a preoccupation with security is certainly
a fundamental element in an overall solution. We
recognize the need for a comprehensive system of
guarantees that should satisfy the need for stability,
detente and trust throughout the region; but at the same
time we must denounce this confusion whereby, on
the principle of unilateral security, a militaristic
doctrine is built up openly aimed at legitimizing permanent military supremacy of one State over all its
neighbours, the final goal of which is nothing other than
the denial of peace and the perpetuation of military

9. However, as we can see, nothing tangible has
been done so far to render justice to the Palestinian
people, that is to say to recognize their legitimate
rights and to put them in a position where they can
exercise them peacefully. It would be tragic to allow
resentment to break out, knowing that the consequences would have an impact on the whole international community.
2

terror, which is bound to have reverberations at
distances increasingly further from the Middle East
itself. A system of guarantees that would be in keeping
with the authentic PrinCiple
of security must be based
on the common claims of all States of the region,
including the future State of Palestine. This element
cannot be dissociated from the comprehensive solution
and should be tackled with a proper sense of responsibility here in the Security Council.

among the catalysts when the world seems to be on the
brink of strife and makes it a genuine contributor to
the efforts at deepening the roots of justice amongst
its People and among the peoples of the world. The
States members of the Arab League appreciate the
hospitality and equality enjoyed by thousands of our
people who became ultimately citizens of your beautiful country and exponents of our humanist culture.
20. The Council is meeting at this time because it
has become clear that the prospects of peace in the
Middle East will diminish as long as the national rights
of the Palestinian people are not satisfied. This is such
an elementary and obvious reality that it seems
redundant to underline it. However, because this fact
is so obvious and self-evident there is a disposition
-which
is diminishing, it is true-to consider the
crisis that stems from Israel’s perpetual violation of
these Palestinian rights as “manageable”. The Council
should not mistake the Palestinian and general Arab
commitment to exhausting all the peaceful, diplomatic
and persuasive channels and options as licence for the
international community to keep on postponing the
inevitable need-indeed this is an imperative requirement-to
impose sanctions on Israel and clearly
penalize it for its usurpation of territory, its violation
of rights, its annexation of land, its planting of colonies,
and its ongoing defiance of and contempt and utter disregard for the will of the international community,
the Charter and resolutions of the United Nations,
That Israel’s record is replete with such contemptuous
,disregard should not be an excuse to thwart the
deliberations and functions of the Council.

15, It is high time for the Israeli authorities to understand that peace and security cannot be brought about
at the expense of the rights of others to existence and
to liberty or on any other basis than that of respect
for the elementary principles of morality and international law. Force and oppression cannot lead anywhere; four wars have not reduced the people of
Palestine to silence. Today, more than ever before,
the Palestinian people is determined to recover its
rights and its sovereignty, supported as it is by the
vast majority of the peoples and nations of the world,
which have expressed their profound conviction that
there can be no peace in the Middle East without a
just settlement of the Palestinian problem.
16. The Palestinian people cannot continue to be the
victim of a situation that it did not create-indeed,
of
a situation for which our Organization must assume its
share of responsibility.
Should it be unable to solve
the underlying problem that is linked to the recognition of those rights, no other peripheral measure,
even the sending of emergency forces to the south or
to the north, can spare it exile, persecution or uncertainty. This people has a right to peace too. The
Council has the ability to define and to put into effect
the terms of a peace based upon justice and law and
to put an end to this uncertainty, which constitutes
the plight of the Palestinian people and has become
that of all the peoples of the region.

21. We are equally aware that there is a difference
among the members of the Council about the timing
of addressing this crucial issue. We in the League of
Arab States and in many non-aligned countries believe
that it is never too soon to spell out unequivocally
the modalities by which the Palestinian people can
exercise their inalienable rights inasmuch as the Palestinian people are perhaps the only people now
deprived of their right to self-determination and to
build their independent State in their homeland. This
continued flagrant violation by Israel of the elementary,
normal, natural and national rights of the Palestinian
people constitutes not only a destabilizing factor in the
region but also a clear threat to the chances of total
peace.

17. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation
from
Spanish):
The next speaker is Mr. Clovis Maksoud, observer
for the League of Arab States, to whom the Council
extended an invitation under rule 39 of its provisional
rules of procedure at its 2204th meeting. I invite him
to take a place at the Council table and to make his
statement.
18. Mr. MAKSOUD:
Mr. President, at the outset
I wish to express my appreciation for the invitation
to address the Council on an issue that is vital to the
Arab nation and the Arab States and crucial to the
future of peace and stability in the region. Needless to
say, we, the League of Arab States, are deeply involved
and very much interested in the outcome of the Council’s deliberations.

22, We also know that those of our friends in Western
European countries that agree with our overall assessment, and have taken positive and constructive steps
in committing their countries to the achievement of the
rights of the Palestinian people and of the right of seifdetermination,
at times consider that, in deference
to the sensitivity of their strategic intimacy with the
global position of the United States, they would like
to enable the United States to discover on its own the
futility of the Camp David framework and then bring
about a resolution of the Council that would in substance reiterate the draft resolution before this body

19. I should like to take this opportunity to join with
mY colleagues in the congratulations
due to YOU
Personally on assuming the presidency of the Council.
Your country, Mexico, has for .a long time exhibited
that degree of independent judgement that places it
3

today, submitted by the Committee on the Exercise
of the Inalienable Rights of the Palestinian People,
and elicit from the United States perhaps a positive
vote or at least an abstention.
23. We do not at all question the motives of our
European friends. As a matter of fact we are deeply
appreciative of the degree of collective statesmanship
that has been demonstrated in dealing with the question of Palestine and by their recognizing the Palestine
Liberation Organization as the legitimate representative of the Palestinian people. We are equally not
oblivious to the measure of difference in our respective
priorities and way of seeing things, but in the light of
the very nature of Israel’s addiction to intransigence
we have our doubts as to the wisdom of enabling this
intransigence to obtain a new lease on life.
24. As far as the United States is concerned,. it
probably wished this debate not even to take place.
Although the United States has frequently and very
recently experienced the muscle of Zionist pressure
and the intellectual and diplomatic terror techniques
of Israel, it seeks to keep the Camp David agreements
floating, although there is a growing erosion of the
credibility of these agreements among American
decision-makers and opinion-makers. The eagerness
of the United States to give the Camp David agreements another chance is extraneous to the issues
before us. This is linked more to the requirements of
electioneering politics than to the imperatives of
consistent and coherent policies.
25. So we are confronted with a dilemma in the
search for what is feasible and credible at the same
time. The dilemma is that the Council’s convictions
are thwarted in part by the variations and the question
of timing and by the shadow of the veto power of the
United Stateson this issue. The Israeli representative
has sought to entrap the Council into responding to
his distortions so that it may lose sight of the central
issue. His rehashing of fabrications and obvious lies
does not transform them into the “truth” he so
arrogantly asserts. The colonization of Palestine by the
Zionists is still too fresh, and within this generation’s
memory, for it to be the subject of controversy as to
the facts. Hence we shall not attempt to respond to
the historical claim, except to say that claims dating
back 2,000 years in history have for the Zionists
become contemporary claims on Arab territories, and
30 years of Zionist usurpation of Palestine and
Israeli violation of Palestinian rights have for Israel
become ancient and obsolete facts.
26, Treating the question of rights from the vantage
point of territories and square miles, as the Israeli
representative has done, when what is at issue is
the human and national rights of the Palestinians and
the usurpation of their land, is typical of racist
behaviour throughout modern history. As for his
attacks on the PLO, all we have to say is that there
is nothing new in his insulting, invective remarks,

because all liberation movements in modern history
have been given the same titles-“terrorists”,
“murderers’ ’ , and so on-by the various racist regimes
and the colonialist Powers. Hence the PLO is in good
company with all the national liberation movements
that have so gallantly achieved for their countries and
their nationals the freedom and independence which
they deserve and to which they are entitled. We only
have to remember that scarcely a year ago the white
racist rbgime in Rhodesia was calling the present Prime
Minister of Zimbabwe by the same titles and namesas
Israel’s Begin and his henchmen use for the PLO
leadership.
27. That the Israeli representative should attribute
the growing conviction in the European Economic
Community countries about the justice of the Palestinians’ struggle and the validity of their right to
self-determination and the recognition by those countries of the representative character of the PLO to
utilitarian motives and to a need for our oil is so
demeaning that it should not elicit any response, either
from us or from those who have been so insulted,
28. The issue that we face is that Israel has already
annexed more than 30 per cent of the Palestinian
territories occupied in 1967, sometimes by establishing
nahals or colonies, on the pretext of “archaeological
sites”, or “theological seminaries”, as at Al-Khalii
(Hebron), or for security reasons. In most of the
colonies they have armed the settlers, while imposing
curfews on the Arab towns, exactly as the Ku Klux
Klan vigilantes did in the early 1920s in the United
States South. But in this case they are officially
sponsored. Therefore, this body must concentrate on
what the Israelis’ hands are doing, and not on what
their tongues are saying.
29. Since the Camp David agreements were signed,
more colonies have been established and planted, and
existing colonies have been expanded and have proliferated. The United States condemned these colonies
as illegal; we have, however, repeatedly noticed the
discrepancy between United States utterances and its
declared policy, on the one hand, and the United
States performance and its practical pursuits, on the
other. We should like in this respect to ask the United
States-or at least to ask the Secretary-General,
Mr. Waldheim, in turn to ask the United States-how
many American citizens there are in those illegal
settlements and colonies in the occupied territories.
How can we tally them? The United States is declaring
that those colonial settlements are illegal; yet it does
not raise the question with its own citizens who are
beefing them up.
30. These are not polemical questions: these are
questions that have to be answered unequivocally and
clearly, because the inconsistency between what is
declared and what is pursued, and the discrepancy
between what is uttered and what is performed, have
constituted the input giving Israel the ability to treat

4

d

y

‘.J

U

theinternational CO.mmUnity
in *the insulting manner
that has characterlzed its attitude and behaviour
throughout.

of the Egyptian people’s valiant commitment to our
concerns and to the common Arab cause.
35. Even if the timetable spelt out by the Camp David
agreementsand put forward by the adherents of those
agreementsis adheredto, the objective of those agreements is so-called autonomy for the Palestinians.Let
me state to this body, on behalf of the League of Arab
States,that, as1 amsure this body is equally convinced,
autonomy does not correspond to national rights.
Autonomy is pre-emptive of sovereignty and independence; autonomy is an administrative formula with
no political
or legal meaning in international law and
international relations. Autonomy reduces national
rights to municipal rights, reduces the rights of the
Palestinians to be citizens and transforms them into
subjectsof an Israeli empire in perpetuity, Autonomy
is, at best, an outgrowth of a colonial and occupying
glutton; it is not, under any circumstances,the food of
human dignity, dignity for the Palestinianpeople.

31, The timetable that the United States has been
@rtising with 26 May as the deadline for bringing out
anoutline for the so-called negotiations for “Palestinianautonomy” is rejected by the Arab States
because
it emerges from agreements that municipalize
thenationalrights of the Palestinians and the PLO has
beenexcludedfrom taking part in negotiations of consequencewithin the framework of a comprehensive
andjust peace.
32, The legality and legitimacy of the Camp David
agreementsare questioned precisely because the
mechanismestablished by them conceives of those
agreements
as a substitute for an alternative to and a
replacementof the United Nations and the Security
Council.The League of Arab States and the Arab
Statesin genera1 have exhibited their unflinching
commitmentto the authority of the United Nations by
suspending
one of the members of the League from its
activitiesbecause it had acquiesced, unfortunately,
in the Camp David agreements, which flout the
authorityof the United Nations and seek to jeopardize
its credibility and effectiveness.

36. So autonomy is not even an option that any Palestinian or Arab is willing to entertain, whether ultimately or in the immediatefuture. That is why we say
that the whole framework of the Camp David agreements and the so-called negotiations on Palestinian
autonomy are, at best, diplomatic day-dreaming. Yet,
in fact, they are a meansto enable Israel to buy more
time, create new facts, proliferate new colonies and
obliterate the demographic, cultural and national
character of the Palestinian constituency in the occupied territories. They also introduce new elements
that render genuine efforts towards peace not only
more complex and more difficult, but almost impossible, unless the Palestiniansand the Arabs are willing
to accept passivity as a substitute for genuine peace.

33. Permit me, Mr. President, to depart for a moment
fromthe text to comment on the Egyptian representative’sstatement in this respect.
34. First, no Arab doubts the commitment of Egypt
or the Egyptian people to the Arab cause and to the
rightsof the Palestinian people. Secondly, the Arab
States,and the Arab League in particular, consider
Egypt an integral part of the Arab nation and
believethat its involvement is historical, authentic and
extremelyvaluable. This is in contradiction and in
contradistinctionto the policies, behaviour patterns
and objectives of the present leadership of Egypt.
Thirdly, the PLO and the Arabs, in the opinion of the
Egyptiandelegation, must wait for the outcome of the
CampDavid negotiating process and then accept or
rejectit. This is precisely the issue. The PLO, the
Leagueof Arab States and its members do not want to
befaced with an outcome to which Egypt is forced
10commit itself while the Arabs reject it. That is
why, since the inception of the League, the Charter
ofthe Arab League, with Egypt as a founding member,
hasmadeillegal any unilateral treaty with the Zionist
State.Fourthly, to the question posed by the Egyptian
representative,“What is the alternative for those who
reject’theCamp David framework?“, our response is
as follows. If President Sadat can conceive of a
strategywithout the Arabs, the Arabs cannot, in view
of their nationalist commitment, evolve a national
strategywithout Egypt. Hence our definite preference
andcommitmentare for the return of Egypt to the Arab
nationalframework and consensus. We consider the
so-calledEgyptian-Israeli peace treaty an interruption
-nay, a disruption-in the authenticity and continuity

37. We are sure that the international community
does not want this fate for them, and the Council
is entrusted with seeking ways and means to bring
about an expeditious peace by removing and
dismantling the obstaclesto peace.Hencethe timetable
spelt out by the Camp David agreementsis irrelevant
to us and, I am sure, irrelevant to the Council, as it
seeks to deflect the efforts of the Council to deal
directly with the central issue-namely, Palestinian
national rights.
38, We are not trying here to paraphrase the past;
nor do we want to get bogged down in the deadlock
of the present. We hope that we can contribute,
through the United Nations, to chartirtg for the future
a course that will ensure the transformation of the
Middle East from an arena of conflict into an arena
of peace and justice. Yet the past cannot be removed
from our present experience. Let me just mention
that in pre-1967Israel-in 1948-there were 475 Arab
villages; now the number is 90 Arab villages, which
means that 385 Arab villages have been totally obliterated. Ninety per cent of the territories annexed by
Israel since 1967, in the West Bank and Gaza,
125,630dunums of cultivable land, belonged to private
5

Arab land-owners; 9 per cent were from lands in the
public domain. The number of colonial settlements in
the occupied territories established to date is 133. In
accordance with Israeli Government plans, many more
are envisaged and existing ones are expected to
multiply and, in Israeli terms, to be “thickened”.

45. The Council has been convened at the request of
the Chairman of the Committee on the Exercise of the
Inalienable Rights of the Palestinian People so that it
may concentrate its attention on the continued violation by Israel of the inalienable rights of those people,
and also under the terms of paragraphs 7 and 8 of
General Assembly resolution 34/65 A, which urged the
Council to consider and to take as early as possible
a decision on the recommendations of the Committee
endorsed in successive resolutions by the Assembly
at its thirty-second, thirty-third and thirty-fourth
sessions. It is not necessary for me to go into detail
about the substance of those recommendations, which
contain a phased and time-bound programme for the
resolution of the question of Palestine, a question
which has been generally recognized as being at the
heart of the problem of West Asia. In his exhaustive
statement before the Council, the Chairman of the
Committee has already made a convincing presentation of the case [220&h meeting]. The representative
of the Palestine Liberation Organization has also
expressed [ibid.], with feeling, the anguish of the
people of Palestine and the depth of their yearning
for a free and independent State of their own in
Palestine.

39. While efforts are being pursued to freeze diplomatic initiatives, are those who are willing to postpone their diplomatic initiatives able to guarantee that
the United States can, in turn, freeze the continued
Israeli mutilation of the Palestinian homeland and
entity in the occupied territories? We say that that is
the centre of the dilemma, not our insistence on
bringing about a credible resolution in the Council
that will enhance the prospects of genuine peace and
embolden the authentic peacemakers.
40. Finally, I should like to take this opportunity
to commend the Committee on the Exercise of the
Inalienable Rights of the Palestinian People on its work
and on its recommendations, which constitute coherent, principled and consistent components of a
policy resolution that could bring about the outcome
for which the world has long been looking, that would
finally enable the Palestinians to exercise their inalienable rights and build in their homeland the independent, sovereign State to which they are historically
entitled and that would lead to the peace in the region
that has long eluded us.

46. Just a few weeks ago, the members of the Council considered the report of the Security Council Commission established under resolution 446 (1979), which
culminated in the unanimous adoption of resolution 465 (1980), expressly calling upon Israel to
dismantle existing settlements and to ceaseas a matter
of urgency the establishment of further settlements
in the occupied Arab territories, including Jerusalem.
The resolution also determined that measures of that
nature taken by Israeli authorities in Palestinian and
other Arab territories occupied since 1967, including
Jerusalem, had no legal validity whatsoever.

41. The PRESIDENT (interpretafion from Spanish):
The next speaker is the representative of India. I invite
him to take a place at the Council table and to make
his statement.
42. Mr. B. C. MISHRA (India): Mr. President,
I should like at the outset to thank you, and through
you the other members of the Council, for giving my
delegation the opportunity to participate in the current
debate on the question of the exercise of the inalienable rights of the Palestinian people.

47. Israel has chosen, however, to treat the unanimous decision of this body with contempt and has
proceeded on a series of provocative gestures and
violations, including the expropriation of vast areas of
Arab-owned land in order to establish new settlements.
These actions have, if anything, further exposed
Israel’s own nefarious designs and they hold out
dangerous portents for peace and stability in the area.

43. In extending to you my warmest congratulations
on your assumption of the presidency of the Council
for the month of April, I should like to state that we
are especially gratified to see you, Sir, presiding over
the current deliberations. India and Mexico are linked
by warm and long-standing ties of friendship and cooperation. We are also conscious of your own
considerable diplomatic skills, wisdom and negotiating
ability, which will no doubt find full expression in
your handling of the deliberations of this body. We
wish you the best in your tasks.

48. The threat to international peace and stability
resulting from Israeli policies can be removed only by
a just solution of the question of Palestine, which is
at the very root of the conflict in West Asia. India’s
position on this question has remained clear and
consistent over the years. In this regard, I could do
no better than to quote from the speech made by the
Prime Minister of India on 28 March welcoming
Chairman Yasser Arafat to India. She said:

44. I should also like to pay a tribute to your predecessor, Ambassador Mills of Jamaica, for the
patience, sagacity and dignified composure with
which he conducted the proceedings of the Council
during last month. No doubt his professional reputation has, over the years, been built on those very
qualities.

“Our sympathy for the Palestinian Arabs has
been a part of independent India’s foreign policy
from its very inception. Even in the 193Os,when
we ourselves were struggling for freedom, Mahatma
6

Gandhiand Jawaharlal Nehru spoke out against the
injustices to which Arabs, and Palestinians in particular, were subjected. Thus our support for the
Palestinian cause has been time-tested and
consistent.”

51. The PalestineCommittee has been mandated by
the General Assembly to strive for the realization of
the inalienable rights of the Palestinian people by all
possible Peaceful means available to it under the
Charter. It is in the context of that mandate that the
Committee has placed before the Council its recommendations for appropriate consideration. We hope
that the Council, as a body with the requisite authority
and power to give effect to these recommendations,
will objectively examine them and act upon them in
order to bring peace and security to the region, in
conformity with the principles of justice and intemational law. Only in that way can the sad cycle of
violence, suffering and strife be broken and a just
solution of the problem attained which will restore
to the people of Palestine their basic human dignity
-and their legitimate national rights. Such a solution
cannot but prove to be in the ultimate interest of the
people of Israel also.

49, An important prerequisite for the attainment of
s peaceful solution is the full and equal participation
of the PLO in any peace negotiations. In regard to
thepeople of Palestine, there is general international
recognition that the PLO is their only genuine representative.To quote again from the speech of the Prime
Ministerof India:
“The plight of the Palestinians has been one of
thetragedies of history. Few people have been more
systematically oppressed and humiliated in their
own land. I hope-indeed I am sure-this will
changesoon and that achievement will be the key
to harmony in West Asia. The PLO has striven to
provide its people a distinct and forceful identity.
The Palestinian people in turn have entrusted to
you, Chairman Arafat, the responsibility of leading
them to their destiny. I assure you of the full support of the people of India in your struggle.”

52. The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Spanish):
The next speaker is the representative of Yugoslavia.
I invite him to take a place at the Council table and
to make his statement.
53. Mr. KOMATINA (Yugoslavia): It gives me great
pleasure to congratulateyou, Sir, as the representative
of Mexico-a country with which Yugoslavia maintains traditional and very friendly relations of overall co-operation-on your assumption of the presidency of the Council for the month of April and to
wish you successin carrying out your responsible
duties. You are a well-known political figure, both in
your country and beyond its borders, and we are confident that your outstanding qualities will greatly contribute to enabling the Council to discharge its task in
dealing with one of the most complex and pressing
issuesfacing the international community.

In recognition of this pre-eminent role of the PLO,
my Government last week accorded full diplomatic
statusto the office of the PLO in New Delhi.
50. There can be no peace in ‘West Asia and no
reduction of the threat to international peace and
securityunless there is clear recognition of the just
causeof the Arabs and Palestinians. In a joint IndiaPLOpress statement issued in New Delhi on 30 March
at the conclusion of Chairman A&at’s visit to India
it was said:

54. I wish also to pay due tribute to your predecessor, Ambassador Mills of Jamaica, for the excellent
manner in which he guided the work of the Council during the month of March.

“The Prime Minister of India reiterated India’s
principled support of the Arab cause in general and
the Palestinian problem in particular. The Prime
Minister stated that a just peace and comprehensive
solution to the Middle East crisis can be found
only with the full participation of the Palestine
Liberation Organization as an equal partner in any
settlement. Such a settlement would have to be
based on complete withdrawal of Israel from all
occupied Palestinian and Arab territories, in&ding
Jerusalem,enabling the Palestinian people to return
to their homeland, to self-determination and to the
establishment of an independent State in Palestine.
In this regard the two sides emphasized the resolutions on the Middle East question, including the
question of Palestine and the Camp David accords,
adopted at the sixth non-aligned summit conference
in Havana. They condemn Israel’s continued flouting
of the United Nations resolutions, its intransigence,
expansionismand aggression in occupied territories
and south Lebanon, establishment of settlements
and exploitation of the natural resources in the
occupied territories.”

55. The Yugoslav delegation, for its part, wishes to
contribute to the debate on this very complex and
urgent problem, in whose very essenceis embodied
the destiny of a whole people and its basic right to
establish its own State.
56. As a member of the Committee on the Exercise
of the Inalienable Rights of the PalestinianPeople, my
country is directly involved in the fulfilment of the
Committee’s extremely complex and responsible task.
The General Assembly’s appraisal, expressed on
several occasions,has been that this important organ
has been carrying out successfully the obligations
entrusted to it and that it has been exerting its utmost
efforts, both in searching for a just solution with
respect to the realization of the national rights of the
Palestinian people and in informing and mobilizing
world public opinion, My country will continue to
7

contribute effectively and actively to the work of the
Committee, in co-operation with the Palestine Liberation Organization and all the members of the Committee, so that the latter may continue to perform its
function of reaching the goals that have been set by
the General Assembly and defined and stipulated in
numerous documents of the world Organization.

All the greater, therefore, is the responsibility for the
present state of affairs, both of Israel and of all those
who assist that country directly or indirectly or who
approve in any form of its policy based on constant
expansion.
61. No people can allow anyone else to decide on its
inalienable national rights. Consequently, the acceptance of the fact that only the PLO can negotiate
legitimately on behalf of the Palestinian people is a
prerequisite on any realistic road leading to the
solution of the Palestinian question, The international
community is becoming ever more aware of this fact,
because the PLO not only has asserted itself as a
constructive participant in international life, including
in the peaceful settlement of the Middle East crisis,
but has actually been recognized as an international
legal and political subject, with whom over 110Member
States have established ties characteristic of relations between sovereign States. No one can turn a
blind eye to this fact and remain idle without running
the risk of becoming a willing or unwilling accomplice.

57, We attach great importance to this debate, considering it to have a far-reaching character. We would
say that this is an exceptional moment at which the
Council should pronounce on the inalienable right of
the Palestinian people to self-determination. In doing
so, it would contribute substantively to the settlement
of the Middle East crisis and to arresting the dangerous trend of deterioration in the international
situation in that region and in the world at large.
58. The Middle East crisis is undoubtedly one of the
most acute and explosive focal points of crisis in
the world today, It is further deepened by attempts to
reach partial solutions and by the general aggravation
of relations in the entire Middle East region. We are
still confronted with continued Israeli aggression and
occupation of Arab territories, with the denial of the
national rights of the Palestinian people and with the
refusal of Israel to comply with United Nations decisions. In this respect there is no sign of a change for
the better, Moreover, the world is faced with growing
negative tendencies taking the form of the use of force,
military intervention and interference in the internal
affairs of sovereign States as a result of the policy
of spheres of interest, bloc rivalries and attempts to
impose on peoples and countries new relations of
dependence. This poses a threat to peace and security
in the world. Individual non-aligned countries are the
main victims of such trends, while constant pressure
is brought to bear on the Non-Aligned Movement,
which is a global and independent factor of peace,
equitable co-operation and independence on a broader
international level.

62. International political practice has provided us
-especially in more recent times-with
abundant
proof of the short-lived and limited value of the policy
of force, occupation and colonization. It is true that
force, especially when used against small peoples and
countries, can bring some short-term geo-strategic
advantages; however, in the long run, it exposes to
peril the very proponents of the use of force. History
has already provided a large number of examples of
unsuccessful attempts to eliminate individual peoples
from the world scene. Therefore, no one should
entertain any illusions in that respect.
63. The just objectives of the struggle for national
liberation and self-determination were, and have
remained, the main bulwark of and factor for peace
and stability in international relations in general. The
liberation of peoples under colonial and foreign
domination has become a fundamental principle of
international relations, while support for this struggle
has been transformed into a duty in the conscience of
mankind. As a matter of fact, no one can proclaim
on the one hand his attachment to these principles
while on the other hand violating them in practice and
acting in complicity with their constant infringement.
The question of respect for the right to national independence is a test of credibility for every national
policy on the international plane. It is an integral part
of the struggle to change international relations in their
entirety. Peoples refuse to reconcile themselves to
relations of dependence in general and even less are
they prepared to acquiesce in their own enslavement.
In the present-day world, this is one of the most real
of the facts of life which are becoming the motive force
of positive evolution in the world. Every far-sighted
policy must take this into account, because involved
here are both realism and moral and humanizing
elements in international relations.

$9. Therefore, we believe that it is necessary to
consider the Palestinian problem with a sense of
responsibility and to take decisions which will contribute to its solution, because it is unthinkable that,
in an age of emancipation, the Palestinian people,
which every day offers proof of its unshakeable
national consciousness and its sense of responsibility
for peace in the region, should be deprived of its
inalienable right to live in its own national State like
any other people. In taking such decisions, the
Council not only would meet the legitimate national
aspirations of the Palestinian people, but would also
clear the only realistic path to the settlement of the
Middle East crisis in its entirety.
60, It is constantly being confirmed that the realization of the inalienable rights of the Palestinian
people is the core of the Middle East crisis, and without
that realization the establishment of a just and lasting
peace in the Middle East Cannot even be imagined,
8

’ M Along the lengthy road leading to the realization
z’its national objectives, the Palestinian people has
beenconfronted with a number of difficulties and
pressllrcs,with misunderstanding, opportunism and
attempts
to use its fight for purposes which are not in
accordancewith its liberation struggle. The whole
classical
and modern arsenal-ranging from the direct
useof force to forcible displacement and acts aimed at
alteringthe demographic structure of the population
andat expropriating land and natural resources, as
wellas other direct or indirect methods designed to
extirpatethe Palestinian people-has been marshalled
against
that people. However, all this has been to no
avail.The stronger and the more direct the force used
against
it, the firmer has the Palestinian people become
initsaspirations,the clearer in defining its objectives,
themore constructive in its messages to the world
andthe more oriented towards co-operation in the
choiceof roads towards the realization of its aims.

has shown once again that there can be no settlement
of the Palestineproblem without a substantive solution
of the basic question concerning the realization of
national rights. A positive decision of the Council
regarding this question would cyyitute a giant step
forward.
68. There is no doubt whatsoever that the establishment of an independent and non-aligned Palestinian
State is a conditio sine qua ~zo)rfor the settlement of
the Middle East crisis. We do not ‘say “non-aligned
State” merely for formal reasons, because the PLO
-the authentic representative of the Palestinian
people-is a full-fledged member of the non-aligned
movement, nor only because the non-aligned countries have provided the broadest platform for a just
solution of the whole problem and have given the
widest and strongest support to the realization of the
historical aspirations of the Palestinianpeople to freedom and independence. I emphasizethis becausewe
are convinced that non-alignment reflects, today, the
interest and desire of every people and every country
to strengthen its national independence, to develop
freely and to participate in international life on a
footing of equality. A positive decision would be a
major step taken by the world Organizationin rejecting
every policy of aggression, occupation and intervention and in defending the inalienable right of peoples
to self-determination, national independence and
sovereignty.

65. Weare deeply convinced that, with regard both to
thecontentof its decision and to its implementation,
theCouncil should compel Israel to behave in conformitywith the principles on which contemporary
international relations are founded. Among those
principles,the non-recognition of the results of aggressionand of the policy of fairs acconzplis, the
non-acquisitionof foreign territories by force, and the
recognitionof the right of all peoples to self-determinationand of all States to free and secure developmentconstitute the cornerstone of those relations.
Thereport of the Committee on the Exercise of the
InalienableRights of the Palestinian People contains
recommendationstaking into account both these principlesand all the realities and complexities of the
current situation, proceeding, of course, from the
absolutenecessity of realizing the basic objective,
namely,the recognition of the inalienable national
rightsof the Palestinian people.

69. Non-aligned and socialist Yugoslavia will continue to exert efforts for a lasting, just and comprehensive settlement of the Middle East crisis, proceeding from the necessityof opposingthe use of force
and from the fact that the freedom and independence
of peoples constitute inviolable values indispensable
for strengthening peace and security everywhere in
the world.
70, The PRESIDENT (inrcrpreratiunfiom
Spanish):
The next speaker is the representative of the Syrian
Arab Republic. I invite him to take a place at the
Council table and to make his statement.

66. The positions of Yugoslavia concerning the settlementof the Middle East crisis have been explained
repeatedlyin the Security Council, the General Assemblyand other bodies of the United Nations
dealingwith this crisis. These stands are based on the
generallyaccepted principles of unconditional withdrawalby Israel from all the Arab territories occupied
in 1967;recognition of the inalienable national right
of the Palestinian people to self-determination,
including the right to establish its own State; and
recognitionof the right of all peoples and Statesin the
regionto an independent and secure existence.

71. Mr. MANSOURI (Syrian Arab Republic):
Mr. President, I thank you very much for .giving
me this opportunity to speak to the Council. First of
all, I should like to expressmy congratulations to you
on your assumption of the presidency of the Council
for this month. The long-standing friendly relations
between our countries as well as your experience and
high qualifications assureus that you will conduct the
work of this Council in a very efficient manner. Allow
me at the same time to pay due respect to your predecessor, Ambassador Mills of Jamaica, for the
efficient manner in which he presided over the work of
the Council last month.

67. We are convinced that the solution of this
complexcrisis can be based only on a comprehensive
approach,within the framework of the decisions of
the Security Council and the General Assembly,
with the participation of the PLO on equal terms.
Attemptsat finding solutions or at imposing settlementsby means of partial approaches or by circumventingthe PLO not only have failed but have even
further exacerbated the Middle East crisis. Practice

72. For a long time the Council has been seized of
the question relating to the exercise by the’ Palestinian
people of its inalienable national rights. Unfortunately,
9

in the past it has not been able to deal positively and
effectively with this question once and for all.

and recognize the reality of the facts in the Middle
East.

73. The history of the United Nations since its establishment, and especially during the last two decades,
has shown remarkable achievements in the acceptance
and recognition of and support for the struggle of
peoples who desired to achieve freedom from colonial
domination and, indeed, the United Nations membership has increased greatly by reason of the emergence
of new States. But, unfortunately, the United Nations
up to now has failed to exert its full power and
authority in helping the Palestinian people to acquire
its freedom and national independence. It is a wellknown fact that the General Assembly, by an overwhelming majority, adopted resolution 3236 (XXIX)
of 22 November 1974, which, infer alia, expressed
its grave concern that the Palestinian people has been
prevented from enjoying its inalienable rights, in particular its right to self-determination, and reaffirmed
the right to self-determination without external interference and the right to national independence and
sovereignty.

77. We sincerely believe that it is high time that the
United Nations, as an international organization,
moved forward and acted immediately to remove the
injustice which was inflicted upon the Palestinian
people more than 30 years ago by the United Nations
itself. The only possible solution is to recognize the
right of the Palestinian people to self-determination
and independence. The solution should come within
and from the Organization as a whole. No solution
can be imposed from outside the United Nations. We
are more than convinced that all that is happening
in the Middle East outside the framework of the United
Nations will not lead to any peaceful settlement in the
area. Consequently, we consider the Camp David
accords and the so-called peace treaty between Israel
and Egypt and any other agreements that may emerge
out of them as null and void. This point of view of
ours is shared with a majority of Member States,
as was clearIy expressed during the debates at the last
session of the General Assembly.

74. Peace and stability in the Middle East cannot be
achieved without settling the Palestinian question,
which is the core of the Middle East problem. It may
be worth mentioning that the Political Declaration of
the Sixth Conference of Heads of State or Government
of Non-Aligned Countries stated that:

78. Furthermore, we regard the provisions of the
Camp David accords and the peace treaty between
Israel and Egypt as far away from and in fact denying
the Palestinian people their inalienable rights. That
denial is in fact an insult to the Palestinian people and
to the Arab nation as a whole. Any negotiations outside the United Nations and without the full participation of the Palestinian people through its representative, the Palestine Liberation Organization, would not
have any chance of survival or success and would
not even be considered by it.

“No just peace can be established in the region
unless it is based on total and unconditional withdrawal by Israel from all the occupied Palestinian
and other Arab occupied territories, and the recovery
by the Palestinian people of all its inalienable
national rights, including its right to return to its
homeland, to self-determination and to the establishment of an independent State in Palestine, in
accordance with General Assembly resolution 3236
(XXIX). ” 1

79. The Palestinian people, who were forcibly
expelled from their homeland, whether in 1948, 1956
or 1967,have the right to return to their homes. Nothing
less than a sovereign national independent State will
meet the demand and satisfy the legitimate aspirations
of the Palestinian people. Anything less is doomed to
failure.

75. During the last session, the General Assembly
adopted resolution 34/65 A, in which it reaflirmed
the inalienable rights of the Palestinian people and
urged the Council once again to consider and take a
decision on the recommendations of the Committee on
the Exercise of the Inalienable Rights of the Palestinian People, which were repeatedly endorsed by
the Assembly in its resolutions 31/20, 32/40 A and
33/28 A, as well as in the aforementioned resolution,

80. We in the Middle East are looking for lasting
peace and stability, but we want a peace based on
justice. We are sure, as everyone knows, that peace
in our part of the world cannot be achieved until the
fundamental issue, that is, the acceptance of the right
of self-determination for the Palestinian people, is
resolved. We appeal to the Council members to
uphold their responsibility, with their powers, and to
act immediately along two parallel lines, and those are:
first, to ensure Israeli withdrawal from all the occupied
Arab territories, and, secondly, to accept and endorse
the recommendations of the Committee on the Exercise
of the Inalienable Rights of the Palestinian People,
namely, to ensure that the Palestinian people are abIe
to exercise their inalienable rights, including their
right to self-determination and to a sovereign independent State.

76. It is beyond any doubt and, in fact, it is needless
to say that owing to obstacles such as the refusal of
one permanent member of the Council, namely, the
United States, the Council up to now has not been able
to give endorsement to the wishes and desires of the
overall majority of the Member States in their
endeavour to recognize the Palestinian people’s
right to self-determination and its right to establish
its own State in its own land. We hope that this time
the Council will be able to overcome those obstacles
10

81, Finally, on 1 March the Council adopted unanimously resolution 465 (1980). That resolution was the
first unanimous step by the Council on behalf of the
iaternational community
towards acceptance of the
Iact that Israeli policy in the occupied Arab territories
hsslargely contributed to a deterioration of the situaIi00 and that it is incompatible
with the pursuit of
peace in the area, and towards asking the Israeli
s0thorities to dismantle the existing settlements.
82, We hope that after this debate the Council will
take another step forward in the direction of peace by
accepting and endorsing the inalienable rights of the
Palestinian people to self-determination
and to a
independent
State in their
sovereign national
homeland.
83. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation
from Spanish):
The representative of the Palestine Liberation Organization has asked to make a statement in reply. I now
call on him.
84. Mr. TERZI

Liberation Organization)
First of all, please allow
me to express my sincere congratulations to you on
your assumption of the presidency of the Council for
themonth of April. Thousands of Palestinians in search
of new opportunities have found in Mexico a home
awayfrom home. The relations between the Palestine
Liberation Organization and Mexico are friendly ones
and serve our common interests as well as the cause of
peace and justice. Mr. President, we are certain that
your dynamism and prudence will produce positive
results during this month.
(interpretationfvom

(Palestine

Spanish):

[The speaker continued

in English.]

85. Now I wish to put on record here the great
appreciation of the Arab nation, and the Palestinian
people in particular, of the historic role of the Egyptian
people and the Egyptian armed forces; it is an historical
fact, one of those facts of history that make people
feel elated, thankful and reassured. It is an historical
fact that since 1948 the armed forces of Egypt have
given all they could, including their lives, in order to
defend, protect and support the cause of their brothers
in Palestine. The Egyptian people have paid with great
sacrifice; that is an historical fact that no one can
deny. To us Palestinians that is a very bright and
honourable page in the history of the Palestinian
People, the complete and full identification of cause,
Purpose and struggle. There should be no malicious
distortion or twisting of words. It is the current policy
0f Sadat and his regime that is damaging the image of
Egypt-of its people as well as its armed forces.
Sadat’s policy, to say the least, does not do honour to
the glorious history of Egypt and the Egyptian people,
especially the armed forces.
I
\

86. This morning our attention was called to African
maturity. African maturity and wisdom have been
Praised. We fully agree, and on this particular issue of

the Camp David accords let us hear again African
maturity as expressed by Mr. Tolbert, President of
Liberia, speaking in the General Assembly in his
capacity as current Chairman of the Organization of
African Unity. President Tolbert said:
“

Africa reaffirmed in Monrovia its unrelenting’support and unswerving commitment to the
struggle of the Palestinian people for the full realization and exercise of all of their national rights.
“In pledging its full support and determination
to continue to work for a lasting and just peace in
the Middle East, Africa, speaking in Monrovia,
condemned all partial agreements and treaties
which violate the recognized rights of the Palestinian
people and contradict the principles of just and
comprehensive
solutions to the Middle East
problem.
“If current peace initiatives in the Middle East
are to lead to a comprehensive, just and durable
settlement, it would seem imperative, in our view,
that the framework of negotiation be expanded to
include the Palestinian people, represented by the
Palestine Liberation Organization. For the Palestinian people alone are entitled to speak for themselves, and their participation is indispensable to the
success of any peace initiative in the Middle East.‘12
87. This is the maturity of Africa. Lessons have to
be drawn from hist.ory and the most recent lesson is
the glorious victory of the people of Zimbabwe under
its internationally recognized leadership, the Patriotic
Front. But we should like those who wish to learn from
history to remember that it was the Patriotic Front
that represented the people of Zimbabwe at Lancaster
House, and not a single State from among the frontline States usurped the right of the people of Zimbabwe
and tried to designate its representatives.
88. In contrast to the case of Camp David, the
Lancaster House negotiations were conducted on the
basis of full recognition of the inalienable rights of the
people concerned, the people of Zimbabwe, and agreements were concluded with the participation of their
representatives, the Patriotic Front. This was not the
case, the pattern or even the aim of the Camp David
accords; and, please, enough of distortions of history.
For those who want to learn from history, the people
of Zimbabwe knew whom to trust; they trusted the
leaders of the Patriotic Front, and not the Muzorewas
and the Quislings.
89. On the issue of inalienable rights, I wish to recall
here that at this time, on Holy Thursday, is the
hour of agony, and in the penitentiary in Chicago a
20-year-old Palestinian, Ziyad Abu Eain, is agonizing
in a hunger strike. He is awaiting deportation in
response to a request by the Israeli authorities for
his extradition for alleged acts against the enemy. The
matter has been before different courts of justice as

well as before the Secretary of State. Ziyad Abu Eain
has even been denied a request to be released on bail
until the legal labyrinth has been exhausted. This action
against a 20-year-old Palestinian is clearly discriminatory.
90. I am aware that this is not a court of justice,
but where can a Palestinian go when his adversary is
the United States Department of State, acting in collusion with the Zionist forces of occupation? Again,
this action of so-called justice is taking place while
a Nazi criminal like Andrea Artukovich has been
living on the West Coast for the last 35 years despite
undisputed and abundant evidence of his effective

role in the massacre of Europeans, mostly Yugoslav
Jews, and despite several requests by the Government
of Yugoslavia for his extradition.
The meeting rose at 6.15 pm.

NOTES
1 A/34/542,

annex,

sect.

1. para.

102 ((9).

2 Official Records of the Gouwrl Assrv~~h/y, Thir/y-forwth SW
sioll, Plenary Meeri~tgs, 10th meeting,
paras. 35-37.

12

HOW

TO OBTAIN

UNITED

NATIONS

PUBLICATIONS

United Nations publications
may be obtained From bookstores and distributors
throughout
the
world. Consult your bookstore
or write to: United Nations, Sales Section, New York or Geneva.
COMMENT

SE PROCURER

LES PUBLICATIONS

DES NATIONS

Les publications
des Nntions Unies sent en vente dans les librairieset
monde entier. Inrormez-vous
auprb de votre libraire ou adressez-vous
des ventes. New York ou Genbve.

UNIES
Its agences depositaires du
a : Nations Unies, Section

HsAawrr
Opmwmaqr~H
OtVbe~HHeHfibm
Has&t
HOW(HO Kynmb
8 HHHWIbIx
mu-a3riirax
H arenrcrnax
80 acex pananax
hfupa. Hasoflere
cnpaera
06 mmamflx
B
aarnesr KH~~~OM
sraranrrue
N~IH nurmire
no afipecy:
Opratrrr3aqun
Ofh=eflmeHHblx
HaunR,
CenqnR no npnname
NnnaHnB, Hbfo-noprc
wnw XCenesa.
COMO

CONSECIJIR

PUBLICACIONES

DE LAS NACIONBS

UNIDAS

Las publicaciones
de Ins Naciones Unidas estPn en venta en librerias y casas distribuidoras
en
todas partes dcl mundo. Consulte a su librero o dirijase a: Naciones Unidas, Secci6n de Ventas,
Nueva York o Ginebra.

Litho in United

Nations,

New York

0030rJ

83.61462-August

1986-2.42~
