VII.

implementation of the relevant decisions of the United
Nations, in particular specific programmes of assistance to the peoples of the colonial Territories and their
national liberation movements;
17. Requesis the Secretary-General to continue to
assist the specialized agencies and other organizations of
the United Nations system in working out appropriate
measures for implementing the relevant resolutions of
the United Nations and to prepare for submission to the
relevant bodies, with the assistance of those agencies
and other organizations, a report on the action taken
since the circulation of his previous report in implementation of the relevant resolutions, including the present
resolution;
18. Requests the Economic and Social Council to
continue to consider, in consultation with the Special
Committee, appropriate measures for co-ordination of
the policies and activities of the specialized agencies and
other organizations of the United Nations system in implementing the relevant resolutions of the General
Assembly:
19. Requests the Special Committee to continue to
examine this question and to report thereon to the
General Assembly at its thirty-sixth session.

57th plenary meeting
11 November 1980

35/30.

United Nations Educational and Training
Programme for Southern Africa

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions on the United Nations
Educational and Training Programme for Southern
Africa, in particular resolution 34/31 of 21 November
1979,
Further recalling the provision in paragraph 4 of its
resolution 34 /31 by which it requested the SecretaryGeneral, in consultation with the Advisory Committee
on the United Nations Educational and Training
Programme for Southern Africa, to complete arrangements for an early evaluation of the Programme in order
to determine its effectiveness and identify priorities for
further work,
Having considered the report of the Secretary-General
on the Programme for 1979 /80, 51 containing an account
of the work of the Advisory Committee during the year,
Noting with appreciation the work of the Evaluation
Group established by the Advisory Committee, on the
basis of which the Committee formulated its conclusions and recommendations, 54
Taking note of the report of the Secretary-General on
assistance to student refugees from Namibia, Zimbabwe
and South Africa,''
Recognizing that the Programme should be strengthened so as to enable it to meet adequately the related requirements of the growing outflow of student refugees
from South Africa and Namibia,
Taking account of the oesirability of providing
educational opportunities and counselling to student
refugees in a broad spectrum of professional, cultural,
technical and linguistic disciplines suitable for their
future functions, notably in the fields of development
and international co-operation,
'' A/35/525.
" Ibid., para. 31.
'' A/35/149

225

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fourth Committee

Recognizing that a substantial increase in contributions is required in view of the increased demand for assistance and the rising cost of scholarships brought
about by inflation,
l. Commends the Secretary-General and the Advisory Committee on the United Nations Educational
and Training Programme for Southern Africa on the
work they have accomplished in assessing the policy and
operations of the Programme and determining the
future course of the Programme in the light of the situation in southern Africa:
2. Endorses the conclusions and recommendations
of the Advisory Committee contained in the report of
the Secretary-General:"
3. Decides that new scholarship awards under the
Programme should continue to be granted to students
from Zimbabwe for a one-year period dating from independence and that awards for Zimbabwean students
already sponsored should be continued until completion of the courses for which the awards were granted:
4. Requests the Secretary-General and the Administrator of the United Nations Development Programme to take appropriate steps to ensure that the
administration of the United Nations Educational and
Training Programme for Southern Africa, both at Headquarters and in the field. is able to cope with the increased demand placed upon the Programme for the
provision of educational and training assistance:
5. Expresses its appreciation to all States, organizations and individuals that have made voluntary contributions or provided scholarships to the Programme:
6. Appeals to all States, . organizations and individuals to make further generous contributions to the
Programme so as to enable it
continue effectively and
to expand its operations to meet the acute need for educational opportunities in southern Africa.

to

57th plenary meeting
I 1 November /980

35/31.

Offers by Member States of study and training
facilities for inhabitants of Non-SelfGoverning Territories

The General Assembly.
Recalling its resolution 34/32 of 21 November 1979,
Having examined the report of the Secretary-General
on offers by Member States of study and training facilities for inhabitants of Non-Self-Governing Territories,'" prepared under General Assembly resolution 845
(IX) of 22 November 1954,
Expressing its particular appreciation of the generous
offers made by Member States of study and training facilities for students from Zimbabwe prior to its accession to independence in April 1980,
Considering that more scholarships should be made
available to the inhabitants of Non-Self-Governing Territories in all parts of the world and that steps should be
taken to encourage applications from students in those
Territories,
l. Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General:
2. Expresses its appreciation to those Member States
which have made scholarships available to the inhabitants of Non-Self-Governing Territories:
"A/35/518

226

General Assembly-Thirty-fifth Session

3. Invites all States to make or continue to make
generous offers of study and training facilities to the inhabitants of those Territories which have not yet attained self-government or independence and, whenever
possible, to provide travel funds to prospective students;
4. Urges the administering Powers to take effective
measures to ensure the widespread and continuous dissemination in the Territories under their administration
of information relating to offers of study and training
facilities made by States and to provide all the necessary facilities to enable students to avail themselves of
such offers;

5. Requests the Secretary-General to report to the
General Assembly at its thirty-sixth session on the implementation of the present resolution;
6. Draws the attention of the Special Committee on
the Situation with regard to the Implementation of the
Declaration on the Granting of Independence to
Colonial Countries and Peoples to the present resolution.
57th plenary meeting
11 November /980
