United Nations

S/PV.3679

Security Council

Provisional

Fifty-first Year

3679th Meeting
Thursday, 11 July 1996, 3.15 p.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Dejammet . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(France)

Members:

Botswana . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Chile . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Egypt . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Germany . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Guinea-Bissau . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Honduras . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Indonesia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Italy . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Poland . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Republic of Korea . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . . . . . .
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Mr. Legwaila
Mr. Somavía
Mr. Wang Xuexian
Mr. Awaad
Mr. Henze
Mr. Queta
Mr. Martínez Blanco
Mr. Wibisono
Mr. Ferrarin
Mr. Włosowicz
Mr. Park
Mr. Lavrov
Sir John Weston
Mr. Inderfurth

Agenda
The situation in Angola
Report of the Secretary-General on the United Nations Angola Verification Mission (UNAVEM III) (S/1996/503)

96-85919 (E)

This record contains the original text of speeches delivered in English and interpretations of speeches
delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records of the Security
Council. Corrections should be submitted to original speeches only. They should be incorporated
in a copy of the record and be sent under the signature of a member of the delegation concerned,
within one week of the date of publication, to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service,
room C-178.

Security Council
Fifty-first year
The meeting was called to order at 3.40 p.m.
Expression of sympathy to the Government and people
of China in connection with the recent floods in the
country
The President (interpretation from French): At the
outset of this meeting, I should like, on behalf of the
Council, to extend deep sympathy to the Government and
the people of China for the great loss of life and property
suffered as a result of the recent floods in China.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in Angola
Report of the Secretary-General on the United
Nations Angola Verification Mission
(UNAVEM III) (S/1996/503)
The President (interpretation from French): I should
like to inform the Council that I have received letters from
the representatives of Algeria, Angola, Brazil, Cape Verde,
Malawi, Mozambique, Portugal, Tunisia, South Africa, the
United Republic of Tanzania and Zimbabwe, in which they
request to be invited to participate in the discussion of the
item on the Council’s agenda. In conformity with the usual
practice, I propose, with the consent of the Council, to
invite those representatives to participate in the discussion,
without the right to vote, in accordance with the relevant
provisions of the Charter and rule 37 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure.
There being no objection, it is so decided.
At the invitation of the President, Mr. Carneiro
(Angola) took a seat at the Council table;
Mr. Lamamra (Algeria), Mr. Amorim (Brazil),
Mr. Leao Monteiro (Cape Verde), Mr. Rubadiri
(Malawi), Mr. Dos Santos (Mozambique),
Mr. Catarino (Portugal), Mr. Abdellah (Tunisia),
Mr. Jele (South Africa), Mr. Mwakawago (United
Republic of Tanzania) and Mr. Mapuranga
(Zimbabwe) took the seats reserved for them at the
side of the Council Chamber.
The President (interpretation from French): The
Security Council will now begin its consideration of the
item on its agenda. The Council is meeting in accordance
with the understanding reached in its prior consultations.

2

3679th meeting
11 July 1996
Members of the Council have before them the report
of the Secretary-General on the United Nations Angola
Verification Mission (UNAVEM III), document
S/1996/503. Members of the Council also have before
them document S/1996/536, which contains the text of a
draft resolution prepared in the course of the Council’s
prior consultations.
I should like to draw the attention of the members of
the Council to document S/1996/494, which contains the
text of a note verbale dated 26 June 1996 from the
Permanent Mission of Angola to the United Nations
addressed to the Secretary-General, transmitting a letter
dated 17 June 1996 from the President of the Republic of
Angola addressed to the Secretary-General.
The first speaker is the Vice-Minister without
Portfolio of Angola, His Excellency General Higino
Carneiro, whom I welcome and on whom I now call.
Mr. Carneiro (Angola) (spoke in Portuguese;
English text furnished by the delegation): First and
foremost, I should like to thank you, Sir, for this
opportunity to address the members of the Security
Council in order to present the views of the Government
of the Republic of Angola on the current stage of the
development of and the prospects for the peace process
under way in my country, which has now reached its
most crucial and decisive phase.
Allow me to congratulate you, Sir, on behalf of the
Government of the Republic of Angola, on your
assumption of the presidency of the Security Council for
this month. I also bring our greetings to your predecessor,
Ambassador Nabil Elaraby, for the dynamic manner in
which he led the activities of this organ during his term
of office. I should also like to take this opportunity to
reiterate our gratitude for the work of the SecretaryGeneral, Mr. Boutros Boutros-Ghali; his Special
Representative for Angola, Mr. Alioune Blondin Beye;
and the troika of observers — the United States of
America, Russia and Portugal — and for their efforts
towards peace in Angola.
Approximately two years ago, as we undertook the
process of implementation of the Lusaka Protocol, we
were aware of its complexities, and of the obstacles and
difficulties that lay ahead. Nevertheless, we had hoped
and prayed that by this point in time we would be much
further advanced in the implementation of the Lusaka
Protocol. We had thought that by now peace would have
been restored and that national reconciliation would be

Security Council
Fifty-first year

3679th meeting
11 July 1996

my Government’s most pressing priority. Consequently,
from the very start we concentrated all of our efforts
towards that goal.

Government’s responsibility, it has supported the
transportation of UNITA forces to the quartering areas in
many ways.

In spite of those efforts, the process has moved
forward slowly; the reasons for this are well known to the
United Nations Angola Verification Mission
(UNAVEM III) and to the members of this Council, which,
repeatedly and in a variety of resolutions and declarations,
have addressed those who have been hampering progress
towards a definite and lasting peace.

These and other achievements could have been more
significant with greater cooperation from UNITA. We are
looking forward to 15 July, when generals who had left
the armed forces to join UNITA will return to their units.

After the last meeting in Libreville between His
Excellency the President of the Republic and the leader of
the União Nacional para a Independência Total de Angola
(UNITA), significant progress was achieved in the
implementation of the Lusaka Protocol, aside from the
effective cessation of hostilities, particularly regarding
military actions and the strengthening of the political
dialogue between my Government and UNITA.
At the risk of being excessively detailed, I would like
to underscore some of those achievements so far. All stages
of the withdrawal of the Angolan Armed Forces (FAA) to
the nearest quartering areas have been completed and troop
movements considered unreasonable by UNAVEM III have
been corrected. The process of selecting and inducting
UNITA troops into the Angolan Armed Forces is already
under way. This process started with the incorporation of
60 UNITA officers, who participated in training seminars
for the selection and induction of UNITA forces, many of
whom are already working in quartering areas, including
Negaje, Ngove, Conduimbala and Vila Nova. The confining
to quarters of the rapid reaction police is already concluded.
The national police is now training personnel appointed by
UNITA who, in the framework of the Lusaka Protocol, will
provide physical security for the leaders of that
organization. Amnesty legislation has been adopted and
promulgated for all crimes committed in the armed conflict
after 31 May 1991. The President of the Republic has
already made a public statement to that effect, as requested
by the leadership of UNITA. The Meehens Corporation has
been hired to remove mines along roads and thus provide
security for the free circulation of goods and people. This
company has been working along the country’s main roads
and railways. The Government has agreed to the opening of
15 quartering areas for UNITA forces in the province of in
Lunda Sul. The joint tasks between the Government and
UNITA teams have not yet been completed. Their aim is
to revise provisions of Angolan constitutional law.
Implementation of the programme to disarm the civilian
population has already begun. Although this is not the

In spite of these positive steps, the peace process is
still hampered by obstacles which, if they continue, might
entail further delays and even backsliding. We are
referring specifically to the quality of UNITA forces and
of the matériel sent to the quartering areas. After
successive appeals and procedures used by the UNITA
leadership, we came to realize that the quantity and
quality of weapons and war matériel delivered so far are
just a small part of what is available to UNITA’s military
branch. We cannot conceive, for example, that only 1,721
kilogrammes of ammunition were available in the four
quartering areas already closed by the Joint Commission.
As a result, this exercise under UNAVEM’s
supervision lacks credibility and is not tolerable. In
addition to being unacceptable, it breeds mistrust between
the two parties and weakens the peace process. The lack
of transparency of this process is reflected not only in the
slow pace of its implementation but also in the large
number of deserters and the quality of the men sent to the
quartering areas. According to figures provided by
UNAVEM III, of the 52,850 men confined to quarters by
10 July, more than 6,000 had already deserted. Thousands
are children, and more than 18,000 have not surrendered
any weapons.
Those members who have monitored the issue of the
domestic Angolan conflict for some time will easily
realize that the types and weights of the weapons and the
quality of the troops that UNITA has delivered raise
questions about the implementation of the Lusaka
Protocol, which calls for the withdrawal, quartering and
disarmament of all UNITA military forces. Accordingly,
it is incumbent upon the Council and UNAVEM III to
take action that will help improve performance in the
quartering process, which UNAVEM itself considers
unacceptable, thereby ensuring that the peace process will
become irreversible. In keeping with the Lusaka
agreements, we must underscore that the effective and full
quartering of the UNITA forces, including the laying
down of arms and technical means of war, is a sine qua
non condition for the smooth unification of the Angolan
Armed Forces and consequently for the implementation of

3

Security Council
Fifty-first year
the political provisions relating to national reconciliation.
As a consequence, full transparency of this verification
process must be assured.
We are also concerned by the proliferation of armed
elements under UNITA command performing alleged law
enforcement roles in areas already vacated by UNITA
forces. This is a flagrant violation of the Lusaka Protocol.
Part II of annex 5 of the Protocol bans any means of
surveillance or law enforcement which is not specifically
allowed by law and by the relevant provisions of the
Bicesse Accords and the Lusaka Protocol.

3679th meeting
11 July 1996
Council. Paragraph 19 of resolution 864 (1993) clearly
calls on all Member States, and particularly Angola’s
neighbours, to maintain a posture conducive to peace in
our country, refraining from actions that may violate the
most elementary precepts of security of any nation.
Consequently, we appeal to the Security Council also to
act in accordance with its high responsibilities in this
area.

As I stated at the outset, we are now reaching the
decisive juncture in the peace process of a country that has
not known peace for over 30 years. Today we have the
basic foundations for the creation of a democratic, united
and prosperous society where all political forces, regardless
of their differences, must play an important role. Creation
in the near future of the Government of Unity and National
Reconciliation, including the invitation extended to the
UNITA leader by His Excellency the President, is
undeniably an expression of this principle and this desire.

Social and economic stability in Angola requires the
social reintegration of the thousands of soldiers to be
demobilized beginning this month. This will prevent them
from turning to weapons again as a means to ensure their
survival, thus endangering peace and stability in our
nation. In view of the current economic crisis in our
country, my Government is not in a position to rise to
this challenge on its own. We therefore appeal to the
international community for assistance. Allow me here to
express our appreciation to the many Governments that
have shown their willingness to support these social
reintegration programmes, and to request that they start
their implementation in coordination with the
Government.

By 30 July 1996, we should conclude the induction of
UNITA forces into the Angolan Armed Forces, followed by
the re-establishment of Government control over areas
currently controlled by UNITA and by the free and
unimpeded circulation of goods and persons throughout the
territory. At that point, UNITA will have regained its
political status as a legal political party; its members will
occupy seats at the National Assembly and it will
participate in the Government of Unity and National
Reconciliation.

This year, 20,000 soldiers will be demobilized out of
a total of 67,000. Let me remind the Council that 40,000
soldiers are already demobilized as a result of the Bicesse
process and have not yet received any help in their
reintegration into civilian life. This large number of
military men will require major assistance from the
Government of Angola. We cannot allow all efforts
invested in the peace process to fail because we have not
been able to provide minimal assistance to those who, for
many years, were raised in a culture of war.

The accomplishment of these tasks requires further
strengthening of the climate of trust between the two
parties. I take this opportunity to reiterate the appeal made
to UNITA by His Excellency President José Eduardo dos
Santos:

At the same time, the launching of economic
rehabilitation in the regions that have been hardest hit by
war will go far towards bringing about a climate of peace
and confidence for the thousands upon thousands of
refugees and displaced persons who were compelled to
leave their homes during the hostilities, but who will be
ready to go back as soon as the situation normalizes. In
this connection, special mention should be made of the
implementation of the demining programmes, many of
which are already under way, and of the efforts under the
community rehabilitation programme submitted last year
at Brussels. We would like to appeal to the Governments
and institutions that have pledged their financial support
to honour their commitments in order to ensure the full
accomplishment of the programme.

“Trust the Government as an honest partner and
emulate with rigour and seriousness the positions
adopted thus far by the Government, strictly honouring
all the commitments from Bicesse and Lusaka”.
At this crucial stage of the peace process, it is also
essential for Angola’s neighbouring States to suspend any
negative actions that might reduce the chances of success.
The constant violations of Angolan territory by illegal
aliens and by foreign enterprises is an issue that must be
considered by the sanctions Committee of the Security

4

Security Council
Fifty-first year
Allow me also to express the profound gratitude of the
people and Government of Angola to all nations that have
provided troops, personnel and matériel to UNAVEM III,
and also to pay tribute to those who lost their lives to the
cause of peace in Angola. A particular word of recognition
goes to the members of the demining team from Uruguay
and Pakistan, who sustained injuries on 17 June in the
fulfilment of their mission.
As this process nears its conclusion, UNAVEM III
will have to issue statements, as called for by its mandate.
We call upon the Security Council to send a special mission
to Angola as soon as possible, to assess the peace process
and to recommend measures appropriate to the situation,
before declaring the Lusaka Protocol fully implemented.
The draft resolution on which the Council is about to
vote today meets the requirements of the internal situation
on the ground. My Government will have no further
objection to agreeing to the extension of the mandate of
UNAVEM III for another three months. My delegation
feels that this period is a reasonable one and will make it
possible to fulfil all the remaining tasks of the Lusaka
Protocol.
Finally, allow me to refer to the letter addressed to the
President of the Security Council, and through him, to its
members, by the Mission of Angola. It expresses the
concern of my Government regarding UNITA’s
performance in incorporating its troops into the Angolan
Armed Forces. We see this as related to the military
situation and to the revision of some elements of Angola’s
constitution: it is a last-minute attempt to use delaying
tactics to slow the peace process. The Council should give
particular attention to this matter, and should urge UNITA
to assume a truly constructive position.
The President (interpretation from French): I thank
the Vice-Minister without Portfolio of Angola for the kind
words he addressed to me.
The next speaker is the representative of Portugal. I
invite him to take a seat at the Council table and to make
his statement.
Mr. Catarino (Portugal) (interpretation from French):
Allow me first of all to congratulate you, Sir, on your
assumption of the presidency of the Council for the month
of July. I have no doubts regarding the effectiveness with
which you will be conducting the work of the Council. Let
me also take this opportunity to congratulate the Permanent
Representative of Egypt, Ambassador Elaraby, and his

3679th meeting
11 July 1996
delegation for the remarkable manner in which they
guided the deliberations of the Council during the month
of June.
(spoke in English)
On the occasion of the renewal of the mandate of
the United Nations Angola Verification Mission
(UNAVEM III) by the Security Council, Portugal is
pleased to note some positive developments which have
taken place in the past two months.
It is a fact that the overall military situation in
Angola remains calm, and one cannot really talk about
any serious violations of the cease-fire. The conclusion of
the military talks between the parties and the beginning of
the incorporation of UNITA military personnel into the
Angolan Armed Forces, together with the progress
achieved in the quartering of UNITA troops and the
quartering of the rapid reaction police, are all positive
signs that the peace process in Angola is moving forward.
Nevertheless, we must also note that the pace of the
implementation of the process is still too slow; time is
becoming more and more pressing for the parties, and
especially UNITA, to give a clear indication that they are
willing to fulfil their commitments to make peace
irreversible in Angola.
Both the Government of Angola and UNITA are the
parties mainly responsible for the achievement of peace
and, of course, those who should be most interested in
that goal. We appeal to them here, and strongly encourage
them to take the necessary steps to finally make possible
the achievement of the lasting peace to which all
Angolans aspire.
We must also stress, however, that some of the
recent positive developments should have been brought
about earlier and more expeditiously, which would have
boosted the confidence needed to consolidate the peace
process and to make the Lusaka Protocol a reality.
My delegation is pleased to note the progress
achieved so far in the registration of UNITA personnel in
quartering areas, and the closing of eight out of the 15
such areas to the induction of additional troops. It is now
urgent that this process be completed in a credible way,
in accordance with the timetable established by the Joint
Commission, and by the handing over of heavy military
equipment to UNAVEM III. At the same time, it is
important to continue the withdrawal of Angolan armed

5

Security Council
Fifty-first year
forces to barracks in accordance with the procedures agreed
with UNAVEM regarding such operations.
All of these are crucial steps, on the one hand, to
move forward with the completion of the national armed
forces of Angola, and, on the other, to implement a
programme of the demobilization and social reintegration of
former combatants.
Parallel to these provisions, it is also of utmost
importance that the efforts regarding the demining of the
country be intensified. We are pleased to note that in the
past two months some progress has been registered in this
area.
Angolan roads free of mines, along with a
commitment from both parties on total freedom of
movement, will contribute in a significant way to an
effective flow of humanitarian assistance, and will make
possible the free circulation of people and goods. These are
also key elements for improving the atmosphere of trust
that is still so sorely needed.
Turning to political issues, Portugal, as a member of
the troika of observer countries of the peace process, can
only describe as encouraging and positive the possibility of
a meeting at the earliest opportunity and in Angolan
territory between President Eduardo dos Santos and Mr.
Jonas Savimbi in order to seek solutions for all outstanding
issues concerning the implementation of the Lusaka
Protocol, and mainly its provisions on national
reconciliation. It is also important that such a political
dialogue be pursued at all levels, between both parties, in
order to consolidate mutual trust in a spirit of tolerance. In
this regard, we also note as a positive element the reports
of a reduction in the intensity and frequency of hostile
propaganda.
While Portugal encourages all efforts aimed at
transforming UNITA into a political party, we also look
forward to concrete measures leading to the formation of a
Government of Unity and National Reconciliation. A fully
functioning Parliament of Angola, with all elected members
occupying their seats, and the incorporation of UNITA
personnel into the State administration at all levels —
national, provincial and local — are also crucial to fostering
a true spirit of national reconciliation.
The resolution of all military issues, followed by an
appropriate and duly supported programme of the
demobilization and social reintegration of former
combatants, together with the creation of political

6

3679th meeting
11 July 1996
conditions for national reconciliation, will pave the way
to lasting peace in Angola. At the same time, the effective
rehabilitation and reconstruction of the infrastructures and
economy of Angola is essential.
By fulfilling the commitments assumed under the
Lusaka Protocol, both the Government of Angola and
UNITA will be showing the international community and
the donor countries that they are worthy of the pledges of
assistance aimed at rebuilding the economy of Angola and
increasing the well-being of its people. In this context,
funds must be provided also so that Angola can integrate
former soldiers into civilian life, while dealing at the
same time with the flow of refugees and displaced
persons.
As a member of the troika of observer States, as a
troop contributing country to UNAVEM III, as a donor
nation, and through enhanced bilateral cooperation,
Portugal continues to be fully committed to the successful
completion of the Angolan peace process. We believe that
national reconciliation can only be achieved through the
full implementation of the “Acordos de Paz” and of the
Lusaka Protocol.
In this context, we fully support the continuing
commitment of the Security Council to bringing peace to
Angola.
In conclusion, I would like to pay tribute to the
efforts of the Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral, Maître Alioune Blondin Beye, and to the
personnel of UNAVEM III, the largest current peacekeeping operation, as well as to the work of United
Nations agencies and non-governmental organizations.
The President (interpretation from French): I thank
the representative of Portugal for the kind words he
addressed to me.
The next speaker is the representative of Algeria. I
invite him to take a seat at the Council table and to make
his statement.
Mr. Lamamra (Algeria) (interpretation from
French): It gives me great pleasure, Sir, to convey to you
the congratulations of my delegation on your assumption
of the presidency of the Security Council. I am convinced
that your professional and human qualities will ensure the
success of its work. My delegation’s congratulations go
also to Ambassador Nabil Elaraby, who so wisely
conducted the work of the Council last month.

Security Council
Fifty-first year
The participation of my delegation, as Chairman of the
African Group, in the Council’s deliberations on the
situation in Angola, is testimony to the abiding interest of
the whole of Africa in developments in that fraternal
country. As spokesman for Africa in its collective solidarity
with Angola, I feel a special honour as the representative of
Algeria, which has always maintained with Angola a
relationship full of reciprocal esteem and understanding,
which goes back to our exemplary relationship as comrades
in arms in the struggle for the completion of the liberation
of Africa.
Angola, which waged an armed struggle for its
national independence, has not been spared by destiny.
Since 1975, this country has been caught in a fratricidal
conflict which has caused thousands of deaths and which
resulted in considerable material damage which has sapped
the fragile economy and diverted energy from economic
and social development.
Endowed with a variety of natural resources, Angola
has never had the respite necessary to develop them to
fulfil its people’s aspirations to well-being. The
post-independence history of that country is a cycle of
human tragedy and material destruction, the result of which
the international community has had ample opportunity to
see: a country so rich in human and material resources
which is now devastated.
The developments of recent years in Angola, with the
commendable support of the United Nations, establish the
conditions for resolving the crisis. The Lusaka Protocol of
4 November 1994 has created promising opportunities for
establishing lasting peace in Angola. Along with the
subsequent arrangements — in particular those concluded
in Libreville between the President of the Republic of
Angola, Mr. Dos Santos, and the leader of the União
Nacional para a Independência Total de Angola (UNITA),
Mr. Savimbi — the Protocol contributes to a framework
conducive to a peace that will enable the Angolan people
finally to devote themselves to the task of national
reconciliation.
The international community has backed its efforts to
find a solution with the laudable work of the SecretaryGeneral’s Special Representative, Mr. Alioune Blondin
Beye, and the deployment of the United Nations Angola
Verification Mission (UNAVEM III), which has carried out
its tasks with efficiency and altruism.
The earliest achievements on the ground show that the
peace process is an irreversible reality. The Secretary-

3679th meeting
11 July 1996
General’s report mentions progress in the observance of
the cease-fire, the quartering of the Angolan Armed
Forces, the deployment of UNAVEM III, the
promulgation of the Amnesty Law, the process of
incorporating the military elements of UNITA into the
Angolan Armed Forces, as well as in the economic and
humanitarian areas, where we have seen an improvement
in food aid programmes, an increase in agricultural
production, greater storage capacities and improved
conditions in merchandise transportation.
The Angolan Government’s contribution to this
progress should be stressed, in particular the steps it has
taken to establish a climate of trust in the quartering of
the rapid reaction police and the efforts it has made to
establish an integrated national military institution.
Further progress would have been possible if the
other party, UNITA, had demonstrated the same
constructive will instead of adopting the dilatory attitude
it continues to nurture. This attitude is manifest in
particular in the dubious conditions surrounding the
quartering and disarming of its troops. It would seem,
indeed, that UNITA has not proceeded to the quartering
of its best-trained troops or given up its heavy weapons,
troop transports or communications and engineering
equipment. Here, we must stress the responsibility of the
UNITA leadership for the slowness of the peace process.
It is of great importance that the Security Council send a
clear, firm message to UNITA that it must abide by the
time-frames to which it agreed, in particular those leading
to the establishment of the Government of Unity and
National Reconciliation. At the same time, it would be
particularly appropriate for countries that have any
influence on UNITA to exert the pressure necessary to
discourage it from using delaying tactics to compromise
the timetable established in UNAVEM III’s mandate.
The situation in Angola poses a challenge to the
international community for several reasons. Political and
military stabilization is important, but it is not enough.
Other, equally decisive questions will determine the longterm success of the implementation of the Lusaka
Protocol and the establishment of lasting peace in the
country. The demobilization and socio-economic
reintegration of former combatants, the demining and
rebuiliding of roads and the rehabilitation of economic
and social activity are all factors that should help to
establish this peace. Hence, assistance by the international
community must be forthcoming in support of the
recovery programme launched by the Government of
Angola, because this is the only way in which Angola can

7

Security Council
Fifty-first year
look with any optimism towards the period following 8
February 1997.
That is also why, on behalf of the African Group, my
delegation supports, in the same spirit as the Vice-Minister
without Portfolio of Angola, the Secretary-General’s
recommendation to extend the mandate of UNAVEM III,
in the profound hope that this new period will see
significant progress in the peace process.
The President (interpretation from French): I thank
the representative of Algeria for his kind words addressed
to me.
The next speaker is the representative of Malawi. I
invite him to take a seat at the Council table and to make
his statement.
Mr. Rubadiri (Malawi): My delegation would like to
thank you, Sir, and the other members of the Security
Council for giving us this opportunity to contribute to this
very important discussion on Angola. I find it a little bit
difficult to be able to say much more in thanking the
previous President and yourself with respect to meetings
that were closed to us, but I am sure they were done with
a lot of wisdom as well.
As members know, Malawi lies deep in the southern
part of Africa in which the Republic of Angola also lies.
The brotherhood of this region, so dear to us, has been
shared in a history that has been as stormy as the Cape of
Good Hope and as dark and tragic as the causes that
mothered it.
We speak, therefore, with feelings of great hope and
conviction that the ray of light in the tunnel will soon be
seen. Miracles have happened in southern Africa. Angola
will not be the exception.
We thank the Secretary-General for his report on the
United Nations Angola Verification Mission (UNAVEM
III), contained in document S/1996/503 of 27 June 1996.
We pay particular tribute to him for his continuing efforts
and those of his Special Representative, Mr. Alioune
Blondin Beye, UNAVEM III personnel and of all others too
many to mention here, in the search for a peace that we
also cherish and yearn for in Angola.
We have seen the development of many positive
advances towards peace. These have been acknowledged in
the Secretary-General’s report, and we welcome these
developments. Like other nations that have spoken before

8

3679th meeting
11 July 1996
us, however, we must say that we remain deeply
concerned by the pace at which some of the agreed
measures have been and continue to be implemented.
In this regard, while acknowledging the positive
developments — such as the adoption of the framework
agreement on military matters, the promulgation of the
Amnesty Law, the beginning of the process of
incorporating UNITA military personnel into the Angolan
Armed Forces and the completion of the quartering of the
rapid reaction police — we continue to have many
anxious moments. We must take notice of the sporadic
skirmishes that have been reported in some provinces. We
hear of delayed quartering, desertions and, above all,
UNITA’s reluctance to hand over better-quality weapons
and other equipment used for military purposes.
These are disturbing developments portending a
spirit of irritating reluctance, a simple lack of faith or
perhaps a deliberate refusal to come out openly for peace
and national reconstruction. As I said before, we cry for
Angola. Our region cries for Angola. We in Africa know
that our tragedies cannot be played out in an arena of
wasted time. The world tends to be impatient with us for
some reason or other. This is an appeal to the brothers
who are players in all this to realize that, after the
popping of bullets, we have to uproot the mushrooms of
mines that form the carpet on which humanity walks in
dear Angola, maiming women, children, old fathers and
mothers. These fields did not come from villages of
Africa, and that is why the international community must
take note of our appeal to help us to demine them.
A wholesome peace cannot be achieved in Angola
and the region if no corrective measures are taken to
address these concerns and many others so succinctly
outlined in the Secretary-General’s report. We urge all the
parties concerned, particularly UNITA, to continue
abiding by the agreements reached in the Lusaka
Protocol. We appeal specifically to UNITA to adhere
strictly to the agreed time-frame for carrying out all
measures aimed at a successful outcome for the Lusaka
Protocol. The people of Angola and the region have
waited so long for peace and tranquility; delay, even in
terms of months, only prolongs the misery and the
suffering.
The peace process in Angola has reached a critical
stage. It requires a concerted effort and the continued
support of the international community. We therefore
support the Secretary-General’s recommendation for the
extension of the mandate of UNAVEM III. We also

Security Council
Fifty-first year
appeal for donor support for the many needs arising from
demobilization and reintegration, and in order to alleviate
the socio-economic hardships that Angola is currently
facing. This region knows that if South Africa was able to
solve problems that touched us all, Angola too will be able
to solve problems critical to the whole of Africa but also to
the international community and the Security Council:
problems of peace and security.
The President (interpretation from French): I thank
the representative of Malawi for the kind words he
addressed to me.
The next speaker is the representative of Brazil. I
invite him to take a seat at the Council table and to make
his statement.
Mr. Valle (Brazil): First of all, let me congratulate
you, Ambassador Dejammet, on your assumption of the
presidency of the Security Council for the month of July.
Under your able and wise guidance the work of the
Security Council will be conducted in a highly effective
way. I would like also to take this opportunity to express
appreciation to your predecessor, Ambassador Nabil
Elaraby, for the competence with which he presided over
the Council during the month of June.
We would like to pay tribute to the key role
Secretary-General Boutros Boutros-Ghali and his Special
Representative, Maître Alioune Blondin Beye, continue to
play in the consolidation of the peace process in Angola.
The multiple efforts deployed by the troika of observer
States in helping the peace process should also be
highlighted.
I wish to thank the Secretary-General for his report on
UNAVEM III (S/1996/503), which in our view presents an
objective picture of the latest developments in the situation
in Angola. In his assessment, the Secretary-General points
out that during the last two months the pace of
implementation of the Lusaka Protocol has improved
somewhat. He also notes, however, that the coming weeks
will be critical.

3679th meeting
11 July 1996
[and] the failure to quarter UNITA police
personnel”. (S/1996/503, para. 37)
It is noteworthy that UNITA’s leader has promised
to hand over weapons of “better quality” (para. 12).
However, it is mentioned in the report that, up to now,
UNITA has not handed over
“any of its heavy weapons, rocket launchers, antiaircraft artillery, armoured personnel carriers and
tanks, communications and engineering equipment or
vehicles used for military purposes”. (para. 13)
Brazil is in agreement with the report when it states that
“Without such equipment, the quartering process
will not be complete” and that “the United Nations
will not be in a position to declare that it is
complete unless convincing evidence is provided that
all regular, commando, engineer, support and other
units of UNITA have been effectively cantoned or
otherwise accounted for”. (Ibid.)
On the political level, the prospects are still not
reassuring. Up to now, Mr. Savimbi has not formally
accepted the post of Vice-President. Most of the UNITA
members of Parliament have not taken their seats in the
National Assembly. Officials from UNITA have not yet
joined the State administration at the national, provincial
and local levels. Therefore, the coming meeting of
President José Eduardo dos Santos and Mr. Savimbi
should indeed provide an opportunity to reach agreement
on these critical questions.
Brazil, as the Council is aware, remains fully
committed to the peace process in Angola. Our very
substantial participation in UNAVEM III reflects a
long-term involvement with Angola and its people, based
on common cultural and historical roots, as well as on
shared aspirations to social and economic development.
We firmly believe that all Angolans are now tired of war
and ready for reconciliation.

The quartering of troops of the União Nacional para
a Independência Total de Angola (UNITA) — one of the
key elements of the Lusaka Protocol — remains subject to
delays. Some of the problems in this area, according to the
report, are the

In this light, the Secretary-General recommends the
extension of UNAVEM III’s mandate for three months.
The suggestion for a renewal of a short duration reflects
the sense of the international community, which we share,
that further procrastination within the peace process is
unjustifiable.

“high number of desertions, the unsatisfactory quality
and quantity of weapons and ammunition handed over,

The mild improvement in the implementation of the
Lusaka Protocol should not distract us from the fact that

9

Security Council
Fifty-first year
the coming weeks will be critical. The Security Council,
while closely monitoring the events in Angola, should
concentrate efforts in assuring that concrete steps required
for the consolidation of the peace process are taken without
further delay.
The President (interpretation from French): I thank
the representative of Brazil for the kind words he addressed
to me.
The next speaker is the representative of South Africa.
I invite him to take a seat at the Council table and to make
his statement.
Mr. Jele (South Africa): My delegation wishes to
congratulate you, Sir, on your assumption of the presidency
of the Council for the month of July. May I also extend a
word of congratulations and appreciation to Ambassador
Elaraby of Egypt for the efficient manner in which he
presided over the deliberations of the Council last month.
My delegation would like to thank the
Secretary-General for his current report on the situation in
Angola. We are pleased to note from the report that there
are positive developments in the implementation of some
aspects of the Lusaka Protocol. We welcome in particular
the promulgation of the Amnesty Law on 8 May 1996, the
completion of the quartering of the rapid reaction police,
and the beginning of the process of incorporating UNITA
troops into the Angola Armed Forces.
However, the information in the report that over
18,000 troops have arrived in the camps without weapons,
and that UNITA has not yet surrendered all of its arsenal
and military equipment, is of grave concern to my
Government.
My Government will not relent in its efforts to ensure
that the peace process in Angola is well on track. In this
connection, a meeting was held recently in South Africa
between my Deputy President and Mr. Savimbi, at which
Mr. Savimbi reiterated UNITA’s commitment to the peace
process. At that meeting, the Deputy President emphasized
to Mr. Savimbi the urgent need for UNITA to translate that
commitment into meaningful, tangible actions.
We consider it essential that both President dos Santos
and Mr. Savimbi should meet again, as a matter of urgency,
in order to address all problem areas. The main focus of
that meeting should be to expedite the issue of the
establishment of the Government of Unity and National
Reconciliation, which we believe is crucial to fostering the

10

3679th meeting
11 July 1996
spirit of reconciliation as well as to enabling both parties
to adopt a common approach on key issues.
My delegation would also like to echo the SecretaryGeneral’s plea to the donor community to respond
generously to the needs created by demobilization and
reintegration. In this regard, my Government has already
contributed 28 million Rand to UNAVEM III for the
quartering of troops prior to demobilization.
The men, women and children of Angola are crying
out for peace in their country, and they deserve it. Both
parties are called upon to fulfil this dream. The
international community can accept no further delays in
the full implementation of the peace process. It is
essential that this process not be held hostage by any of
the parties concerned.
Finally, my delegation wishes to register its full
support for the Secretary-General’s recommendation that
the mandate of UNAVEM III be extended for three
months, to 11 October 1996.
The President (interpretation from French): I thank
the representative of South Africa for the kind words he
addressed to me.
The next speaker is the representative of the United
Republic of Tanzania. I invite him to take a seat at the
Council table and to make his statement.
Mr. Mwakawago (United Republic of Tanzania):
My delegation extends hearty congratulations to you, Sir,
on your assumption of the presidency of the Security
Council for the month of July. I also wish to use this
opportunity to express my delegation’s appreciation to
Ambassador Nabil Elaraby for his excellent stewardship
of the Council in the month of June.
It is an honour and privilege for me personally to be
granted this opportunity to address the Security Council
for the first time. The honour to my country is doubly
significant when the issue under consideration is an
African issue, specifically, the fraternal country of
Angola. Allow me to join others in addressing the
Security Council as it considers yet again in a matter of
two months, a report of the Secretary-General on the
United Nations Angola Verification Mission
(UNAVEM III).
We need not belabour the point that Angola, a
country so devastated by war and internecine conflict,

Security Council
Fifty-first year
now deserves peace, peace-building, conflict resolution and
national reconciliation. It is on the basis of that conviction,
backed by the Bicesse Accords, the Lusaka Protocol and
the relevant Security Council resolutions, that the
international community remains and must continue to
remain seized of the Angolan situation until peace arrives
in this otherwise abundantly endowed African country.
Progress on the ground must primarily be predicated
on the imperative that the Angolans themselves must first
and foremost commit themselves fully to efforts aimed at
restoring peace and stability in their country. The role of
the international community must not be more than to
complement the demonstrable political will of all the parties
to the conflict, in particular the Government of the Republic
of Angola and UNITA, to bury the old hatchet and give
peace a chance at last.
Indeed, the very signing of the lengthily and arduously
negotiated Lusaka Protocol on 20 November 1994
symbolized the resolve of both the main parties to settle the
Angola question by peaceful means. Furthermore, it is at
the request of Angolans that the international community,
through UNAVEM III, maintains an important presence in
that country to help facilitate the implementation of the
peace process.
Despite the many hurdles surrounding the painfully
slow peace process, it is an undeniable fact that the
presence of UNAVEM III in Angola has contributed
enormously towards the return of relative calm in that
country. It is also through UNAVEM III that the concerns
of the international community continue to be articulated,
daily goading the Government and UNITA to expedite the
peace process by fully honouring their undertakings to
implement all provisions of the Lusaka Protocol. The
current report of the Secretary-General points to some
positive achievements made on the ground. The cease-fire
is generally holding. These achievements should provide
more room for energizing and consolidating the peace
efforts of the Angolan people backed by UNAVEM III.
It is most encouraging to read in the report that,
during the period under review, the pace of implementation
of the Lusaka Protocol has been improving. A few of the
high points are the Government’s promulgation of the
Amnesty Law on 8 May, completion of the quartering of
the rapid reaction police, and the second phase of the
withdrawal of the Angolan Armed Forces from forward
positions. Some progress has also been made on the part of
UNITA in the quartering of its troops, and a start has been

3679th meeting
11 July 1996
made to the incorporation of UNITA military personnel
into the national army.
Apart from the Government’s responsibility to fully
deliver on its obligations with regard to the peace process,
UNITA too clearly owes it to itself to do a lot to better
the pace of its current performance. It must cooperate
more with the Government and UNAVEM III in
expediting the process of incorporating its troops into the
national army by the agreed deadline of the end of July,
and in facilitating the return of its generals to Luanda. At
the same time, UNITA must complete the quartering of
its remaining troops in a transparent manner. Last but not
least, UNITA must hand in heavy weapons and related
matériel to complete the quartering process.
Delayed action on whatever pretext or hidden agenda
will not be tolerated by the international community at
this critical stage in the Angolan peace process, especially
when the Secretary-General is working to recommend
additional resources to assist the incorporation process
and help Angola to recover from decades of war.
In commending these positive developments, the
Secretary-General points to the many as yet unfulfilled
tasks that should have been completed well before
yesterday. The process, which ought to have progressed
from a cease-fire through the demobilization of
ex-combatants and the formation of a new army, to
national reconciliation, still remains far behind schedule.
Time is running out. The agony and suffering of the
Angolan people continue. My delegation would like to
make a strong appeal to UNITA to give peace a chance.
A national effort is urgently required to address the
serious problems of reconciliation, mine clearance and
economic development.
The Secretary-General has warned that for the peace
process to succeed in Angola all the parties, and UNITA
in particular, must demonstrate greater readiness to
implement, without delay or prevarication, all the
commitments they have entered into. It is on this basis
that the international community will continue to support
the efforts of the Angolan people to restore peace and
stability to their country.
In conclusion, allow me to associate the Government
of Tanzania with the appreciation expressed to the
Secretary-General’s Special Representative, to the
personnel of UNAVEM III and to the various agencies
and non-governmental organizations which are doing

11

Security Council
Fifty-first year
invaluable work in Angola in many fields under very
difficult conditions. Tanzania hopes that the international
community will remain steadfast in support of peace in
Angola without showing the least signs of indifference or
insufficient concern for Africa’s longest civil war, which is
steeped in internal conflicts and sometimes fuelled by
continuing external interests.
In making these comments, Tanzania associates itself
with the draft resolution before the Security Council at this
meeting.
The President (interpretation from French): I thank
the representative of the United Republic of Tanzania for
the kind words he addressed to me.
The next speaker is the representative of Tunisia. I
invite him to take a seat at the Council table and to make
his statement.
Mr. Abdellah (Tunisia) (interpretation from French):
Allow me at the outset, Sir, to say how pleased the
Tunisian delegation is to see you presiding over the
Security Council. Your ability and experience, combined
with an in-depth knowledge of international problems,
particularly in Africa and the Middle East, are guarantees
of effective action in support of peace and security in the
world. My congratulations go equally to your predecessor,
Ambassador Nabil Elaraby of Egypt, who did excellent
work in the Council last month.
The implementation of the Lusaka Protocol has today
reached a crucial stage, which calls for intensified efforts
with a view to ensuring the success of the peace process in
Angola. It is true that progress has been achieved. The
cease-fire is generally being respected. However, we cannot
fail to note that difficulties persist in the implementation of
that Protocol. The operations for the quartering of troops
unfortunately continue to encounter delays which can have
only negative implications for the peace process, thereby
prolonging the suffering of the population. At the present
stage, the aim should be to strengthen trust between the
parties and encourage a climate of cooperation and national
reconciliation.
New measures have been a taken to that end, such as
the adoption of a framework agreement on military matters;
the promulgation on 8 May of the Amnesty Law; the
beginning of the process of incorporating military elements
of UNITA into the Angolan Armed Forces; the completion
of the quartering of the rapid reaction police; and the
second phase of withdrawal of the Angolan Armed Forces

12

3679th meeting
11 July 1996
from advanced positions. All these measures, set out in
the Secretary-General’s report of 27 June 1996, should
inspire UNITA to extend its full cooperation in the
implementation of the agreements reached.
The effective and complete quartering of combatants
and the unification of the armed forces are all the more
important because the pursuit of other operations,
including the demobilization of troops and their
incorporation into civil society, as well as demining,
depend upon them.
In that respect, we welcome the action pursued by
the United Nations to resolve the problems posed by the
demobilization of troops, whose repercussions on security
and the economic and social situation are clear. Likewise,
we cannot fail to express our deep satisfaction at efforts
to accelerate the demining process in Angola.
The role of UNAVEM III in the peace process is of
the greatest importance. My delegation would like on this
occasion to pay tribute to the personnel of the United
Nations Mission, who are working under difficult and
often dangerous conditions.
We hope that the Angolan parties will make further
process on the road to peace, thereby enabling the United
Nations forces to discharge their tasks under better
conditions in order to fulfil their mandate as scheduled by
February 1997. It is clear that the reconstruction of the
country and the improvement of the living standards of
the population are essential elements in the peace process.
In this context, the reforms which the Government
of Angola is striving to introduce to remedy the economic
problems of the country deserve effective support from
the international community. In that respect, accelerating
the peace process calls for a sustained commitment by
investors and donors to continue and increase their
contributions.
For all these reasons my delegation supports the
recommendation of the Secretary-General to extend the
mandate of UNAVEM III for three months, until 11
October 1996.
The President (interpretation from French): I thank
the representative of Tunisia for the kind words he
addressed to me.

Security Council
Fifty-first year
The next speaker is the representative of Zimbabwe.
I invite him to take a seat at the Council table and to make
his statement.
Mr. Mapuranga (Zimbabwe): My delegation wishes
to congratulate you, Sir, on your assumption of the
presidency of the Security Council for the month of July.
We are sure that the Council’s business will benefit
tremendously from your wisdom and experience. May I
also extend our warmest congratulations to Ambassador
Nabil Elaraby of Egypt on his excellent stewardship of the
work of the Council last month.
The Zimbabwean delegation is most grateful to you,
Sir, for convening this meeting on the situation in Angola.
We are also thankful to the Secretary-General, Mr. Boutros
Boutros-Ghali, for his most informative report on the peace
process in that country.
The Government and the people of Zimbabwe have
continued to watch and witness developments in the
brotherly country of Angola with immense interest and deep
concern, as well as with boundless good will. Whilst we are
fully convinced that the Bicesse and Lusaka accords,
together with other subsequent frameworks of
understanding, provide a sound basis for a solution in
Angola, we cannot help getting worried at the pace at
which the overall peace process has been evolving. Taking
into consideration the readiness of the people of Angola to
return to peace, the current and prolonged no-war-no-peace
situation in that country is no cause for comfort.
In this regard, we are encouraged to note recent
commendable measures, such as the promulgation of the
Amnesty Law; the completion of the quartering of the rapid
reaction police; the adoption of the framework agreement
on military matters; the beginning of the process of
incorporating UNITA military personnel into the Angolan
Armed Forces; the second phase of the withdrawal of the
Angolan Armed Forces from forward positions; some
progress in the quartering of UNITA troops; and UNITA’s
submission of proposals to change the status of its radio
station.
On the other hand, we are informed in the SecretaryGeneral’s report that the pace of the already much-delayed
quartering of UNITA troops has decreased significantly;
that significant numbers of UNITA troops arrive at the
quartering camps with hardly any weapons at all; that there
is a high number of desertions from the quartering areas;
and that UNITA has not yet handed over to UNAVEM III
personnel its heavy weapons, rocket launchers, anti-aircraft

3679th meeting
11 July 1996
artillery, armoured personnel carriers and tanks,
communications and engineering equipment or vehicles
used for military purposes. The Secretary-General makes
it clear in his report that there will be no quartering
exercise to talk about until those important parts of the
UNITA arsenal are brought in and all regular, commando,
engineer, support and other units of UNITA are cantoned
or otherwise accounted for.
The Secretary-General’s report also states that:
“If the peace process is to succeed, the parties,
especially UNITA, must show greater readiness to
implement, in good time, the commitments they
have entered into”. (S/1996/503, para. 39)
We call upon the international community in general, and
the troika of observers in particular, to use their good
offices to add impetus to the peace process, in the
interests of the people of Angola.
We agree with the Secretary-General’s observation
that the demobilization and socio-economic integration of
former combatants is an essential precondition for lasting
peace in Angola. We therefore look forward to his
recommendations on this issue, as promised in his report.
The Government of Zimbabwe recognizes with great
appreciation the commendable efforts of all those
Governments, non-governmental organizations and other
agencies that have come to the assistance of the people of
Angola in their hour of need through the provision of
humanitarian aid in its multifarious forms. We can only
encourage them to continue doing everything possible to
sustain their current and future efforts.
Finally, my delegation supports the
Secretary-General’s recommendation with regard to the
extension of the mandate of UNAVEM III.
The President (interpretation from French): I thank
the representative of Zimbabwe for the kind words he
addressed to me.
The next speaker is the representative of
Mozambique. I invite him to take a seat at the Council
table and to make his statement.
Mr. Dos Santos (Mozambique): My delegation joins
preceding speakers in extending to you, Sir, sincere
congratulations on your assumption of the presidency of
the Security Council for the current month. We have no

13

Security Council
Fifty-first year
doubt that your presidency is an assurance of the successful
outcome of the Security Council’s work this month.
I would also like to pay special tribute to your
predecessor, Ambassador Elaraby, for the brilliant manner
in which he presided over the Council’s work last month.
We come to this House humbled by the decisive role
that the Council played in bringing peace and stability to
Mozambique. We come, therefore, with a great sense of
duty and responsibility to make our modest contribution to
consideration of the issue before the Council today.
The Council is meeting once again in order to
discharge its responsibilities at an important time in the
history of the people of Angola, when peace and stability
are within their grasp. My delegation has carefully
examined both the report of the Secretary-General on the
United Nations Angola Verification Mission (UNAVEM
III) and the draft resolution before the Council. We have
also listened with keen attention and interest to the
statement made by Mr. Higino Carneiro, Vice-Minister
without Portfolio of Angola. We thank Vice-Minister
Carneiro for giving us once again the real picture of the
situation prevailing in that sister country. His statement
underscores the urgency and determination with which the
international community at large and the Council in
particular must address the issue before it today.
My delegation wishes to welcome the positive
developments in the peace process, particularly those
described in paragraphs 6 and 36 of the Secretary-General’s
report, namely the promulgation of the Amnesty Law; the
completion of the quartering of the rapid reaction police;
the partial withdrawal of the Angolan Armed Forces (FAA)
to barracks; some progress in the quartering of União
Nacional para a Independência Total de Angola (UNITA)
troops; and a small beginning of the incorporation of
UNITA military personnel into the armed forces. These are
significant steps towards implementation of the Lusaka
Protocol.
However, my delegation would like to express concern
over the fact that the steps towards the formation of the
Government of Unity and National Reconciliation are not
being implemented, mainly because UNITA is not showing
readiness, despite high-level consultations between the
Government and UNITA on constitutional amendments.
Furthermore, UNITA delays in the quartering of troops and
its significantly reduced hand-over of its real military
equipment to the United Nations Angola Verification
Mission (UNAVEM III) continue to be one of my

14

3679th meeting
11 July 1996
delegation’s concerns. Having all these developments in
mind, my delegation concurs with the Secretary-General’s
recommendation that the mandate of UNAVEM III be
extended for a further period of three months, until 11
October 1996.
My Minister of Foreign Affairs and Cooperation,
speaking before the Council on 27 January 1995, stressed
the importance of these issues and underlined the
importance we attached to the early implementation of the
mandate of UNAVEM III. Our experience in the
deployment of United Nations forces and the
implementation of Security Council resolutions and
presidential statements in our country shows that the
sooner such a verification mission is established, deployed
and implemented, the better for the success of the peace
process.
The relevance and urgency of this action by the
Council should not be underestimated. The signing of the
Lusaka Protocol represented the culmination of a long and
delicate process of negotiations to address the war
situation in Angola and to contribute to bringing about
peace and stability not only in that country but also in the
entire region of southern Africa. We strongly believe that
there is no real reason for peace in Angola to be delayed
any longer.
No one should be allowed to hold the Angolan
people hostage to motives alien to their desire for peace
and prosperity. I would like, therefore, to urge the
Council to look into these matters even more diligently
and expeditiously, clearly identifying at every stage the
detractors of the peace process.
The United Nations and the international community
at large are duty-bound to extend their hand of solidarity
to the people of Angola and their legitimate Government
in their quest for peace and stability. In assisting the
Angolan people, we consider of utmost importance
observance of the principles and purposes of the Charter
as well as of the principles of sovereignty,
non-intervention and non-interference in the internal
affairs of the Republic of Angola, in line also with the
peace accords.
So long as peace is not an irreversible reality in
Angola, the success achieved in Mozambique can be
considered neither complete nor solid. We wish to
reaffirm our unconditional support for and solidarity with
the people and the Government Of Angola. We reiterate
our readiness to do our best to assist in efforts aimed at

Security Council
Fifty-first year
bringing about peace, harmony and national reconciliation
in that sister country.
We urge every State Member of the United Nations,
and in particular the members of the Security Council, to
continue to render support to the peace process in Angola
and to use all means at their disposal for the successful
conclusion of the mandate of UNAVEM III.
The President (interpretation from French): I thank
the representative of Mozambique for the kind words he
addressed to me.
The next speaker is the representative of Cape Verde.
I invite him to take a seat at the Council table and to make
his statement.
Mr. Leao Monteiro (Cape Verde)(interpretation from
French): May I extend our congratulations to you, Sir, on
your assumption of the presidency of the Security Council
for this month. We are confident that the Council will
benefit greatly from your recognized skill and experience.
We also thank your predecessor, Ambassador Elaraby, for
the excellent work and the dedication that he showed in
guiding the work of the Council last month.
As shown in the report of the Secretary-General issued
two weeks ago, there has been some movement over the
last two months in the process of implementing the agreed
framework to advance the final settlement of the Angolan
conflict. We welcome this and congratulate the parties on
their many achievements.
It is particularly gratifying to note that the military
situation is now calm, despite some isolated difficulties, and
that political dialogue is being consolidated, reinforcing a
climate of peace. The draft resolution before the Council
will go far towards crowning United Nations efforts in
conducting the peace process to a successful conclusion in
Angola. We hope that these recommendations will have a
positive fruitful impact upon all involved, including the
international community. This is necessary because the
positive developments so far have been insufficient and are
still slow. Persistent delays may unfortunately have
consequences that would go beyond a mere waste of time.
Precious though time may be, they could contribute to
eroding the most essential factor of the peace process,
namely mutual trust. Without going into details, we should
note that some failings brought to light in the SecretaryGeneral’s report and in the draft resolution, are raising
questions that need to be promptly answered, lest serious
fears arise as to the future.

3679th meeting
11 July 1996
If, despite everything, the implementation of the
agreements is pursued and the light at the end of the
tunnel can be seen by the Angolans, we should still have
no illusions about any rapid achievement of happiness for
this fraternal people. The time can be considerably
shortened, however, if the international community does
provide persistent and consistent aid to the national efforts
of the Angolan people. Here too, time is of the essence.
We believe that inadequacies and slowness in the keeping
of promises must be quickly overcome. Support must
precede and catalyze the process, and must not come
forward a posteriori. Useful and beneficial social activity
that can reintegrate combatants into a new national fabric
is of an importance and urgency that must not ever be
underestimated.
We thank the Council for this opportunity to join in
the many expressions of solidarity towards the Angolan
people and to offer encouragement and support to the
parties in the peace process in that African country with
a view to its successful conclusion in the shortest possible
time. The tireless efforts of the Secretary-General, of his
Special Representative, of UNAVEM III and of the three
observer countries are deeply deserving of praise. The
success of the mission will undoubtedly be realized
thanks to those efforts. We also state our support for the
extension of the mandate of UNAVEM III, as
recommended by the Secretary-General.
The President (interpretation from French): I thank
the representative of Cape Verde for the kind words he
addressed to me.
It is my understanding that the Council is ready to
proceed to vote on the draft resolution contained in
document S/1996/536. Unless I hear any objection, I shall
put the draft resolution to the vote.
There being no objection, it is so decided.
I shall first call on those members of the Council
who wish to make statements before the voting.
Mr. Henze (Germany) (interpretation from French):
Allow me at the beginning of my statement to
congratulate you, Sir, on your assumption of the
presidency of the Security Council and to wish you every
success in your work. Naturally, you can count on our
close cooperation with you. It is in a feeble effort to
express our feelings of great friendship and respect that
I shall try to make my brief statement in French.

15

Security Council
Fifty-first year
Germany will vote in favour of the extension for three
months of the United Nations Angola Verification Mission
(UNAVEM III). This three-month extension of the mandate
of UNAVEM III, which has become the largest United
Nations peace-keeping operation, will show the parties in
Angola that we remain determined to support the peace
process in that country, which has started to recover from
the aftermath of a long civil war.
We have noted with satisfaction the progress made in
recent weeks in the attainment of the goals and the
application of the timetable agreed between the Government
of Angola and UNITA. We encourage the parties to
continue on this path.

3679th meeting
11 July 1996
provided to Angola. In all, if contributions made by my
country to the European Union are taken into account,
Germany will have contributed $100 million in assistance
to Angola over the last five years.
I should like to conclude by paying tribute to the
personnel of UNAVEM, the personnel of United Nations
programmes and bodies, and non-governmental
organizations for the laudable job they have been doing
in difficult conditions.
The President (interpretation from French): I thank
the representative of Germany for the kind words he
addressed to me.

The job that remains to be done is not an easy one.
Although the timetable agreed between the Angolan
Government and UNITA provides for the carrying out of
several initiatives in the weeks to come, it seems to me that
two elements in particular should be at the forefront of our
concerns.

Mr. Awaad (Egypt) (interpretation from Arabic): I
should like at the outset, Sir, to express my great pleasure
at seeing you preside over the Council this month. We are
fully confident that your well-known diplomatic skills and
experience will be a great asset to the Council in its
work.

From the military standpoint, it is essential that the
quartering of all UNITA troops and their integration into
the Angolan Armed Forces, as well as the handing over of
all weapons, in particular UNITA’s heavy weapons, should
be completed as soon as possible.

I should also like to take this opportunity to express
our gratitude for all the kind words addressed to
Ambassador Nabil Elaraby, President of the Council for
June.

From the political standpoint, the establishment of the
Government of Unity and National Reconciliation as well
as the speedy solution to the question of the post of VicePresident offered to UNITA remain essential.

I deem it important to stress that the international
community cannot fail to support the peace process in
Angola. To make the process a success, the parties, in
particular UNITA, must show greater determination to
discharge their commitments in timely fashion.
I take this opportunity to recall that UNAVEM must
complete its mission by February 1997. We call upon the
Angolan parties to make every effort to consolidate the
peace process and to promote lasting national reconciliation
in Angola.
The German Government will continue to support the
peace process in Angola. In the area of demining in
particular, the German Government intends to keep its
deminers in the country to continue to give Angola
assistance given the importance of finding a solution to this
question. This assistance is just part of the humanitarian aid

16

I should also like to welcome His Excellency, the
Vice-Minister without Portfolio of Angola, who takes a
keen interest in participating in the public meetings of the
Council devoted to the situation in his country.
The Council’s consideration of the situation in
Angola takes place today in a climate that differs greatly
from that which prevailed at the time of our last meeting
on the subject two months ago. The steps taken by the
Government of Angola and UNITA during the last two
months are, in our view, extremely positive developments.
The existence of some negative aspects does not detract
from their positive nature. These negative aspects are
attributed to the suspicion and mistrust that are the result
of more than two decades of devastating civil war.
The delegation of Egypt has read the report of the
Secretary-General on the situation in Angola. We should
like to express our appreciation to the Secretary-General
and his Special Representative, and to the United Nations
Angola Verification Mission (UNAVEM III) for their
efforts, particularly in view of the fact that they are
carrying out their tasks under very trying circumstances.

Security Council
Fifty-first year
The report of the Secretary-General makes it clear that
the challenges currently facing the peace process in Angola
can be summed up in two main factors. First is the need for
UNITA to complete the quartering of all its combatants and
to hand over all its weapons and military equipment and
ammunition to the United Nations in a manner that would
allow movement towards the subsequent stages of the peace
process. The second factor is the need for the reintegration
of the demobilized military personnel of UNITA and the
Angolan Armed Forces into civilian life. This is an
extremely difficult task, particularly since such personnel
number nearly 90,000.
We believe that facing these challenges constitutes an
important basis for the achievement of national peace in
Angola. If those challenges are not faced, the political
solution will remain fragile. We also believe that failure to
implement the provisions of the Lusaka Protocol within the
agreed time-frame will erode the credibility of the whole
peace process and will not help create a political climate
favourable to beginning a new stage for the Angolan
people, to bring them closer to national reconciliation, and
to achieving rehabilitation, reconstruction and sustainable
social, economic and human development.
The Angolan Government has recently taken
praiseworthy steps, foremost among them beginning the
disarmament of the civilian population, completing the
quartering of the rapid reaction police, and the partial
withdrawal of UNITA troops to the quartering areas, in
addition to the beginning of the induction and
reincorporation of some UNITA military personnel into the
Angolan Armed Forces. All these are positive steps that
reinforce mutual trust, and they deserve reciprocal positive
steps from UNITA.
The eyes of the world are today on UNITA and its
leader, Mr. Savimbi. He is being urged to take bold steps
and initiatives in the right direction. We are confident that
he will give the supreme interests of his people precedence
over any other consideration. The people of Angola have
the right to live in peace and harmony. They have the right
to start the real battle to achieve human, social and
economic development. The negative ramifications of the
civil war are no secret. The unemployment rate in Angola,
which has climbed higher than 50 per cent, and the
country’s severe financial deficit and external debt burden
are all clear proof of the deterioration of the economic
situation in this sisterly African country.
We hope that the August meeting between President
dos Santos and Mr. Savimbi will lead to definitive solutions

3679th meeting
11 July 1996
to all outstanding political matters, foremost among which
are, first, the question of the post of Vice-President,
which is to be occupied by UNITA; secondly, the
assumption by some UNITA leaders of ministerial posts
in the new Government; and, thirdly, the occupation by
UNITA of seats reserved for it in the Parliament and in
the civilian administration at the local, provincial and
national levels. This, naturally, would mean that UNITA
would be transformed into a political party acting within
the framework of Angolan legitimacy.
We share the Secretary-General’s assessment that
Angola today needs the support and assistance of the
international community more than ever. The war has
destroyed the basic facilities of the State, including the
educational and health systems. According to United
Nations statistics, the mortality rate of children under five
has reached 320 per 1,000. The rate of registration of
children in primary schools is 45 per cent of the target.
These figures speak for themselves; they do not need any
explanation.
On another level, one result of the war is 10 million
land-mines — the highest rate in the world. Every citizen
in Angola has a land-mine waiting for him or her. In
addition to the presence of 1.25 million displaced persons
within the boundaries of Angola, there are almost 300,000
refugees in neighbouring countries. This, in brief, is the
situation for the coming stage, which makes it incumbent
on the international community and the relevant United
Nations organs to extend all possible support and
assistance to realize the Angolan people’s legitimate hope
for and aspiration to a better life. Egypt, for its part, will
hold back no possible support or assistance to the
brotherly Angolan people.
The Egyptian delegation supports the extension of
the mandate of UNAVEM III for a further three months,
until 11 October. My delegation will vote in favour of the
draft resolution before the Council. It is our hope that we
will periodically receive from the Secretary-General
reports and information on developments in that sisterly
country.
The President (interpretation from French): I thank
the representative of Egypt for the kind words he
addressed to me.
Mr. Legwaila (Botswana): Mr. President, your great
country, France, is well known for its contribution to
refining the art of diplomacy. You therefore have the full
confidence and support of my delegation as you discharge

17

Security Council
Fifty-first year
the responsibilities of President of the Council for this
month. I also wish to thank your predecessor, Ambassador
Elaraby of Egypt, for the excellent manner in which he
deployed a combination of ancient and contemporary
Egyptian political skills to guide the work of the Council
last month.
Every single day that goes by matters a great deal to
the people of Angola, and for the prospects for durable
peace in that country. The dawn of a new day without
cease-fire violations and innocent lives lost reinforces the
hope of a war-weary people for a better tomorrow. The
Government of Angola and UNITA have a historic
opportunity to put an end to the civil war that has brought
their country to the brink of self-destruction. Botswana is
satisfied with the progress made by the Government of
Angola in the implementation of its commitments. We
encourage the Government to continue to take decisive
steps and exercise exemplary leadership in the
implementation of the Lusaka Protocol.
The time has come for UNITA to recognize that as a
party to the “Acordos de Paz” and the Lusaka Protocol it
has a duty and an obligation to implement its own
commitments expeditiously and in full. The peace process
requires partnership, trust and good faith. UNITA took
great risks in waging war against the Government of
Angola, and it almost destroyed the country; it must now
faithfully and constructively take risks to participate
vigorously in establishing peace in Angola. We therefore
call upon UNITA expeditiously to quarter the remaining
troops and hand over to the United Nations Angola
Verification Mission (UNAVEM III), without further delay,
all arms and ammunition, especially the heavy military
equipment which has been so obviously absent from the
items handed over to UNAVEM III to date. We fully share
the Secretary-General’s view that unless the heavy weapons
are handed over, the quartering will not be complete. The
recent successful conclusion of the military talks should
make it easier for UNITA to find its way, and should
enable it to exercise greater flexibility in the resolution of
the remaining issues.
The next few weeks will be crucial in the
consolidation of the peace process and in making sure it
becomes irreversible. Botswana attaches the utmost
importance to the formation of a Government of Unity and
National Reconciliation. We strongly believe that such a
Government would have a salutary effect on the overall
peace process. In this respect, UNITA members of
Parliament should take their rightful places in the National
Assembly, as this would have a positive effect on the talks

18

3679th meeting
11 July 1996
on constitutional issues. In the same vein, we support the
Secretary-General’s observation that the question of the
post of Vice-President for Mr. Savimbi should be
resolved at the earliest possible opportunity. A meeting
between President dos Santos and the leader of UNITA
therefore has the full encouragement of my delegation, as
such a meeting may speed up Mr. Savimbi’s decision
finally to assume his responsibilities in the national
Government.
While the international community continues to
apply pressure on the Government of Angola and UNITA
to meet the obligations they have freely entered into, it is
necessary for us all to bear in mind the desperate need for
the provision to the Government and people of Angola of
financial resources necessary to support, buttress and
sustain the peace process in that war-ravaged country.
The reconstruction and rehabilitation of the Angolan
economy is a key element in underpinning the peace
process. Assistance is urgently needed now as the process
of demobilization and social reintegration gets under way.
It is essential that the demobilized ex-combatants be
assisted in becoming productive members of Angolan
society. It is important to give particular attention to this
aspect of the Angolan peace process, as it has the
potential to haunt the country in the years ahead if
neglected.
As we extend the mandate of UNAVEM III to 11
October 1996, I wish to conclude by expressing the strong
desire of my country to see the next three months used
productively to establish a solid foundation for lasting
peace in Angola so that, when the Council considers the
next report of the Secretary-General in October, which
will be the beginning of the rainy season in southern
Africa, the people of Angola will be looking forward to
tilling the soil of their land and planting their crops
without fear of resumed warfare under the cover of the
sprouting bushes.
The President (interpretation from French): I thank
the representative of Botswana for the kind words he
addressed to me.
Mr. Somavía (Chile) (interpretation from French):
At the outset, on behalf of Chile I wish to congratulate
you, Sir, on the very effective and experienced way in
which you have guided the Council’s work. You, and the
French team assisting you, may rely on Chile’s full
support in the exercise of your important functions.
(spoke in Spanish)

Security Council
Fifty-first year
I also wish cordially to thank Egypt for its excellent
and effective conduct of the presidency last month. Once
again, Ambassador Elaraby demonstrated the personal and
professional abilities that we all admire and which have
earned such prestige for his country and himself. I
congratulate the outstanding team that helped him in his
work and thank them for the consideration they showed us
during Egypt’s exercise of the presidency.
The excellent report submitted by the SecretaryGeneral on the United Nations Angola Verification Mission
(UNAVEM III) reveals an improvement in the political
situation in that country. The encouraging news in that
document has been supplemented by other information
provided orally by the Secretariat and other parties during
discussion of this item.
Like others who have spoken before me, I wish very
briefly to emphasize some of the achievements made in the
peace process, including such fundamental aspects as the
maintenance of the cease-fire; the ongoing quartering of
troops of the União Nacional para a Independência Total de
Angola (UNITA) and the incorporation of some of its
personnel into the Angolan Armed Forces; the quartering of
the rapid reaction police; the promulgation of the Amnesty
Law; the demining of roads; and the expansion of
humanitarian assistance coverage.
All of this is cause for satisfaction and should provide
an important incentive to the international community for
maintaining and increasing its support for Angola.
However, and unfortunately, this progress is unfolding
against a general background of delay in the fulfillment of
commitments assumed by the Government and UNITA.
This would explain the occasional tendency of some
analysts to underrate the importance of these achievements.
As we have heard in the course of this debate, the
peace process has reached a critical stage. The Council and
the United Nations as a whole should therefore insist on
respect for the agreed timetables for achieving the
objectives.
That is why the parties, and UNITA in particular,
must show clear proof of their willingness successfully to
complete the peace process and to begin the reconstruction
of Angola. Accordingly, there are certain steps that are
indispensable in creating a climate of confidence in the
political resolve to strengthen peace and give the Angolan
people hope for a safe life. These steps include the handing
over of the heavy weapons, including munitions, that
UNITA still possesses; the formation of the Government of

3679th meeting
11 July 1996
Unity and National Reconciliation; and the incorporation
of UNITA members into State administration, Parliament
and the Armed Forces. I would also mention the need to
make progress towards the complete demining of the
existing 10 million mines, which instil a deep sense of
insecurity in anyone travelling through Angolan territory.
It is important for the parties to bear in mind the
approaching end of UNAVEM III and the beginning of its
personnel reduction so that they can act to establish a
climate conducive to moving from the final cessation of
hostilities to a new stage of consolidating peace through
development to improve the living conditions of those
who have suffered most in this civil war: the people of
Angola.
The economic and social challenges facing Angola
are of such magnitude that they require the efforts of all
the country’s inhabitants, especially its leaders. The
Secretary-General’s report calls attention to the country’s
critical economic situation and the large sums that will be
required to support Angola’s rehabilitation. According to
this report, the amount of aid already committed — much
less the quantities actually contributed — is insufficient
to cover the implementation of the most urgent
rehabilitation programmes, especially as regards the
demobilization and socio-economic reintegration of
former combatants.
A climate of political stability and civil calm is
therefore indispensable for attracting private capital and
the support of the international community. Delays and
postponements of political agreements also set back the
implementation of the urgent and necessary international
support so sorely needed by Angola. We all know that
true peace will come when there is true development to
the primary benefit of the disadvantaged sectors.
We believe that the draft resolution before us
contains a balanced text that recognizes the progress
achieved in Angola but that also emphasizes the priority,
at this stage of the process, of the timely and complete
fulfillment of outstanding commitments.
The Government, and especially UNITA, should step
up efforts to consolidate peace, because that alone will
encourage the international community to provide the
support necessary to overcome the massive crisis in
Angola.
I wish to convey my thanks for the efforts made by
the United Nations personnel in the field and the workers

19

Security Council
Fifty-first year
of humanitarian organizations and for the work done by the
United States of America, the Russian Federation and
Portugal towards a solution of the problems afflicting
Angola.
In conclusion, I would say that, despite the tragedies
of the past, despite the slow progress towards peace, and
despite all that remains to be done, Chile is firmly
convinced that, given time, the leaders and people of
Angola will have set the world an example of sensible and
stable reconciliation. This is the time to think only of the
needs and interests of the families of Angola and the
communities in which they live. This process will succeed
only when it has brought peace to the hearts of the people
and fearlessness in looking forward to a new life of security
for all.
The President (interpretation from French): I thank
the representative of Chile for the kind words he addressed
to me.
Mr. Park (Republic of Korea) (interpretation from
French): I congratulate you, Sir, on your assumption of the
presidency of the Security Council for the month of July.
I pledge the full support and close cooperation of my
delegation as you carry out your important responsibilities.
I also pay warm tribute to your predecessor, Ambassador
Elaraby of Egypt, for the effective way in which he guided
the work of the Council last month.
(spoke in English)
Since the last extension of the mandate of the United
Nations Angola Verification Mission (UNAVEM III) two
months ago, there have been encouraging developments in
the Angolan peace process. We welcome in particular the
impressive progress in the quartering of troops of the União
Nacional para a Independência Total de Angola (UNITA),
with more than 20,000 additional UNITA soldiers registered
in the quartering areas. We are also gratified to note the
completion of the quartering of the rapid reaction police;
the adoption of the framework agreement on military
matters, which made possible the beginning of the longawaited process of incorporating UNITA military personnel
into the Angolan Armed Forces; the promulgation of the
Amnesty Law; and the start of talks between the Angolan
Government and UNITA on constitutional amendments
necessary for the formation of the Government of Unity
and National Reconciliation.
Although overall progress to date has been positive
enough to warrant cautious optimism for the future, my

20

3679th meeting
11 July 1996
delegation shares disappointment at the slow pace at
which the peace process has been moving forward. The
unsatisfactory quantity and quality of UNITA weapons
handed over to UNAVEM III also remains a matter of
concern. It must be recalled that the quartering process
will not be complete until all UNITA troops are quartered
in a credible and verifiable manner and all UNITA
weapons, in particular heavy weapons, are handed over to
UNAVEM III.
The Angolan peace process is now moving into its
most critical stage. The three key tasks of the Lusaka
Protocol — the quartering of UNITA troops, the
formation of the unified armed forces, and the
establishment of the Government of Unity and National
Reconciliation — should be completed in the coming
days or weeks. The peace process will remain incomplete
unless these crucial tasks are successfully achieved in
good time. The draft resolution on which the Council is
about to vote correctly outlines, in paragraphs 6, 8, 12
and 13, the nature of these tasks and specific steps to be
taken by the Angolan parties. We urge the Angolan
parties to implement their commitments without further
delay.
In overcoming the remaining obstacles to the peace
process, there is no substitute for the political will of the
parties themselves. Mutual trust between President dos
Santos and Mr. Savimbi is central to the commitment and
political will of the parties. In this respect, we attach great
importance to arriving at a clear understanding between
the two leaders regarding their respective roles and the
nature of the posts to be allocated to UNITA leaders in
the Government of Unity and National Reconciliation.
Problems of this nature can best be resolved in a meeting
between the two leaders. We view the relevance of
paragraph 14 of the draft resolution in this context.
One daunting challenge that comes with the progress
of the peace process is the demobilization and social
reintegration of ex-combatants. Much has been said about
the inseparable linkage between peace and development.
The presence of a large number of demobilized
ex-combatants in an economically precarious country such
as Angola will most likely generate additional social
tension, hindering the consolidation of hard-won peace.
Hence the urgent need for professional training and the
creation of employment opportunities, which go hand in
hand with economic reconstruction and development.
While the Angolan Government is to play a central role,
we emphasize the support of international financial
institutions as well as the generosity of major donor

Security Council
Fifty-first year
countries. It is in this light that we view the merit of
paragraphs 11 and 22 of the draft resolution.
Finally, we support the extension of the UNAVEM III
mandate for three months, as recommended by the
Secretary-General.
In that light, my delegation will vote in favour of the
draft resolution before the Council.
The President (interpretation from French): I thank
the representative of the Republic of Korea for the kind
words he addressed to me.
Mr. Wang Xuexian (China) (interpretation from
Chinese): Please allow me at the outset, Sir, to congratulate
you on your assumption of the presidency of the Security
Council for this month. I am convinced that under your
guidance the Council’s work this month will be successful.
At the beginning of our meeting today, Sir, you
expressed sympathy on behalf of the Council for the heavy
losses suffered by China in the recent serious floods. I will
faithfully convey your words of sympathy to the
Government and the people of China. I am sure that your
expression of sympathy will provide strong support to the
people of China, who are at this moment fighting the
floods. On behalf of the Chinese people, I would like to
express my heartfelt thanks to you and through you, Sir, to
the other members of the Council.
I wish also to pay tribute to Ambassador Elaraby,
President of the Council last month, and to the Egyptian
delegation. The excellent job they did fully demonstrates
the skills of the ancient civilization of Egypt and the
intelligence and wisdom of the Egyptian people.
I take this opportunity also to extend a warm welcome
to His Excellency the Vice-Minister without Portfolio of
Angola and to thank him for coming to the Council and
making a statement, which we greatly appreciate.
The Chinese delegation will vote in favour of the draft
resolution before us. This draft resolution decides to extend
the mandate of the largest current United Nations
peace-keeping operation by a further three months. This
demonstrates the strong support of the international
community for the Angolan peace process. We sincerely
hope that both parties in Angola, particularly the União
Nacional para a Independência Total de Angola (UNITA),
will seize this opportunity and make full use of the
favorable conditions created by the extension of the

3679th meeting
11 July 1996
mandate of the United Nations Angola Verification
Mission (UNAVEM III) to accelerate the peace process
with a view to ultimately achieving national
reconciliation.
Developments during the past two months show that
the parties concerned in Angola have taken a number of
concrete steps to accelerate the process of national
reconciliation and that some substantive progress has been
made in the peace process.
We appreciate the Angolan Government’s enactment
of an Amnesty Law and its completion of the quartering
of the rapid reaction police force. These are necessary
measures to build mutual trust and we would like to
express our appreciation.
However, we are deeply concerned at the failure to
achieve the anticipated objectives in implementing the
Lusaka Protocol and the relevant agreements reached by
the two Angolan parties. We call on the two parties,
particularly UNITA, to demonstrate greater political will
and a sense of national responsibility, to refrain from
further delaying the implementation of the provisions of
the Lusaka Protocol and the timetable reached by the two
sides, to complete the quartering of forces and to take
part in real earnest in the establishment of a Government
of Unity and National Reconciliation and of joint national
armed forces. The Chinese delegation wishes emphatically
to point out once again that stagnation in the Angolan
peace process is inconsistent with the spirit of the
agreements reached by the parties concerned and is not
what the international community would like to see.
The Angolan peace process is now at a critical
historical juncture. If the two parties in Angola,
proceeding from their overall national interests, can truly
remove past grievances, bury the hatchet, build mutual
trust and firmly advance the peace process, the future of
Angola is bound to take a turn for the better, and the
Angolan people will be able to embark on the broad road
of national rejuvenation and development. Conversely,
continued stagnation, or even retrogression, in the peace
process will let slip the peace and tranquility long desired
by the Angolan people and thrust the Angolan nation into
further chaos and misery. We expect the two parties,
particularly UNITA, to live up to the wishes of the
Angolan people and the international community by
making a choice in line with the historical requirements
and by taking a political decision in the interests of
Angolan nation.

21

Security Council
Fifty-first year

3679th meeting
11 July 1996

The Chinese Government and people have always
been very much concerned about the destiny of African
peoples and have sympathized with and supported the cause
of peace in African countries. During his visit to Africa last
May, Chinese President Jiang Zemin pointed out that most
African countries are moving towards political stability and
entering a new historical period of seeking peace, stability
and development. We are most gratified by the advent of
such a period.

the UNITA troops, although not complete, is under way;
and that the process of their incorporation into the
Angolan Armed Forces has begun. Over the last few days
new information has reached the Security Council
concerning the speeding up of the quartering process for
the remaining UNITA contingents also. It is our hope that
after far too many unwarranted delays, the UNITA
leadership will make good on the commitment undertaken
with the signing of the Lusaka Protocol.

Now, the question of Angola has become the last hot
issue in southern Africa to be resolved. We are in favour of
continued strong support for the Angola peace process by
the international community, so as to bring peace and
tranquility to southern Africa as a whole.

The progress achieved so far is still very fragile. The
draft resolution on which the Council is about to vote
clearly indicates areas in which further steps have to be
taken quickly by the parties to consolidate a peace
process which, as emphasized by the Secretary-General,
has reached a critical juncture. On the political level,
substantial progress has yet to be achieved. It is high time
for a coalition Government to be formed and for the
UNITA members of Parliament to take their seats in the
National Assembly. Such a development would not only
mark a turning point in the crisis, but would also allow
the depleted energies of the country to be focused on the
crucial emergency of the looming economic disaster.

Full-scale reconstruction remains to be undertaken in
the post-war Angola. Economic recovery and reconstruction
will be an arduous task for Angola, but this is the key to
lasting peace. The international community should attach
great importance to this question and give it effective
support. China will continue to do its best to contribute to
Angola’s economic reconstruction. We are confident that
once peace comes to Angola, the great and industrious
Angolan people will overcome their difficulties and build
Angola into a prosperous and beautiful country.
The President (interpretation from French): I thank
the representative of China for the kind words he addressed
to me.
Mr. Ferrarin (Italy) (interpretation from French):
Allow me first, Sir, to convey to you heartfelt
congratulations on your assumption of the presidency of the
Council for July. I have no doubt that your experience and
great diplomatic skills will provide firm, effective guidance
in our work. To that end, you can count on the full
cooperation of the Italian delegation.
I should also like very warmly to thank Ambassador
Nabil Elaraby and the entire delegation of Egypt for their
excellent and very effective guidance of the Council’s work
during the month of June.
(spoke in English)
The most recent report of the Secretary-General on the
situation in Angola confirms a number of positive
developments. Albeit with persisting hesitations, the Lusaka
Protocol is being implemented, and, in this connection, it is
particularly important that a framework agreement on
military matters has been achieved; that the quartering of

22

The disquieting information provided in this respect
by the Secretary-General’s report shows quite clearly that
the prospects for peace in Angola might be disrupted if an
upturn in the economic and social situation is not quickly
achieved. International assistance to Angola, though
insufficient, is already under way, and all the relevant
entities of the United Nations system are also active in
the country. Let me here recall that for the period 19901995, the Italian Government provided assistance in
various forms to a total of $109 million. For the year
1996 additional funds totalling approximately $12.5
million have been allotted. Moreover, Italy is participating
with a team of instructors in the demining activities being
conducted by the parties with the assistance of the United
Nations and the international community.
Mine clearance and road rehabilitation are essential
for the safety of the population, as well as for the
economic recovery of Angola. Progress in both areas is
being reported as a result of the good work carried out by
specialized units of the United Nations Angola
Verification Mission (UNAVEM III) and by
non-governmental organizations. We note that, after
extensive delays, UNITA is also showing greater
cooperation in the demining activities.
To maximize the impact of the assistance provided
and to allow a resumption in earnest of economic activity,

Security Council
Fifty-first year
a more effective handling of the situation in Luanda and the
extension of State administration throughout the country are
absolutely necessary. The post-conflict peace-building phase
which Angola is now entering will require a determined
effort by all, inside and outside the country, to recreate
conditions allowing the population to benefit from the rich
natural resources of the country.
Although the peace process now seems to be well
established, the enduring commitment of the parties remains
of critical importance. Both parties — but in particular
UNITA — should show an even stronger determination to
pursue in good faith the full implementation of the Lusaka
Protocol. Let us not forget that the many delays of the last
few months have resulted in new and even more unjustified
suffering for the people of Angola.
Finally, let me express once again our heartfelt thanks
to all those who have contributed to this peace-keeping
operation: the Secretary-General and his Special
Representative, Maître Alioune Blondin Beye, the
UNAVEM III personnel and the troika of observer nations.
For the reasons explained above, Italy will vote in
favour of the draft resolution before the Council.
The President (interpretation from French): I thank
the representative of Italy for the kind words he addressed
to me.
Mr. Queta (Guinea-Bissau) (interpretation from
French): Allow me first, Sir, to say how very pleased we
are to see you presiding over the work of the Security
Council for the month of July. We are sure that, thanks to
your skills and well-known qualities, our work will be
successful. At the same time I should like to express our
gratitude to Ambassador Elaraby and the entire delegation
of Egypt for their excellent work in conducting the business
of the Council in June.
I should also like to take this opportunity to welcome
His Excellency General Higino Carneiro, Vice-Minister
without Portfolio of the Government of Angola.
Since 8 May, the date of the last extension of the
mandate of UNAVEM III, the situation in Angola with
regard to the consolidation of the peace process has
improved in an encouraging way, despite certain delays. In
fact, the adoption by the two parties of the framework
agreement on military matters, the beginning of the
incorporation of the military personnel of UNITA into the
Angolan Armed Forces, the agreement between the

3679th meeting
11 July 1996
President of Angola and Mr. Savimbi on the
establishment of a Government of Unity and National
Reconciliation by the second week of August, and the
progress made in demining and lifting checkpoints are all
positive developments, which we applaud.
Accordingly, my delegation encourages the parties to
continue to show their commitment to peace by
destroying stocks of land-mines and by lifting all
checkpoints so as to guarantee the free circulation of
people and goods throughout all the territory of Angola.
The quartering and disarmament of all UNITA
forces — another essential element of the peace
process — and the handing over of all their weapons,
should be completed without further delay.
We welcome the measures taken by the Government
of Angola towards peace, such as the amnesty proclaimed
in keeping with the Libreville accord, the completion of
the quartering of the rapid reaction police and the
adoption of the programme for the disarmament of the
civilian population. These important measures adopted by
the Government of Angola will, we are sure, help to
consolidate peace in this fraternal country.
Despite continuing delays, my delegation believes
that the process that has been started is on the right track.
We therefore encourage the President of Angola and the
head of UNITA to meet as soon as possible in Angola to
resolve all outstanding issues. In fact, only political will
and the determination of the parties can help to bring
about a lasting peace, stability and security in Angola.
As for security, the two parties and others interested
in Angola should take all necessary steps to guarantee the
security of United Nations personnel and the personnel of
other international organizations, as well as the premises
that they occupy, in addition to freedom of circulation for
humanitarian relief. This could encourage the international
community to continue to provide Angola with aid.
In the current stage of the process, the
demobilization of ex-combatants, their reintegration into
civil society and the recovery and reconstruction of the
Angolan economy are of the greatest importance.
Accordingly, my delegation encourages the international
community to provide the necessary financial resources
within the joint United Nations Appeal for Angola, in the
certain belief that the two parties will honour their
obligations under the Lusaka Protocol.

23

Security Council
Fifty-first year
We will support the draft resolution before us to
extend the mandate of UNAVEM III because we are
optimistic enough to believe that the Angolan leaders,
particularly the head of UNITA, will renew their
commitment to the peace process that we have hoped for.
In conclusion, my delegation wishes to pay tribute to
the efforts of the observer countries, the United States of
America, the Russian Federation and Portugal, to those of
the Secretary-General and his Special Representative, and
to the entire personnel of UNAVEM III for their
commitment to the implementation of the Lusaka Protocol.
The President (interpretation from French): I thank
the representative of Guinea-Bissau for the kind words he
addressed to me.
Mr. Lavrov (Russian Federation) (interpretation from
Russian): I congratulate you, Sir, on your assumption of the
duties of President of the Council, and wish you, and the
entire French delegation, every success in that post. We
express our gratitude to your predecessor, the Permanent
Representative of Egypt, Ambassador Elaraby, for the work
carried out by him and the Egyptian delegation last month.
It also gives me sincere pleasure to thank the head of
the Angolan Government delegation, General Carneiro,
Vice-Minister without Portfolio, for his comprehensive
statement. As one of the troika of observer nations of the
Angolan settlement process, the Russian Federation is
keenly interested in the successful advancement of the
peace process and the speedy establishment in that country
of lasting peace and stability, and is sparing no effort to
attain those goals. Resolving the years-long conflict in
Angola would not merely be a great boon for that friendly
country and other countries in southern Africa, but would
be a major success story for the peace-keeping activities of
the United Nations and the international community as a
whole.
We are pleased to note that the implementation of the
Lusaka Protocol has recently been proceeding at a faster
pace. The completion of the talks on military questions has
opened the way to the establishment of a unified armed
force. Agreement has been reached on the creation by the
middle of August of a Government of Unity and National
Reconciliation. Several important steps have been taken to
consolidate the peace process, including the quartering of
the rapid reaction police, the continuation of the withdrawal
of troops to defensive positions, and the start of the
operation to disarm the civilian population. Progress has
been made in the area of demining and ensuring freedom

24

3679th meeting
11 July 1996
of circulation of people and goods, and the level of
hostile propaganda has dropped. At the same time, we are
concerned that the implementation of key elements of the
peace process is still very much behind schedule. Again,
we must say that the primary responsibility for this lies
with UNITA.
Recently, under pressure from the international
community, UNITA has taken certain positive steps,
notably by bringing the overall number of its servicemen
registered in the quartering areas to 53,000. Nevertheless,
the commitments it undertook in this area have not been
fully met. We agree with the conclusion of the SecretaryGeneral’s report, that until UNITA quarters all of its
troops and hands over to UNAVEM III all of its
weapons, including heavy weapons, the quartering cannot
be deemed complete. A component of this process must
be the quartering of the so-called police forces set up by
UNITA in several regions in violation of the Lusaka
Protocol.
It is also important for the leadership of UNITA
immediately to comply with the agreements to return the
generals assigned to them to the Angolan Armed Forces,
ensure that UNITA Members of Parliament take their
seats in the National Assembly, and take steps speedily to
incorporate its designated representatives into the work of
the country’s State administration at various levels. Of
great importance is a constructive solution to the question
of the post of the Vice-President of the country.
The coming weeks will be decisive for the fate of
the peace process as a whole, as important decisions of a
military and political nature are taken. In this regard, we
feel it is appropriate that the international community not
relax its justified, targeted and carefully measured
pressure on the participants in the settlement, encouraging
them scrupulously to abide by the Lusaka Protocol.
It is important that this policy be combined with
purposeful support of the peace process, including
material assistance for the implementation of the
painstakingly planned and phased demobilization of
former combatants and their integration into civilian life.
Very active support is also necessary in establishing
greater trust between the parties. We have high hopes for
the meeting scheduled for early August between President
dos Santos and the leader of UNITA, Mr. Savimbi.
The Russian delegation feels that the draft resolution
on Angola before the Council today is adequate to the
tasks of this stage of the Angolan settlement. We believe

Security Council
Fifty-first year
that the Security Council’s new resolution will send a
serious signal to the participants in the settlement, primarily
UNITA, to show good faith in fulfilling the obligations they
have assumed. The Russian delegation, together with other
members of the Security Council, will vote in favour of this
draft resolution.
The President (interpretation from French): I thank
the representative of the Russian Federation for the kind
words he addressed to me.
Sir John Weston (United Kingdom of Great Britain
and Northern Ireland): Our congratulations go to you, Sir,
on your assumption of office and our thanks to the
Egyptian delegation for guiding us so successfully through
June.
The draft resolution before us correctly identifies the
steps which are necessary for a lasting peace in Angola and
we will vote in favour of it. The draft resolution extends
the mandate of the United Nations Angola Verification
Mission (UNAVEM III) to 11 October 1996. While we do
not generally favour short mandates, we believe a threemonth mandate is necessary to keep pressure on the parties
at this crucial stage in the peace process.
Angola is moving closer towards a secure and peaceful
future. We are pleased that an Amnesty Law has now been
promulgated and that the quartering of the rapid reaction
police has been completed. We welcome the continuing
withdrawal of the Angolan Armed Forces to barracks and
the recent reports that UNITA has released all remaining
prisoners. We are also encouraged that preparations have
now been made to quarter more UNITA troops.
These and other developments are, rightly in our view,
acknowledged in the draft resolution as positive steps in the
peace process. We urge both parties to ensure that these
efforts are not set back by a failure to follow through on
the remaining Lusaka Protocol commitments. It is
important, therefore, that the extension of the mandate of
UNAVEM III to 11 October 1996 be used constructively.
Much remains to be done. In particular, we need to
see UNITA complete the quartering of its troops and hand
over its arms, heavy weapons, ammunition and other
equipment. This has to be matched by the incorporation of
UNITA military personnel into the Angolan Armed Forces
and of its civilian personnel into the State administration
and the national police. The broader process of
demobilization and reintegration also needs to be stepped
up, and it is essential that both parties agree soon on the

3679th meeting
11 July 1996
formation of a Government of Unity and National
Reconciliation. We urge President dos Santos and Mr.
Savimbi to meet as soon as possible to discuss the
outstanding issues.
We are concerned at recent reports that the
integration of UNITA into the Angolan Armed Forces
may have been suspended. We have commended the
integration process in paragraph 4 of the draft resolution.
It is clearly important, therefore, that the Government
clarify the situation so that the process can be resumed
without delay.
We hope that the Secretary-General will be able to
report by 1 October that these tasks have been completed.
They should be concluded promptly — delays in one area
risk undermining progress in other areas and could put the
entire peace process in jeopardy. It is worth noting that
UNAVEM III is the largest United Nations peace-keeping
operation. As such, it remains an important test for the
United Nations as a whole.
Finally, I should like to pay tribute to the
achievements of the Secretary-General’s Special
Representative, Mr. Beye, and to the men and women of
UNAVEM III, who are working actively on behalf of the
international community to achieve a stable and peaceful
future for the people of Angola.
The President (interpretation from French): I thank
the representative of the United Kingdom for the kind
words he addressed to me.
Mr. Martínez Blanco (Honduras) (interpretation
from Spanish): Allow me to convey to you, Sir, our
sincere congratulations on your assumption of the
presidency of the Security Council for this month. Your
vast diplomatic experience and your distinguished
personal and professional abilities ensure the success of
our work. We offer you and the entire French delegation
our full cooperation.
We also congratulate Ambassador Nabil Elaraby and
the delegation of Egypt for their outstanding handling of
the Council presidency in June.
The current situation in Angola and the state of the
implementation of the Lusaka Protocol and the timetable
agreed by the parties indicate that the Government of
Angola and the União Nacional para a Independência
Total de Angola (UNITA) are not doing everything
necessary to accelerate the peace process in that country.

25

Security Council
Fifty-first year
There have been some positive developments in the
peace process in Angola, such as the promulgation of the
Amnesty Law; the completion of the quartering of the rapid
reaction police; the ongoing withdrawal to barracks of the
Angolan Armed Forces; the beginning of the incorporation
of UNITA troops into those forces; the adoption of a
programme for disarming the civilian population; and a
gradual of the improvement of the humanitarian situation.
We must recognize that aspects that are fundamental to the
pacification of the country have yet to be fully carried out.
The quartering of UNITA troops within the time-frame set
out in Security Council resolution 1055 (1996) and the
timetable set by the Joint Commission has not been
completed, nor has UNAVEM III received all the arms,
munitions and military equipment. Moreover, in the
political sphere, there is as yet no tangible progress with
regard to the prompt formation of the Government of Unity
and National Reconciliation.
Overall, for my delegation, the political, military,
economic and social outlook in Angola continues to be
discouraging. So long as the parties have not fully
implemented the “Acordos de Paz”, the Lusaka Protocol
and the relevant Security Council resolutions, and have not
observed the commitments undertaken at Libreville, Gabon,
we believe that there will be no lasting solution to the
Angolan problem. We believe that the parties, especially
UNITA, must show greater interest in promptly carrying
out their commitments in order not to further delay the
peace process. We therefore urge them speedily to fulfil
their obligations and to take the necessary corrective steps.

3679th meeting
11 July 1996
is necessary. We will vote in favour of the draft
resolution extending its mandate for three additional
months.
The President ((interpretation from French): I thank
the representative of Honduras for the kind words he
addressed to me.
Mr. Wibisono (Indonesia): It is indeed a great
pleasure for my delegation to associate itself with
previous speakers in congratulating you, Sir, on your
assumption of the presidency of the Council for the
month of July. We are confident that given your vast
experience and leadership we can be assured of
substantial progress in the work of the Council. Let me
pledge my delegation’s full cooperation to you and your
delegation as you discharge your tasks. I should also like
to congratulate your predecessor, Ambassador Nabil
Elaraby, and the delegation of Egypt, for their skillful
stewardship of the Council’s activities last month.
We also wish to extend a sincere welcome to the
Vice-Minister without Portfolio of Angola, General
Higino Carneiro, and to express our appreciation for his
lucid statement on the situation in Angola.

Angola is experiencing a serious economic and social
crisis that requires the immediate assistance of the
international financial institutions and the support of the
donor countries. The rehabilitation of communities
devastated by war, the reconstruction of the Angolan
national economy and the process of the demobilization and
social reintegration of ex-combatants are essential
conditions for the restoration of peace in Angola. My
country therefore appeals to the international community
and to donor countries to continue their support for the
peace process and for the needs arising from the
demobilization and reintegration process.

Like others, the Indonesian delegation is most
grateful to the Secretary-General for his comprehensive
and informative report on the United Nations Angola
Verification Mission (UNAVEM III) submitted pursuant
to Security Council resolution 1055 (1996) of 8 May
1996. My delegation is gratified to note that UNAVEM
III has greatly contributed to the implementation of the
Lusaka Protocol and continues to play an exemplary role
not only in the realm of peace-keeping, but also in
peace-building and post-conflict management. In this
regard, we would like to pay tribute to the personnel of
UNAVEM III for their highly commendable work under
difficult circumstances, as well as to the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, Mr. Alioune
Blondin Beye, for his dedication to furthering a
comprehensive and sustainable peace in the country.
Similarly, we welcome the efforts of the observer States
in promoting peace and security in Angola.

With regard to UNAVEM III, my delegation
recognizes that the Mission has pursued all its activities in
monitoring and verification, assistance to humanitarian
convoys, the work of demining and road repair, as well as
human rights training for UNITA soldiers in the quartering
areas. My delegation therefore believes that, at the present
phase of the peace process, the presence of UNAVEM III

Substantial progress has been made towards the
establishment of a lasting peace in Angola, as is clearly
reflected in the various paragraphs of the draft resolution
now before us. We are pleased to note that steps are
being taken in accordance with the Lusaka Protocol. This
is reflected in the promulgation of the Amnesty Law, the
completion of the quartering of the rapid reaction police,

26

Security Council
Fifty-first year
and the partial withdrawal of the Angolan Armed Forces
(FAA) to barracks. The agreement reached between the
President of Angola and the leader of UNITA on the
establishment of a Government of Unity and National
Reconciliation will capitalize on the positive achievements
made previously. Throughout this process, the presence of
UNAVEM III has contributed significantly to advancing the
restoration of peace to Angola by a multitude of tasks: the
monitoring and verification of the cease-fire; the withdrawal
and quartering of troops and police; the guarding of
collected weapons; the patrolling of major routes; escorting
humanitarian convoys; and other essential tasks. It is
therefore clear that UNAVEM III has had to devote as
much attention to alleviating the misery of the civilian
population as to efforts to control and resolve the conflict.
But given the considerable role UNAVEM III plays in
Angola, my delegation feels that the task at hand is far
from complete and that much remains to be done. We are
seriously concerned at the slowness of the pace in the
implementation of some aspects of the Lusaka Protocol,
which has already fallen behind schedule. The quartering
and disarming of União Nacional para a Independência
Total de Angola (UNITA) troops constitute critical
components for the success of the peace process. The
Indonesian delegation urges the parties to capitalize on the
positive momentum of the peace process before a new
series of concerns emerges to confront the nascent Angolan
State. In this regard, we would like to remind both parties
that UNAVEM III is expected to complete its mission by
February 1997. We therefore call on the parties to
accelerate the pace in the areas of the disarmament of the
civilian population and the incorporation of UNITA forces
into the FAA, and to complete the withdrawal of the FAA
from forward positions. It is also essential that the quality
of weapons handed over by UNITA be improved,
particularly the heavy weapons, and that a solution be
found to address the high desertion rate.
It is the view of my delegation that disarming the
population, building a national army and reintegrating the
ex-combatants are crucial steps for a lasting and
comprehensive peace in Angola. There are already alarming
indications regarding the breakdown of law and order. In
regions where UNITA troops are withdrawing, banditry,
looting and killing are threatening the return to normalcy.
Such a situation only highlights the need to extend State
administration throughout the country, as referred to in
paragraph 5 of the draft resolution. It is therefore essential
for the political leaders to achieve a Government of Unity
and National Reconciliation as soon as possible in order to
avoid any serious deterioration in Angola.

3679th meeting
11 July 1996
In this regard, my delegation underlines the
importance of paragraph 13 of the draft resolution, urging
the Government of Angola and UNITA to take all
necessary steps for all elected members of Parliament to
take their seats in the National Assembly. This will
generate the functioning of democratic mechanisms in the
country, which could bring about a climate conducive to
political stability and genuine peace. In this context, it is
clearly discernable that hostile propaganda broadcasts can
indeed adversely affect the spirit of national reconciliation
and reconstruction in Angola. My delegation therefore
calls upon the parties concerned to put an end to this
exercise, which not only hinders the implementation of
the peace process as a whole but also damages it.
The need for Angola to reconstruct its national fabric
is essential. This, in our opinion, is a multifaceted
endeavour. It is therefore imperative that the Lusaka
Protocol be implemented in full and in a timely manner,
which in turn will establish peace between the parties.
Moreover, we are aware of the threat that mine pollution
poses; hence, mine-clearance is fundamental if the
Angolan people are to return to the fields and move freely
in their own country. Needless to say, the reconstruction
of the country’s infrastructure will undoubtedly enable the
people of Angola to resume a semblance of normal life.
The many woes that confront Angola, compounded by the
deep economic crisis, can be solved only through the full
implementation of the Protocol. It is therefore necessary
for the international community to continue to respond
positively to the rehabilitation efforts of Angola, for this
would constitute a vital contribution to a durable peace.
None the less, it must be emphasized that genuine
peace can be attained only if the parties themselves show
greater readiness to implement their commitment and to
act in a spirit of flexibility and compromise. We look
forward to the meeting between President dos Santos and
Mr. Savimbi in the territory of Angola, as this will
provide the opportunity for them to resolve all remaining
issues and to promote confidence-building between the
parties.
In the light of these considerations and given the
fundamental role UNAVEM III plays in contributing to
the implementation of the peace process, my delegation
supports the extension of the Mission’s mandate for
another three months, and therefore will vote in favour of
the draft resolution now before us. Not only will this
extension consolidate the gains achieved in the peace
process; it ought to be seen as an opportunity for the
parties faithfully to implement all relevant agreements

27

Security Council
Fifty-first year
they themselves have entered into. It is our sincere hope
that during this period the parties will be afforded a
significant opportunity to demonstrate their willingness to
resolve their own problems and to respect the role of
international and regional organizations.
The President (interpretation from French): I thank
the representative of Indonesia for the kind words he
addressed to me.
Mr. Włosowicz (Poland): Let me begin, Sir, by
extending to you our most sincere congratulations on your
assumption of the presidency of the Security Council for
the month of July. We have full confidence in your
leadership. I also wish to thank your predecessor,
Ambassador Nabil Elaraby of Egypt, for his efficient
and — let me stress — pleasant conduct of the business of
the Council during the month of June.
The civil war that has ravaged Angola for the last 20
years is one of the most bloody and long-lasting internal
conflicts in Africa. It has devastated that beautiful, rich
country. Almost half a million Angolans have perished in
its wake and three million people remain internally
displaced today.
A ray of hope, none the less, shone on Angola in
November 1994 at the signing of the Lusaka Protocol
between the leaders of the warring parties. The international
community in general had good reason to be satisfied —
above all the United Nations and, particularly, this body. It
was, after all, very much as a result of the active, strong
and unanimous position of the Security Council that the
parties to the conflict in Angola began the difficult task of
national reconciliation. There is no doubt that the Lusaka
Protocol represented a turning-point and, at the same time,
an auspicious start for the building of a peaceful,
prosperous and, most important, unified Angola.
Following the signing of the Lusaka Protocal, it has
clearly emerged from the Security Council debates on
Angola that the process of national reconciliation is a far
more complex undertaking than could have been predicted.
The report of the Secretary-General presenting
developments in the situation in Angola since May 1996,
contained in document S/1996/503, is slightly more
optimistic in tone than previous reports. Unfortunately, it
does not contain significantly different observations. We are
encouraged to note positive elements such as the
promulgation of the Amnesty Law, completion of the
quartering of the rapid reaction police, some progress in the

28

3679th meeting
11 July 1996
quartering of UNITA troops and the beginning of the
incorporation of UNITA military personnel into the
Angolan Armed Forces.
At the same time, we are disappointed to note
negative elements such as the high number of desertions
from the quartering areas, the unsatisfactory quality and
quantity of weapons handed over by UNITA, the failure
to quarter UNITA police personnel, delays in the
quartering of all UNITA troops, and the incomplete
withdrawal of Government troops from forward positions.
Factors such as these do not allow us to claim that the
peace process in Angola has already reached that critical
point from which we need fear no return to a state of
war.
We fully share the opinion of the Secretary-General
that the coming weeks will be crucial for the future of
Angola. The first important task to be accomplished
during this time is the integration of Government and
UNITA troops into the joint Angolan Armed Forces. This
should be accompanied by the demobilization of the
remaining troops and the demilitarization of the civilian
population. The next step in national reconciliation, we
believe, should be to establish a new political dimension,
the most important feature of which will be a fully
inclusive Government and State administration in which
both parties are properly represented.
Good will and the full engagement of all parties
concerned are needed now more than ever. We call upon
the Government of Angola, and in particular upon
UNITA, to ensure that all their declarations and
commitments are put into effect and that the schedules
adopted are fulfilled in appropriate and timely fashion.
Angola is now confronted with enormous economic
and social challenges such as reconstruction of the
national economy, preparation for a possible food
shortfall, reintegration of the demobilized troops into the
social life of Angola and, last but certainly not least, the
clearance of the mines that continue to endanger the life
and health of civilians. The international community will
certainly continue to offer its assistance, provided that the
people of Angola demonstrate their willingness to
cooperate actively to restore long-lasting peace and
stability to their country.
The international community has made a concerted
effort to help Angola in the best way it can. The proof is
embodied in UNAVEM in all its phases. UNAVEM,
already in phase III, is the largest United Nations

Security Council
Fifty-first year
peace-keeping operation anywhere in the world. However,
it must be clear that the presence of UNAVEM in Angola
can be justified only if there is visible progress in the
process of national reconciliation.
Today we are going to extend the mandate of
UNAVEM III for a further three months. Our delegation
very much hopes that the presence of UNAVEM III will be
properly and effectively utilized by the leaders and the
people of Angola, who have been given a great opportunity
to return promptly to a state of normalcy. That opportunity
must not be missed.
The President (interpretation from French): I thank
the representative of Poland for the kind words he
addressed to me.
I shall now put to the vote the draft resolution
contained in document S/1996/536.
A vote was taken by show of hands.
In favour:
Botswana, Chile, China, Egypt, France, Germany,
Guinea-Bissau, Honduras, Indonesia, Italy, Poland,
Republic of Korea, Russian Federation, United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland,
United States of America
The President (interpretation from French): There
were 15 votes in favour. The draft resolution has been
adopted unanimously as resolution 1064 (1996).
I shall now call on those members of the Council who
wish to make statements following the voting.
Mr. Inderfurth (United States): May I first express
my delegation’s congratulations to you, Sir, on your
assumption of the presidency during the month of July and
pledge our full cooperation, and also express my
delegation’s appreciation to Ambassador Elaraby and the
Egyptian delegation for their excellent stewardship of the
Council during the month of June.
Finally, may I express our welcome to the Angolan
delegation that has joined us in the Council today led by
Minister Carneiro.
The United States is strongly committed to the
Angolan peace process, a process that we believe will give
Angolans the opportunity to build a strong, prosperous,

3679th meeting
11 July 1996
united, democratic and peaceful nation. The resolution we
have just adopted demonstrates that the Security Council
shares that commitment. We welcome the progress that
has been made to date, and we are encouraged that the
process is moving forward. Yet, sharing the view of other
Council members, we regret that implementation is still
behind schedule, leaving important steps still to be taken.
Rapid progress is essential, including in such vital areas
as demobilization, reintegration and demining.
There has been real movement since the renewal of
the mandate on 8 May. In these eight weeks, we have
seen passage of an Amnesty Law; an accord between the
Angolan Armed Forces and UNITA on military
integration; entry of the vanguard of UNITA officers into
the Angolan Armed Forces; the quartering of another
17,000 troops, bringing the numbers to over 50,000
registered; three ceremonies to destroy landmines;
quartering of the Government’s rapid reaction police;
further withdrawals of the Angolan Armed Forces to
barracks; launching of a plan to disarm the civilian
population; good progress in bilateral GovernmentUNITA discussions on constitutional reform; closing of
eight UNITA quartering sites; and lifting of some
checkpoints. Clearly, some of these actions have been
incomplete, but movement has been substantial and in the
right direction. These are important steps toward peace
for the people of Angola.
Let me focus for a moment on a key phase of the
peace process, namely demobilization. Quartering of
UNITA troops must conclude soon — this month — and
a rapid and orderly demobilization of those who will not
enter the integrated military must begin in order to sustain
confidence in the peace process. Some 67,000
Government and UNITA soldiers are scheduled to be
demobilized: soldiers who are understandably uncertain
and anxious about their future. These soldiers have much
to contribute to Angola’s massive reconstruction process.
Angolan authorities and the international community
must ensure that the considerable energy and talent of
these demobilized soldiers are properly developed and
channelled. International support is essential to ensure that
demobilization and reintegration of former combatants is
rapid. We and our partners in the international donor
community are committed to assisting the successful
demobilization of Government and UNITA troops, but
only $10 million of the $42 million required for the first
year of the demobilization and reintegration process has
been received. We call on other Member States to give
this urgent requirement their fullest attention. Demobilized

29

Security Council
Fifty-first year
combatants must have a real stake in peacetime Angola;
they must be convinced that there is indeed “life after
Lusaka”.
Today’s resolution rightly calls attention to the urgent
task of demining. Demining is essential to enable the free
circulation of people and goods throughout Angola, and
thus crucial to demobilization and reconstruction efforts.
We encourage the parties to exert an even greater effort in
all phases of the demining process. We also commend the
three land-mine destruction ceremonies that have been held,
one by the Government and two by UNITA. We continue
to believe a joint land-mine destruction ceremony would
have a tremendous impact on the psychology of Angolans,
providing further assurances that after two decades of war
a new era of peace and national reconciliation is dawning.
The coming few months are of critical importance for
the peace process. As the peace process moves forward,
and with UNAVEM’s expected completion date of February
1997 drawing closer, the tasks become harder, the stakes
get higher, and the political will required of both parties
must not waver. The Government and UNITA have, in the
Joint Commission, agreed upon a calendar of actions for
July. The Security Council will be following the actions of
the parties closely to see that each side is living up to its
obligations. The UNITA troops which will enter into the
unified armed forces must be selected, and they, along with
UNITA officers, must enter into the new, joint military. We
were distressed to learn this morning that there seems to be
some disruption in the selection process which had just
started in the past few days. We trust that both sides will
show the utmost commitment, political will and necessary
flexibility to get the process of incorporating UNITA troops
into the Angolan Armed Forces back on track without
further delay.
Creation of the joint military, and demobilization of
those troops not selected for its ranks, will be an important
cornerstone in building the trust and confidence that are key
to the future of Angola. Another pivotal step will be the
establishment of a Government of Unity and National
Reconciliation. We fully understand that these steps are not
easy ones to take, but they must be taken, not only to fulfil
formal obligations, but to cement the confidence and trust
the parties have been building over the past year and a half.
Differences of opinion may arise and actions may be
questioned, but any difficulties must be worked out through
peaceful means and dialogue. With the requisite political
will, in the current climate of growing cooperation, the
necessary steps can be taken within the time-frame agreed
to by the two parties. We fully expect to hail the formation

30

3679th meeting
11 July 1996
of a new Government of Unity and National
Reconciliation, and the irreversibility of the peace
process, within the current mandate period covered by
today’s Security Council resolution.
I conclude by commending the Secretary-General’s
Special Representative, Maître Beye, the Force
Commander of UNAVEM, and all personnel of
UNAVEM III for their dedication and courageous service
in the cause of peace. The peace process would not be
where it is today without them. We are also grateful for
the generosity of countries that have contributed troops to
the UNAVEM force.
The President (interpretation from French): I thank
the representative of the United States of America for the
kind words he addressed to me.
I shall now make a statement in my capacity as the
representative of France.
The Security Council regularly takes up the question
of Angola. For the first time, we note that, as the
Secretary-General has stressed in his report, real progress
has been made in implementing the peace process. Peace
in Angola is becoming truly credible.
First, we should congratulate the Angolan
Government, which has made swift progress in
implementing its obligations, especially with regard to the
Amnesty Law, the release of prisoners, the quartering of
the rapid reaction police and the recent launch of the
disarmament programme for the civilian population. We
also warmly welcome the efforts made by UNITA with
regard to the quartering of its troops. The resolution that
we have just adopted takes account of these positive
developments, and that is why we voted in favour of it.
However, much remains to be done. First, it is
absolutely essential that the quartering of UNITA troops
be completed as soon as possible. Quartering will become
truly credible only when UNITA has handed over its
heavy weapons and all troops have been demobilized. At
the same time, it is clear that that quartering makes sense
only if there is a real possibility for former combatants to
be integrated into the Angolan Armed Forces or to be
rapidly and effectively reintegrated into civilian life. That
is why it is essential that integration and reintegration of
demobilized combatants be carried out promptly.

Security Council
Fifty-first year

3679th meeting
11 July 1996

It is equally essential that national reconciliation be
gradually consolidated and that, in that spirit, a Government
of unity be rapidly formed. We understand that the question
of the vice-presidency which should fall to Mr. Savimbi is
the keystone of all of these negotiations. We therefore hope
that the meeting between President dos Santos and Mr.
Savimbi, which should be held in Angola in early August,
will bear fruit.
It is important that the parties understand that the
United Nations will not be present in Angola indefinitely.
It is clear that UNAVEM III will have to begin leaving the
country as scheduled in February 1997. For that reason it
is necessary for the former warring parties to overcome
their remaining problems as soon as possible and in the
general interest, and for the international community to
support the efforts towards economic rehabilitation that are
needed in Angola to ensure stability and lasting
development in that country.
I now resume my functions as President of the
Council.
There are no further speakers for this meeting. The
Security Council has thus concluded the present stage of its
consideration of the item on its agenda.
The meeting rose at 7 p.m.

31
