A /72/PV.68

United Nations

General Assembly

Official Records

Seventy-second session

68th plenary meeting

Friday, 8 December 2017, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Lajčák . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (Slovakia)

In the absence of the President, Mr. Perera (Sri
Lanka), Vice-President, took the Chair.
The meeting was called to order at 10.10 a.m.
Agenda item 15 (continued)
Culture of peace
Reports of the Secretary-General (A/72/488
and A/72/621)
Draft resolutions (A/72/L.21 and A/72/L.26)
The Acting President: Members will recall
that the General Assembly, at its sixty-first plenary
meeting, held on 1 December 2017, adopted resolution
72/17, entitled “Effects of terrorist acts directed against
religious sites on the culture of peace”, under this
agenda item.
I now give the floor to the representative of Algeria
to introduce draft resolution A/72/L.26.
Mr. Boukadoum (Algeria) (spoke in Arabic): On
behalf of all the sponsors of draft resolution A/72/L.26,
entitled “International Day of Living Together in Peace”,
it is my pleasure to present the draft resolution in this
plenary meeting of the General Assembly. I would like
to thank all of the countries that contributed to the draft
resolution, as well as its sponsors, especially Arab and
African countries and other friendly delegations.
The draft resolution proposed by Algeria is the
fruit of informal consultations among countries carried
out in a transparent and constructive way. We therefore

have a consensual text that takes into consideration the
concerns and aspirations of all.
(spoke in English)
Algeria is the homeland of Saint Augustine,
Al-Kahina, Lalla Fadhma N’Soumer, Emir Abdelkader
and Roger Hanin. It was the adopted country of Frantz
Fanon and Miriam Makeba. It is also the second
homeland of Nelson Mandela, as he used to say himself.
Algeria is located at the crossroads of many cultures,
traditions, religions and civilizations that have shaped
its past, the bulk of its present and will continue to
shape its future. We will remain an open society.
(spoke in French)
The draft resolution before us today contains
13 preambular and seven operative paragraphs, the
first of which designates 16 May as the International
Day of Living Together in Peace. The goal of the draft
resolution is to further promote living together in
peace, tolerance, peaceful coexistence and harmonious
cohabitation, as well as in mutual understanding and
respect, without distinction of race, nationality, sex,
civilization, language or religion.
(spoke in Spanish)
The draft resolution also calls on all Member
States to further promote reconciliation to help ensure
sustainable peace and development, including by
working with communities, religious leaders and other
relevant actors. It also invites United Nations entities
and other international and regional organizations, as
well as civil society — including non-governmental

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of speeches
delivered in other languages. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only.
They should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

17-42761 (E)

*1742761*

A/72/PV.68

organizations and individuals — to celebrate the
International Day of Living Together in Peace.
(spoke in French)
I also stress that the draft resolution is a model of
cooperation and harmony between civil society and
States. With us here today is Sheikh Khaled Bentounès,
Honorary President of the Association internationale
soufie Alawiyya and spiritual guide of the Tariqa
Alawiyya, which has consultative status in UNESCO. I
want to highlight an excerpt of the statement he would
have liked to deliver here.
“[T]he immanent humanity within us expresses
itself more when each of us decides to create a rich
life for him- or herself with and for others”.
That is the very spirit of our joint efforts, which have
resulted in this draft resolution.
(spoke in Arabic)
Finally, it is the wish of the sponsors that draft
resolution A/72/L.26 be adopted by consensus.
The Acting President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Malaysia to introduce draft resolution
A/72/L.21.
Mr. Yaakob (Malaysia): I have the honour of
introducing draft resolution A/72/L.21, entitled
“Moderation”.
Moderation is acceptance and respect. It involves
mutual understanding and the celebration of the
rich dimensions of diversity. Diversity enriches and
strengthens the fabric of life. More than tolerance, the
acceptance of diversity is the key to peaceful coexistence.
Time and again, history has shown that the rejection
of moderation — that is, choosing to be extreme in any
way or form — can ignite conflict and discontentment,
leading ultimately to war and untold suffering.
Moderation, on the other hand, can mitigate or prevent
such effects. It is therefore imperative that moderation
be seen as the bedrock of international relations in a
world where in some parts of the globe peace remains
elusive to this day.
As we deliberate on our agenda today, we are happy
to note that other world leaders, as well as our Prime
Minister, are promoting the approach of moderation.
The concept can be seen in various outcome documents
of a number of international associations such as the
Association of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN), the
2/21

08/12/2017

Movement of Non-Aligned Countries, the Organization
of Islamic Cooperation, the Commonwealth of Nations
and the Asia-Europe Meeting.
Only two days ago, President Trump made
a reference to moderation in a speech he gave in
Washington, D.C., saying,
“So today we call for calm, for moderation and for
the voices of tolerance to prevail over the purveyors
of hate. Our children should inherit our love, not
our conflicts”.
While Malaysia is extremely concerned about President
Trump’s decision regarding Jerusalem, we can identify
with the spirit of the importance of making the voices
of moderation and tolerance prevail.
Recognizing that moderation as an approach can
contribute to peaceful coexistence, today Malaysia is
introducing draft resolution A/72/L.21. Among other
things, the draft resolution calls on the international
community to support a global movement of moderates
as a common platform to amplify the voices of
moderation over extremism. We are also seeking to
proclaim 2019 the International Year of Moderation,
when we would encourage and support initiatives that
promote mutual respect and peaceful coexistence and
reject the extremists who divide us all.
To that end, my delegation has convened five
informal consultations and numerous bilateral meetings
over the past two months. We were encouraged by the
engagement of delegations during the discussions of
the draft and believe that the results are reflected in
a fair and balanced text as we move forward. I would
like to take this opportunity to express my most sincere
appreciation to all the delegations that have engaged
with us during these informal consultations. I would
also like to invite those delegations to sponsor and
support the draft resolution.
I would now like to deliver a statement in my
national capacity under the agenda item “Culture
of peace”.
Malaysia would like to align itself with the
statement to be delivered by the representative of Brunei
Darussalam on behalf of the Association of Southeast
Asian Nations on agenda item 15, “Culture of peace.”
At the outset, I want to thank the Secretary-General
for his report on the promotion of a culture of peace and
interreligious and intercultural dialogue, understanding
17-42761

08/12/2017

and cooperation for peace (A/72/488), and to express
our appreciation to him for his report entitled “A world
against violence and violent extremism” (A/72/621).
They chronicle important efforts by the United Nations
system to promote a global culture of peace and
non-violence, both within and beyond national borders.
Malaysia commends the work of UNESCO,
UNICEF and the Alliance of Civilizations, as well as
other United Nations entities and initiatives, in pursuit
of the true understanding and tolerance that bridges
divides and overcomes prejudices through intercultural
and interreligious dialogue. We also commend the
efforts that have been undertaken to instil values
related to a culture of peace through education and a
focus on involving young people. It is in full support
of these undertakings that Malaysia has in the past
become a sponsor of the annual resolution on the
promotion of interreligious and intercultural dialogue,
understanding and cooperation for peace and will do so
again at this session.
We are also encouraged that the strong impetus
gained from the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development — which makes numerous references to
peace, particularly in Sustainable Development Goal
16 — has helped the United Nations system to work
towards promoting a culture of peace. We believe
firmly that we can look forward to seeing these efforts
deliver quantifiable and significant outcomes on the
realization of peaceful and inclusive societies for
sustainable development.
In addition to action within the United Nations
system, we would also like to highlight the contribution
that the concept of moderation can add to efforts
promoting a culture of peace. In 2010, the Prime Minister
of Malaysia called on the silent majority of moderates to
come together in a global movement to reclaim centre
stage from the loud voices of hatred and extremism (see
A/65/PV.19). Since then, neither the relevance nor the
urgency of this call has subsided. The international
community remains mired in violent conflicts across
the world that are perpetrated by extremists who
choose to influence by sowing discord, instilling fear
and committing acts of terrorism. Now more than ever
we need the collective voices of moderates to be heard
in order to quell the extremist rhetoric that is the polar
opposite of the culture of peace that is so vital to lasting
stability, security and development.

A/72/PV.68

While the call for a global movement of moderates
is fairly recent, moderation itself is an age-old, living
principle that is embodied in all the great religions.
By advocating a middle path between extremes,
moderation is an approach that emphasizes the universal
values of mutual respect, understanding, tolerance and
compassion. These are key ingredients to cultivating a
culture of peace.
There are many leaders who personify moderation
in their approach, and we need not look far for vivid
examples of moderation in action in three of the most
popular recipients of the Nobel Peace Prize. Martin
Luther King, Jr.’s struggle against racial inequality led
to great advancements in civil rights for the people. The
world is also still mourning the loss of President Nelson
Mandela, who exemplified the virtues of forgiveness
and reconciliation, among others. Moderation is also
reflected in the conduct of Malala Yousafzai, the
young Pakistani who defends the right of all children,
including girls, to education.
The Global Movement of Moderates is a sincere
attempt to channel en masse the courage and spirit
shown by Martin Luther King, Jr., Nelson Mandela and
Malala Yousafzai. Since its inception, the Movement
has had far-reaching support from many quarters
across the world. In particular, ASEAN has endorsed
and adopted the Global Movement of Moderates as
part of its recognition of moderation as a central value
of the ASEAN way. It underpins the interactions
of our multiracial, multicultural and multireligious
communities in which we give priority to the peaceful
resolution of disputes.
The general absence of wars and armed conflict
among neighbours in our region is a testament to
ASEAN’s commitment to upholding moderate values,
which promote mutual trust and confidence and
uphold dialogue and negotiation as key means for
resolving disputes. The idea of the Global Movement of
Moderates is also supported by many others, as can be
seen in the various outcome documents of a number of
international associations and conferences, including
the Non-Aligned Movement, the Organization of
Islamic Cooperation, the Commonwealth and the AsiaEurope Meeting.
Malaysia believes that moderation in all its forms
can complement the mission and work of the United
Nations system at various levels in promoting a culture
of peace. That is why we are introducing draft resolution

17-427613/21

A/72/PV.68

A/72/L.21 on moderation, an initiative that we feel is
very timely.
In conclusion, the obstacles that prevent a culture
of peace from taking root are many, but they are not
insurmountable. We believe that moderation can provide
a valuable contribution to the overall endeavour of
building a culture of peace that is vital to the sustained
development and prosperity that we all desire.
Ms. Md Jaini (Brunei Darussalam): I have the
honour of delivering this statement on behalf of
the members of the Association of Southeast Asian
Nations (ASEAN) — Cambodia, Indonesia, the Lao
People’s Democratic Republic, Malaysia, Myanmar,
the Philippines, Singapore, Thailand, Viet Nam and my
own country, Brunei Darussalam.
We would like to thank the Secretary-General
for his report entitled “Promotion of a culture of
peace and interreligious and intercultural dialogue,
understanding and cooperation for peace” (A/72/488).
We are particularly pleased to note the increasing
significance and scope of the promotion of a culture of
peace and interreligious and intercultural dialogue and
cooperation undertaken by the Organization.
With more than 600 million people, South-East
Asia enjoys a multitude of ethnicities, religions,
languages and cultures. Our rich diversity and peaceful
coexistence have been a source of strength and
harmony for ASEAN since its inception 50 years ago.
Promoting a culture of peace is an intrinsic value of our
organization, as enshrined in the Bangkok Declaration
of 1967 and the Treaty of Amity and Cooperation in
Southeast Asia and further reaffirmed in ASEAN’s
Community Vision 2025 and our shared aspiration for
a truly inclusive and people-oriented, people-centred
ASEAN community. Moreover, we remain resolute in
maintaining and promoting enduring peace, security
and stability in the region, as well as the peaceful
resolution of disputes, without resorting to the threat or
use of force, in accordance with universally recognized
principles of international law. In this regard, ASEAN
will continue to play a central role in developing a
rules-based regional architecture.
ASEAN is firmly committed to doing its part
to instil and uphold the values and norms of peace,
harmony, intercultural understanding, the rule of
law, good governance, respect, trust, tolerance,
inclusiveness, moderation, social responsibility and
diversity. During the thirty-first ASEAN summit, held
4/21

08/12/2017

in Manila last month, our leaders adopted the ASEAN
Declaration on a Culture of Prevention for a Peaceful,
Inclusive, Resilient, Healthy and Harmonious Society,
which aims to strengthen coordination in promoting a
culture of prevention across the three pillars of ASEAN,
whose main thrusts include the promoting peace and
intercultural understanding, respect for all and support
for the values of moderation, as called for by the Global
Movement of Moderates.
ASEAN continues to place great emphasis
on promoting dialogue and education to foster
interreligious and intercultural understanding with
broad participation at all levels. In particular, we
recognize the role of young people as agents of change
and peace and the need to inculcate a culture of peace
from a young age. The ASEAN Youth Interfaith
Camp 2017 was held last October in Indonesia under
the theme of “Tolerance in Diversity for a World
Harmony”, with a view to promoting dialogue and
mutual understanding among young people of different
faiths and cultural backgrounds.
The rising threat of terrorism and violent
extremism across the globe is a grim reminder of the
need for sustained efforts to combat this scourge and
promote peace and tolerance. We would like to take
this opportunity to reiterate our strong condemnation
of violent extremism and terrorism in all its forms
and manifestations. We must not allow the seeds of
intolerance, hatred and extremism to take root. However,
this global threat requires a collective effort. In that
regard, ASEAN highly appreciates the work of various
regional and international organizations, notably the
United Nations, in promoting a culture of peace through
dialogue and negotiations, enhanced tolerance, trust
and mutual understanding and addressing all forms of
political and religious disputes and radicalism.
For our part, we look forward to enhancing the
comprehensive partnership between the Association of
Southeast Asian Nations and the United Nations and
leveraging the complementarities between ASEAN’s
Community Vision 2025 and the 2030 Agenda for
Sustainable Development. We believe that there is great
scope for closer cooperation in promoting the culture of
prevention and in averting violent extremism.
ASEAN also stands firmly behind the initiative
just introduced by Malaysia through its draft resolution
on moderation (A/72/L.21), submitted during the
current session. The draft resolution puts in context
17-42761

08/12/2017

the importance of providing the voices of moderation
with a platform against the backdrop of the widespread
propagation of violent extremism promoted by an
irresponsible few. It seeks to proclaim 2019 as the
International Year of Moderation and encourages and
supports initiatives that promote mutual respect and
peaceful coexistence so as to drown out the voices of
extremism. In anticipation of its consideration by the
Assembly immediately after this debate, on behalf
of ASEAN, I want to take this opportunity to seek
the support of all delegations for the draft resolution
on moderation.
ASEAN also lauds the efforts of the United Nations
Alliance of Civilizations in facilitating the global
conversation on living together in diversity, preventing
intercultural crises and mobilizing broad public
support for cultural diversity, tolerance and inclusion.
We also commend UNESCO for its positive role as the
lead organ for intercultural dialogue. ASEAN member
States are committed to the International Decade
for the Rapprochement of Cultures and to further
strengthening its activities in order to promote the value
of learning to live together in peace. We believe that all
of these multilateral initiatives are mutually reinforcing
and foster a culture of peace. We fully support the
continued participation of all relevant stakeholders,
including religious leaders, women, young people and
members of civil society, the media and academia.
In conclusion, ASEAN is firmly committed to
promoting the culture of peace. As a multiracial,
multicultural and multireligious community, we are
all part of the same family, with a shared future and a
common desire to live in a world of peace, stability and
prosperity founded on respect and a deep appreciation
for humankind’s diversity. We stand ready to work
with our partners and the international community
to complement the work of the United Nations in
promoting a culture of peace and interreligious and
intercultural dialogue.
Mr. Said (Libya) (spoke in Arabic): “We the
peoples” is how the Charter of the United Nations
begins. We come from different places and different
environments. We have our own cultures, civilizations
and beliefs, which we share with the world. Together,
we build human civilization.
The concept of peace is also reflected in the
Constitution of UNESCO, which says that

A/72/PV.68

“since wars begin in the minds of men, it is in the
minds of men that the defences of peace must be
constructed”.
We welcome the role of UNESCO in our efforts to
realize peace and a culture of peace through all of its
cyclical programmes and activities. The ultimate goal in
seeking peace is to establish agreement between parties
and harmony among peoples and to end any feelings of
animosity. The Charter shows that in order to achieve
peace we need security and stability across the world,
in societies and in families, a goal that will enhance
prosperity and development for all. We must work to
make peace and help the parties to conflicts arrive
at negotiated agreements. We must work to maintain
peace by preventing conflicts between parties. We must
work to build peace by creating the social conditions
that societies need to be able to live in peace. If we
are to achieve those goals, we must also strengthen
human rights, economic development and assistance
and social solidarity.
In the final decade of the twentieth century, we saw
many calls for strengthening peace. On 20 November
1997, the General Assembly adopted resolution 52/15,
proclaiming 2000 the International Year for the Culture
of Peace. On 10 November 1998, the General Assembly
adopted resolution 53/25, proclaiming the first decade
of the new century as the International Decade for a
Culture of Peace and Non-Violence for the Children of
the World. On 6 November 1999, the General Assembly
adopted the Declaration and Programme of Action on
a Culture of Peace (resolution 53/243), which offered
guidelines to Governments, international organizations
and the international community as a whole for
strengthening a culture of peace.
The terms “culture” and “peace” are now closely
related in the area of peacebuilding. The concept of a
culture of peace was formulated at a UNESCO meeting
in Côte d’Ivoire in 1989, and by 1999 it was reflected
in programmes of action in the truest sense, becoming
part of UNESCO’s strategy for rejecting violence and
promoting peaceful coexistence and respect for the
rights of others, their freedoms, heritage and ways of
life. The Declaration in resolution 53/243 outlined the
fostering of a culture of peace through education as the
first of eight action areas.
We all know that the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development is aimed at building peaceful and
inclusive societies so that sustainable development

17-427615/21

A/72/PV.68

can be achieved in peace and prosperity. We must all
work together to accelerate the achievement of the
16 Sustainable Development Goals, which guarantee
global participatory activities at all levels with a view
to achieving sustainable development. We affirm that
Governments, civil society and local communities must
all work together to implement sustainable solutions
and confront violence, achieve justice and ensure that
everyone is involved.
The Alliance of Civilizations is not about the
merging of religions, beliefs or cultures. Civilization is
an umbrella for all religions and cultures. The purpose
of dialogue among civilizations is to study the origins
of differences so that we can resolve disputes, with
the understanding that they must be resolved ethically
and peacefully. To enrich the culture of peace we
must genuinely believe in such principles as respect
for human rights, freedom of opinion and expression,
justice and equality, and the fight against poverty
and unemployment. I would like to thank all Member
States that have introduced draft resolutions intended
to strengthen the concept of a culture of peace and
encourage dialogue, understanding and cooperation
among religions and civilizations, all in order to
enhance tolerance, diversity and cultural diversity as
ways of preventing conflict.
My country condemns the terrorist attack that took
place north of Sinai in the Arab Republic of Egypt on
24 November, targeting believers at prayer and taking
at least 305 lives, including 27 children. This terrorist
act, condemned by all peoples of the world, shows
that terrorism has no religion and no allies. Terrorists
simply exploit anything that will further their economic
and political interests, which no one but the leaders of
terrorist organizations understands. We should address
this extremist ideological thought, whose sources must
be extirpated by fighting its ideologies.
We welcomed Saudi Arabia’s establishment of the
Centre for Moderation this year. We are counting on
the Centre to cut off all the intellectual sources used
by terrorists and to counter their attempts to realize
their political goals and agendas, which they alone are
privy to.
My delegation commends our Organization’s
efforts to encourage dialogue, understanding and
cooperation among religions and cultures with a view
to achieving peace. We also commend UNESCO’s
leading role in enhancing and consolidating a culture
6/21

08/12/2017

of peace, and that of the High Representative of the
Secretary-General, who is working diligently to realize
and promote a culture of dialogue and understanding at
the organizational level.
Mr. Al-Abdali (Oman) (spoke in Arabic): At
the outset, I would like to thank the President of the
General Assembly for convening today’s meeting, and
the Secretary-General for his two reports on a culture
of peace (A/72/488 and A/72/621).
The dissemination of a culture of peace, dialogue,
tolerance and acceptance of the other has been helping
to create a philosophy of tolerance among the peoples
of the world for differences between languages and
religions. It urges people to believe in love and fraternity,
regardless of their views, beliefs, language or ethnic
origins. These principles have produced generations
who reject violence in all its forms and believe in peace
and coexistence, which lead to stability, progress and
development for all.
The conflicts in the Middle East have led to the
emergence of many extremist groups whose beliefs run
counter to a culture of peace, tolerance and dialogue.
We have to put a stop to their influence by working to
address and abolish these scourges through appropriate
measures consistent with our various resolutions,
treaties and conventions.
We in Oman firmly believe that peace and dialogue
are absolutely crucial, and that it is our responsibility to
achieve them, something we have repeatedly affirmed
in national, regional and international forums. We have
translated that faith into reality by making it a way of
life, with practices that organize relations among our
citizens and with the world. Our foreign policy and
international relations are based on promoting peace,
coexistence, tolerance, dialogue and close cooperation
with all peoples.
In the context of the implementation of resolution
65/5, whereby every first week of February is
designated World Interfaith Harmony Week, the Sultan
Qaboos Cultural and Scientific Centre organized an
event entitled “Annual Oman Week for Rapprochement
and Understanding among Peoples”, designed to
promote communication among cultures, build greater
understanding, bring together scientists, intellectuals
and academics from all over the world to strengthen
dialogue, and establish peaceful relations and mutual
respect among different cultures.
17-42761

08/12/2017

The Sultanate of Oman has wide experience in
promoting a culture of tolerance through “Message
of Islam from Oman”, an exposition organized by our
Ministry of Religious Affairs to disseminate genuine
and honest religious tolerance among many countries
and peoples of the world. It is also intended to build trust
among Muslims and others of different religions, and to
strengthen coexistence, in addition to disseminating a
culture of peace, understanding, peaceful coexistence
and moderation. It sends a message to everybody
that there is a common humanitarian ground that
we can build on that is greater than the differences
among humans.
In conclusion, we call on the international
community to disseminate a culture of peace, dialogue
and understanding, to shoulder its responsibilities,
work for peace and resolve disputes through dialogue.
In this respect, we reiterate that our country stands
ready to cooperate with the United Nations to build
a new world where security and stability prevail. We
would like to thank the delegations that have sponsored
the draft resolutions under this agenda item.
Mr. Alrowaiei (Bahrain) (spoke in Arabic): My
delegation would like to thank the Secretary-General
and his team for preparing the reports on the promotion
of a culture of peace and interreligious and intercultural
dialogue, understanding and cooperation for peace
(A/72/488 and A/72/621).
By virtue of its geographic location, history and
human heritage, my country is located at a crossroads
of coexistence among different religions and cultures.
Bahrain is an integral part of the Arab world, the
Islamic world and indeed of the world as a whole.
Accordingly, we want this reality to be reflected in
the relations among its sects, denominations and all its
various cultures. These sects and denominations are a
source of richness and diversity for us in the light of our
long history of coexistence and tolerance.
The Kingdom of Bahrain, led by His Majesty
King Hamad bin Isa Al-Khalifa; His Royal Highness
Prince Khalifa bin Salman Al-Khalifa, the Prime
Minister; and His Royal Highness Prince Salman bin
Hamad Al-Khalifa, the Crown Prince, Deputy Supreme
Commander and First Deputy of the Prime Minister,
upholds the diversity that characterizes our country. In
an article in the Washington Times on 10 October, His
Majesty underscored that the Kingdom of Bahrain is
stronger because of its diversity, and that our world will

A/72/PV.68

be safer and more prosperous once we see the beauty of
this diversity. It can teach us many lessons, particularly
about religious tolerance.
The Kingdom of Bahrain believes in the link
between culture and development and pays special
attention to developing a culture of peace, diversity
and coexistence. We have established the King Hamad
Global Centre for Inter-Faith Dialogue and Peaceful
Coexistence in Los Angeles, and adopted the Kingdom
of Bahrain declaration on promoting religious freedom
for all. We have created the King Hamad Chair in
Inter-Faith Dialogue and Peaceful Coexistence at the
Sapienza University of Rome. That is what Bahrain
is all about. I note that His Royal Prince Khalifa bin
Salman Al-Khalifa, the Prime Minister, was honoured
with the Shield of Tolerance by the World Federation
for Peace and Love, which is a testament to his efforts
to establish peace, tolerance and harmony and to the
Kingdom’s achievements in this area.
Finally, the Kingdom of Bahrain underscores that
manifestations of intolerance and extremism can be
rolled back only by building and developing a culture
of peace at the national and international levels,
strengthening the principles of dialogue, peaceful
coexistence, sustainable development and respect for
human rights. The Kingdom of Bahrain continues to
work to achieve reform and genuine development. It
promotes the rule of law, multilateralism and effective
political participation. His Majesty has made it clear
that the Kingdom of Bahrain and its people represent
the principles of friendliness, tolerance, mutual respect
and openness to the world. We are proud of our diversity
and our firm belief that every individual has the right to
a safe and dignified life.
Ms. Algharabally (Kuwait) (spoke in Arabic):
At the outset, my delegation would like to thank the
Secretary-General and his team for preparing the
reports before us today on the activities undertaken
by the main entities of the United Nations to
strengthen dialogue, understanding and cooperation
among religions and cultures in order to achieve
peace (A/72/488 and A/72/621). My country also
welcomes UNESCO’s efforts and good offices aimed
at strengthening and consolidating a culture of peace.
We contribute to creating an environment conducive
to such a culture through the implementation of the
Declaration and Programme of Action on a Culture of
Peace, and the Action Plan for the International Decade
for the Rapprochement of Cultures (2013–2022).

17-427617/21

A/72/PV.68

The relevant General Assembly resolutions are
closely related to the implementation of the 2030
Agenda for Sustainable Development and seek to
establish societies in which peace and justice prevail.
This applies particularly to Sustainable Development
Goal 16, which seeks to promote peaceful and inclusive
societies. We also thank those Member States that have
submitted draft resolutions designed to strengthen the
idea of the culture of peace and to promote dialogue,
understanding and cooperation among religions
and cultures in order to strengthen the principles of
tolerance and respect for cultural diversity as a means
of conflict prevention.
We live in a world where the culture of peace is
threatened by conflicts and disputes among States,
societies and individuals, as well as by intolerance,
extremism, violence and religious hatred. Intellectual
disputes have worsened the situation. We live in a world
where people reject the views of others and where a
lack of peaceful coexistence is evident. We should
seek to understand the reasons for people’s intolerance
and rejection of each other’s views, as well as why
they resort to extremism and violence as a means of
expression. We must work together at the local, regional
and international levels to transform the world’s culture
from one of hatred, tolerance and war into one that
believes in existential and intellectual coexistence.
Our world is facing a serious threat of extremism
and terrorism. There is no country or society safe
from the scourge of extremism and terrorism, which
represent a major challenge to a culture of peace and
dialogue. We need to work together to address that
threat and to promote peace, peaceful coexistence,
dialogue, understanding and cooperation among
religions and cultures.
The first phrase in the Charter of our Organization
is “We the peoples of the United Nations”. We come
from different environments, cultures, civilizations
and beliefs, but we have only one world in which we
all come together to form human civilization. The State
of Kuwait attaches great importance to strengthening
a culture of peace, especially today, when extremism,
intolerance and terrorism have increased in many
countries and are trying to bring chaos and intimidation
to our societies.
Peace leads to justice. It will enable us to achieve the
Sustainable Development Goals. Promoting peace will
help put an end to injustice and enable the oppressed
8/21

08/12/2017

to achieve self-determination. Building lasting peace
must be based on mutual understanding, which means
that peace is above all a culture founded on education.
In that regard, we thank all States that contributed to
the success of the High-level Forum on the Culture of
Peace, held pursuant to resolution 71/252 in September
2016.
The State of Kuwait is keen to strengthen the
culture of tolerance and coexistence, values and
concepts that are enshrined in the Kuwaiti Constitution,
which provides that every citizen has rights and
responsibilities, regardless of gender, origin, language
or religion. Our Constitution also states that justice,
freedom and equality are the pillars of society and that
cooperation leads to establishing strong bond among
the citizens. Based on Kuwait’s concern to promote
moderation, our Government has set up a high-level
committee to strengthen moderation in society, address
extremism and intolerance in all their forms, and
promote the principle of national unity.
Peace is a concept that was rooted in Kuwaiti
society before the creation of the modern State. It
paved the way for tolerance, acceptance of the other
and dialogue with different cultures and religions.
There are many examples in the history of Kuwait
of rapprochement and openness towards different
civilizations and peoples. These are reflected in our
Constitution, which guarantees freedom of speech and
allows the free and safe observance of religious rites.
The State of Kuwait is a small country but it is a place
where people of different nationalities and cultures live
together peacefully and enjoy security and stability
with mutual respect and well-being.
Finally, my delegation would like to underscore
the fact that enriching a culture of peace requires us to
work hard to strengthen the principles of that culture,
such as respect for human rights and freedom of speech,
the implementation of policies of justice and equality,
the eradication of poverty and unemployment, and the
raising of people’s awareness of their responsibilities
for peace. A country that deprives its people of their
right to a dignified life will not be able to develop a
culture of peace and non-violence. That is why we
call for respect for these rights so that we may attain
a world in which rights are guaranteed and one where
friendliness, peace and tolerance prevail.
Mr. Locsin (Philippines): The Philippines
commends the President of the General Assembly for
17-42761

08/12/2017

convening today’s meeting on the culture of peace. We
also welcome the unflagging efforts of the SecretaryGeneral to sustain the peace agenda by declaring 2017
as a year for peace and calling for a surge in diplomacy
for peace, an ironic echo of the famed but failed surge
in Afghanistan for the same peaceful purpose.
As States Members of the United Nations, we
share the aspirations and responsibility for achieving
a peaceful world through mutual respect, tolerance,
acceptance, reconciliation and respect for the rule of
law, a world in which conflict is avoided and injustice
corrected by means that are conducive to peace rather
than provocative of war. For the Filipino people, this is
a natural goal. We have been victims of atrocities in two
wars, one of independence and the other of liberation,
but we have never committed atrocities ourselves. We
are a nation that has never committed massive human
rights violations that provoke conflict. We have always
been committed to avoiding conflict and promoting
peace at home and abroad. The Philippines has never
adopted war as a means of teaching a lesson or exacting
revenge; rather, we have engaged in war as a last resort,
because peace without freedom and justice is also
unacceptable to Filipinos.
Since 2004, together with Pakistan, we have
sponsored the annual resolution on the promotion of
interreligious and intercultural dialogue, understanding
and cooperation for peace, whose objectives are
twofold — first, to promote interreligious and
intercultural dialogue to achieve peace and stability
and as the most promising course for realizing the 2030
Agenda for Sustainable Development; and secondly,
to strengthen mechanisms and take appropriate action
to promote sincere and constructive dialogue across
cultural and religious divides. The first objective
reduces the material causes of conflict that arise
from the frustration of basic human needs, and the
second reduces the intellectual obstacles to mutual
understanding, thereby fostering mutual respect and
tolerance despite continuing disagreement.
In building a high-trust Philippine society,
President Rodrigo Roa Duterte is unequivocally
committed to a peace agenda that accompanies a longterm development agenda for areas threatened by armed
conflict. In places where people have nothing to lose,
they are prepared to lose everything in a conflict in the
hope of taking something away from others.

A/72/PV.68

For the Bangsamoro peace process, we are now
following a new peace and development road map that
is characterized by the inclusion of all — not just select
Muslim groups — a continuous dialogue rather than a
hectoring monologue, confidence-building initiatives
involving all stakeholders — not just the politically
connected — the consolidation and convergence
of prior peace agreements and a readiness, so rare
in other conflicts, to acknowledge the self-identity
of Bangsamoros as our Muslim Filipino brothers
and sisters.
We Filipinos are so confident in our singular national
identity that we are not afraid to call the differences that
make the Philippines a diverse and interesting nation by
their proper names. In the spirit of inclusiveness, in the
desire for the widest participation and in the hope of the
closest convergence, we want our fellow citizens, the
Bangsamoro, along with the larger national community,
to take ownership of peacebuilding.
To that end, the Government has expanded the
peace table to include informal peace tables. A peace
caravan is crossing the country so that officials can
engage in peace conversations to gather insights on
how to create more avenues for dialogue and better
bridges for peace. We are speeding up the delivery of
programmes to rebuild devastated areas and restore the
equanimity of war-torn communities, which will give
them a stake in keeping the peace and avoiding quarrels
that lead to conflict.
The Philippines attaches great importance to
religious and faith-based organizations playing a
greater role in preventing the outbreak and escalation
of violence and expanding the constituency for peace.
In a conflict that is misidentified as religious, it is
important for religious persons and institutions of
all faiths to clarify what is religion and what is just
bloody ambition, and what is prayer and what is rapine
disguised as piety. The sexual use and trade of women
and children can never qualify as a religious rite; it
is pure evil that deserves to be relentlessly punished
as such.
The Philippines recognizes the crucial role of
women in promoting the peace agenda. Those who
make homes and keep families provided for and united
have the greatest stake in the requirements of peace and
the deepest understanding of them. The Philippines was
the first country in Asia to adopt a national action plan
on women and peace and security. It incorporates much

17-427619/21

A/72/PV.68

08/12/2017

knowledge gained from the role of women in conflict
situations, not least the imperative of gender equality
between the women who bind the wounds of war and the
men who inflict them. The rehabilitation of Marawi City
demonstrates the Philippine Government’s commitment
to attaining peace with security, prosperity, justice, law
and order.

are based on our policies and guided by our societal,
religious and cultural traditions. We have adopted an
approach of moderation, tolerance and acceptance
of differences among cultures, civilizations and
religions, and we play an active and responsible role
in the international community to contributing to the
promotion of international peace and security.

The Philippines stands in solidarity with nations
committed to securing a just and enduring peace, a
shared prosperity and partnerships productive of those
aims. If history is to judge the United Nations on its
role in the unfolding narratives of war and peace,
it should be a compelling story of hope and healing,
reconciliation and renewal and a peace that passes all
expectations, given the tragic history of humankind.

The State of Qatar believes in the importance
of achieving Sustainable Development Goal 16 and
supporting the efforts of the United Nations. My country
has played a leading role in that regard. In cooperation
with Member States and the United Nations, we have
established a global coalition for reporting on the
progress made in achieving Goal 16, that of peaceful
and inclusive societies for all.

Ms. Al-Thani (Qatar) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I would like to thank the President for convening
this important meeting to discuss one of the most
important items on our agenda, the culture of peace.

In the light of the role played by the United Nations
Alliance of Civilizations in enhancing a culture of
peace, dialogue and understanding among cultures and
religions, we have been at the forefront of countries
supporting the Alliance and continue to do so in every
possible way. The State of Qatar is committed to
achieving its 2030 National Vision in order to enhance
cultural exchange among countries. We have established
institutions for spreading a culture of peace and
dialogue among cultures, promoting the acceptance of
others, fighting extremism and rejecting violence. That
includes the Arab Cultural Institute, which opened in
Berlin this year and is aimed at deepening cooperation
between Germany and the Arab world.

Since we are discussing it as we are witnessing
developments in the Middle East, we want to reaffirm
the importance of avoiding any measures that run
counter to the noble goal of sustainable peace, which
the world needs more than ever today. When it comes to
the Middle East, we believe that if we do not resolve the
Palestinian question, peace in the region will continue
to be unattainable.
The State of Qatar seeks to achieve peace by
rejecting all measures that call for recognizing Al-Quds
Al-Sharif as the capital of Israel. Al-Quds Al-Sharif
holds a special place in the hearts of Arab and Muslim
peoples. We must respect the city’s legal and historic
status and warn the world of the dangerous repercussions
for security and stability in the Middle East of any
such measures that run counter to international law,
resolutions of international legitimacy and efforts to
achieve peace on the basis of a two-State solution.
The international efforts to promote a culture of
peace and intercultural and interreligious dialogue
and understanding reflect the determination of the
international community to confront all the difficulties
and hurdles preventing us from achieving international
peace and security, especially in the light of increasing
international conflicts and crises. We must therefore
provide conditions conducive to peace and as an
international community, focus on them by respecting
and upholding the legitimate rights of our peoples and
providing conditions for sustainable development that
10/21

The State of Qatar looks at peace in a comprehensive
way. Peace is not just the absence of violence; sustainable
peace is based on justice and resolving conflict. We
have therefore paid a great deal of attention to, and
participated in, international efforts to support the role
of mediation and preventive diplomacy — a major pillar
of the Secretary-General’s action plan in that regard.
On 18 and 19 January 2018, we will host regional
consultations on maintaining peace for Middle East
and Islamic countries, in preparation for the high-level
meeting to be held in the General Assembly in April
on sustaining peace. The State of Qatar believes in the
importance of preventing conflicts and resolving them
through peaceful means. Our efforts have borne fruit,
and we have contributed to enhancing international
peace and security, which the international community
has welcomed.
In conclusion, the State of Qatar reiterates its
commitment to continue implementing the Declaration
17-42761

08/12/2017

and Programme of Action on a Culture of Peace and to
provide support to all efforts at the national, regional
and international levels to promote the culture of peace
and non-violence and support preventive diplomacy in
order to benefit humankind as a whole.
Mrs. Rodríguez Camejo (Cuba) (spoke in Spanish):
Agenda item 15 serves to remind us that peace is not
only a goal to be fulfilled but also an overarching aim
to be safeguarded. There can be no peace without full
respect for the sovereignty of States, and there can be
no peace without respect for the self-determination of
peoples and the territorial integrity of States. Violence
must be brought to an end, life respected and dialogue
and cooperation seriously considered. Emphasis must
be placed on education and the transmission of values
for peace.
Cuba notes with concern that the deep fault line
between the rich and the poor that divides human
society, and the ever-increasing gap between the
developed and developing worlds, poses a major threat
to global prosperity, peace and security and stability.
We fully believe that in order to maintain and promote
peace, States’ policies must focus on removing the
threat of war, particularly nuclear war, committing to
the peaceful settlement of international disputes and
respecting and promoting the right to development.
In promoting and developing a culture of peace, it
is essential to condemn all acts, methods and practices
of terrorism, including State terrorism, and to take
concrete steps to fight that scourge.
We note with concern the persistence of issues such
as intolerance and discrimination on ethnic, religious
or racial grounds; the threat and use of force in
international relations; covert regime-change agendas
promoted by great Powers in developing countries that
do not bend to their designs; and the development of new
and more sophisticated weaponry and the persistence
of large nuclear arsenals. All that compromises real
possibilities for advancing towards the culture of peace.

A/72/PV.68

promoting a culture of peace through the inclusion
of the study of various cultures and civilizations in
educational programmes, including their languages,
history and sociopolitical philosophy, as well as an
exchange of knowledge and information on those
subjects. We also want to highlight the role of the
mass media in disseminating human values and the
importance of ethical conduct in contributing to mutual
respect among civilizations. We reaffirm that peace
is a fundamental requirement for the promotion and
protection of all human rights of all people.
Finally, we reiterate the full validity of the
Proclamation of Latin America and the Caribbean as
a Zone of Peace, adopted at the highest level by the
Community of Latin American and Caribbean States in
January 2014, as well as the Declaration and Programme
of Action on a Culture of Peace.
Mr. Habib (Indonesia): Indonesia aligns itself with
the statement delivered earlier by the representative
of Brunei Darussalam on behalf of the Association of
Southeast Asian Nations.
I thank the Secretary-General for his comprehensive
reports (A/72/488 and A/72/621), and UNESCO for its
valuable contribution to advancing the Programme of
Action on a Culture of Peace.
Eighteen years after the adoption of the Declaration
and Programme of Action on the Culture of Peace,
Indonesia notes that tremendous work has been done
at all levels to ensure tolerance, dialogue, respect and
mutual understanding, as well as the efforts made to
shift mindsets and behaviour from conflict and violence
to dialogue and peacebuilding.

Putting an end to the economic, commercial and
financial blockade imposed by the United States of
America against Cuba would be a step conducive to
peace and the peaceful settlement of differences.

Nevertheless, intolerance is still rampant in
many parts of the world. In some areas it has grown
into radicalism, violent extremism and xenophobic
movements. Widespread economic and social injustice,
human rights violations and violence are used by
extremist groups, including religious and faith-based
extremists, to recruit children and youth and groom
them as the next generation of extremists. Diversity is
increasingly being portrayed as a threat that undermines
our societies rather than an asset that can benefit us all.
Indonesia has some observations on that issue.

Peace can be fostered only if it responds to and
meets a set of values, attitudes, traditions, behaviours
and lifestyles — in other words, a genuine culture
of peace. Cuba believes that education is the path to

First, military measures alone will not be enough to
combat and eliminate violent extremism. We need more
comprehensive measures to address the root causes of
ongoing conflicts in the world. By doing so, we will be

17-4276111/21

A/72/PV.68

08/12/2017

able to break the cycle of violence and extremism on
the ground.

and ensuring the full participation of all components of
society in decision-making.

Secondly, not only should our efforts to promote a
culture of peace equate to an absence of violence, they
should alsos to foster synergies between sustaining
peace and development. We must cultivate peace and
stability to work for us by implementing the Sustainable
Development Goals, as well as by promoting and
protecting the human rights of all people, without
distinction.

Consistent with our commitment to promoting
democracy, Indonesia hosted the tenth Bali Democracy
Forum on 7 and 8 December. The Bali Democracy
Forum was established with the basic idea of creating
democratic synergies among countries with different
religions, culture and political systems in order to enable
their mutual assistance of each other in the practice of
democracy. During the Forum, participating countries
shared their best practices, based on the principles of
equality, mutual respect and understanding.

Thirdly, based on Indonesia’s experience, the most
constructive policy is one that mixes hard and soft
approaches. A hard approach uses law enforcement and
implementation of the relevant legal framework, while
a soft approach works through education, interfaith
dialogues and a variety of socioeconomic empowerment
measures aimed at building harmony, respect and
tolerance among cultures and people.
Indonesia has always upheld the value of unity
in diversity, as well as a culture of peace. We are
advancing that culture through its eight action areas,
including education, sustainable economic and social
development, respect for human rights, equality
between women and men, inclusivity, democratic
participation and tolerance.
Through education, children and young people
should be equipped with the universal values of peace,
human rights, gender equality and respect for others at
the earliest stage of their lives. The family serves as the
starting point, followed by society and school, where
children learn and exercise values to enable them to
resolve disputes peacefully and in a spirit of respect for
human dignity, tolerance and non-discrimination.
Along with promoting education, Indonesia is trying
to cut the deadly links between violent extremism and
extreme poverty by creating jobs, reducing inequalities
and building just and inclusive societies. We are
promoting economic growth through various measures,
particularly poverty eradication, redistribution of
economic sources and access to employment and a
productive economy.
It would be difficult to sustain such efforts without
a vigorous and active political system. Indonesia
recognizes that democracy and democratization are
compatible with the culture of peace. That includes
strengthening good governance, weeding out corruption
12/21

In conclusion, I would once again like to remind
us all that we must work together and spare no effort
to build a more peaceful, inclusive, democratic and
harmonious society through the promotion of dialogue,
tolerance and respect for one another.
Mr. Suan (Myanmar): Building peace is a
cherished effort of the people of Myanmar today. We
are holding the Twenty-First-Century Panglong Union
Peace Conference with the aim of forging lasting peace.
We believe in a culture of dialogue for reconciling
differences, building trust and confidence and pursuing
lasting peace. After almost seven decades of fraternal
strife, our country’s ethnic armed groups, armed forces,
political parties and Government have all agreed to
come together around the negotiating table to pave the
way for peace, national reconciliation and a democratic
federal union.
We know from our own national experience that the
road to peace has never been an easy path to tread, but
it is the only one that can lead the people of Myanmar to
their long-held aspiration to a peaceful and prosperous
nation. The quest for peace through dialogue requires
vision, political will, mutual respect and trust among
the dialogue partners. Courage, a spirit of cooperation
and accommodation are required. We have launched
that ambitious national peace process in the spirit of
Panglong, which is based on the principles of unity,
equality, justice and peace for all ethnic nationals of
the union.
Religious harmony and tolerance of cultural
diversity are crucial to sustaining peace and
development in an increasingly globalized and heavily
interdependent world. Myanmar is a land of more than
100 different ethnic peoples with their own cultural
identities and languages. It is also a multireligious
country, where the faithful of all four major religious
17-42761

08/12/2017

tribes live in peace and harmony. Freedom of religion
and the right to one’s own cultural identity and heritage
are guaranteed by the Constitution.
His Holiness Pope Francis paid an official visit to
Myanmar last month, the first papal visit ever in 500
years of Catholic missions in Myanmar. The historic
event took place a few months after the establishment of
diplomatic relations between Myanmar and the Holy See,
and was yet another testimony to religious tolerance and
freedom of faith in a country where an overwhelming
majority of the population professes Buddhism.
Myanmar is one of the most ethnically diverse
countries in the world. It is home to 135 officially
recognized ethnic groups, each with its own distinct
culture and faith. In a total population of 51 million,
89.89 per cent are Buddhist, 6.31 per cent Christian,
2.2 per cent Muslim and 0.4 per cent Hindu. In order
to promote religious harmony and peace among
different communities, we have established interfaith
friendship groups at the national level representing
all religions, with 137 interfaith friendship subgroups
across the country. As of October, 112 interfaith
dialogues, awareness talks and combined prayer
services had been held all over the country for peace
and national reconciliation in 2017 alone.
Intolerance and religious extremism are extremely
harmful to sustaining peace and harmony in a diverse
society, and Myanmar strongly condemns terrorism in
all its forms and manifestations. The terrorist attacks on
25 August against Myanmar security forces in northern
Rakhine, carried out by the Arakan Rohingya Salvation
Army (ARSA), triggered a tragic humanitarian problem.
The atrocities claimed many innocent civilian lives,
killing men, women and children. People of several
different communities, including Buddhists, Muslims
and Hindus, were murdered by ARSA.
Today we are witnessing surging intolerance,
hatred and terrorist activities in many parts of the
world. Myanmar condemns any act of terrorism, violent
extremism, incitement to religious hatred and hostility
anywhere and in any society. Peace is not a given gift;
many lives have been sacrificed in the name of peace
throughout human history. However, it is a reward, and
it comes after sincere efforts by all those concerned.
We must all work together to build a global culture of
peace through compassion, tolerance and an inclusive
society, and we must leave no one behind.

A/72/PV.68

Mr. Yao Shaojun (China) (spoke in Chinese):
China thanks you, Sir, for presiding over today’s
meeting. Today’s world faces multiple challenges.
Regional hotspot issues pop up everywhere. Threats
of violent extremism are on the rise. The problem of
unbalanced and inadequate development is everywhere.
The international community should vigorously
promote a culture of peace and insist on peace and
development, which are common themes of our era, and
work to maintain world peace and promote dialogue
across civilizations. China would like to highlight
three issues.
First, we should work to maintain lasting peace.
Countries should uphold the purposes and principles
of the Charter of the United Nations, implement the
Declaration and Programme of Action on the Culture of
Peace, respect each other, consult on a basis of equality
and engage in dialogue rather than confrontation.
Partnership, not alignment, is the new strategy for
fostering international cooperation. Conflicts should be
resolved through dialogue, and disagreement through
consultation. Concerted efforts should be made to tackle
traditional and non-traditional security threats and
combat all forms of terrorism and violent extremism.
Secondly, we should work to achieve shared
prosperity. According to the relevant United Nations
studies, poverty, a lack of education and employment
opportunities and other factors have become the main
drivers spreading violent extremism. Countries should
embrace the kind of open, inclusive, tolerant and
balanced economic globalization that produces win-win
results. The 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development
should be comprehensively implemented in order to
enable countries to enjoy the benefits of development
and everyone to enjoy quality lives, peace and health.
Thirdly, we should work to promote exchanges
across civilizations, since enhancing civilization and
human progress goes hand in hand with an approach
that seeks common ground while putting aside
differences, remaining open and tolerant and providing
opportunities for exchanges and mutual learning across
civilizations. We must understand that the world is rich
and colourful and that civilizations are diversified to
ensure they can coexist harmoniously, enhance each
other’s splendour, remove cultural gaps and eliminate
spiritual disillusionment.
The recently concluded nineteenth National
Congress of the Communist Party of China called for

17-4276113/21

A/72/PV.68

a new type of international relations based on mutual
respect, justice, cooperation and win-win opportunities
for building a shared future for humankind. The
diversity of civilizations should be respected. We
should conduct exchanges that overcome hostility,
promote mutual learning and resolve conflict. We
must encourage harmonious coexistence in order to
erase cultural superiority. Traditional Chinese culture
emphasizes the concept of peace and cooperation
and the idea that the world is one. It also underscores
coexistence, which leads to harmony throughout the
world. Those are all key elements behind the concept
of building a shared future for humankind. China is
willing to work with the entire world to maintain global
peace and development.
Mr. Mahfouz (Egypt) (spoke in Arabic): Egypt has
always sought to promote dialogue among nations and
the rapprochement of cultures. We continue to engage in
serious efforts to end wars and armed conflict sparked
by racial, faith-based or religious reasons.
The Government of Egypt is working to enhance
diplomacy in support of a culture of coexistence and
dialogue among nations. We are doing so by holding
major events to bring together nations, spreading the
concept of peace through the rejection of violence,
promoting coexistence and the sharing of expertise
and highlighting women’s role in society and the
importance of empowering them. The World Youth
Forum, held recently in Sharm El-Sheikh from 4 to
10 November, was a major event serving as an effective
platform for fostering direct dialogue among young
people from different parts of the world, enabling them
to discuss their hopes for a better future in the modern
world and convey to the world a message of peace, love
and development. The World Youth Forum will be an
annual event held in Egypt at the end of every year.
But peace is not just about the absence of conflict;
it also requires an interactive and participatory process
to enhance dialogue and resolve conflicts in the spirit
of understanding and cooperation. Humankind must
completely eradicate all forms of discrimination and
extremism. Regrettably, international conflicts still
exist in the Middle East and Africa, and we must not
forget that a culture of peace is a set of values, customs
and behaviour, based on the principles of respecting
life, rejecting violence, combating extremism and
promoting peaceful practices by advancing education,
dialogue and cooperation, full respect for national
sovereignty, the political independence of countries,
14/21

08/12/2017

non-interference in their internal affairs and the
resolution of conflicts through peaceful and diplomatic
means and respect for human rights.
We must also make every possible effort to meet the
development and environmental needs of current and
future generations. We must commit to the concepts
of freedom, justice, democracy, tolerance, solidarity,
pluralism, cultural diversity and peaceful coexistence
among nations. The international community must
not ignore the inherent right of all nations, including
those living under the yoke of colonialism or other
forms of foreign control or foreign occupation, to selfdetermination — and therefore their right to live in
peace, stability and security. We want to highlight the
plight of the Palestinian people, who have lived under
the yoke of military occupation for decades, and stress
that one of the international community’s priorities is
maintaining the Arab identity of Al-Quds Al-Sharif
as the birthplace of revered religions and home to
holy sites.
In conclusion, we must recognize that an increasing
number of movements are calling for an end to conflict
among civilizations and require the United Nations
to take on an increasing responsibility for fostering
dialogue. We must also recognize that the cause of a
culture of peace represents a valuable opportunity for
peoples all over the world to overcome terrorism and
extremist ideologies and the violence and destruction
they bring. My Government would therefore like
to express its sincere appreciation following the
Assembly’s adoption by consensus last week of
resolution 72/17, entitled “Effects of terrorist acts
directed against religious sites on the culture of peace”.
All United Nations documents and reports must
include clear references to a culture of peace. We
therefore support all the draft resolutions under this
item — both the traditional ones submitted by friendly
nations such as Bangladesh, the Philippines and
Pakistan, and the new draft resolutions submitted by
Algeria and Malaysia.
Mr. Kadiri (Morocco) (spoke in French): My
delegation is pleased to be able to participate in today’s
discussion. We have studied the reports (A/72/488 and
A/72/621) of the Secretary-General outlining the main
activities conducted by the United Nations during the
past year on this issue.
Today’s debate is an opportunity for us to reaffirm
the international community’s commitment to a culture
17-42761

08/12/2017

of peace and similar values. Now more than ever, we
reiterate the importance and urgency of ensuring that
the values of peace, tolerance, dialogue and coexistence
prevail over ignorance and propaganda. Today the
General Assembly is emphasizing its commitment to
implementing the objectives of a culture of peace and
non-violence, almost 20 years after the adoption of
resolution 53/243, on the Declaration and Programme
of Action on a Culture of Peace.
My delegation takes this opportunity to congratulate
Ms. Audrey Azoulay on her election as the new Director
General of UNESCO, and welcomes the work done by
the United Nations Alliance of Civilizations to promote
a culture of peace through education and dialogue,
among other means.
It is sad to see today the rising incidence of acts of
intolerance, discrimination, xenophobia, Islamophobia
and inter-State, inter-ethnic and interreligious
tensions. It is sad to see that peace remains elusive in
certain regions. The culture of peace and sustainable
development are two intrinsically linked notions. It
goes without saying that peace is based on achieving
sustainable development, just as the full implementation
of 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development depends
on peace. In the quest for peace, the role played by women
and young people in the peaceful resolution of disputes
is critical and must be supported and encouraged.
My delegation underscores that Morocco has
implemented a national programme to integrate the
theme of a culture of peace into the school curriculum
and to organize regular meetings on the dialogue
among cultures and civilizations. Morocco was the first
Arab country to work with UNESCO on developing a
national strategy for the prevention of violent extremism
through education. We should also encourage the
positive contributions of the media and civil society,
which have a real role to play in encouraging collective
awareness, promoting social dialogue as a vehicle for
peace, diffusing values of tolerance and openness,
and fighting against hate speech and incitement to
discrimination, hostility and violence.
Religious leaders have a key role to play in
preventing and combating incitements to hatred. We
must encourage cooperation among religious leaders
of all religions and back it with the principles of
tolerance and mutual respect. In the fight against
religious extremism and terrorism, Morocco has
adopted a multidimensional approach. In that regard,

A/72/PV.68

my country understood at an early stage the need to
adopt a preventive strategy based on religious training
and human development, and we have taken concrete
measures to regulate religious teaching through the
training of imams.
Encouraged by that success, we have exported
our programmes and now train imams nationally and
internationally, at home and in sub-Saharan Africa,
Europe and Asia. Since the inauguration of the
Mohammed VI Institute for the Training of Imams,
Morchidines and Morchidates in Rabat in March 2015,
nearly 2,000 imams have benefited from the special
training we provide at the national and international
levels. That policy is accompanied by a widespread
rehabilitation project for traditional Koranic schools,
which are a vital part of Morocco’s religious and
cultural heritage.
The Mohammed VI Foundation for African Oulema
is holding a meeting of its regular session in Fez today,
with the participation of approximately 300 Islamic
scholars from 32 African countries, including more than
80 women and 20 Moroccan scholars who are members
of the Foundation, four of whom are women. In that
framework, and based on its traditional values and
political will, Morocco continues to work to maintain
spaces of peace and prosperity and to establish goodneighbourly relations and trust within cultural spaces.
Since the announcement by the United States of
its intention to recognize Al-Quds as the capital of
Israel and transfer its Embassy to the holy city, His
Majesty King Mohammed VI, President of the Al-Quds
Committee of the Organization of Islamic Cooperation,
has sent a message to the American President and the
United Nations Secretary-General, expressing his
profound personal concern and the deep anxiety of
Arab and Muslim States and countries over the United
States decision, and calling for the preservation of the
holy city’s legal, political and historical status while
avoiding any action that could undermine its current
political status.
The Kingdom of Morocco insists on the importance
of preserving the historical, legal and political status of
Al-Quds and calls on the United Nations, particularly
the permanent members of the Security Council, to
fully assume their responsibility so as to prevent any
action that might undermine that status or international
efforts to resolve the Palestine-Israel conflict. Morocco
reaffirms its unconditional support for and ongoing

17-4276115/21

A/72/PV.68

solidarity with the brotherly Palestinian people as
they strive to recover their legitimate rights, first and
foremost the right to form an independent State with
eastern Al-Quds as its capital.
In conclusion, in line with the guidance of His
Majesty King Mohammed VI, President of the Al-Quds
Committee, Morocco will work, in coordination with the
Palestinians and other Arab, Muslim and international
parties to come together with a view to addressing this
dangerous development.
Mr. Qassem Agha (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in
Arabic): I wish a good morning to Al-Quds Al-Sharif,
the capital of occupied Arab Palestine, the core of
peace, the birthplace of Jesus Christ, a flower of cities
and a place of tolerance and moderation. The future of
Al-Quds Al-Sharif is not threatened by any country or
any country’s President. It is threatened by its history,
and it depends on the will and determination of the loyal
and honourable people who support a proper solution to
the Palestinian question.
Today’s vote in favour of all the draft resolutions
that call for the prevention of violence and violent
extremism, and for which the General Assembly
has called on Member States to unite against violent
extremism in all its forms and manifestations, is in line
with Syria’s unwavering position in favour of promoting
a culture of peace, dialogue among cultures and a
rejection of violence. It also confirms our rejection of
any State initiative based on extremism and terrorist
Wahhabi ideology, whereby certain terrorist groups are
created to promote obscurantist thinking and their own
personal political interests. My delegation reiterates
its rejection of any initiative that undermines the fight
against extremism or the dissemination of tolerance.
It is dangerous to assign that noble mission to the
institutions of countries with which we are all familiar.

08/12/2017

to remove all other components, Christians or Muslims.
ISIS says the same. It wants to establish a country for all
those who believe in ISIS, for Muslims only, and only
for those who believe in a culture of killing, bloodshed
and the destruction of cultures and civilizations.
That simple approach shows that the reason for
the suffering in the region is that Israel has introduced
religious intolerance, racial extremism and religious
extremism into it. It has introduced the concept of the
occupation of another’s territory into our region. During
the 70 years that have passed since the establishment of
this international Organization, hundreds of resolutions
have been adopted condemning Israel and its illegal
expansionist policies. I would like to remind members
that Israel is dealing with terrorists from Jabhat
Al-Nusra and ISIS in the occupied Syrian Golan. It is
providing them with protection and assistance against
the United Nations Disengagement Observer Force all
along the line of separation in the Golan.
Israel recently launched missiles into the heart
of Damascus, and we responded accordingly. We can
therefore not be blamed when we respond and reply
adequately to Israeli audacity with like for like, when
appropriate. We hope for victory for Palestine and the
Arab cause.
Mr. Khoshroo (Islamic Republic of Iran): I would
like to begin by thanking the Permanent Missions
of Malaysia and Algeria to the United Nations for
introducing the draft resolutions under consideration
today — draft resolution A/72/L.21, entitled
“Moderation”, and draft resolution A/72/L.26, entitled
“International Day of Living Together in Peace”. We
hope that they will be adopted by consensus.

We must speak the truth concerning developments
in the Arab and Muslim world. Israel, the occupying
Power, was established on the basis of Zionist ideology,
which includes policies promoting Israel as an occupying
Power. Israel was established on the basis of Zionism,
and we all know that Zionism is a form of racism. It
is the equivalent of the terrorist Islamic State in Iraq
and the Sham (ISIS). It does not believe in a culture of
peace, and it strives to promote violence and religious
extremism, as we see daily at the political level.

The documents under consideration by the
Assembly today also include document A/72/621,
which contains the report of the Secretary-General on
the implementation of resolution 70/109, entitled “A
world against violence and violent extremism”. As my
country was the resolution’s main sponsor, I would like
to thank the Secretary-General and his colleagues in
the Secretariat for their efforts in preparing the relevant
report. I would also like to commend the entire United
Nations system for all the initiatives and undertakings
aimed at implementing the resolution, with a view to
preventing and countering violent extremism, a list and
review of which are provided in the report.

Zionism says that it wants to steal all of Palestine
to build a Jewish State for Jews only — in other words,

The United Nations was founded in the high hope
of saving future generations from the scourge of war.

16/21

17-42761

08/12/2017

As such, peace lies at the heart of the work of the
Organization, and a culture of peace is the essence of
the Charter of the United Nations.
As the world today faces a baffling number of
increasing risks and challenges, the responsibility
of the United Nations to foster and promote peace
is also growing, especially with the increase in the
number of State and non-State actors spreading hateful
ideologies. The world situation demands that all States
be more vigilant with regard to the implications and
consequences of their messages, actions and decisions
on the fragile situation of peace.
Those who try to legitimize occupation in our
region by rejecting the historical realities are gravely
undermining peace. The occupation of Palestinian
land is at the root of every crisis in our region. Any
action aimed at denying the inalienable rights of the
Palestinian people, including with regard to the holy
city of Al-Quds, and particularly the Al-Aqsa Mosque,
will result only in more bloodshed and rage.
We strongly condemn the recognition of the city of
Al-Quds by the United States of America as the capital
of the Israeli regime, as well as the plan to transfer the
United States Embassy to the holy city. That unilateral
act constitutes a grave violation of international law,
since any territorial acquisition resulting from the use
of force is illegal, and all States have an obligation
to refrain from any action that runs counter to that
principle. The United States action is not only illegal
but also indicates how hypocritical its policy is with
regard to peace and stability in the Middle East.
The international community will hold the United
States and the Israeli regime responsible for all the
dangerous consequences of that reckless and illegal act.
Throughout history, occupation and peace have never
gone hand in hand. The present case is no exception,
and there can be no peace or justice as long as the
occupation of Palestinian land continues.
The failed experiences of the past should not be
repeated. Those who prefer sanctions and coercion to
diplomacy and negotiation strengthen extremism and
weaken the culture of peace and tolerance by their deeds
and rhetoric. Unilateralism and coercive measures create
instability and insecurity in international relations and
are to blame for spreading terrorism and extremism.
What is happening today in many parts of the world,
from the occupied Palestinian territory to Yemen,

A/72/PV.68

represents failures in our joint endeavour to enhance
peace in the world. But we cannot and should not give
up. In fact, despite all the difficulties and challenges
facing our region, there are grounds for optimism. The
recent series of defeats of the Islamic State in Iraq and
the Sham (ISIS) in our region, most notably in Syria
and Iraq, represent a turning point and a historical
victory for peace and peace-loving nations.
We want to sincerely congratulate the Governments
and the courageous peoples of Syria and Iraq on their
decisive victories against terrorist groups, which
have been made possible only by their bravery and
steadfastness. However, despite these military defeats,
the ideology and networking that created ISIS are still
alive. No final victory against ISIS, or terrorism in
general, can be imagined without ridding the world of
the dark takfiri ideology that inspires it and similar
terrorist groups.
War and conflict have always imposed themselves
on societies. However, the cost of war today has
made it a non-option, and it is therefore imperative to
make lasting peace a reality. To that end, the Islamic
Republic of Iran, as the initiator of the concept of a
world against violence and extremism, once again
invites all peace-loving nations to close ranks in the
cause of peace.
Mr. Mohamed (Maldives): Peace is the natural
condition for the existence of humankind, and war and
aggression are artificially created hurdles hampering the
basic human instinct for cooperation and coexistence.
Promoting a culture of peace requires that we enable
those values to grow unhindered.
The General Assembly’s Declaration and Programme
of Action on a Culture of Peace prioritizes education
as a key strategy in cultivating and nurturing such
a culture. That means structuring our education systems
and preparing educational materials with a view to
helping individuals to cultivate the values of peace.
If properly designed and delivered, education has an
extraordinary capacity to enable individuals to unlearn
the evil art of oppression and learn the beautiful art of
compromise. Education helps us to step into the realm
of possibilities — to look further, to try harder and to
return to the natural condition of human existence.
The United Nations system is doing a commendable
job in bringing about such a change in the mindsets of
millions of people around the world through education.
UNESCO in particular is doing an admirable job in

17-4276117/21

A/72/PV.68

working with the Governments of Member States to
tailor their education materials in a way that will create
sufficient space for a culture of peace to flourish.
In the Maldives, the Government of President
Abdulla Yameen Abdul Gayoom is implementing
policies to enable Maldivian women and men, girls
and boys, to dream bigger, achieve higher, cultivate
and live in a culture of peace, respect and tolerance
and learn to cherish the value of compromise. The
Maldives approach in creating a culture of peace is
by promoting sustainable and inclusive economic and
social development, respect for human rights, equality
between women and men, democratic participation
and tolerance. We recognize the relationship between
building a culture of peace and building a stronger, more
prosperous and a more resilient nation. The Government
is investing more in women and young people, who play
crucial roles in creating, consolidating and sustaining
a culture of peace and respect for basic human rights.
The 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development
forms a central part of that strategy. The Maldives
has achieved quality universal primary and secondary
education, while ensuring that children learn the values
of respect and tolerance from an early age. That is
supplemented by targeted education that promotes
peaceful coexistence and harmony and prevents the
spread of ideologies that lead to violent extremism.
Education must also be the key strategy in the fight
against terrorism and violent extremism. Learning the
virtues of tolerance should form the bedrock of our
shared approach to education and social development.
We can do that by closing the existing gaps in our
societies that lead people to incite hate. We can do that
by overcoming all types of prejudice against Muslims
or any other groups of people. The Government and the
people of the Maldives condemn the efforts by some
to associate Islam with terrorism. We unequivocally
condemn all acts, methods and practices of terrorism
as criminal and unjustifiable, regardless of their
motivation, in all their forms and manifestations,
wherever and by whomsoever committed. The Maldives
condemns in the strongest terms the recent terrorist
attack that took place in Egypt targeting worshippers
during prayers.
Fostering a culture of peace also requires the
media, including the companies that own social media
platforms, to ensure that the free media is not used as
18/21

08/12/2017

an instrument to incite hate and to plan and carry out
acts of terrorism.
The power of peace can overcome the tyranny of
ignorance, for peace is more powerful than the total
accumulation of any social power.
The Maldives believes that the Security Council
has an extraordinary opportunity to create conditions
for peace. The Maldives hopes to be elected to the
Council for the term 2019 to 2020, and to contribute to
strengthening the Council’s ability in shaping a shared
vision of peace — a vision for humankind to return
to the default mode of coexistence, where freedom
and equality are achieved through understanding,
respect and tolerance, and where our shared belief in
the culture of peace will guide us to our common and
shared destiny.
Mr. Islam (Bangladesh): As the original proponent
of a culture of peace at the United Nations, Bangladesh
is pleased to see the growing interest in the issue, as
manifest in the number of draft resolutions introduced
under this agenda item this year.
Since the Assembly’s adoption in 1999 of resolution
53/243 A and B, on a culture of peace, Bangladesh has
been facilitating subsequent draft resolutions at the
General Assembly every year. The annual consensus
adoption of the resolution reaffirms the international
community’s commitment to the enduring value of a
culture of peace. It is to be expected that there should
be renewed interest in the subject against the backdrop
of the Secretary-General’s call for a surge in peace
diplomacy. We remain grateful to the Presidents of
the General Assembly for organizing high-level events
on a culture of peace, as mandated by the resolution,
and we urge all the relevant United Nations entities to
mainstream the promotion of a culture of peace as an
underlying objective in their respective areas of work.
We thank the Secretary-General for preparing a
detailed report (A/72/488) on the activities that have
taken place since last year under this agenda item.
We recognize that the promotion of a culture of peace
and interreligious and intercultural dialogue have
gained further impetus from the 2030 Agenda for
Sustainable Development.
The need for greater tolerance and understanding
cannot be overemphasized in our increasingly
multicultural, multireligious and interdependent
societies. We need active and conscious efforts to
17-42761

08/12/2017

promote cultural diversity as an important element
for social inclusion. Education must be prioritized
across all societies as the most effective vehicle for
nurturing the values of inclusivity, pluralism, tolerance,
moderation and peaceful coexistence. The observance
of the International Day of Living Together in Peace
should further reinforce that message.
Our children and youth remain our best hope
for peace. The seeds of a culture of peace must be
sown in the minds of the young. On 7 September,
the President’s High-level Forum on the Culture of
Peace focused on the relevance and importance of
early childhood development in promoting a culture
of peace. We encourage the United Nations entities
concerned, such as UNESCO and the United Nations
Alliance of Civilizations, to forge ahead with their
far-reaching work on peace and global citizenship
education. We urge Member States to support initiatives
to create avenues for promoting children’s and youth
engagement in peace. In that context, we commend
to the attention of all concerned the research study
on youth, peace and security mandated by Security
Council resolution 2250 (2015).
Last year, resolution 71/252, entitled “Follow up to
the Declaration and Programme of Action on a Culture
of Peace”, recognized the potential contribution of
the United Nations peacebuilding architecture to the
promotion of a culture of peace. Building on that, this
year Member States have rightly recognized that efforts
for peacebuilding and sustaining peace should take into
account the promotion of a culture of peace. We would
suggest that the Secretary-General’s forthcoming
report on sustaining peace appropriately reflect that
recognition.
We recall that in resolution 70/291, the General
Assembly acknowledged the relevance of the
Programme of Action on a Culture of Peace in the
context of the comprehensive implementation of the
United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy.
There is indeed further scope for exploring how the
promotion of a culture of peace can effectively and
sustainably contribute to combating terrorism and
preventing violent extremism conducive to terrorism.
We consider the notion of moderation to add a
further useful dimension to this discourse, including
in the context of mitigating the potential damaging
consequences of extremism, while upholding respect
for fundamental rights and freedoms.

A/72/PV.68

Bangladesh condemns the cowardly terrorist
attacks on holy sites in Egypt last month, as well as all
such attacks, as an affront to our shared commitment to
a culture of peace.
Building the mindset of a culture of peace is
perhaps the most basic and constructive approach to
preventing conflict. We must strive to put dialogue
for reconciliation and peace at the forefront of our
efforts to combat the hatred, intolerance, exclusion and
sectarianism that foment conflict and war.
In that spirit, we recall in particular the desperate
situation of the Rohingya in Myanmar’s Rakhine state
and continue to urge the international community to
work to ensure their fundamental human rights and
freedoms, including their right to return to their homes,
and to self-identification, citizenship and the other
basic rights they need to lead a dignified life.
The Acting President: We have heard the last
speaker in the debate on agenda item 15.
We shall now proceed to consider draft resolutions
A/72/L.21 and A/72/L.26.
The Assembly will first take a decision on draft
resolution A/72/L.21, entitled “Moderation”.
I give the
the Secretariat.

floor

to

the

representative

of

Mr. Nakano (Department for General Assembly
and Conference Management): I should like to
announce that, since the submission of the draft
resolution, and in addition to those delegations listed
in document A/72/L.21, the following countries have
also become sponsors of the draft resolution: Algeria,
Bahrain, Bangladesh, Brunei Darussalam, Cambodia,
Côte d’Ivoire, Egypt, Guinea, Indonesia, the Lao
People’s Democratic Republic, Kiribati, Lebanon, the
Maldives, Morocco, Myanmar, Oman, the Philippines,
Qatar, Saudi Arabia, Singapore, Sri Lanka, the Sudan,
Thailand, Uzbekistan, Viet Nam, Yemen and Zimbabwe.
The Acting President: A recorded vote has
been requested.
A recorded vote was taken.
In favour:
Albania, Algeria, Andorra, Angola, Argentina,
Armenia, Australia, Austria, Azerbaijan, Bahrain,
Bangladesh, Belarus, Belgium, Bhutan, Bolivia
(Plurinational State of), Bosnia and Herzegovina,

17-4276119/21

A/72/PV.68

08/12/2017

Brazil, Brunei Darussalam, Bulgaria, Cabo Verde,
Cambodia, Canada, Chile, China, Colombia,
Costa Rica, Côte d’Ivoire, Croatia, Cuba, Cyprus,
Czech Republic, Denmark, Djibouti, Dominican
Republic, Ecuador, Egypt, Equatorial Guinea,
Eritrea, Estonia, Ethiopia, Fiji, Finland, France,
Gambia, Georgia, Germany, Greece, Guatemala,
Guinea, Hungary, Iceland, India, Indonesia,
Iran (Islamic Republic of), Iraq, Ireland, Italy,
Jamaica, Japan, Jordan, Kazakhstan, Kiribati,
Kuwait, Lao People’s Democratic Republic, Latvia,
Lebanon, Lesotho, Libya, Liechtenstein, Lithuania,
Luxembourg, Malaysia, Maldives, Mali, Malta,
Marshall Islands, Mexico, Micronesia (Federated
States of), Monaco, Mongolia, Montenegro,
Morocco, Mozambique, Myanmar, Namibia,
Nepal, Netherlands, New Zealand, Nicaragua,
Nigeria, Norway, Oman, Pakistan, Panama, Papua
New Guinea, Paraguay, Peru, Philippines, Poland,
Portugal, Qatar, Republic of Moldova, Romania,
Russian Federation, San Marino, Saudi Arabia,
Senegal, Serbia, Singapore, Slovakia, Slovenia,
Solomon Islands, South Africa, Spain, Sri Lanka,
Sudan, Sweden, Switzerland, Syrian Arab
Republic, Thailand, the former Yugoslav Republic
of Macedonia, Timor-Leste, Togo, Tunisia, Turkey,
Tuvalu, Ukraine, United Arab Emirates, United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland,
Uzbekistan, Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of),
Viet Nam, Yemen, Zambia, Zimbabwe
Against:
Israel, United States of America
Draft resolution A/72/L.21 was adopted by 135
votes to 2 (resolution 72/129).
The Acting President: The Assembly will now
take a decision on draft resolution A/72/L.26, entitled
“International Day of Living Together in Peace”.
I give the
the Secretariat.

floor

to

the

representative

of

Mr. Nakano (Department for General Assembly
and Conference Management): I should like to announce
that, since the submission of the draft resolution,
Algeria has become a sponsor on behalf of the States
Members of the United Nations that are members of the
Group of African States.
In addition to the delegation listed in document
A/72/L.26, the following countries have also become
20/21

sponsors of the draft resolution: Armenia, Bahrain,
Bangladesh, the Plurinational State of Bolivia,
Bulgaria, China, Cuba, Estonia, France, Indonesia,
Kiribati, Kuwait, Lebanon, Malaysia, Nicaragua,
Oman, Qatar, Saudi Arabia, Spain, the Syrian Arab
Republic, Thailand, Turkmenistan, the United Arab
Emirates, the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela, Viet
Nam and Yemen.
The Acting President: May I take it that the
Assembly wishes to adopt draft resolution A/72/L.26?
Draft resolution A/72/L.26 was adopted (resolution
72/130).
The Acting President: Before giving the floor to
delegations that wish to speak in explanation of vote
or position, I would like to remind delegations that
explanations are limited to 10 minutes and should be
made by delegations from their seats.
Ms. Galarneau (Canada): I have the honour of
delivering this explanation of vote on behalf of Canada
on resolution 72/129, entitled “Moderation”.
First, Canada would like to thank Malaysia for
introducing a resolution on this fundamental issue, and
the facilitator and our colleagues for their sustained
efforts to achieve a consensus text. We would also like
to express our appreciation to Malaysia for its efforts
to prevent and counter violent extremism through
domestic and international initiatives. Canada is deeply
committed to countering violent extremism, as we have
demonstrated in our consistent support and engagement
on this issue. We are also committed to promoting
pluralism, inclusion, respect for diversity and all human
rights. For these reasons, Canada decided to support
the resolution.
We would like to emphasize that we understand
that interventions aimed at preventing and countering
violent extremism, including those that fall under
the term “moderation”, are locally relevant and
contact-specific. We believe that when they occur,
there must be guarantees of respect for human
rights, diversity and inclusion, with a view to helping
individuals and communities become more resilient
to attempts to radicalize them into violence. It is a
difficult balance, but one that we are committed to
continuing to work with all our partners to preserve.
Our position is that a rules-based, open and pluralistic
society, characterized by a wide diversity of thought
and belief, is a precondition for a culture of peace.
17-42761

08/12/2017

Mr. Brown (United States of America): The United
States of America strongly believes in working together
to build a more secure and peaceful world through
the promotion of justice, democracy, human rights
and fundamental freedoms, as well as by rejecting
violence and by addressing the root causes of conflict.
However, we have serious concerns about resolution
72/129, on moderation. For example, the United States
cannot accept the language in paragraph 3, which
calls on the international community to support the
Global Movement of Moderates initiative, owing to
our concerns about the current ability of the Global
Movement of Moderates Foundation of the Government
of Malaysia to conduct the proposed activities.
The United States also reaffirms its well-known
position that the exercise of the right to freedom of
expression should be afforded the maximum possible
protection. We also reaffirm our support for freedom
of expression and religion, including respect for the
right to freedom of thought, conscience or belief. In
that regard, we are unable to support the language in
paragraph 1 that does not distinguish between the terms
“extremism” — which may be subjectively applied to
certain groups and can be used to suppress the exercise
of the freedoms of expression and religion, as well as
other human rights and fundamental freedoms — and
“violent extremism”, which we universally oppose.
Furthermore, the word “moderation” remains
undefined in international law and, in our discussions,
we are concerned about the possibility that the
implementation of moderation-focused programmes
and policies will be subject to abuse. We are concerned
that individuals in States could construe moderation as
justifying undue restrictions on freedom of expression or
religion, both of which would contradict internationally
recognized rights.
The United States believes in working together to
protect human rights and to help ensure that the actions
of Member States to counter violent extremism are
not counterproductive.
Mr. De Souza Monteiro (Brazil): Brazil would
like to explain its vote on resolution 72/129.
Brazil welcomes the adoption of the resolution on
moderation. It is reassuring to have such a high level
of engagement within an agenda item devoted to the

A/72/PV.68

culture of peace. While we also welcome the adoption
of yet another resolution, I would like to highlight the
fact that article 1 of the Declaration on a Culture of
Peace (resolution 53/243A), adopted in 1999, lists nine
fundamental elements for the promotion of a culture of
peace, including the right to development, sustainable
development and freedom of expression and the
promotion of gender equality. This year we have seen a
significant increase in the number of resolutions under
this agenda item. Although some elements of a culture
of peace have received much attention, others have not.
We therefore hope that in future discussions, the areas
of sustainable development and human rights will be
better reflected in the efforts of the General Assembly
to promote a culture of peace.
The Acting President: We have heard the last
speaker in explanation of vote.
Several delegations have asked to speak in exercise
of the right of reply. I would like to remind members that
statements in exercise of the right of reply are limited
to 10 minutes for the first intervention and five minutes
for the second, and should be made by delegations from
their seats.
Ms. Shilo (Israel): Syria once again took advantage
of this platform to attack my country, Israel, with
false accusations and pure lies. I will not waste the
Assembly’s time by reacting to that heinous statement
by the representative of Syria, a country that kills its
own people, including by using chemical weapons.
(spoke in Arabic)
In a fire, the modest bather perishes, while the
shameless survive.
Mr. Qassem Agha (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke
in Arabic): As the representative of Israel finished
her statement, she used a proverb that says that those
who are modest end up dying. We would like to reply
by saying that the shape of the bottle tells us what is
inside. The continued occupation of the Syrian Golan
and extremism are two sides of the same coin — that is,
of Da’esh and extremist thinking throughout the world.
The Acting President: The Assembly has thus
concluded this stage of its consideration of agenda
item 15.
The meeting rose at 12.30 p.m.

17-4276121/21
