232
General Assembly- Fortietb Session
==---------------------=--=----=------~-------------------····----

entrusted with the consideration of the reports of States
parties on the implementation of the conventions;
(e) A list of articles dealing with related rights under
the various conventions and a compilation of the current
guidelines;
2. Expresses its deep concern about the alarming
number of reports overdue from many States parties to the
international conventions on human rights, 120 which negatively affects the reporting systems ofthose conventions, in
particular the International Convention on the Elimination of Ali Forms of Racial Discrimination and the International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural
Rights;
3. Expresses particular concern that sorne States that
are parties to four or to five conventions seem to have serious difficulties in submitting their reports, as indicated by
the repeated reminders addressed to them by the Secretary-General at the request of the competent supervisory
bodies;l20
4. Takes note with interest of Economic and Social
Council decision l 985/ l 32 of 28 May l 985, by which,
while maintaining the first six-year cycle of the reporting
procedures on the implementation of the International
Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights, the
Council decided to establish a nine-year period for the
subsequent cycles, and considers this decision a first step
towards the necessary lightening of the heavy burden of
reporting obligations placed upon the States parties to that
Covenant;
5. Supports the request addressed to the SecretaryGeneral by the Commission on Human Rights, in its resolution 1985/45, concerning the provision of practica!
assistance to States, under the programme of advisory
services in the field of human rights, in the preparation of
their reports under United Nations conventions;
6. Commends the United Nations Institute for Training and Research for having organized in the Caribbean
region, at the suggestion of the Centre for Human Rights
and with its close co-operation, a training course on the
preparation and submission of reports under international
conventions on human rights, and expresses the hope that
other courses of that type may be organized in Africa and
Asia;
7. Relieves that new timely steps are needed in order to
ascertain better the most relevant causes ofthe present situation regarding the non-submission of reports and to
devise feasible types of action intended to remove the difficulties being encountered;
8. Requests the Secretary-General, to this end, to send
a note verbale to all States parties to the five United
Nations conventions on human rights having at 1 February 1986 more than two reports overdue, inviting them
to indicate, if they so wish, the reasons for their difficulties
in complying with the reporting obligations with regard to
the conventions under which their reports are overdue and
their interest, if any, in technical advice and assistance
with a view to better fulfilling their reporting obligations;
9. Invites the supervisory bodies entrusted with the
consideration of reports submitted under all conventions
currently in force to give particular attention, during the
usual consideration of the action taken by the General
Assembly on their annual reports, to the report ofthe Secretary-Generail 23 and to the present resolution;
lO. Recommends to the States parties to the International Convention on the Elimination of Ali Forms of
Racial Discrimination that, at their next meeting. they
123 N40/600 and Add. l.
124 N40!425.

consider suggesting to the Committee on the Elimination
ofRacial Discrimination the adoption, as a general rule, of
the practice already being followed by the Committee of
considering two successive reports in one single text;
11. Requests the Secretary-General to submit to the
General Assembly at its forty-first session a report containing updated information on the general situation with
regard to overdue reports, an assessment ofthe operational
and financia! implications of increasing training activities
in this field and the results ofthe request addressed to him
in paragraph 8 above;
12. Decides to consider at its forty-first session the convening, in 1987, of another meeting of the Chairmen of the
supervisory bodies, including the Committee on the Elimination of Discrimination against Women and, if already
established, the committee against torture, in order to consider jointly the report of the Secretary-General requested
in paragraph 11 above;
13. Ful/y concurs with the considerations and suggestions of the Secretary-General on the question of consolidating the guidelines of the supervisory bodies entrusted
with the consideration of reports of the States parties on
the implementation of the conventions on human rights;
14. Takes note with appreciation ofthe compilation of
the general guidelines elaborated by the various supervisory bodies and of the list of articles dealing with related
rights under the five conventions, 123 both of which are
very helpful for States parties in the preparation of their
reports;
15. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its
forty-first session a separate item entitled "Reporting obligations ofStates parties to the United Nations conventions
on human rights".
116th plenary meeting
13 Decemher l 985

40/117. Second International Conference on Assistance to Refugees in Mrica
The General Assembly,
Reca//ing its resolutions 37/197 of 18 December 1982,
38/120 of 16 December 1983 and 39/139 of 14 December
1984 relating to the Second International Conference on
Assistance to Refugees in Africa,
Having considered the report of the Secretary-General
on assistance to refugees in Africa, 124
Mindful that the fundamental purpose of the Declaration and Programme of Action adopted by the Second
International Conference on Assistance to Refugees in
Africa, held at Geneva from 9 to 11 July 1984, m was to
launch collective action by the international community
aimed at achieving lasting solutions,
Grave/y concerned at the persistent and serious problem
of large numbers of refugees on the African continent,
Aware of the heavy burden borne by African countries
of asylum on account of the presence of these refugees and
its consequences for their economic and social development, and of the heavy sacrifices made by them, despite
their limited resources,
Deeply concerned that the refugee situation has been
severely affected by the critica! economic situation in
Africa, as well as by drought and other natural disasters,
Recognizing that the efforts of the countries of asylum
require the concerted support ofthe international commul25 A')'l/402, annc,

VI.

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

nity to meet the needs for emergency relief and for
medium- and long-term development aid,
Taking note ofthe declarations and resolutions adopted
by the Assembly ofHeads ofState and Govemment ofthe
Organization of African Unity at its twenty-first ordinary
session, held at Addis Ababa from 18 to 20 July 1985, 126
and of the resolutions adopted by the Council of Ministers
of the Organization of African Unity at its forty-second
ordinary session, held at Addis Ababa from I O to 17 July
1985, in particular resolution CM/Res. 989 (XLII) on the
situation of refugees in Africa, 35
Emphasizing the collective responsibility of sharing the
urgent and overwhelming burden of the problem of
African refugees through effective mobilization of additional resources to meet the urgent and long-term needs of
the refugees and to strengthen the capacity of countries of
asylum to provide adequately for the refugees while they
remain in those countries, as well as to assist the countries
of origin in rehabilitating voluntary retumees,
Reiterating the vital importance of the complementarity
between refugee aid and development assistance,
Desirous of ensuring the speedy implementation of the
recommendations and pledges made at the Second International Conference on Assistance to Refugees in Africa,
l. Expresses its deep appreciation to African host
countries, which are the biggest donors, for their generous
contribution and continuous efforts to alleviate the plight
of refugees in spite of their critical economic situation;
2. Reiterates its appreciation to all donor countries the
organizations and specialized agencies of the U~ited
Nations system, regional organizations and intergovemmental and non-govemmental organizations for their initial support and response to the projects submitted to the
Second Intemational Conference on Assistance to Refugees in Africa; 127
3. Urges the intemational community to maintain the
momentum created by the Conference and to translate
into reality the projects submitted as well as the principies
of the Declaration and Programme of Action adopted by
the Conference;
4. Emphasizes the vital importance ofthe complementarity of refugee aid and development assistance and of
ach~eving durable solutions to the problems of refugees in
Afnca and the necessity of providing assistance for the
strengthening ofthe social and economic infrastructures of
African countries receiving refugees and retumees;
5. Requests the United Nations High Commissioner
~or Re_fugees to continue to keep the situation of refugees
m Afnca under constant review so as to ensure that adequate assistance is available for care and maintenance and
for bringing about durable solutions;
6. Requests the United Nations Development Programme to increase its efforts to mobilize additional
resources for refugee-related development projects and, in
general, to promote and co-ordinate with the host
countries and the donor community the integration of refu~ee-related activities into national development planmng;
7. Cal/s upon all Member States and organizations of
the United Nations system concemed, as well as relevant
!"C&i?nal, intergove~mental and non-govemmental organ1zations, to lend the1r support to the speedy implementation of the recommendations and pledges made at the
Conference;
126 See A/40/666, annex J.
127 See A/40/425, annexes 1-III.
178 Ofjicia/ Records o(the General .·ls.1cmt,/y l-iirt1eIh Se.rnor,. Supplemenr
No 12 (A140112)
•
•

233

S. Requests the Secretary-General, in accordance with
the Declaration and Programme of Action, to monitor, in
consultation and close co-operation with the Organization
of African Unity, the United Nations High Commissioner
for Refugees and the United Nations Development Programme, the follow-up to the Conference;
9. A/so requests the Secretary-General to report to the
General Assembly at its forty-first session, through the
Economic and Social Council, on the implementation of
the present resolution.
116th p/enary meeting
13 December 1985

40/118. Report of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees
The General Assembly,
Having considered the report of the United Nations
High Commissioner for Refugees on the activities of his
Office, 128 as well as the report ofthe Executive Committee
of the Programme of the High Commissioner on the work
of its thirty-sixth session, 129 and having heard the statement made by the High Commissioner on 11 November
1985, 130
Recal/ing its resolution 39/ l 40 of 14 December 1984,
Reaffirming the purely humanitarian and non-political
character of the activities of the Office of the High Commissioner,
Deeply concerned that refugees and displaced persons of
concem to the High Commissioner continue to face distressingly serious problems in all parts of the world,
Particular/y concerned that in various regions the safety
and welfare of refugees and asylum-seekers continue to be
seriously jeopardized on account of military or armed
attacks, acts of piracy and other forms of brutality,
Stressingthe fundamental importance ofthe High Commissioner's function to provide intemational protection
and the need for States to co-operate with the High Commissioner in the exercise ofthis essential function, particularly in view of the continued and persistent violations of
the basic rights of refugees and asylum-seekers,
Emphasizing that voluntary repatriation or retum
remains the most desirable solution to the problems of refugees and displaced persons of concem to the High Commissioner,
Emphasizing a/so the importance for the intemational
community to continue to provide assistance and resettlement opportunities for those refugees for whom no other
durable solution may be in sight, particularly in regions
where countries of first refuge continue generously to
receive refugees arriving by land or by sea,
Commending States that, despite severe economic and
developmental problems of their own, continue to admit
large numbers of refugees and displaced persons into their
terri tories,
Noting with deep appreciation the valuable support
extended by many Govemments to the High Commissioner in the performance of his humanitarian tasks,
Deep/y concer,:ie1 about th~ shortage of funds faced by
the H1gh Comm1ss1oner and 1ts consequences for his ability to fulfil his mandate.
Noting with satisfaction the efforts ofthe High Commissioner. in the field of intemational protection. to address
129 Jh1d .. Supp/ement No. ! .' 1 (A 401121 Add. 1)
1.lO lh1d., f'orlleth .\'t'.Hldf1, f hrrd ( ·omnuttcc, _\?th meeting, paras. 7-1 7.
