S/2015/258

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
16 April 2015
Original: English

Twenty-first semi-annual report of the Secretary-General to
the Security Council on the implementation of
Security Council resolution 1559 (2004)
I. Background
1.
The present report is my twenty-first semi-annual report on the
implementation of Security Council resolution 1559 (2004). It provides a review
and an assessment of the process of the implementation of the resolution since my
previous report on the subject, which was issued on 7 October 2014 ( S/2014/720). I
note herein the continued lack of progress on key provisions of the resolution and
highlight increasing concerns about pressure on the sovereignty, territorial integrity
and political independence of Lebanon. On 19 March, the Security Council adopted
a presidential statement (S/PRST/2015/7) in which, among other things, it urged all
parties to reflect positively on ways forward on all outstanding issues in the
implementation of relevant Security Council resolutions, including resolution 1559
(2004), and expressed concern at violations of Lebanon’s sovereignty, the stalemate
in the election of Lebanon’s President, the impact of the conflict in the Syrian Arab
Republic on Lebanon’s security and stability, and condemned acts of terrorism that
have taken place in Lebanon. In the statement, the President of the Council also
commended the role of the Lebanese Armed Forces in defending Lebanon ’s
sovereignty, and welcomed the renewal of the mandate of the Special Tribunal for
Lebanon.
2.
As I stated in my report on the implementation of resolution 1701 (2006)
(S/2015/147), on 28 January, Hizbullah launched several anti-tank guided missiles
from the area of operations of the United Nations Interim Force in Lebanon
(UNIFIL) towards an Israeli military convoy south of the Blue Line, which resulted
in the deaths of two Israeli soldiers and injured several other soldiers and civilians.
In the retaliatory fire by the Israel Defense Forces, a UNIFIL peacekeeper was
killed. Both of those incidents are in serious violation of resolutions 1559 (2004)
and 1701 (2006). At the time of the incident, I condemned all violence and called
upon all concerned to exercise maximum calm and restraint, to refrain from any
action that could undermine the stability of the area and to act responsibly to
prevent any escalation in an already tense regional environment.
3.
The position of President of Lebanon has been vacant for almost one full year.
While recognizing the efforts of the Prime Minister, Tammam Salam, and the
Government in governing Lebanon throughout this difficult period, I am

15-06040 (E)

210415

*1506040*

S/2015/258

increasingly concerned at both the lack of progress in electing a new president and
the impact on Lebanon of such a prolonged vacuum. The Parliament has been called
into session to elect a president on 20 separate occasions since the position became
vacant on 25 May 2014, but it has failed to convene on the issue owing to the lack
of a quorum. Within that context, I note constraints on activity within the Cabinet
brought about largely by the vacuum. On 5 November, however, the Parliament did
meet to agree on the extension of its own mandate until June 2017.
4.
The war in the Syrian Arab Republic continues to have a significant impact on
Lebanon’s security and stability. On 24 October 2014, clashes between militant
groups and the national armed forces in the northern city of Tripoli resulted in four
fatalities and dozens of injuries. On 10 January, a twin suicide bomb attack on a café
in the Jabal Mohsen area of Tripoli killed at least nine people, including a member
of the internal security forces, and injured 37 others. Other terrorist attacks included
two car bombs on 3 and 8 December in the area of Aa rsal, which also caused death
and injury. The armed forces and security services have detained a number of
individuals involved in security incidents as part of their security operations in
Tripoli, the Bekaa and southern suburbs of Beirut. Under the auspices of the
Speaker of Parliament, Nabih Berri, dialogue between representatives of the Future
Movement and Hizbullah began on 23 December 2014 and has continued over six
sessions to date. The existence of the dialogue has contributed to a reduction in
tensions between Lebanon’s Sunni and Shia communities.
5.
The national armed forces have continued to face challenges to Lebanon ’s
sovereignty and territorial integrity. They have responded effectively and have
contributed to a decrease in the overall number of cross-border incidents in
Lebanon’s northern and eastern border areas during the reporting period.
Nonetheless, a significant threat to Lebanon’s security from forces fighting across
the border in the Syrian Arab Republic remains, in particular from the Islamic State
in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL) and Jabhat al-Nusra (Nusra Front) and other extremist
elements.
6.
Lebanon continues to host the largest number of refugees per capita in the
world, with 1,168,000 registered refugees from the Syrian Arab Repub lic. On
28 October, the Government of Germany hosted a ministerial meeting in Berlin of
the International Support Group for Lebanon, within the context of a wider
conference on Syrian refugees in the broader Middle East region. The group
recognized the burden on Lebanon of dealing with such an unprecedented number of
refugees and the need for greater international assistance and burden -sharing. On
15 December, the Government of Lebanon launched its crisis response plan for
2015-2016, a joint initiative with the United Nations to meet the humanitarian,
protection and socioeconomic needs of the most vulnerable Syrian refugees and host
communities in the country. Harsh winter weather has caused conditions that have
tragically led to a number of deaths from hypothermia in the refugee community.
Separately, the Government of Lebanon also introduced a set of measures on
31 December to restrict the flow of refugees into the country and better manage the
refugee presence. The United Nations continues to work closely with the
Government of Lebanon on mobilizing support for its crisis response plan and on
the provision of greater assistance to the most vulnerable refugees affected by the
crisis.

2/13

15-06040

S/2015/258

II. Implementation of resolution 1559 (2004)
7.
Since the adoption of resolution 1559 (2004) on 2 September 2004, several of
its provisions have been implemented, as I highlighted in my previous reports.
Presidential and parliamentary elections were conducted freely and fairly in 2008
and 2009. The Syrian Arab Republic withdrew its troops and military assets from
Lebanon in April 2005. Lebanon and the Syrian Arab Republic established full
diplomatic relations in 2009.
8.
During the reporting period, the Prime Minister continued to affirm Lebanon ’s
respect for all United Nations resolutions. The conflict in the Syrian Arab Republic
and its corresponding impact on Lebanon, however, continued to limit progress in
the implementation of the outstanding provisions of resolution 1559 (2004) and
other resolutions pertaining to Lebanon.
9.
The delineation of the Syrian-Lebanese border, which was strongly encouraged
by the Security Council in its resolution 1680 (2006), remains pending. Moreover,
the existence and activities of Lebanese and non-Lebanese militias along the border
continue to pose a threat to the stability of the country and the region. The national
armed forces have deployed several regiments on the eastern border, increasing the
presence of State authority in the border areas. I welcome that positive development
and continue to highlight the need for the Government and the armed forces to
continue to step up their efforts to provide stability and for the international
community to continue to support such efforts. The State must achieve a full
monopoly on the possession of weapons and the use of force throughout Lebanon.
10. My representatives and I remained in regular contact with all parties in
Lebanon during the reporting period, as well as with relevant regional and
international leaders. I met the Prime Minister on 31 March on the margins of the
Kuwait donor conference and noted the additional challenges that Lebanon faced as
a result of the conflict in the Syrian Arab Republic, including the impact on
political, security and economic life. I underlined the importance of putting aside
partisan politics and electing a new president without delay, as called for by the
Security Council, so that Lebanon would be fully capable of making necessary and
urgent decisions on matters relating to the security and stability of the c ountry. The
Deputy Secretary-General met with the Speaker of Parliament and the Prime
Minister, as well as with Patriarch Bechara Boutros al-Rahi, during his visit to
Lebanon from 14 to 17 December 2014. In the context of the launch of the Lebanon
crisis response plan for 2015-2016, the Deputy Secretary-General highlighted the
importance of electing a new president without further delay. He also noted the
continued impact on Lebanon of the conflict in the Syrian Arab Republic, including
in respect of Syrian refugees and the host communities supporting them.

A.

Sovereignty, territorial integrity, unity and political independence
of Lebanon
11. With the adoption of resolution 1559 (2004), the Security Council aimed at
strengthening the sovereignty, territorial integrity, unity and political independence
of Lebanon under the sole and exclusive authority of the Government of Lebanon
throughout the country, in line with the Taif Accords of 1989, to which all the
political parties in Lebanon had committed themselves. This objective has remained

15-06040

3/13

S/2015/258

the highest priority of my efforts to facilitate the implementation of all resolutions
pertaining to Lebanon.
12. I am increasingly concerned by the continued failure to elect a new president.
With the mandate of the former President having ended almost one year ago the
country has become increasingly vulnerable in the face of continuing security,
economic and humanitarian challenges. The Prime Minister and his Government
have worked to ensure the continuity of State institutions in the absence of a
president, but this has become increasingly difficult. While the Parliament has been
called into session on numerous occasions since 24 May 2014, it has failed to
convene to elect a new president because of the lack of a quor um, specifically the
absence of parliamentarians from Hizbullah and the Free Patriotic Movement.
However, as I indicated earlier in the present report, it did agree to extend its
mandate until 20 June 2017.
13. I note that the renewed dialogue, under the auspices of the Speaker of
Parliament, and held with representatives of the Future Movement and Hizbullah,
has led to progress in reducing tensions and providing political cover for security
operations against militants and criminals in various locations a round the country,
although it has not yet made progress on a mechanism to help the parties overcom e
the deadlock and move forward on electing a new president. In the interest of all
Lebanese communities and Lebanon’s standing regionally and internationally, I call
upon all Lebanese politicians to meet to elect a new president without further delay.
14. In its resolution 1680 (2006), the Security Council strongly encouraged the
Government of the Syrian Arab Republic to respond positively to the request of t he
Government of Lebanon to delineate their common border. I continue to call upon
the Syrian Arab Republic and Lebanon to achieve the full delineation of their
common border. Given the continuing conflict in the Syrian Arab Republic,
however, progress has been even more difficult to achieve and no tangible steps
were taken by either side in that regard during the reporting period.
15. The delineation and demarcation of the boundaries of Lebanon remain
elements essential to guaranteeing national sovereignty and territorial integrity.
They also remain critical to facilitating proper border control. The complex security
situation along the Syrian-Lebanese border in the current circumstances, including
continuing reports of cross-border fighting and movements of arms and people,
further underlines the urgency of demarcating the border. While acknowledging the
bilateral nature of border delineation, progress on the matter remains an obligation
of the two countries, in accordance with Security Council resolutions 1680 (2006)
and 1559 (2004).
16. Cross-border violations of Lebanese sovereignty and territorial integrity have
continued on the eastern and northern borders as a direct result of the conflict in the
Syrian Arab Republic. During the reporting period, there has been a decrease in the
number of cross-border events, but there were at least 45 cross-border shooting
incidents, 7 incidents of cross-border-shelling and 16 rocket attacks from the Syrian
side of the border. The Government of the Syrian Arab Republic has also continued
to conduct air raids, in violation of Lebanese sovereignty and territorial integrity.
The incidents caused injuries and material damage.
17. Security personnel, including members of the national armed forces and
internal security forces, who were kidnapped and taken hostage in August 2014

4/13

15-06040

S/2015/258

during an incursion of armed men belonging to the Nusra Front and ISIL, have still
not been released. Since their kidnapping, four have been executed by their captors;
the latest death was announced on 5 December 2014. Efforts to secure the release of
the remaining hostages are ongoing.
18. The continued occupation by Israel of the northern part of the village of
Ghajar and an adjacent area north of the Blue Line stands in violation of the
sovereignty of Lebanon and resolutions 1559 (2004) and 1701 (2006). My
representatives and I continue to engage closely with both parties with a view to
facilitating the withdrawal of the Israel Defense Forces from the area, pursuant to
resolution 1701 (2006).
19. There was no progress in relation to the issue of the Shab ’a Farms area during
the reporting period. Neither the Syrian Arab Republic nor Israel has yet responded
with regard to the provisional definition of the area contained in my report on the
implementation of resolution 1701 (2006), issued on 30 October 2007 ( S/2007/641).
20. Unmanned aerial vehicles and fixed-wing aircraft, including fighter jets, of the
Israel Defense Forces continued to make almost daily overflights of Lebanon during
the reporting period, in violation of Lebanese sovereignty and resolutions 1559
(2004) and 1701 (2006). The Government of Lebanon has regularly and repeatedly
protested against the violations. I have deplored them and demanded t hat they cease
immediately. The Israeli authorities, in turn, claim that the overflights are carried
out for security reasons.

B.

Extension of control of the Government of Lebanon over all
Lebanese territory
21. The Government of Lebanon has reiterated to the United Nations its intention
to extend State authority over all Lebanese territory, as called for in the Taif Accords
and in resolution 1559 (2004). The national armed forces and internal security
forces have played a crucial role in implementing that commitment under difficult
circumstances and the ability of the Lebanese State to fully exercise its authority
over all its territory continues to be challenged.
22. Concern remains at the involvement of Lebanese fighters in the Syrian
conflict, including members of Hizbullah. Hizbullah has continued to publicly
acknowledge its participation in the fighting in the Syrian Arab Republic, contrary
to its commitment to the Baabda Declaration and Lebanon’s policy of
disassociation. Funerals of its members killed in the fighting in the Syrian Arab
Republic continued to be held in Lebanon during the reporting period. Other
Lebanese have also participated in the fighting across the border in the Syrian Arab
Republic alongside Syrian opposition forces and also reportedly for the Nusra Front
and ISIL. The involvement of Hizbullah and other Lebanese elements in the fighting
in the Syrian Arab Republic further jeopardizes the stability and security of
Lebanon.
23. The national armed forces have deployed border regiments on the northern and
eastern borders of the country. The deployment has repelled attempted incursions of
Lebanese territory by armed fighters on several occasions. However, on
1 December, during one of those attempts, six Lebanese soldiers were kille d and one
was injured near the town of Ras Baalbek. In another such incident, on 23 January,

15-06040

5/13

S/2015/258

clashes with armed fighters in the same area led to the death of eight soldiers and
the injury of a number of others.
24. Urgent international support of the national armed forces remains a priority.
The delivery of assistance related to the contribution of $3 billion from Saudi
Arabia, announced in March 2014, is expected to begin imminently in cooperation
with France. The additional donation of $1 billion by Saudi Arabia to Lebanon for
specifically engaging in counter-terrorism activities has further bolstered the
capacity of the armed forces and security services in that regard. B ilateral security
assistance by the United States of America, the United Kingdom of Great Britain
and Northern Ireland and other Member States has also helped to strengthen the
capability of the armed forces.
25. Owing to the efforts of the national armed forces and security agencies, and
the increased cooperation between them, there has been an overall decrease in the
number of terrorist incidents in the country. However, on 3 December, a Lebanese
soldier was killed and two others injured when they attempted to defuse a bomb
close to the outskirts of the town of Aarsal. On 8 December, also in Aarsal, a car
bomb exploded injuring at least three. On 10 January, a double suicide bomb attack
in the largely Alawite neighbourhood of Jabal Mohsen caused nine fatalities,
including one member of the internal security forces, and injured 37. The Nusra
Front claimed responsibility for that attack, which received broad condemnation
from across Lebanon’s political spectrum.
26. Security operations have been carried out throughout the country with specific
plans implemented in Aarsal, Tripoli, the Bekaa area and southern suburbs of Beirut,
leading to the detention of some extremists and criminals. In addition, on
12 January, the internal security forces conducted an unprecedented security
operation aimed at disrupting a terrorist communication network in Roumieh prison.
27. With regard to the border of Lebanon with the Syrian Arab Republic, there
continued to be reports of arms trafficking in both directions. The Government of
Israel has consistently alleged, including in a letter dated 12 December addre ssed to
the Secretary-General and the President of the Security Council ( S/2014/878), that
there are ongoing arms transfers to Hizbullah across the Lebanese -Syrian border.
Although the United Nations is not in a position to independently verify those
concerns, it takes such reports seriously. Hizbullah has continued to openly claim
that it has a substantial and sophisticated military capacity which is separate from
that of the Lebanese State and which it claims serves as a deterrent against potential
aggression from Israel.
28. On 18 January, an alleged Israeli airstrike in the Golan Heights killed six
Hizbullah members and a high-ranking Iranian military officer. At the time of the
incident I expressed concern about the potential consequences of such an episode,
particularly in the context of the conflict in the Syrian Arab Republic and the
corresponding impact on Lebanon. I called upon all sides to act responsibly to
prevent any further escalation in respect of the sovereignty and territorial integrity
of all of the countries concerned.
29. In view of the continuing cross-border incidents and the reports of arms
smuggling, there remains an urgent need to improve the management and control of
Lebanon’s land borders. Tackling that challenge is also necessary in order to prevent
armed groups and militias in Lebanon from expanding their arsenals of weapons,

6/13

15-06040

S/2015/258

given that such expansion outside State control constitutes a threat to national and
regional peace.

C.

Disbanding and disarmament of Lebanese and non-Lebanese militias
30. In its resolution 1559 (2004), the Security Council called for the disarming and
disbanding of all Lebanese and non-Lebanese militias, a key provision of the
resolution that has not yet been implemented. It reflects and reaffirms a decision to
which all Lebanese committed themselves in the Taif Accords, which led at the time
to Lebanese militias, with the exception of Hizbullah, relinquishing their weapons.
Given the current national context and the growing impact of the Syrian crisis on
Lebanon, it is critical that the Accords be preserved and implemented by all in order
to avoid the spectre of a renewed confrontation among the Lebanese and to
strengthen the institutions of the State.
31. Lebanese and non-Lebanese militias within the country continue to operate
outside the control of the Government, in serious violation of resolution 1559
(2004). While several groups across the political spectrum in Lebanon possess
weapons outside government control, the armed component of Hizbullah is the most
significant and most heavily armed Lebanese militia in the country. The
maintenance of arms by Hizbullah and other groups poses a serious challenge to the
State’s ability to exercise full sovereignty and authority over its territory. In
addition, several Palestinian armed groups continue to operate in the country inside
and outside the refugee camps.
32. There has been no tangible progress towards the disbanding and disarming of
Lebanese and non-Lebanese militias, as called for in the Taif Accords and resolution
1559 (2004). Since the adoption of that resolution, no specific steps have been taken
to tackle that crucial issue, which lies at the heart of the sovereignty and political
independence of Lebanon. Several Lebanese groups and individuals continue to
speak up against the maintenance by Hizbullah of a military arsenal and the
presence of armed groups such as the “Seraya al-Muqawama”, which they consider
to be a destabilizing factor in the country and a factor that undermines democracy.
Many Lebanese see the continued existence of such arms as an implicit threat for
use within Lebanon for political reasons.
33. I have repeatedly expressed my deep concern to Lebanese leaders about the
serious risks that armed groups pose to the stability of the country and the region. I
have urged them to tackle the matter without further delay, given that it is their
obligation under Security Council resolution 1559 (2004). In a democratic State, it
is a fundamental anomaly that a political party maintains its own militia.
Nonetheless, Hizbullah has continued to openly claim that its military capacity is
separate from that of the Lebanese State and that its arms serve as a deterrent
against potential aggression from Israel.
34. In its statement, in which it claimed responsibility for the 28 January attack
against an Israeli military convoy, Hizbullah attributed the action to its “Quneitra
martyrs group” in reference to the 18 January alleged Israeli airstrike on the Gola n.
Israel retaliated against Lebanon on 28 January, firing mortar rounds and artillery
into the areas of Arab el Louaize, near Ghajar, Majidiye and Kafr Chouba (in sector
east of the UNIFIL area of operations). During the course of Israeli retaliatory fire a
UNIFIL peacekeeper was killed in position 4-28. There were further retaliations

15-06040

7/13

S/2015/258

from both sides, the details of which were set out in my previous report on
resolution 1701 (2006).
35. The claim of responsibility by Hizbullah for the attack across the B lue Line on
28 January demonstrated clearly the maintenance of unauthorized weapons by
Hizbullah, outside the control of the State, and Hizbullah ’s willingness to use such
weapons against Israel. It confirmed the concern I have voiced for some time about
the impact on Lebanon’s stability and security. The presence of other armed
extremist militants in Lebanon, as witnessed in Tripoli, Aarsal and the Bekaa is also
deeply worrisome. Violence and terrorist acts continued during the reporting period,
causing loss of life and great suffering and fear among many innocent Lebanese
from all communities nationwide.
36. It is in the national interest of Lebanon to ensure that those behind the
perpetration of terrorist acts, including political assassinations, are hel d accountable
and that violence is not committed with impunity. It has been 10 years since the
assassination of the former Prime Minister, Rafiq Hariri, and the adoption of
resolution 1757 (2005). On 31 December 2014, the mandate of the Special Tribunal
for Lebanon was extended for another three years from 1 March 2015.
37. Reports of groups in Lebanese communities carrying arms to protect
themselves for fear of attack by such groups as the Nusra Front and ISIL, have
continued in the reporting period. I emphasize the importance of having the
Government of Lebanon ensure the security and stability of those areas, including in
communities located close to the border, which would demonstrate the significance
of the presence and role of State authorities, rather than militias, in that regard.
38. I have consistently highlighted the National Dialogue as the best way to deal
with the issue of arms and achieve the ultimate goal of no weapons or armed forces
in Lebanon other than those of the Lebanese State. I note that once again no sessions
of the National Dialogue were held during the reporting period — another tangible
effect of the continued vacuum in the presidency. I am concerned that this in turn
puts at risk the possibility of building consensus and a unifi ed vision on the issue.
39. During the reporting period, the security situation in the Palestinian refugee
camps remained generally stable, with the exception of a few violent incidents. On
24 November, a Syrian refugee was killed during a clash between a rmed groups in
Burj el Barajneh camp. The capacity of the Joint Security Force, which largely
controls security in Ein el-Hillweh camp, has increased. In cooperation with
Lebanese authorities, the Joint Security Force intervened on a number of occasions
to prevent the further escalation of security incidents, including on 20 January when
a Palestinian was killed in Ein el-Hillweh. I am encouraged by the launch of the
Joint Security Force in Mieh Mieh camp on 26 March. I welcome the renewed
commitment of Palestinian leaders to disassociate the Palestinian camps in Lebanon
from the violence in the Syrian Arab Republic and the region more broadly.
40. Humanitarian conditions for Palestine refugees in Lebanon are increasingly
dire, with the influx of an additional 45,000 refugees from the Syrian Arab Republic
since the beginning of the crisis, placing tremendous additional pressure on the
overall situation in the camps and gatherings and on the efforts of UNRWA to assist
them. UNRWA has taken measures to reduce the tension between the Palestine
refugees who have been residing in Lebanon and those arriving from the Syrian
Arab Republic by, for example, including refugee children in regular classes in

8/13

15-06040

S/2015/258

UNRWA schools. The United Nations has continued to urge the Lebanese authorities
to improve the living conditions of the refugees. Those efforts should be done
without prejudice to the eventual resolution of the Palestine refugee question in the
context of a comprehensive peace agreement in the region, and bearing in mi nd the
detrimental effects of the dismal living conditions on the wider security situation.
41. The presence of Palestinian armed groups outside the camps continues to
challenge the ability of Lebanon to exercise full sovereignty over its territory.
Notwithstanding the decision taken in 2006 by the National Dialogue and confirmed
in subsequent sessions, no progress was made during the reporting period with
regard to dismantling the military bases of the Popular Front for the Liberation of
Palestine-General Command and Fatah al-Intifada in the country. All but one of the
bases are located along the Syrian-Lebanese border. Their presence continues to
undermine Lebanese sovereignty and governmental authority and makes delineation
of the border more difficult. It poses a serious challenge to the effective control of
the eastern border between Lebanon and the Syrian Arab Republic. I have reiterated
my calls upon the Lebanese authorities for the implementation of earlier decisions
of the National Dialogue, specifically those relating to the dismantling of the above mentioned military bases, and upon the Government of the Syrian Arab Republic to
cooperate with those efforts in good faith.

III. Observations
42. I continue to be disappointed at the lack of further tangible progress made
towards the implementation of the remaining provisions of resolution 1559 (2004).
Lebanon continues to face challenges to its stability and security, both internally and
along its borders with the Syrian Arab Republic, including fr om terrorism and
extremist groups and arms smuggling. I am concerned that the continued stagnation
in the implementation of the resolution could lead to the erosion of provisions
already implemented and contribute to a further deterioration in the stabilit y of
Lebanon. I reiterate my firm conviction that it is in the best interest of Lebanon and
the Lebanese to make progress towards the full implementation of resolution 1559
(2004) for the long-term stability of the country and the region.
43. I remain deeply concerned over the serious deterioration in January of the
security situation in southern Lebanon. I condemn the violence committed by all
sides and call upon all concerned to exercise maximum calm and restraint, to refrain
from any action that could undermine the stability of the area and to act responsibly
to prevent any escalation in an already tense regional environment. I call upon all
sides to adhere to all relevant Security Council resolutions and condemn the tragic
death of a United Nations peacekeeper.
44. I have repeatedly cautioned that the widespread proliferation of weapons
outside the control of the State, combined with the existence of heavily armed
militias, undermines the security of Lebanese citizens. The maintenance by
Hizbullah of sizeable and sophisticated military capabilities outside the control of
the Government of Lebanon remains a matter of grave concern, in particular
because it creates an atmosphere of intimidation and represents a key challenge to
the safety of Lebanese civilians and to the Government monopoly on the legitimate
use of force. The serious impact of those arms was clearly felt during the reporting
period, especially in the context of the incidents of 28 January. I reiterate my call

15-06040

9/13

S/2015/258

upon Hizbullah and all other parties concerned not to engage in any militant activity
inside or outside Lebanon, consistent with the requirements of the Taif Accords and
resolution 1559 (2004).
45. I have repeatedly condemned the continued violation of the sovereignty of
Lebanon, including cross-border incidents in which civilians and members of the
national armed forces have been killed or injured on the Lebanese side of the border
because of the actions of warring parties in the Syrian Arab Republic. I condemn the
continuation of cross-border shelling and rocket attacks by various groups in the
Syrian Arab Republic and the air raids by the Syrian air force on Lebanese territory,
which are a further violation of Lebanese sovereignty. I continue to call upon all
parties, including the Government of the Syrian Arab Republic, to respect the
sovereignty and territorial integrity of Lebanon, in accordance with Security
Council resolution 1559 (2004).
46. I condemn the participation of Lebanese citizens in the conflict in the Syrian
Arab Republic in breach of the commitment of all Lebanese parties consistent with
the ministerial declaration of the current Government, to the policy of disassociation
and the principles of the Baabda Declaration agreed to by all Lebanese parties in
June 2012. The involvement of Hizbullah and other Lebanese elements in the
fighting in the Syrian Arab Republic seriously jeopardizes the security and stability
of Lebanon. I welcome the continued commitment of the Prime Minister to
Lebanon’s policy of disassociation, but remain deeply concerned about the ongoing
threat to Lebanon posed by terrorism and extremism, including from groups such as
ISIL and the Nusra Front. I deplore the terrorist attacks that have occurred in the
country, including those carried out by groups involved in the fighting in the Syrian
Arab Republic. The suicide attacks that took place in Tripoli on 10 January led to a
tragic loss of life and risked setting one Lebanese community against another as a
result. However, I applaud the response of the various communities involved,
especially those from the area of Jabal Mohsen, which refused to retaliate or
respond to such violence. I encourage the Government of Lebanon and local leaders
to facilitate and support the efforts of Lebanese communities working towards
strengthening ties, including the development of socioeconomic opportunities for
the most vulnerable citizens. Working in such a spirit of moderation and unity will, I
hope, bring the various communities in Lebanon together and contribute to the
country’s strength and resilience.
47. I am encouraged by the successes of the Lebanese State, specifically the
national armed forces, in strengthening its presence in border areas, in order to
better protect the sovereignty and territorial integrity of th e country. The positive
impact of the deployment of border regiments has been felt across Lebanon,
especially in the communities most affected by and vulnerable to attack from
extremist armed groups attempting to infiltrate Lebanon ’s borders, such as the Nusra
Front and ISIL. I regret that the deployments have not been without cost, including
the loss of life of Lebanese soldiers. I condemn the detention and deplorable
executions of Lebanese soldiers and security force personnel held captive by the
Nusra Front and ISIL in the eastern Lebanese-Syrian border area. I call upon those
holding the remaining security personnel hostage to release them without further
delay.
48. I welcome the cooperation between the various State security agencies and the
armed forces, which has led to the detention and arrest of a number of extremists

10/13

15-06040

S/2015/258

and criminals, particularly in Tripoli and the Bekaa area where specific security
plans have been implemented. Their roles, including in counter-terrorism efforts,
have been critical in preserving Lebanon’s security and stability in the face of
multiple challenges. I note the dialogues that have been held between opposing
political parties in Lebanon and welcome all attempts to deepen unity and political
consensus throughout the country. Dialogue and unity are the best response to any
attempts at dividing and destabilizing Lebanese society, and I encourage the parties
concerned to continue such efforts in the interest of all communities. Broad political
support for the various security operations, including subsequent judicial processes,
also sends an important message that violence with impunity will not be tolerated. I
note the commitment of the former President of the Special Tribunal for Lebanon,
Judge David Baragwanath, to completing the current trial within the Tribunal’s
recently renewed third mandate, on the tenth anniversary of the assassination of the
former Prime Minister of Lebanon, Rafiq Hariri, and 21 others who were killed in
the same attack.
49. There is growing fear in Lebanon about the incursion of armed militants and
terrorists across the border from the Syrian Arab Republic, including ISIL and the
Nusra Front. Continued reports of the formation of armed groups in local
communities close to those border areas, with the alleged aim of providing
protection to the local population, are worrisome.
50. I continue to urge the Government and armed forces of Lebanon to take all
measures necessary to prohibit Hizbullah and other armed groups from acquiring
weapons and building paramilitary capacity outside the authority of the State, in
violation of resolution 1559 (2004). It is vital that the National Dialogue meet again
to address issues of national importance, including the arms held by Hizbullah and
other groups. The discussion paper on a national defence strategy developed in the
context of the National Dialogue remains a valuable starting point in that regard. It
remains important that earlier decisions of the National Dialogue be implemented. I
also call upon countries in the region that maintain close ties with Hizbullah to
encourage the transformation of the armed group into a solely political party and its
disarmament, in accordance with the requirements of the Taif Accords and
resolution 1559 (2004), in the best interests of Lebanon and regional peace and
security.
51. I welcome the support provided by the international community for the
national armed forces and security agencies. Bilateral assistance has also played an
important part in providing timely and urgently needed requirements. The
finalization of the agreement for $3 billion of assistance from Saudi Arabia, to be
delivered in cooperation with France, is a positive development and will contribute
to the strengthening of the armed forces. Another positive development is the
additional $1 billion contribution from Saudi Arabia to strengthen Lebanese security
services. I encourage progress in expediting the delivery of this much -needed
capability, particularly in counter-terrorism and border protection, in order to give
the armed forces the superiority needed to effectively address the multiple security
challenges facing Lebanon.
52. The situation of Palestinian refugees in Lebanon and the limited resources
available to UNRWA to assist them remains a concern, particularly in the light of
the continued presence of Palestine refugees from the Syrian Arab Republic who
have fled the violence there. I call upon donors to increase their support to UNRWA

15-06040

11/13

S/2015/258

and its vital work in providing services to Palestine refugees in Leban on. I note the
work of the Palestinian joint security force in preventing an escalation of conflict on
several occasions in the Ein el-Hillweh camp and welcome the renewed
commitment of Palestinian leaders to disassociate the Palestinian camps in Lebanon
from the violence in the Syrian Arab Republic and the region more broadly.
53. I regret the absence of any progress on the delineation and demarcation of the
border with the Syrian Arab Republic, which has a significant impact on border
control. I remain of the view that integrated border management will, in the longer
term, contribute significantly to better control of the borders of Lebanon and help to
prevent the illegal transfer of weapons and fighters in both directions. This has
become even more pressing in the context of events in the Syrian Arab Republic.
54. The continued violations committed by Israel in respect of the sovereignty and
territorial integrity of Lebanon, including the conspicuous overflights of Lebanese
territory by Israeli military aircraft, are deplorable. I reiterate my call upon Israel to
adhere to its obligations under relevant Security Council resolutions and to
withdraw its forces from the northern part of the village of Ghajar and an adjacent
area north of the Blue Line, as well as to cease its overflights of Lebanese airspace,
which undermine the credibility of the Lebanese security services and generate
anxiety among the civilian population. Recent incidents along the Blue Line, as
detailed in my reports on the implementation of resolution 1701 (2006), underscore
the importance of ensuring that the situation along the entirety of the Blue Line
remains stable, including in the Shaba’a Farms area. I welcome the resumption of
calm and the recommitment by both Lebanon and Israel to the cessation of
hostilities, and call upon all sides to avoid any provocative rhetoric. Full
implementation of all provisions of relevant resolutions remains the best prevention
against the risk of miscalculation or tensions.
55. I am concerned at the continued failure, for almost a full year, to elect a new
president, which puts additional pressure on the remaining State institutions,
including the Cabinet. Leaving the position of Head of State vacant increases the
country’s vulnerability to mounting security, economic and humanitarian challenges.
I commend the efforts of the Prime Minister and the Government to ensure national
unity and the continuity of State institutions. Lebanon cannot afford to wait for a
new crisis in order to resolve the anomaly, and I hope that Lebanese leaders will use
the opportunity of the current relative stability to put the national interest ahead of
partisan politics with regard to the election. I note that a parliamentary quorum was
observed on 5 November, when Lebanese politicians met to extend the mandate of
the Parliament until June 2017. I therefore call upon Lebanese members of
Parliament to exercise their responsibility by attending sessions of the Parliament
and ensuring that a quorum is observed so that a new presid ent can be elected
without further delay. The Lebanese people deserve to have a Head of State to help
contribute to unity and stability in the country and to tackle long -term issues that
have a tangible impact on all Lebanese.
56. Recent security developments, especially in the eastern border region, have put
even greater pressure on the refugees, the host communities that receive them and
the country, necessitating further support from the international community. I
welcome the launching of the crisis response plan, jointly developed by the
Government and the United Nations. I encourage the Lebanese authorities to
continue to work closely with the United Nations in their efforts to host, assist and

12/13

15-06040

S/2015/258

protect refugees in accordance with human rights and human itarian principles. The
refugee crisis in Lebanon is not only a major humanitarian and socioeconomic
burden for Lebanon but also a challenge to the country’s stability and must be
addressed as such. I strongly encourage Member States, including regional do nors,
to fulfil their burden-sharing responsibilities by contributing generously through the
crisis response plan and the other mechanisms addressed at the Kuwait donor
conference held on 31 March 2015.
57. Developments in the region make for an even more complex and fragile
environment in which Lebanon’s security, stability and unity remain key elements,
and I remain firmly committed to the implementation of resolution 1559 (2004). I
therefore count on the continued commitment of the Government to its int ernational
obligations and call upon all parties and actors to fully abide by resolutions 1559
(2004), 1680 (2006) and 1701 (2006). I also call upon Member States to renew
efforts to support Lebanon in ensuring respect for its obligations under those
resolutions as the best way to advance the country’s long-term prosperity and
stability as a democratic State. I will continue my efforts towards the full
implementation of those and all other resolutions pertaining to Lebanon.

15-06040

13/13
