A

UNITED
NATIONS

General Assembly
PROVISIONAL
A/S-17/PV. 8
9 March 1990
ENGLISH

Seventeenth special session
GENERAL ASSE~BLY
PROVISIONAL

VERBATI~

RECORD OF THE EIGHTH MEETING

Held at Headquarters, New York,
on Fridav, 23 February 1990, at 3 p.m.
President:

~r.

GARBA

(Niqeria)

Adoption of a political declaration and a qlobal proqramme of action [14]
Follow-up measures for the implementation of the decisions adopted by the
special session: report of the ~~ Hoc Committee of the Seventeenth Special
Session [ 15]
Statement by the President
Minute of silent praver or medit~tion [2]
Closure of the seventeenth special session of the General Assemblv

This record contains the oriqinal text of speeches delivered in Enqlish and
interpretations of SPeeches in the other lanquaqes. The final text will be printed
in the Official Records of the General ~ssemblv.
Corrections should be submitted to oriqinal speeches onlv. Thev should be
sent under the siqnature of a member of the deleqation concerned, within one week,
to the Chief, Official Records Editinq Section, Department of Conference Services,
room DC2-750, 2 United Nations Plaza, and incorporated in a coov of the record.
90-60045

6732V (E)

JP/ck

A/S-17/PV. 8
2-5

.The meeti!:_XI was called to order'at 4 p.m.
,·

AGENDA ITEMS 14 and 15
ADOPTION OF A POLITICAL DECLARATION AND A GLOBAL PROGRAMME OF ACTION
FOLLOW-UP MEASURES FOR THE IMPLEMENTATION O,F THE,·, DECISIONS
ADOPTED BY THE SPECIAL
I
SESSION: REPORI' OF THE AD HOC COMMITTEE OF THE' SEVENTEENTH SPECIAL SESSION
(A/S-17/lll
-----The PRESIDENT:

This afternoon the Assembly will consider the report

(A/S-17/11) of the Ad Hoc Committee of the Seventeenth Special Session on aqenda
items 14 and 15.
I request the Rapporteur of the Ad Hoc Committee of the Seventeenth SPecial
Session, Mr. Anatoli Oleinik of the Ukrainian Soviet Socialist Republic, to
introduce the report.
Mr. OLEINIK (Ukrainian Soviet Socialist Republic), Rapporteur of the
Ad Hoc Committee of the Seventeenth Special Session (interpretation from Russian):
I have the honour to Present the report of the Ad Hoc Committee of the Seventeenth
SPecial Session, which appears in documents A/S-17/11 and A/S-17/AC.l/L.3.

The

paraqraph contained in document A/S-17/11 will be incorporated into the final text
of the report.
In paraqraph 12 of document A/S-17/AC.l/L.3 the Ad Hoc Committee recommends to
the General Assembly the adoption of a draft resolution, to which are annexed the
Political Declaration and the Global Proqramme of Action, as orally revised by the
Committee.

A/S-17/PV. 8
6

JP/ck

(Mr. Oleinik, Rapporteur,
Ad Hoc Committee of the
Seventeenth Special Ses~ion)
I wish to draw attention to the followinq oral amendments to the text of the
Global Proqramme of Action adopted by the Ad Hoc Committee at its final meetinq.
The fourth line of paraqraph 22 on paqe 12 of the Enalish text should now
read:
"be made available to all countries, in particular, develoPinq countries, in
order to assist".
In paraqraph 39(a) on paqe 15 of the Enalish text the word "directly", in the
fourth line, should be deleted.
In paraqraph 93, on paqe 22 of the Enqlish text, in lines 4 and 5 the words
"International Narcotics Control Board and its secretariat, the Division of
Narcotic Druas and the United Nations Fund for Drua Abuse Control need"
should be replaced by the words
''United Nations structure for druq abuse control needs".
The Secretariat will ensure that the other lanquaqe versions conform to the
Enqlish version of the text.
The PRESIDENT:

I thank the Rapporteur of the Ad Hoc Committee of the

Seventeenth Special Session for his introduction of the Committee's report,
containinq a draft resolution to which are annexed the Political Declaration and
the Global Proqramme of Action, as orally revised.
If there is no proposal under rule 66 of the rules of procedure, I shall take
it that the Assembly will not discuss the rePort.
It was so decided.
The PRESIDENT:
vote.

Statements will therefore be limited to exPlanations of

A/S-17/PV.S
7

JP/ck

(The President)
The positions of deleqations reqardinq the various recommendations of the
Ad Hoc Committee have been made clear in the Committee and are reflected in the
relevant official records.
May I remind deleqations that, in accordance with General Assembly
decision 34/401, explanations of vote are limited to 10 minutes and should be made
by deleqations from their seats.
There beinq no sPeakers in explanation of vote, the Assembly will now turn to
the draft resolution recommended in paraqraph 12 of the report (A/S-17/11) of the
Ad Hoc Committee of .the Seventeenth Special Session.
The Global Proqramme of Action that the Ad Hoc Committee recommends to the
General Assembly for adoption includes a number of what are, for the Orqanization,
new and siqnificant mandates whose implementation will require substantial
additional resources.

Given their far-reachinq nature, it is not possible, at this

staqe and within the limited time available, to identify the additional
requirements with anY deqree of precision.
It would therefore be the intention of the Secretary-General to assess the
scope of these new mandates carefully and identify the most efficient and speedy
way of ensurinq their implementation and the related resources that would be
required in time for their incorooration in the United Nations system-wide action
plan on druq abuse control.
The Plan, which is aimed at the full imPlementation of all existinq mandates
and subsequent decisions of interqovernmental bodies, will, as required by the
General Assembly in its resolution 44/141, be discussed by the Committee for
Proqramme and Co-ordination at its forthcominq session in May and subsequently by
the Economic and Social Council.

The Plan, as required by the same resolution,

will contain a realistic cost estimate for its implementation.

JP/ck

A/S-17/PV. 8
8

(The President)
Based on the outcome of the review by the Economic and Social Council, the
additional resources required for the implementation of the Plan 1990-1991 would be
subject to the criteria for the use of the Continqency Fund, in accordance with
existinq Procedures relatinq to the proqramme budqet.
For the biennium 1992-1993, provision for any additional requirements would be
made in the context of the prooosed budqet outline for the biennium 1992-1993, also
bearinq in mind the expectation of the General AssemblY as expressed in paraqraPh 7
of the Global Proqramme of Action that additional requirements would be reflected
as a hiqh priority in the medium-term plan for the period 1992-1997 and in the
proqramme budqet for the biennium 1992-1993.
We shall now proceed to take a decision on the draft resolution, to which are
annexed the Political Declaration and the Global Proqramme of Action, as orally
revised, and which is contained in paraqraph 12 of the report of the Ad Hoc
Committee.
May I take it that the Assembly wishes to adopt the draft resolution?
The draft resolution was adopted (resolution A/S-17/2).
The PRESIDENT:

We have thus concluded our consideration of aqenda items

14 and 15 and of all other items on the aqenda.
STATEMENT BY THE PRESIDENT
The PRESIDENT:

We are about to conclude the seventeenth SPecial session

of the General Assembly, which has been devoted to the question of international
co-operation aqainst illicit production, supply, demand, traffickinq and
distribution of narcotic druqs and psychotropic substances.

The qoal that the

special session set for itself in the four-day discourse was to expand the scope
and effectiveness of international co-operation in the resolute campaiqn to
eradicate the menace of narcotic drugs from the face of the earth.

JP/ck

A/S-17/PV.S
9-10

(The President)
It is a measure of the qrave concern we all share over the abuse of narcotic
druas and their many-sided catastroohic consequences for the oeace, securitY and
economic well-beinq of human societies that the debates have been characterized on
the one hand bv a deliqhtful absence of acrimony and on the other bv a Passionate
intensity in the calls for action.
We have been honoured to hear from the Prime Ministers of Peru and Trinidad
and Tobaqo.

The presence of Attorneys-General and law Ministers in many

deleqations also underscored the importance attached to the work of this special
session.

Thus many speakers have rendered various analvses of the problems and,

inter alia, made interestinq and oriqinal suqqestions for combatinq the druq
oroblem.

Some deleaations have not onlv shared with us their e~periences of the

drua menace, but also quite qenerously offered to share their
law-enforcement and other measures.

e~pertise

in

JP/ck

A/S-17/PV.8
11
(The President)
With different deqrees of emphasis, deleqations, while acknowlerlqinq the

primary responsibilities of Member States to contain the social and economic
outraqe which the druq problem represents, have insisted on concerted international
action under the aeqis of the United Nations.

In doinq so, they have demanded

substantial strenqtheninq of the relevant United Nations aqencies.

Like most of

you, I was struck by the limited resources provided for the United Nations aqencies
involved in this matter.

The scope of the challenqes posed by the druq problem

obliqes the United Nations to increase its financial resources above the present
fiqure of 0.04 per cent of its annual budqet.
In this connection, let me reiterate the point I made in mv oPenino statement
concerninq the need for the relevant United Nations aqencies to be provided with
financial resources to match the challenqe at hand.

It would still be unrealistic

to expect the United Nations aqencies to perform the tasks allotted to them
effectively without increasinq their financial allocations.
After all, the question of controllinq oruq abuse is a matter of dealinq with
a plaque of modern times.

In their war aqainst many societies, the druq cartels

and their henchmen ask no quarter and qive no quarter.
For our part, we need to streamline our efforts in the fiqht aqainst the druq
plaque.

To that end, I appeal to Member States which have not vet done so to qive

priority to hasteninq their leqal procedures for the ratification of the 1988
United Nations Convention aqainst Illicit Traffic in Narcotic Druqs and
Psychotropic Substances.

By doinq so, and faithfully implementinq the provisions

of that Convention and those before it, we can, I believe, achieve that essential
international co-operation without which our efforts will remain unfocused.

A/S-17/PV.S

JP/ck

12

AGENDA ITEM 2
MINUTE OF SILENT PRAYER OR MEDITATION
The PRESIDENT:

We have come to the end of the seventeenth special

session of the General Assembly.

I invite representatives to stand and observe one

minute of silent praver or meditation.
The members of the General Assembly observed a minute of silence.
CLOSURE OF THE SEVENTEENTH SPECIAL SESSION OF THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY
The PRESIDENT:

I declare closed the seventeenth special session of the

General Assembly.
The meetinq rose at 4.15 p.m.
