148

General Assembly-Thirty-second Session

Drug Abuse Control by giving due consideration to the
economic and social development provided in drug
control programmes financed by the Fund;
3. Urges all international or multilateral organizations and institutions concerned with providing economic and social development aid to co-operate with
the United Nations by supporting financially the implementation of such drug control programmes which
include sectors dealing with the economic and social
development of the areas covered by those programmes;
4. Requests the Secretary-General to bring the
present resolution to the attention of all Governments
and of international or multilateral organizations and
institutions concerned with providing economic and
social development aid and to invite them to co-operate
in its best possible implementation.
105th plenary meeting
16 December 1977

32/126.

Intensified and co-ordinated efforts to
fight the illicit traffic in and illicit demand for narcotic drugs and psychotropic substances

The General Assembly,
Recalling relevant articles of the Single Convention
on Narcotic Drugs, 1961, as amended by the 1972
Protocol Amending the Single Convention on Narcotic
Drugs, 1961, 60 as well as of the 1971 Convention on
Psychotropic Substances, 61
Bearing in mind Economic and Social Council resolutions 1932 (LVIII) and 1934 (LVIII) of 6 May
1975, 2002 (LX) of 12 May 1976, 2064 (LXII),
2067 (LXII) and 2081 (LXII) of 13 May 1977, as
well as the relevant recommendations of the Fifth
United Nations Congress on the Prevention of Crime
and the Treatment of Offenders, 62
Recognizing the serious health, social and economic
problems caused by drug abuse,
Noting with satisfaction the considerable results
achieved by national law enforcement agencies, by increasing regional and interregional collaboration and
in co-operation with the competent international organizations and bodies, in intercepting more and more
the actual movement of drug contraband,
Noting with great concern that the continuing international illicit traffic in both narcotic drugs and psychotropic substances causes the death of many human
beings or severely infringes upon their health and thus
is detrimental to many societies,
Convinced that measures to reduce illicit demand for
narcotic drugs and psychotropic substances, including
prevention, treatment and rehabilitation, must be taken
concurrently with measures to reduce illicit supply of,
and illicit traffic in, drugs,
Convinced also that intensified and co-ordinated
efforts by all competent agencies and organizations concerned with the fight against illicit drug traffic, at the
60 Ibid.

61 See

Official Records of the United Nations Conference
for the adoption of a Protocol on Psychotropic Substances,
vol. I (United Nations publication, Sales No. E.73.XI.3),
part four.
62 See A/CONF.56/10 (United Nations publication, Sales
No. E.76.IV.2 and corrigendum).

national, regional and international levels, could bring
about better results in the interception of such traffic,
I. Urges every Government to intensify its efforts in
that respect by strengthening and co-ordinating its law
enforcement agencies responsible for intercepting the
illicit traffic in narcotic drugs and psychotropic substances, by providing them with the best and most
expeditious ways and means of exchange of relevant
operational information with the respective authorities
of other countries and by co-operating to the fullest
extent possible with the international organizations
working in this field, in order to achieve the best possible results and to avoid waste of time and manpower;
2. Calls upon those international organizations and
bodies, such as INTERPOL, the International Criminal
Police Organization, and the Customs Co-operation
Council, to assist, in all possible ways and in the most
co-ordinated manner avoiding duplication, the respective law enforcement agencies of all Governments, in
particular by providing them with all available operational information related to the illicit traffic in narcotic
drugs and psychotropic substances;
3. Invites Governments to take all appropriate
measures against drug abuse, including in particular
the early prevention of drug addiction and health education programmes, as well as to provide facilities for
treatment and rehabilitation of persons addicted to
drugs;
4. Invites Governments to carry out evaluation of
their drug prevention programmes in order to assess
their efficiency as well as to expand and intensify research in the fields of epidemiology and knowledge of
causes and motives of drug abuse with regard to both
pharmacological and sociological aspects;
. 5. Calls for more extensive and effective co-operat10n of Governments and competent bodies of the
United Nations and specialized agencies in order to
facilitate appropriate designing and implementation of
programmes aimed at reducing illicit demand for drugs
and at furthering exchange of experience and information among scientists and experts from various nations
who arc actively engaged in this field;
6. Reiterates its appeal to all States not yet parties
to the 1971 Convention on Psychotropic Substances
to take steps to accede to it and requests the SecretaryGeneral to transmit this appeal to all Governments
concerned;
7. Urges Governments to provide, in addition to
the data already furnished in their annual reports to
the Secretary-General, other relevant information on
the extent, patterns and any new trends in the abuse
of narcotic drugs and psychotropic substances as well
as information on programmes undertaken t~ reduce
illicit demand for drugs;
8. Requests the Secretary-General to strengthen and
expand to the extent possible, in co-operation with the
specialized agencies, the facilities available to provide
Governments which request it assistance in their work
to reduce illicit demand for drugs.
105th plenary meeting
16 December 1977
32/127.

Regional arrangements for the promotion and protection of human rights

The General Assembly,
Mindful of the suggestions made for the establishment, in regions where it does not already exist, of

VI.

Resolutions adc:,pte<l on the reports of the Third Committee

regional machinery for the promotion and protection of
human rights, 63
Aware of the importance of encouraging regional cooperation for the promotion and protection of human
rights and fundamental freedoms,
Recalling Commission on Human Rights resolution 7
(XXIV) of 1 March 1968, 64 in which the Commission
requested the Secretary-General to consider the possibility of arranging suitable regional seminars under
the programme of advisory services in the field of human
rights in those regions where no regional commission
on human rights exists at present for the purpose of
discussing the usefulne1,,s and advisability of the establishment of regional commissions on human rights,
Recognizing the important contribution of the regional commissions of the United Nations in the economic and social fields,
l. Appeals to States in areas where regional arrangements in the field of human rights do not yet
exist to consider agreements with a view to the establishment within their respective regions of suitable
regional machinery for the promotion and protection
of human rights;
2. Requests the Secretary-General, under the programme of advisory services in the field of human rights,
to give priority to the organization, in regions where
no regional commission on human rights exists, of
seminars for the purpose of discussing the usefulness
and advisability of the establishment of regional commissions for the promotion and protection of human
rights;
3. Further requests the Secretary-General to submit a progress report on the implementation of the
present resolution to the General Assembly at its thirtythird session for further consideration.
105th plenary meeting
16 December 1977

32/128.

Missing persons in Cyprus

The General Assembly,
Concerned at the lack of progress towards the tracing
and accounting for missing persons in Cyprus,
Expressing the hope that the informal discussions
now taking place to establish a joint committee to trace
missing persons are successful,
l. Requests the Secretary-General to provide his
good offices, through his Special Representative in
Cyprus, to support the establishment of an investigatory
body with the participation of the International Committee of the Red Cross which would be in a position
to function impartially, effectively and speedily so as to
resolve the problem without undue delay;
2. Invites the parties concerned to continue cooperating in the establishment of the investigatory body
and work out the modalities with a view to activating
it expeditiously.
105th plenary meeting
16 December 1977

32/129.

World Conference to Combat Racism
ancl Racial Discrimination 6 ~

The General Assembly,
Recalling its relevant resolutions, in particular resolutions 3057 (XXVIII) of 2 November 1973 and
31;78 of 13 December 1976, in which it affirmed its
total abhorrence of racism, racial discrimination and
apartheid and n.:solved to achieve their total elimination,
Taking note of Economic and Social Council resolution 2057 (LXII) of 12 May 1977, including the
annex thereto, in relation to the preparation of the
World Conference to Combat Racism and Racial Discrimination.
Taking note of the communication dated 4 February
1977 from the Government of Ghana, 66
1. Endorses Economic and Social Council resolution 2057 (LXII), including the annex thereto;
2. Regrets the circumstances which led to the withdrawal by the Government of Ghana of its offer to act
as host to the World Conference to Combat Racism
and Racial Discrimination and expresses its appreciation
to that Government for its co-operation;
3. Decides to convene the Conference at Geneva
from 14 to 25 August 1978;
4. Requests the Secretary-General to invite as participants in the Conference:
(a)
All States;
( b) The United Nations Council for Namibia, in
accordance with General Assembly resolution 31/149
of 20 December 1976;67
5. Requests the Secretary-General to invite to the
Conference as observers:
(a) Representatives of national liberation movements recognized in its region by the Organization of
African Unity, in accordance with General Assembly
resolution 3280 (XXIX) of 10 December 1974;
( b)
Representatives of organizations that have received a standing invitation from the General Assembly
to participate in the sessions and the work of all international conferences convened under its auspices, in
accordance with Assembly resolutions 3237 (XXIX)
of 22 November 1974 and 31/152 of 20 December 1976;
( c) The specialized agencies concerned as well as
interested organs and bodies of the United Nations;
( d) Interested intergovernmental organizations;
(e) The Special Committee against Apartheid;
(f) The Special Committee on the Situation with
regard to the Implementation of the Declaration on
the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries
and Peoples;
(g) The Committee on the Elimination of Racial
Discrimination;

(h)

The Commission on Human Rights;

( i)

Other interested committees of the United

Nations;
63 A/10235, paras. 93-97 and 173-178, A/32/178, paras.
107-111.
64 See Official Records of the Ec~nomic and Social Council,
Forty-fourth Session, Supplement No. 4 (E/4475), chap. XVIII.

149

65 Sec

also sect. X.B.5, decision 32/ 433.

66 E/5911.
67 Sec also

resolution 32/9 E.
