United Nations

S/PV.6524

Security Council

Provisional

Sixty-sixth year

6524th meeting
Wednesday, 27 April 2011, 4 p.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Osorio . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Colombia)

Members:

Bosnia and Herzegovina . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Brazil . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Gabon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Germany . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
India . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Lebanon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Nigeria . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Portugal . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
South Africa . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . .
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Mr. Barbalić
Mrs. Viotti
Mr. Li Baodong
Mr. Araud
Mr. Messone
Mr. Wittig
Mr. Hardeep Sing Puri
Mr. Salam
Mr. Amieyeofori
Mr. Moraes Cabral
Mr. Pankin
Mr. Sangqu
Sir Mark Lyall Grant
Ms. Rice

Agenda
The situation in the Middle East

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-506.

11-31393 (E)

*1131393*

S/PV.6524

echoing slogans that have been heard elsewhere in the
region.

The meeting was called to order at 4 p.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in the Middle East
The President (spoke in Spanish): Under rule 37
of the Council’s provisional rules of procedure, I invite
the representative of the Syrian Arab Republic to
participate in this meeting.
Under rule 39 of the Council’s provisional rules
of procedure, I invite Mr. Lynn Pascoe, UnderSecretary-General for Political Affairs, to participate in
this meeting.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I now give the floor to Mr. Pascoe.
Mr. Pascoe: I appreciate the opportunity to brief
the Council once again today on the situation in Syria.
We are following developments as closely as
possible, and I base this briefing on reports from the
Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs,
the Office of the High Commissioner for Human
Rights (OHCHR) and other United Nations entities,
published and confidential information from major
international
human
rights
and
humanitarian
organizations and a review of reputable media sources.
We have also reviewed the official websites of the
Government of Syria and social media sites of Syrian
opposition groups.
Anti-Government demonstrations started in midMarch, following the detention of 15 school children in
Dar’a for writing anti-Government graffiti. Those
demonstrations have since gradually, but steadily,
increased in geographic scope and participation. There
are documented reports of protests in the coastal cities
of Latakia, Baniyas and Jablah and the central cities of
Homs and Hamah, the southern cities of Dar’a and
Izra, the eastern city of Dayr Al-Zawar, the suburban
towns around Damascus of Duma and Al-Moadamyeh
and in the north-east in the cities of Al-Hasakak and
Al-Qamishli. Demonstrations in the major cities of
Damascus and Aleppo have been sporadic and more
limited. Protesters began with demands for greater
freedom and political and economic reforms. They are
increasingly calling for the downfall of the regime,

2

The Syrian authorities have reacted with a mix of
reform measures and increasingly violent repression,
which the Secretary-General has strongly condemned.
In his speech to the Parliament on 30 March, President
Al-Assad announced that a series of political, social
and economic reforms would be undertaken to respond
to demands of the Syrian people, including an
investigation into the killings during protests. On
7 April, a presidential decree granted long-awaited
citizenship to stateless Kurds residing in the north-east
of the country. On 15 April, the President pledged to
release all protest-related detainees, except those
accused of committing crimes “against the nation and
the citizens”. Local officials were removed, and new
ones appointed, in an apparent attempt to open
dialogue with the population in Homs and Dar’a.
On 16 April, President Al-Assad swore in a new
Government, which he tasked with developing reforms,
including preparing new laws on media and political
parties. In a series of decrees issued on 21 April, he
lifted the state of emergency, which had been in place
since 1963. He also abolished the High Security Court
and recognized the right to peaceful protest while
strictly regulating it. The next day, Friday, 22 April,
witnessed the largest demonstration to date across the
country, with demonstrators claiming that the measures
taken were too little and too late. Despite the promise
of reform, in fact, the Government crack-down
intensified dramatically. OHCHR has information that
more than 100 persons were killed in many towns
across the country from Friday to Sunday. There is
growing concern about the overall well-being of the
population, including their access to medical care and
services, and access to food and water in some cities.
Following the massive demonstration of Friday,
22 April, the Syrian army started a major military
operation against Dar’a and surrounding villages.
Tanks and large numbers of soldiers entered the area.
Given the siege-like conditions, it is difficult to
confirm our information. But reliable sources are
consistently reporting the use of artillery fire against
unarmed civilians, door-to-door arrest campaigns, the
shooting of medical personnel who attempt to aid the
wounded, raids against hospitals, clinics and mosques
and the purposeful destruction of medical supplies and
arrests of medical personnel.

11-31393

S/PV.6524

The United Nations can confirm that electricity,
communications systems and water in the city have
been cut since at least Monday, and that as a result of
those operations United Nations Relief and Works
Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East schools
and health facilities in Dar’a have been closed for the
past week. There are reported shortages of medicine,
water and food, and this could become a major
humanitarian issue in the coming days.
The United Nations is requesting access to those
areas to assess humanitarian needs and to provide an
accurate first-hand account of developments.
I should also note that the land border between
Syria and Jordan has been closed for much of the
period of this ongoing military operation.
The towns of Duma and Al-Moadamyeh, in the
vicinity of Damascus, are also surrounded by tanks and
armed forces, as had been Baniyas earlier this month.
There have been reports of security forces opening fire
on demonstrators in the city of Djabla, killing at least
13 in the past couple of days. In Homs, security forces
opened fire on demonstrators on 18 and 19 April,
reportedly killing up to 20 people. Overall since midMarch, a review of reputable reports from media and
human rights groups put the total number of antiGovernment demonstrators killed by security forces
and their supporters at more than 300, most likely
between 350 and 400.
The High Commissioner’s Office has also
received information of wide-scale arrests of
protesters, human rights defenders, lawyers, journalists
and others. There are serious allegations of beatings
and torture of people detained in connection with the
protests, including children.
A review of the reports of the media,
international human rights groups, United Nations
agencies and diplomatic missions confirm that the
overwhelming majority of protests have been peaceful
and unarmed. However, there have been credible
reports of a very few instances where protesters have
used force, resulting in the deaths of members of the
security forces.
Human Rights Watch has documented, with
eyewitness testimony, only one such incident, on
8 April in Dar’a, when, after a number of protesters
had been killed by live fire from the security forces,
some demonstrators seized weapons from an

11-31393

abandoned checkpoint and opened fire, killing perhaps
a dozen security personnel. There are no confirmed
reports that this is a recurring phenomenon, nor do we
have confirmation of reports of security personnel or
soldiers being killed by Government agents. Some of
the overall confusion on this sensitive issue may stem
from the widely reported presence of armed security
agents and regime supporters in civilian clothes.
The lack of transparency is compounded by the
denial of access to the international and independent
media, which, of course, violates freedom of the press
and the right to information. The Committee to Protect
Journalists and numerous other sources note that the
Syrian authorities continue to detain journalists on a
regular basis, disrupt Internet and telephone service,
prohibit the entry of international journalists into the
country, and block all access to areas of unrest. One
cumulative effect of this policy is to prevent the
collection and dissemination of accurate and impartial
information, leaving observers unable to confirm or
deny many allegations.
The official news agency, the Syrian Arab News
Agency reported the death of at least 21 military and
security personnel in recent days, and it alleged that
more than 290 internal security officers had been
injured since the beginning of the events. The
Government has stated that most of the killings of
civilians have been committed by anti-Government
armed militias, but it has provided no evidence to date
to support this.
Syrian television has also broadcast alleged
confessions by detained protesters speaking of armed
protesters and interference from abroad. The Syrian
State media has also accused Lebanon’s Future
Movement of supplying arms to the protesters, which it
has denied. We have no further information on those
allegations.
The
Secretary-General
and
the
High
Commissioner for Human Rights have emphasized that
all the killings during the demonstrations should be
investigated, including the alleged killing of military
and security officers. There will be a special session of
the Human Rights Council on the situation of human
rights in Syria in Geneva on Friday.
The regional implications of the situation in Syria
are a source of concern in particular for its neighbours.
In a press release dated 25 April, the Secretary-General
of the League of Arab States said that the League was

3

S/PV.6524

following the current developments in a number of
Arab countries with great concern. It supported the
growing popular aspiration in the Arab world for
change, social modernization, the end of repression and
a movement towards democratization and reform. It
urged an immediate halt to violence against
demonstrators, insisting that the people’s demands for
freedom and democracy deserved support, not bullets.
The statement also announced that the
forthcoming meeting of the League of Arab States
Ministers for Foreign Affairs will discuss the current
dangerous situation between the people and their
Governments in the Arab world. We also note the
efforts made by the Government of Turkey to engage
with Syrian interlocutors.
The Secretary-General is following the situation
in Syria closely and with deep concern. As members
are aware, he has issued three statements and spoken
directly with President Al-Assad. The SecretaryGeneral has condemned the use of violence against
peaceful demonstrators and called for an independent,
transparent and effective investigation into the killings.
He has conveyed our belief that the Syrian authorities
should fulfil their obligation to protect civilians and
respect international human rights, including the right
to freedom of expression and peaceful assembly, as
well as the freedom of the press.
Repression is not the solution. An inclusive
dialogue and genuine reforms should address the
legitimate aspirations of the Syrian people, restore
confidence and ensure social peace and order.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I thank
Mr. Lynn Pascoe for his briefing.
Ms. Rice (United States of America): I should
like to thank Under-Secretary-General Pascoe for his
briefing on the deteriorating situation in Syria. The
United States condemns in the strongest possible terms
the abhorrent violence used by the Government of
Syria against its own people. My Government calls on
President Al-Assad to change course now and heed the
calls of his own people. We also call on the
international community to respond to this brutal
crackdown and to hold accountable those who are
perpetrating these gross human rights violations.
The United States has expressed its position to
the Syrian Government, and we are considering a range
of options, including targeted sanctions, to respond to

4

the outrageous and ongoing use of violence against
peaceful protesters. We are particularly concerned
about continued reports of gratuitous violence against
unarmed demonstrators. I am pleased to note that the
Human Rights Council decided this morning to hold a
special session on the situation of human rights in
Syria on Friday. The United States is one of the many
supporters of this decision and believes the event to be
an important and timely response given the horrific
actions taking place. These brutal acts are those of
neither a responsible Government nor a credible
member of the international community.
Syrian Government actions up until now have not
been serious responses to the demands of its people.
Instead, the Syrian Government’s violent repression of
peaceful protesters is continuing. Casting blame on
outsiders instead of addressing its own internal failures
is no way for a Government to respond to legitimate
calls for reform from its people.
Syrian security and military forces continue to
attack civilian protesters, while the Government
continues to seek Iranian assistance in repressing
Syria’s citizens through the same brutal tactics that
have been used by the Iranian regime. The Syrian
Government must stop the arbitrary arrest, detention
and torture of civilians, especially journalists and
activists. We call on the Syrian Government to allow
the media, including foreign journalists, as well as
human rights monitors, to verify events independently
on the ground, which include reports of indiscriminate
attacks on populated areas by Syrian forces.
The Syrian Government must acknowledge its
people’s legitimate calls for substantial and lasting
reform. Words must be backed by actions to ensure real
reform in Syria. The Syrian people’s cries for freedom
of expression, association, peaceful assembly and the
ability to freely choose their leaders must be heeded.
Sir Mark Lyall Grant (United Kingdom): I
should like to thank Mr. Lynn Pascoe for his briefing
today. What we have heard from Mr. Pascoe is of grave
concern to my Government. This is a moment of hope
for many people across the Middle East and North
Africa. Their voices are being heard as never before.
New democratic processes are under way in Egypt and
Tunisia, reflecting a long-pent-up desire for more open
and representative government. Other Governments
across the region are responding positively to the
demand for reform.

11-31393

S/PV.6524

In Syria, the Government has so far chosen a
different path. What we have seen in recent weeks is a
systematic attempt to stifle the legitimate demands of
the Syrian people through violence and oppression.
Despite the best efforts of the Syrian Government to
bar access to international media and to suppress
independent coverage of what is happening, we have
witnessed the repeated and deliberate targeting of
civilians and the use of tanks and other heavy
weaponry against peaceful protestors.
Mr. Pascoe spoke of the 350 to 400 demonstrators
killed by the security forces over the past few weeks.
The Syrian army has imposed a siege on the city of
Dar’a, including cutting all phone lines, water and
electricity. The military is firing indiscriminately in the
city itself. The security forces are also attacking
several surrounding towns and suburbs of Damascus.
We condemn utterly and without reservation the
violence and killings perpetrated by the Syrian security
forces against civilians, who are expressing their views
in peaceful protests.
We now need to see four things. First, the violent
repression must stop immediately. The Syrian
Government has a responsibility to protect peaceful
protestors, not to attack them. President Al-Assad must
order his forces to show maximum restraint. The
protestors themselves must ensure that their actions are
peaceful.
Secondly, President Al-Assad’s Government
needs to respond to the legitimate demands of the
Syrian people with immediate and genuine reform, not
brutal repression. The emergency law should be lifted
in practice. On 21 April, the Permanent Representative
of Syria told the Security Council that legislation had
been enacted recognizing the right to peaceful
demonstration, but the reality on the ground stands in
stark contrast to that commitment.
Thirdly, those responsible for the violence must
be held to account. We strongly support the SecretaryGeneral’s call for an independent, transparent and
effective investigation into the killings. The
perpetrators of violence against civilians, and in
particular those who have ordered it, must be brought
to justice.
Fourthly, the international community needs to
speak with one voice in condemning the violence in
Syria. The United Kingdom is working intensively
with its international partners to persuade the Syrian

11-31393

authorities to stop the violence and to respect the basic
and universal human rights to freedom of expression
and assembly. We will look at further measures with
our European Union and other partners if the violence
does not stop. That may include targeted financial and
travel sanctions against those responsible for the
violence, as well as their families and business
interests.
Syria is at a fork in the road. Its Government can
still choose to bring about the genuine reform that
alone can provide peace and stability for Syria in the
long term, or it can choose ever more violent
repression, which can only bring short-term security
for the authorities, but at a terrible cost to Syria’s
people and the country’s future. We urge President
Al-Assad to take the first course, which is the only way
for Syria to regain its place at the heart of the Middle
East.
Mr. Araud (France) (spoke in French): I should
like to thank Under-Secretary-General Pascoe for his
briefing to the Council on the situation in Syria, which
has further heightened the concerns of its members.
I would like to express, before the Council,
France’s deep concern at the violent actions of the
Syrian authorities against civilian demonstrators. We
unreservedly condemn such unacceptable brutality,
which has already caused not only hundreds of deaths
among Syrian civilians, but also numerous
disappearances of demonstrators, journalists and
human rights activists. For the past three days, Dar’a
has been a city besieged by the Syrian army, deprived
of water, electricity and contact with outside world,
surrounded by tanks and threatened with heavy
artillery.
The memories of the bloody massacres of the
civilian population in Syria in the early 1980s, in
particular in Hama, are too painful for the international
community to silently stand by in the face of escalating
repression. Today, the Council must send a clear
message to the Syrian authorities that this
indiscriminate and brutal repression must stop
immediately. The Syrian authorities must respect the
fundamental rights and freedoms of the country’s
citizens, particularly the right of peaceful protest and
freedom of the press. The arbitrary arrests must stop, as
must the restrictions being imposed on the media.
We call on the Syrian authorities to immediately
release prisoners of conscience. We support the

5

S/PV.6524

Secretary-General’s appeal for an independent,
transparent and effective investigation into the crimes
that have been committed. Those who ordered and
perpetrated those acts should be held accountable for
their actions.
Only reforms responding to the legitimate
aspirations of the population will help to preserve the
country’s stability, which is in the interest of all. Syria
plays a decisive role in regional stability. However, at
this stage, we cannot help noting that the lifting of the
state of emergency and other reforms announced by the
President have been followed by a contradictory
upsurge in violence. The Syrian people’s call for
freedom, democracy and respect for their universal
rights must be heard by the Syrian authorities or,
failing that, by the Security Council.
If no positive developments unfold, France and
other countries will review a wide range of alternatives
for increasing pressure on the Syrian regime to stop the
repression and take steps towards reform. Strong
measures must be taken if these calls go unheeded. The
Human Rights Council is also seized of the matter, and
we trust that it will adopt a resolution at the close of its
special session on Friday.
Mr. Sangqu (South Africa): We, too, join in
thanking Under-Secretary-General Pascoe for his
briefing on the unfolding situation in Syria, about
which South Africa is very concerned. We regret the
loss of life in Syria and call on all parties to the
conflict to show restraint. We welcome the lifting of
the state of emergency, which had been in place for
almost 50 years. We also welcome the adoption of
other reforms introduced by the Syrian authorities over
the past few days. We urge the Government of Syria to
move swiftly to implement the necessary reforms
towards democratization, in accordance with the will
and aspirations of its people.
The voices of people in Syria and other countries
in the Middle East and North Africa cannot be ignored.
It is important for their Governments to ensure that the
rights of their people are protected and that they be
allowed to voice their grievances peacefully. Syria is
integral to a wider resolution of the Middle East
conflict; its stability is linked to that of its neighbours.
Finally, we urge the Syrian authorities to initiate
an open, transparent and all-inclusive process with
their people in order to address their grievances and, in
turn, guarantee their fundamental political rights and

6

freedoms, including their rights
assembly and freedom of speech.

to

freedom

of

Mr. Wittig (Germany): We are grateful to you,
Sir, for having convened this very timely meeting. Let
me also thank Under-Secretary-General Pascoe for his
briefing. The information that he gave us is deeply
worrying. The Council must urgently discuss the
situation in Syria. The scale of the violence and
brutality used for internal repression is deeply
disturbing. What is more, the situation has obvious
regional and international implications, given Syria’s
critical importance to peace and security in the Middle
East, including being host to a United Nations
peacekeeping mission.
The briefing that we heard and the facts on the
ground have shown that the Syrian authorities are
using violence against peaceful demonstrators. We are
deeply shocked by the deaths of civilians who were
killed because they tried to exercise their fundamental
rights. The systematic use of force by deploying tanks
and using live ammunition comes from the Syrian
authorities. The demonstrators do not have tanks. They
do not arrest people arbitrarily. They do not curtail
journalists in their reporting.
The continued violence against peaceful
protesters is completely unacceptable. It has to stop
immediately. All announcements of reforms are
undermined by the ongoing violence. The reports we
have received from Dar’a are deeply disturbing. Tanks
and artillery have been deployed. There have been
many casualties. It is impossible to access the area. We
demand access for international observers. Those
responsible for the killings should be held accountable.
In this connection, we strongly support the
Secretary-General’s
call
for
an
independent,
transparent and effective investigation into the killings.
The Syrian authorities must respect human rights,
including the right to peaceful assembly, as well as
freedom of opinion and of the press. We also call on
the Syrian authorities to respect the obligation to
safeguard the integrity and dignity of all detainees and
their right to a fair legal process.
The Syrian Government now has a choice to end
the violence and initiate the tangible and meaningful
reforms that are needed, or to continue with ever more
violent repression. Choosing the latter would be a very
short-sighted approach and would require us to react

11-31393

S/PV.6524

with the appropriate measures. Ongoing repression is
not a solution.

democratic development in Syria in the interests of all
its citizens will occur.

Germany has so far taken up a number of
diplomatic and political initiatives. We have strongly
supported a special session on Syria at the Human
Rights Council, and welcome the fact that it will take
place this Friday. Together with our partners, we will
consider action at the level of the European Union
before the end of the week. This might include
sanctions.

The main thing, in our view, is that the current
situation in Syria, despite increasing tension and
confrontations, does not present a threat to
international peace and security. One cannot disregard
the fact that the violence does not originate entirely
from one side. Inter alia, an army column was fired
upon on the Latakia-Tartus road, and there have been
armed attacks on military facilities and posts and the
killing of police personnel followed by the abuse and
desecration of their bodies.

Mr. Pankin (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We thank Mr. Lynn Pascoe for his briefing.
Like other members of the Security Council, the
Russian Federation views with great concern the
increasing tension and manifestations of confrontation
in Syria, which are claiming victims and causing
suffering among the demonstrators, law enforcement
personnel and the army. We expect the Syrian
authorities to conduct a transparent and effective
investigation of all such cases and the guilty to be
brought to justice.
The dangerous deterioration of the situation
requires a careful, tried and tested approach. What can
be done to help resolve the situation rather than cause
further harm?
Clearly, the process of democratic reforms
proclaimed and being earnestly implemented by the
leadership of Syria is worthy of support. A great many
significant steps have been taken in a very short period
of time. A presidential decree has been signed, lifting
the state of emergency in the country. The issue of
granting citizenship to a large section of the population
has been resolved. Preparations are under way for the
upcoming special parliamentary session to adopt laws
on demonstrations, political parties, local Government
and the media. Measures are being elaborated to step
up the fight against corruption, unemployment and the
development of rural areas of the country.
The search for fair solutions to persistent
problems must be carried out by the Government
alongside all social, political and religious forces in a
constitutional manner, and the sooner the better.
Violence, regardless of what side the perpetrators are
from, must be avoided. It is only through constructive
dialogue on the implementation of announced political
reforms and socio-economic change that stability and

11-31393

A real threat to regional security, in our view,
could arise from outside interference in Syria’s
domestic situation, including attempts to promote
ready-made solutions or to take sides. It is increasingly
clear that some demonstrators, both in Syria and other
countries, hope that the deteriorating situation could
force the international community to help them and to
take sides. Such approaches lead to an endless cycle of
violence and represent an invitation to civil war. It is
extremely important to focus all efforts on avoiding
such a dangerous turn of events, especially as Syria is
the cornerstone of the Middle East security
architecture. Destabilizing that significant link in the
chain will lead to complications throughout the region.
Mr. Li Baodong (China) (spoke in Chinese): I
thank Under-Secretary-General Lynn Pascoe for his
briefing.
China is closely following the unfolding situation
in Syria. Syria is an important country in the Middle
East. We hope that the various parties there will resolve
their differences through political dialogue and address
the current crisis in an appropriate manner, so as to
maintain stability and order in the country.
We welcome the fact that the Government of
Syria recently lifted the state of emergency and
announced political reforms and the launch of national
dialogue. It has also decided to investigate all recent
incidents. We hope that these measures will help to
promote the achievement of the aforementioned
objectives.
The turbulence in some countries in the Middle
East and North Africa is a matter of deep concern. It
has not only had a negative impact on peace and
stability in these countries, but has also significantly
undermined stability of the region. How to address

7

S/PV.6524

these issues is a common challenge that we all face. It
is also a common task, because if these issues are not
addressed appropriately, they will threaten peace and
stability in other regions and have a significant
negative impact on the recovery of the world economy.

law and order and to prevent violence. The primary
responsibility of the Council in this particular instance
is to urge all sides to abjure violence in any form and
to seek a resolution of grievances through peaceful
means.

Therefore, with regard to the events that have
taken place in these countries, we hope that the
international community will offer constructive help in
line with the purposes and principles of the United
Nations Charter.

We believe that regional and subregional
organizations have an important role to play in
resolving the crisis in the region, including in Syria. It
is essential that all efforts be made to de-escalate
tensions rather than to exacerbate them. My delegation
would support all measures designed to end violence
and restore peace.

Mr. Hardeep Singh Puri (India): I would like to
thank Under-Secretary-General Lynn Pascoe for his
briefing on the situation in Syria.
Syria has, historically and in contemporary times,
been an important country in the Middle East. Its role
in the Middle East peace process and in the stability of
the wider region cannot be overemphasized. Thus,
prolonged instability or unrest in Syria may have
ramifications for the region and beyond.
Reports of violence during the recent
demonstrations in parts of Syria, resulting in the deaths
of several demonstrators and security personnel, are of
concern. There have been reports of armed extremist
elements mingling with the demonstrators and using
the demonstrations to attack security personnel and
damage Government property, and there is an apparent
lack of information regarding those responsible for
those violent attacks.
We have noted that Syria has appointed a
commission of inquiry into the violence during the
demonstrations and announced various measures to
address the grievances of its people, including the
lifting of emergency laws, the abolition of State
security courts, the transfer of investigative powers to
the police, and so on. The Government has also
announced procedures for organizing peaceful
demonstrations. We hope that these measures, initiated
by the Syrian Government as part of an inclusive
process of political dialogue and reform, will initiate
the process of meeting the aspirations of all sections of
Syrian society.
As we deplore any violence from any quarter, the
Council needs to make clear that it is the responsibility
of sovereign States to respond to the aspirations of
their people through administrative, political, economic
and other measures. At the same time, it is for States to
decide on the best course of action to maintain internal

8

Mr. Messone (Gabon) (spoke in French): Like
other delegations, Gabon wishes to express its deep
concerns regarding the alarming situation in Syria.
Gabon welcomes the lifting of the state of emergency
and other measures taken by the Syrian authorities.
However, we urge those authorities to put an
immediate end to the ongoing repression of peaceful
demonstrations and to investigate such human rights
violations.
My country stresses the need to respect
international humanitarian law in the face of the
deterioration of the humanitarian situation described by
Under-Secretary-General Pascoe. My delegation urges
the Government of Syria to take concrete measures for
deep-rooted reform to meet the aspirations of its
people. We also urge the authorities to ensure the
protection of civilians during law enforcement
operations.
Gabon, attached to inclusive political dialogue as
a bulwark of peace, urges the authorities in Syria to
establish recognized mechanisms that take into account
the legitimate aspirations of the people to lasting peace
and stability. That is why we welcome the upcoming
meeting of the Ministers for Foreign Affairs of the
League of Arab States on 8 May.
Finally, we urge all regional actors to support
efforts to establish dialogue to put an end to the current
cycle of demonstrations and repression.
Mrs. Viotti (Brazil): I thank Under-SecretaryGeneral Lynn Pascoe for his briefing. Basic freedoms
must be upheld in all contexts. That must be the
coherent message of this Council and the international
community in responding to the challenges posed by
the historic changes in the Arab world. Brazil stands in
solidarity with those demonstrating peacefully for

11-31393

S/PV.6524

more political participation, improved
opportunities, freedom and dignity.

economic

We express concern at the current escalation of
violence in Syria. We condemn the use of force against
unarmed demonstrators wherever it occurs. We hope
that the crisis can be addressed through dialogue. The
legitimate aspirations of the populations in the Arab
world must be addressed through inclusive political
processes, and not by military means. At this stage,
further repression is likely only to produce more
protests and dissent. We expect the Syrian leadership to
pursue the path of dialogue and reform as the most
effective way to de-escalate the situation.
We note efforts at reform made by the Syrian
Government. The lifting of the state of emergency and
other concrete legislative measures are encouraging
steps to address the legitimate aspirations of the
population. We expect such measures to be
implemented without delay. We take this opportunity to
encourage the Syrian Government to engage in a broad,
inclusive political dialogue with all relevant parties.
Reform, not repression, is the way forward.
Regional
organizations
have
a
crucial
contribution to make in forging political solutions with
real chances of succeeding and leading to peaceful
transformation. In this connection, I would like to
underscore the vital role of the League of Arab States
in encouraging steps in the right direction.
We are all well aware of the importance of
stability in Syria to the overall stability of the Middle
East. Syria being so central to regional stability, it is all
the more relevant that reforms and meaningful
dialogue be fostered there in a peaceful and stable
environment, as free as possible from tensions and
outside pressures.
Mr. Salam (Lebanon) (spoke in Arabic): I should
like to start by thanking Mr. Pascoe for his briefing.
I recall that the links between Lebanon and Syria
transcend those of mere good-neighbourliness. That is
why the Taif Agreement, which is the foundation of
Lebanon’s Constitution, stipulates that Lebanon, Arab
in its identity, is linked by sincere fraternal relations
with all Arab States and has special relations with Syria
that draw their strength from history and common
fraternal interests. Coordination and cooperation
between the two countries are based on those
principles.

11-31393

The security of Lebanon is bound up with that of
Syria, and vice versa. What takes place in Lebanon
affects Syria, and what takes place in Syria affects
Lebanon. History has demonstrated that fact most
convincingly. In referring to developments in Syria,
President of the Republic Michel Sleiman expressed
very clearly that
“Lebanon supports stability in Syria and the
wider Arab world, but most especially in Syria
because the security of both countries is linked.
Lebanon also supports Syria’s leadership in its
decision to initiate reforms, including the lifting
of the state of emergency and the laws on
political parties and information. Lebanon also
recognizes the fact that the calls for reform are
correct and justified and not intended to foment
sectarian rivalries and strife.”
Today, more than ever, the hearts and minds of all
Lebanese people stand in support of Syria’s sovereignty
and territorial integrity, its people and the safety and
security of its children. In Lebanon, we know better
than anyone else how central Syria’s role has been
throughout history. We regret the deaths of the victims.
We extend our condolences to their families and hope
that Syria will enjoy peace and progress.
Mr. Amieyeofori (Nigeria): I, too, would like to
thank Under-Secretary-General Pascoe for his
comprehensive and insightful briefing on the situation
in Syria.
Nigeria shares the concerns of most delegations on
the widespread violence that has engulfed Syria since
late March and led to hundreds of deaths and injuries.
We call for an end to the violence and bloodshed and
urge all the parties to maintain calm and restraint.
In these circumstances, we want to reiterate the
importance of the protection of civilians, respect for
human rights and the need to uphold the right to
peaceful assembly. The lifting of the 48-year old
emergency law and the programme of reforms
announced by the Government, although long overdue,
are steps in the right direction. We therefore encourage
the Government of Syria to consolidate this process
and to swiftly implement these measures.
In our view, resolving the Syrian crisis, as most
speakers have noted, requires some measure of caution,
as this crisis could negatively affect regional peace and
security.

9

S/PV.6524

Finally, we call for an inclusive dialogue and
genuine reforms that address the legitimate concerns
and aspirations of the Syrian people, including a
democratization process that will promote peace and
stability in the country. In this regard, we welcome the
statement issued by the League of Arab States. Our
view is that the Arab League has an important role to
play in the efforts to resolve the Syrian crisis. We urge
the Syrian authorities to provide access for
international aid and assistance to those in need of care
and drugs in order to halt the deteriorating situation in
the country.
Mr. Barbalić (Bosnia and Herzegovina): At the
outset, allow me to thank Under-Secretary-General
Lynn Pascoe for providing us with the briefing on
recent developments in Syria.
Bosnia and Herzegovina expresses its deep
concern with regard to the situation in Syria and its
regret over the loss of life and the high number of
injuries. We offer our most sincere condolences to the
families and friends of those who have lost their lives.
We also join others today in condemnation of the
ongoing violence which must stop immediately. All
those responsible for these crimes must be brought to
justice and held accountable for their actions.
We take note of the lifting of the state of
emergency and of the programme of reforms
announced by President Al-Assad. We share the view
of the Secretary-General that the effective
implementation of reforms is necessary to address the
legitimate aspirations of the Syrian people and ensure
social peace and order in Syria. Moreover, it is our
strong belief that the aspirations and demands of the
people should be addressed through an inclusive and
meaningful Syrian-led ballot.
In conclusion, Syria’s critical importance to the
peace and security of the Middle East cannot be
overstressed. Therefore, while fully supporting Syria’s
sovereignty and territorial integrity, we strongly
believe that the aspirations and demands of the people
should be addressed through an inclusive and
meaningful Syrian–led ballot.
Mr. Moraes Cabral (Portugal): I wish to thank
Under-Secretary-General Lynn Pascoe for his briefing.
Dramatic events in the region are quickly
changing the face of the Middle East. Like those
elsewhere in the region, people in Syria are demanding

10

freedom, democracy and reform. The one and only way
to respond to such legitimate aspirations is through
genuine and inclusive dialogue. Violence and
repression can never be the answer.
Portugal is gravely concerned about the situation
in Syria and the increasing levels of violence resulting
in hundreds of deaths and injuries. We extend our
condolences to the families of all the victims. We
strongly condemn the violence against peaceful
demonstrators and call for an immediate end to the
violence and for those responsible to be held
accountable. We support the Secretary-General’s call
for an independent, transparent and effective
investigation into the killings.
Portugal takes note of the Syrian Government’s
decision to lift the state of emergency, of the laws
introduced over the past few days, and of the
announced intention to proceed with political reform.
These measures and intentions must nevertheless be
credible, carried out in an effective way and translate
into real improvements and effective reform. Syrian
authorities have an obligation to respect human rights,
including the right to freedom of expression and
peaceful assembly, as well as freedom of the press, and
to respect the integrity and dignity of arrested persons
and their right to due legal process.
My country is mindful of Syria’s critical
importance to the peace and security of the Middle
East. We also remain fully committed to the
independence, sovereignty, unity and territorial
integrity of Syria. Portugal welcomes and supports the
statement issued by the General Secretariat of the
League of Arab States on the current developments in
an increasing number of Arab cities, its appeal to
Governments
to
commit
to
an
immediate
implementation of reform, and the forthcoming
meeting of the League’s Foreign Ministers.
Portugal calls once again upon the Government to
Syria to show all possible restraint and to ensure the
protection of its citizens. We call upon all parties in
Syria to engage in a genuine, comprehensive and
inclusive dialogue and to embark on an inclusive and
sustainable reform process.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I shall now
make a statement in my capacity as representative of
Colombia.

11-31393

S/PV.6524

We have taken careful note of the briefing of
Under-Secretary-General Lynn Pascoe, for which we
thank him.
Colombia expresses its concern over the
deterioration of the situation in Syria and deplores the
violent repression to which demonstrators have been
subject, as well as the deaths of many civilians. We
believe that it is unacceptable to use disproportionate
force against the civilian population and therefore call
for the immediate cessation of all acts of violence as an
indispensable element of a solution to the crisis.
It is the responsibility of the Syrian Government
to respect and protect the individual freedoms and
fundamental rights of the entire population. In order to
restore peace and order, the Government must
guarantee all citizens the right to life and the full
exercise of their freedom of expression and right to
peaceful assembly, in strict compliance with its
international obligations and the provisions of
international human rights law.
We note the lifting of the state of emergency and
the programme of reforms announced by President
Bashar al-Assad, and hope that, through an inclusive
dialogue and the effective application of these reforms,
progress can be made towards social peace and order.
Colombia urges the civil authorities and the
demonstrators to find a way to build channels of social
and political dialogue that respond effectively to the
legitimate aspirations of the Syrian people to a just,
equitable and democratic society in which citizens can
freely exercise their fundamental rights and freedoms.
Colombia reiterates the urgent need to end the violence
and calls strongly for the respect of human rights of
Syrian citizens. We look forward to an independent and
transparent investigation into the killings, and support
initiatives to find a political solution that will bring the
parties closer together and contribute to an end to the
violence.
I now resume my functions as President of the
Council.
Mr. Ja’afari (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in
Arabic): More than six weeks have passed since the
onset of acts of violence perpetrated by extremist
groups whose fundamental goal is clearly the fall of the
Syrian Government. Throughout this time, law
enforcement authorities have exercised the utmost
restraint, in order to avoid the killing of innocent

11-31393

civilians. However, those groups, which included
armed criminal elements, have continued to kill
innocent citizens and many members of the security
forces, as well as to attack Government facilities and
army and law enforcement installations.
As the Security Council is aware, the
Government has taken many measures in response to
legitimate popular demands, including the lifting of the
state of emergency, the abolition of the High Security
Court and the issuance, for the first time in Syria’s
history, of a legislative decree on peaceful
demonstrations. Measures have also been taken to
combat corruption and to respond to popular demands
on issues related to the daily lives of Syrian citizens.
Moreover, I would like to draw the Council’s attention
to the fact that there will be further measures by the
Government to bolster reform in the country, following
calls from several members of the Council.
Rather than backing down in the light of the
reform measures taken by the Syrian leadership,
regrettably, the parties behind the demonstrations have
responded with further attacks against army positions
and by destroying security installations, killing many
security personnel, mutilating corpses, raising slogans
of incitement and burning private and public
establishments. I have here with me the names of 51
members of the armed forces who were killed by these
armed gangs. The list includes the names of both
soldiers and officers. I would be happy to provide
copies to anyone who would like one.
In response to popular demands, the President of
the Syrian Arab Republic has met with delegations
from every province in the country in order to respond
directly to citizen complaints and demands. The
President has issued instructions to respond to all
legitimate demands, including investigating all acts of
killing and declaring that all civilian and military
casualties are to be considered as martyrs.
Faced with these initiatives of openness by the
State and its institutions, those who are attempting to
undermine Syria have tried to exploit the positive
environment in order to erode the country’s security
and stability by blocking roads, threatening citizens,
forcing schools and Government institutions to close
and continuing to carry out acts that run counter to the
interests of citizens, their security and their ability to
live normal lives throughout the country.

11

S/PV.6524

That campaign within Syria has gone hand-inhand with an unprecedented media campaign in the
region against Syria and its national and Arab policies.
There has been incitement to terrorism and sabotage.
Doubts have been sown as to the Government’s intent.
In many cases, facts have been turned on their heads.
Demonstrators have been incited to burn State property
and raise doubt about its position on events. There has
been encouragement to acts of violence and
justification for it, in an attempt to make the
Government’s reform efforts null and void. There have
also been fatwas from beyond our borders, calling for
opposition to authority and State institutions.
That campaign has been accompanied by
information confirming that official parties outside the
country have been financing and responsible for
inciting acts of sabotage against Syria, its people and
its leadership. For example, let me refer to an article in
the Washington Post dated Monday, 18 April, which
states that, since 2006, the State Department has
provided up to $6 million to several Syrian opposition
figures to run a satellite television station called
Barada, which is headquartered in London. In addition,
since 2005, the United States Administration has
provided financial support to Syrian opposition figures.
All of this is part of a long-term campaign that,
according to the Washington Post, “is aimed at the
regime of President Bashar Al-Assad. To complete the
picture of this conspiracy against my country, allow me
to refer the Council to the statement made to a number
of media outlets by a Syrian opposition figure living in
France, namely, that he had received offers from three
foreign parties to bring weapons into Syria.
These actions have had a negative impact on our
national economy. Markets are stalled. Tourism has
come to a halt. Investment is down. All of this is part
of an effort to heighten instability in as many Syrian
cities and villages as possible.
The authorities, within the responsibility that they
have to protect Syria and its borders with neighbouring
countries, have stopped many arms shipments that had
been sent to groups attempting to undermine stability
and security in the country. It has been proved that
those weapons were sent from overseas by extremist
religious groups to their agents inside the country with
the goal of killing innocent people, burning public and
private institutions and, in general, causing chaos in
the country. It was natural, under such circumstances,
for the State to undertake to fulfil — just as would any

12

other State facing such threats and dangers — its
fundamental responsibility to respond to the calls of its
citizens, who had been enjoying peace and security.
The Syrian leadership is convinced that such
extremist circles do not want reform; they want to
overthrow the Government through killing and chaos.
It was thus natural for the Syrian leadership to respond
to the appeals of its citizens that it save them from the
actions of such terrorist extremist groups and to restore
order to the country. That is exactly what happened in
the city of Dar’a, which Mr. Pascoe mentioned earlier.
Security forces found large numbers of sophisticated
weapons, including machine guns and advanced
communications equipment. The operation also led to
the detention of a large number of members of those
extremist groups that have been sowing terror and
death; other groups managed to escape outside the
province. The detainees have admitted to their crimes
and to the fact that they had received large sums of
money for their acts, which the State can neither accept
nor justify.
Syria sees no justification for a debate on this
issue in the Security Council. We view with grave
suspicion the attempts made by some to give the
impression that the Syrian State does not protect its
people. While armed groups have committed acts of
killing and destruction, as I have stated, let me stress
that no one has the right to protect, or even hint at
protecting, such groups. The Syrian State is defending
its people. It is saving them from the seditious plots
being hatched by Syria’s enemies in an attempt to
undermine its security and independence. It is rejecting
the massive political pressure brought to bear by some
from outside the country to change national policies
that serve the interests of the people and the nation.
In order to safeguard the rights of all Syrian
citizens, a judicial commission has been set up to
investigate all cases involving losses of life among
civilians and military personnel, which are regrettable,
as a result of the latest clashes.
The falling of even one victim from my
Government, which we regret, is too high a price to
pay. As a Government, we cannot accept that some
claim to value the lives of our sons more than we do.
Policies of interference in the affairs of other States on
the basis of various pretexts and justifications have
always proved to be erroneous. We believe that some
of the statements we have heard today against Syria

11-31393

S/PV.6524

can only be considered an encouragement to extremism
and terrorism. The price will be paid by innocents in
Syria and the rest of the world. Stability and peace in
the region will also pay a price.
We cannot be convinced that the convening of
such meetings serves the interests of the Syrian people,
even as it is interpreted by extremist groups as
international support for them and their wrongful
practices.
We reaffirm that the age of colonialism has
passed. All the peoples of the world are now aware of
the new methods used by some States to interfere in the
affairs of other States, be it in the framework of the socalled responsibility to protect or that of humanitarian
intervention, which have been rejected by all
developing countries, even as attempts are being made
to ram them through international forums, including
the United Nations. We have always feared that the use
of such lofty concepts would undermine the unity,
sovereignty and independence of the peoples of the
developing countries.
Syria stresses that what is happening on the
ground can in no way be considered peaceful
demonstrations. Otherwise, how could so many
martyrs have fallen among our security forces, our
army and our innocent civilians? Syria also stresses
that it will move forward on the road of reform, as
announced by the President of the Syrian Arab
Republic. We will continue to satisfy the legitimate
demands of our citizens; we will continue to protect
their lives and property. We will not allow terrorism or
extremism to kill our people.
The attempt by some members of the Security
Council, with unprecedented enthusiasm, to bring what
is a Syrian internal affair under the agenda item
entitled “The situation in the Middle East” — an item
devoted fundamentally to seeking a peaceful settlement
to the Arab-Israeli conflict and the establishment of a

11-31393

Palestinian State according to well-known international
terms of reference — makes us and many others
wonder about the decades-long lack of such enthusiasm
in attempting to end the Israeli occupation of Arab
lands occupied since 1967. However, for us the answer
is clear. It is a policy of double standards. It is the
dominance of the rule of force over the rule of law. If
there is any doubt as to the truth of what we are saying,
we would ask why some have used the so-called right
of veto 48 times to protect Israeli aggression and
occupation, most recently a scant two months ago — a
veto that led to the aborting of an international
resolution condemning Israeli settlement of occupied
Palestinian land.
We expect from the leaders of the members of the
Security Council that they encourage further national
reform instead of attempting to ignore the path of
reform and to sow doubt as to the continuing attempts
at reform by my Government — a reform that is
ongoing and will continue.
In this context, we find it truly strange to hear the
Permanent Representative of the United States of
America make unfounded claims, which can in no way
be considered serious or legitimate, concerning Syria’s
alleged exploitation of its special relations with Iran to
“repress” Syrian citizens. This surreal, Hollywoodstyle attempt to link the two countries reflects a lack of
respect for the Security Council and its responsibility
to protect international peace and security, and clearly
reveals the United States Administration’s true ill will
towards my country. Such designs have no bearing
whatsoever on the interests of Syria, its people or its
Government.
The President (spoke in Spanish): There are no
further speakers inscribed on my list. The Security
Council has thus concluded the present stage of its
consideration of the item on its agenda.
The meeting rose at 5.20 p.m.

13
