A

UNITED
NATIONS

General Assembly

Distr.
GENERAL
A/RES/45/63
14 December 1990

Forty-fifth session
Agenda item 62

RESOLUTION ADOPTED BÏ THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY
[on the report of the First Committee (A/45/784)]

45/63.

Israeli nuclear armament

The Cenerai A5seaMY>
Bearing in mind its previous resolutions on Israeli nuclear armament, the
latest of which is resolution 44/121 of 15 December 1989,
Recalling its resolution 44/108 of 15 December 1989, in which, inter alia, it
called for placing all nuclear facilities in the region under International Atomic
Energy Agency safeguards, pending the establishment of a nuclear-weapon-free zone
in the Middle East,
Recalling also Security Council resolution 487 (1981) of 19 June 1981, in
which, inter- alia, the Council called upon Israel urgently to place all its nuclear
facilities under Agency safeguards.
Noting that only Israel has been specifically called upon by the Security
Council to place its nuclear facilities under Agency safeguards.
Noting with grave concern Israel's persistent refusal to commit itself not to
manufacture or acquire nuclear weapons, despite repeated calls by the General
Assembly, the Security Council and the International Atomic Energy Agency,
Talcing note of resolution GC (XXXIV)/RES/526 of 21 September 1990, adopted by
the General Conference of the International Atomic Energy Agency,
Taking into consideration the final document on international security and
disarmament adopted by the Ninth Conference of Heads of State or Government of

90-35909

2961Z (E)

/...

X/RES/45/бЗ
Page 2

Non-Aligned Countries, held at Belgrade from 4 to 7 September 1989, 1/ in
paragraph 12 of which Israel was condemned for continuing to develop its nuclear
military programmes and weapons of mass destruction and for its refusal to
implement the resolutions of the United Nations and the International Atomic Energy
Agency in this regard.
Deeply alarmed by the information with regard to the continuing production,
development and acquisition of nuclear weapons by Israel and its testing of their
delivery systems in the Mediterranean, thus threatening the peace and security of
the region.
Aware of the grave consequences that endanger international peace and security
as a result of Israel's development and acquisition of nuclear weapons and Israel's
collaboration with South Africa to develop nuclear weapons and their delivery
systems.
Deeply concerned that Israel has not committed itself to refrain from
attacking or threatening to attack safeguarded nuclear facilities,
1.
Reiterates its condemnation of Israel's refusal to renounce any
possession of nuclear weapons;
2.
Reiterates also its condemnation of the co-operation between Israel and
South Africa in the military field;
3.
Expresses its deep concern regarding the information on Israel's
continuing production, development and acquisition of nuclear weapons and testing
of their delivery systems;
4.
Reaffirms that Israel should promptly apply Security Council resolution
487 (1981)* in which the Council, inter alia, requested it to place all nuclear
facilities under International Atomic Energy Agency safeguards and to refrain from
attacking or threatening to attack nuclear facilities;
5.
Calls upon all States and organizations that have not yet done so not to
co-operate with or give assistance to Israel that could enhance its nuclear-weapons
capability;
6.
Requests the International Atomic Energy Agency to inform the
Secretary-General of any steps Israel may take to place its nuclear facilities
under Agency safeguards;
7.
Requests the Secretary-General to follow closely Israeli nuclear
activities and to report thereon to the General Assembly at its forty-sixth session;
8.
Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its forty-sixth session
the item entitled "Israeli nuclear armament".

Sith pighgry tneetihq
4 D^çember 1995

1/

See A/44/551-S/20870, annex.
