S/PV.8812

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-sixth year

8812

th meeting
Friday, 2 July 2021, 3 p.m.
New York

President:

Mr. De Rivière. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(France)

Members:

China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Estonia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
India . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ireland. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kenya. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Mexico. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Niger. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Norway . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Saint Vincent and the Grenadines. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Tunisia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Viet Nam . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Dai Bing
Mr. Jürgenson
Mr. Tirumurti
Ms. Byrne Nason
Mr. Kimani
Mrs. Buenrostro Massieu
Mr. Maman Sani
Ms. Juul
Mr. Nebenzia
Ms. King
Mr. Ladeb
Lord Ahmad
Mrs. Thomas-Greenfield
Mr. Dang

Agenda
Peace and security in Africa

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

21-17867 (E)
*2117867*

S/PV.8812

Peace and security in Africa

cities of Tigray, including Adwa, Aksum, Shire and
Humera. The TDF are now in Mekelle.

The meeting was called to order at 3.05 p.m.
Expression of thanks to the outgoing President
The President (spoke in French): As this is the
first public meeting of the Security Council for the
month of July, I should like to take this opportunity to
pay tribute, on behalf of the Council, to His Excellency
Mr. Sven Jürgenson, Permanent Representative of
Estonia, for his service as President of the Security
Council for the month of June. I am sure I speak for
all the members of the Council in expressing deep
appreciation to Ambassador Jürgenson and his team for
the great diplomatic skill with which they conducted
the Council’s business last month.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Peace and security in Africa
The President (spoke in French): In accordance
with rule 37 of the Council’s provisional rules of
procedure, I invite the representative of Ethiopia to
participate in this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the following
briefers to participate in this meeting: Ms. Rosemary
DiCarlo, Under-Secretary-General for Political and
Peacebuilding Affairs, and Mr. Ramesh Rajasingham,
Acting Under-Secretary-General for Humanitarian
Affairs and Emergency Relief Coordinator.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I now give the floor to Ms. DiCarlo.
Ms. DiCarlo: Ethiopia is at a critical juncture.
Recent developments demonstrate the need to address
issues plaguing the country in a comprehensive and
sustainable way. The consequences of not doing so
could be disastrous.
After almost eight months of conflict, the Federal
Government of Ethiopia announced, on 28 June, a
unilateral ceasefire in Tigray, citing the need to address
the humanitarian crisis in the region. Subsequent to the
announcement, the Ethiopian National Defence Forces
and the provisional Tigray administration withdrew
from Tigray’s capital, Mekelle. On 27 and 28 June, the
Tigray Defence Forces (TDF), entered major towns and
2/19

02/07/2021

The situation in Mekelle is reportedly calm, and
the TDF appear to be in control of the city. Reports
indicate that leaders of the previous Tigray regional
administration, including its former president, have
returned to Mekelle. As of today, the TDF has yet to
agree to a ceasefire.
While there have been no reports of serious
incidents, basic services to support humanitarian
delivery are absent. Mekelle has no electrical power
or Internet. Key infrastructure has been destroyed,
and there are no flights entering or leaving the area.
Elsewhere in Tigray, the Eritrean Defence Forces have
withdrawn to areas adjacent to the border, while in the
west of Tigray, the Amhara regional forces remain in
place despite advances by the TDF. On 29 June, the
Amhara branch of the ruling Prosperity Party issued a
statement warning that Amhara regional forces would
oppose any attempts by the TDF to take the territory
in western Tigray that was seized during the conflict.
In short, there is potential for more confrontations and
a swift deterioration in the security situation, which is
extremely concerning.
The ceasefire announcement provides an
opportunity that all parties to the conflict, including
the Tigray People’s Liberation Front, must seize and
build upon. In this regard, we urge the TDF to endorse
the ceasefire immediately and completely.
As the Acting Under-Secretary-General for
Humanitarian Affairs and Emergency Relief
Coordinator will outline, our immediate concern is
focused on those in urgent need of assistance in Tigray.
Food insecurity has continued only to worsen in recent
days. We must scale up the response.
All parties must ensure the safe passage of
humanitarian workers for the continued delivery of
supplies. The destruction of the Tekezé bridge on 1 July
effectively cut off central Tigray from western Tigray,
closing a vital artery for humanitarian assistance.
A ceasefire observed by all parties would not
only facilitate the provision of humanitarian aid, but
it would also be a starting point for the necessary
political efforts to chart a way out of the crisis. The
conflict in Tigray is a result of deep-rooted political
grievances that can only be resolved through dialogue
and a credible political process.
21-17867

02/07/2021

Peace and security in Africa

This morning, in a briefing to the diplomatic
core in Addis Ababa, the Deputy Prime Minister and
Foreign Minister said that once the election results
were announced and a new Government formed, the
Government would take steps to hold an all-inclusive
dialogue process. This is a welcome development.
Such a process could be part of a broader effort to
address the country’s structural challenges, encourage
reconciliation and foster consensus on the way forward
for Ethiopia’s transition.
Once again, and predictably, civilians have paid
the heaviest price in an armed conflict. An estimated
1.7 million people have been displaced, with more
than 60,000 refugees crossing into the Sudan. I call on
the parties to make the protection and well-being of
civilians a matter of paramount concern. That requires
strict respect for international humanitarian law and
human rights law.
I also call on the parties to offer all necessary
assistance to the ongoing joint investigation by the
Office of the United Nations High Commissioner
for Human Rights and the Ethiopian Human Rights
Commission. There must be accountability for the
grievous human rights violations committed during
the conflict, including acts of sexual violence against
children and adults, and mass killings. This morning,
the Federal Government of Ethiopia reiterated
its commitment to the joint investigation and to
accountability. We look forward to seeing the concrete
results of that undertaking.
Furthermore, Ethiopia’s neighbours can play a
constructive role in supporting the country’s transition
while respecting its sovereignty. The withdrawal of
Eritrean forces from Tigray must be fully implemented.
The 2018 rapprochement between Ethiopia and
Eritrea and the reforms introduced by Prime Minister
Abiy Ahmed raised hopes for a new era of stability and
peace in the Horn of Africa. The wide-ranging transition
has proved to be both challenging and hopeful. It has
brought to the fore disagreements around fundamental
issues such as the federal structure of the State and the
role and status of ethnicity, as well as how such disputes
should be addressed.
The recent national elections were an important
milestone in that regard. They were, by many accounts,
an improvement on previous polls in the country
and were held in a generally peaceful manner. They
were, however, affected by insecurity and technical

S/PV. 8812

problems. Some opposition groups did not participate.
It is my hope that the electoral process can be concluded
in a peaceful and secure environment and that any
disputes are addressed in accordance with the laws and
constitution of Ethiopia.
But elections are just one part of the democratic
process. I urge the Federal Government to deepen efforts
to open the political space and facilitate the meaningful
participation in public life of all Ethiopians, including
women, youth and civil society.
Many of the political parties that chose not to
participate in the recent polls cited the need for
something more than the ballot box to heal the deep
divisions in Ethiopia’s body politic and society. Many
asked for a national dialogue as a space or platform
where Ethiopians could reflect about reconciling the
many competing visions of the future of the country’s
political system.
In its recent ceasefire announcement,
Government stated, referring to the elections:

the

“Ethiopians from all walks of life have sent a
strong signal that they are ready to work together
to build a stronger, united and democratic Ethiopia,
removing the seeds of discord and division sown
within the Ethiopian body politic”.
I encourage the Government to follow through on
today’s announcement and harness those sentiments. In
that regard, I offer the full expertise and support of the
United Nations, including assistance to domestically
driven, inclusive and comprehensive mediation and
dialogue processes. We hope that such a dialogue
would include discussions at the federal member state
level encouraging as many sectors of the population as
possible to have an input into the consolidation of the
reform process and the future of the country.
The promise of the Ethiopian transition remains
real and can be fulfilled with the necessary political
will. Peace and stability in the country, the cornerstone
of the Horn region, may well depend on it.
Allow me to offer some areas of concerted
international support to Ethiopia as it traverses the
current crisis.
The international community must continue to call
for a permanent ceasefire to be honoured by all parties.
We should urge Ethiopia’s leaders to work swiftly to
restore national unity through a process of inclusive

21-178673/19

S/PV.8812

Peace and security in Africa

02/07/2021

dialogue and reconciliation. Again, the Government’s
recent indication of its intent to do so is positive.

that means that more people will certainly die if we do
not reach them with humanitarian assistance.

As the delivery of humanitarian services to those
who have suffered this tragic conflict is vital, I urge
Member States to generously support those efforts.

Let me also emphasize that what we are seeing in
Tigray is a protection crisis. On 22 June, an air strike
on a busy market in Togoga killed and injured dozens of
civilians. That is just one of many times when civilians
have been killed in the eight months of conflict
in Tigray.

Finally, the Federal Government of Ethiopia has
committed to not allowing impunity, as that would
severely harm the cause of justice and sustainable
peace. That is an important commitment to ensuring
accountability for the crimes and atrocities committed
during this conflict. The international community must
encourage the Government and the TDF to live up
that commitment.
The United Nations will continue to stand alongside
Ethiopia. We are ready to extend all the means of
support at our disposal to help put the country back
on track.
The President (spoke in French): I thank
Ms. DiCarlo for her briefing.
I now give the floor to Mr. Rajasingham.
Mr. Rajasingham: Just over two weeks ago,
on 15 June, we briefed the Council on famine in
Tigray, with more than 350,000 people in catastrophe
conditions — the worst famine situation we have seen
in decades. In the short space of time since then, the
situation has worsened dramatically.
The Council has just heard from Under-SecretaryGeneral DiCarlo about the political and security
dynamics in Tigray and Ethiopia. What I would like to
speak about is the humanitarian situation. This, I am
afraid, is more alarming than when the Council was
briefed two and a half weeks ago. Two million people
are still displaced, and close to 5.2 million people still
require humanitarian assistance — the great majority
of them women and children.
One of the most distressing trends is an alarming
rise in food insecurity and hunger due to conflict. More
than 400,000 people are estimated to have crossed the
threshold into famine, and another 1.8 million people
are on the brink of famine. Some are suggesting that the
numbers are even higher. Indeed, 33,000 children are
severely malnourished. Moreover, the food insecurity
crisis will continue to worsen during the impending
rainy season, as food supplies are exhausted and the
risk of flooding and water-borne diseases, including
cholera, increases. Considering where we already are,
4/19

As has been widely reported by senior United
Nations officials, civil society and others, we have
multiple credible and widely corroborated cases of
serious sexual and gender-based violence. More than
1,200 cases have been reported, with more continuing
to emerge. That is likely, we fear, only a fraction of the
actual cases, as stigma, shame and fear of reprisals as
well as the lack of health and psychosocial services lead
to underreporting.
All parties to the conflict must respect their
obligations under international humanitarian law.
Attacks directed against civilians and indiscriminate
attacks are prohibited. Allegations of serious violations
must be thoroughly and independently investigated
by the State, and the perpetrators must be prosecuted
regardless of who they are.
To recall what should be already obvious to all
of us, humanitarian workers must never be a target.
Still, last week three humanitarian colleagues from
Médecins sans Frontières were brutally and deliberately
murdered in Tigray, this only weeks after aid workers
from the Relief Society of Tigray and the International
Committee for the Development of Peoples were
killed, on 29 May and 28 April, respectively. Twelve
humanitarian workers have now been killed since the
start of the conflict.
Despite the challenges, humanitarian actors
continue to work to reach people in desperate need. In
the last two months 3.7 million people have received
emergency assistance; 167,000 displaced persons have
received non-food items; and 630,000 people have been
reached by water trucks. However, it is estimated that
more than 2.5 million people in rural Tigray have not
had access to essential services over the last six months.
That includes many of the people facing famine and is
also part of the reason that they face famine.
The lives of many of those people depend on our
ability to reach them with food, medicine, nutrition
supplies and other humanitarian assistance. We need to
21-17867

02/07/2021

Peace and security in Africa

reach them now; not next week — now. As the Council
has heard us say before, to do so we need timely,
unimpeded, safe and sustained access. International
humanitarian law requires all parties to a conflict to
facilitate this. Let me explain what this looks like and
be clear about what exactly we are asking for.
Over the past few days our colleagues in Mekelle
have been able to move towards Abd Adi and Samre
and from Shire teams have reached Selekleka and have
travelled from Axum to Adwa. That is positive, and
we now plan to dispatch convoys with humanitarian
supplies to many of the areas that have been difficult
for us to reach before.
But we can do so for only as long as we have
something to deliver. Today the World Food Programme
has enough food for only 1 million people for the next
month in Mekelle. That is a fraction of what we need for
the 5.2 million people who need food aid. However, we
have also almost run out of health, water, sanitation and
other non-food items kits. Food alone does not avert
a famine. Water sanitation and nutrition supplies are
essential in such a response. We also desperately need
to prevent a cholera outbreak or people dying from other
communicable diseases.
Earlier this week, the Government of Ethiopia
announced a humanitarian ceasefire. We wholeheartedly
welcome this and look forward to its implementation
throughout the conflict area. It is imperative that all
parties to the conflict, whoever they are and wherever
they are, ensure no further escalation in conflict. We
cannot afford to fail in this endeavour. The affected
populations in Tigray on the brink of starvation
deserve no less. All groups must stop fighting to allow
humanitarian aid to get through unimpeded and to
protect civilians. There is no other way to achieve this.
While inside Tigray, we may now be able to reach
areas that were difficult to reach before; it is essential
that we act fast and without any further obstruction.
What we need first and foremost is for all armed and
security actors to provide guarantees for safe road
access for humanitarian workers and supplies to and
from Tigray, as well as to and from the most remote
parts of the region. This means not stopping us from
getting through checkpoints, but rapidly letting us
proceed in all directions. As we speak, there are five
UNICEF trucks loaded with life-saving water and
sanitation supplies blocked in Afar. Earlier this week a
convoy of Word Food Programme trucks was prevented

S/PV. 8812

from entering Tigray from Gondar. All these trucks
must immediately be allowed to proceed.
Secondly, we must be allowed to use the fastest and
most effective route to get humanitarian supplies to the
people in need. We need immediate, unhindered and
sustained access from both Kombolcha and Semera to
Mekelle, and from Gondar to Shire. I am deeply alarmed
by yesterday’s destruction of the Tekezé River bridge
and the reported damage to two other bridges, which
has cut off our main supply route from Gondar to Shire,
which we use to bring in food and other life-saving
supplies. We call on the Government of Ethiopia to
immediately repair these bridges and, by doing, so help
prevent the spread of famine.
Thirdly, we must also be able to use the fastest and
most effective modality to deliver supplies and transport
humanitarian staff. This means that we need to be able
to fly, and I welcome the information received today that
the Government of Ethiopia has approved our request
for an United Nations Humanitarian Air Service flight
to Mekelle tomorrow. We hope that this will not be a
one-off but will continue and be extended to all airports
in Tigray. I also call on all parties to provide security
assurances for these humanitarian air operations.
Fourth, we need to be able to bring in and use all
appropriate communication equipment, such as verysmall-aperture terminals, very-high-frequency radios
and satellite phones, for humanitarian purposes. These
are critical for the safety and security of humanitarian
workers. We use these all over the world. We ask that
the Government of Ethiopia fast track all requests
made by humanitarian organizations. We also call
on the Government to see to the immediate return of
the communications equipment confiscated from the
offices of humanitarian organizations by the Ethiopia
National Defense Forces. Trucks commandeered from
humanitarian organizations must also be returned by
those responsible.
We also urge the Government of Ethiopia to restore
and maintain electricity, communication networks and
banking services in Tigray, without which we cannot
effectively reach populations, as well as to allow the
free flow of essential commercial goods, including
fuel at scale. Without fuel we cannot transport food
and people will starve. We cannot run water pumps
providing clean water and prevent cholera, which kills.
Hospitals cannot operate and people will suffer. In

21-178675/19

S/PV.8812

Peace and security in Africa

short, without fuel, humanitarian operations will not be
possible and lives will be lost.
We have repeatedly said that the only way to stop
the humanitarian situation from further deteriorating is
peace. The welcomed announcement, as I mentioned,
by the Government of Ethiopia of a ceasefire must be
the beginning of this peace — for the sake of millions
of innocent civilians. The conflict has already caused
enormous suffering to the civilian population. It must
stop now. The ceasefire has raised expectation amongst
the population, and we now need to reach people
throughout Tigray with humanitarian assistance to
prevent a spread of famine and, as I mentioned before,
an outbreak of cholera. But humanitarian assistance
alone is not enough. We are not the solution. Unless
civilians can return to normality and farmers can
access their fields, famine will take an even tighter grip
on Tigray.
We welcome the Government’s announcement
today of the formation of a high-level mechanism to
solve access problems and challenges in real-time, and
we look forward to working together to make sure that
we immediately reach people. There can be no reason
for the ceasefire to fail and humanitarian convoys
to be blocked. We hope that this mechanism can be
operational within next 48 hours so as not to waste any
more time and lose any more lives.
I conclude by asking the Security Council and
all those with influence to help us save lives and
prevent famine and further suffering by ensuring these
fundamental requests are fulfilled.
The President (spoke in French): I thank
Mr. Rajasingham for his briefing.
I now give the floor to those Council members who
wish to make statements.
Mrs. Thomas-Greenfield (United States of
America): Let me start by thanking our colleague
from Estonia for presiding last month in such an
extraordinarily successful way.
I would also like to thank all the briefers for their
comprehensive briefings on the ongoing crisis in
Tigray. The United States deeply appreciates the work
they and their teams have done and that they continue
to do. I also want to thank my colleagues on the Council
for participating in today’s open briefing.
6/19

02/07/2021

In recent months, the Council has been briefed and
discussed the situation in Tigray privately half a dozen
times. We have from non-governmental organizations
and United Nations agencies about vast displacements,
countless human rights abuses, hundreds of thousands
of people facing famine, the bombing of civilians, the
killing and intimidation of humanitarian workers, the
systematic rape of women and girls and unspeakable
acts of sexual violence, the purposeful obstruction
of humanitarian aid and the deliberate destruction of
United Nations communications equipment. Tragically,
these stories remain pervasive.
As the Office for the Coordination for Humanitarian
Affairs (OCHA) told us recently, tragedies of historic
proportions are taking place in Tigray, and that is why
we called for this meeting today. It is important for the
people of the region to hear our voices and to know
that they have not been forgotten, and for the parties
to the conflict to know that we are watching. We know
that millions of civilians in the region are desperately
suffering, and we called for today’s briefing because the
conflict needs to end. We need to marshal more funding
and scale up the United Nations response, we need to
ensure respect for international humanitarian law and
humanitarian access, and we need public accountability
for the atrocities that have been committed.
This week, the Government unilaterally announced
a ceasefire, stating that it was doing so for humanitarian
purposes. The Government must now demonstrate
that it truly intends to use the ceasefire to address
the humanitarian catastrophe in Tigray. In fact,
Ethiopian forces looted the offices of humanitarian
aid organizations and destroyed communications
equipment as they retreated from Mekelle. This is
beyond unacceptable. All equipment looted must
be returned.
We have also since learned that one or more
bridges were destroyed along critical access routes to
Tigray. Access by road and by air — which, along with
electricity, telecommunications, banking activity and
fuel supplies is essential to enabling aid delivery — are
being denied, as we heard that today from OCHA.
Humanitarian workers are reporting that it is more
difficult to reach desperate people in Tigray now than
it was just a week ago. Such acts, if verified, are an
indication not of a humanitarian ceasefire, but of a
siege. The Ethiopian Government can and should prove
this analysis wrong by providing unhindered movement
of humanitarian supplies, commodities and personnel
21-17867

02/07/2021

Peace and security in Africa

into and throughout Tigray. If they do not, we believe
that hundreds of thousands of people could starve
to death.
Once again — we need access, we need aid and we
need to end the conflict. Instead of further escalation,
we need all parties to negotiate a true ceasefire, and
then to honour that ceasefire. To be clear, this includes
the Tigrayan forces, the Tigray Defense Forces,
which must also demonstrate that they will abide by
international humanitarian law and work peacefully
and within legal frameworks toward a peaceful solution.
And there is more we need to know about the actions
of other forces in the region. For the time being, with
the Government’s ceasefire declaration in place, we
have a precious opportunity. Now is the time to secure
peace — right now.
The members of the Council can help translate this
ceasefire declaration, first, into a sustainable peace
and, then, into dialogue, reconciliation and healing.
If the parties to the conflict fail to seize this moment,
the consequences for the people of Ethiopia will be
devastating — more fighting, more famine, more
abuses, more suffering by ordinary Ethiopians and a
far more destabilized Horn of Africa.
Further fighting poses a risk to the integrity of
the Ethiopian State and to the stability of the entire
region. A meaningful ceasefire deal would affirm the
redeployment of forces and the complete withdrawal of
Eritrean troops and Amhara regional forces. It would
facilitate unhindered humanitarian access. It would
affirm that neither the internal nor the external borders
of Ethiopia will be changed by force, in contravention
of the Constitution, and it should lay the groundwork
for discussions towards political solutions to the crisis.
We must also recognize the wider political context
in which this context has unfolded. That includes both
last month’s national election and the extraordinary
transition that began several years ago, but remains
very much unfinished. The United States commends
those Ethiopians who exercised their right to vote last
month. Elections alone, however, cannot revoke the
escalating polarization that has plagued the country.
The next step is to move towards genuine political
reform. Ethiopians must come together to confront the
country’s growing divisions and preserve the future of
the rich and dynamic society.
If this dialogue is to succeed, either in the short
term or in breaking long-term cycles of violence, all

S/PV. 8812

Ethiopians must be able to call it their own. Equally
important will be credible and independent mechanisms
for justice and accountability for the atrocities
committed. To that end, we welcome the ongoing
investigation by the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Human Rights and the Ethiopian
Human Rights Commission, and we strongly support
the African Commission on Human and People’s Rights
Commission of Inquiry as it fully and independently
investigates violations, abuses and atrocities taking
place in Ethiopia. That includes last week’s senseless
killing of three Doctors Without Borders workers,
which we condemn in the strongest terms.
In recent days, I have been deeply disturbed to hear
from non-governmental organizations on the ground
about other ways their personnel are being deliberately
targeted for harassment and violence. This must stop
and the perpetrators must be held to account.
The United States stands ready to assist Ethiopia
in solidifying and implementing a ceasefire, providing
life-saving humanitarian aid and resolving this
devastating conflict. We also stand ready to support the
wider, necessary dialogue across Ethiopia and promote
democratic renewal, national unity and peace. The
Security Council should also step up to address these
tasks. We must use this opportunity to protect and save
the lives of the people in Tigray as they continue to
face famine, displacement and violence, and we must
do everything in our power to bring all Ethiopians
together for the future security, stability and prosperity
of their country.
Lord Ahmad (United Kingdom): I would like to
begin by thanking Under-Secretary-General DiCarlo
and Acting Under-Secretary-General Rajasingham for
their expert insights and briefings today.
Today is an important opportunity. It is right that
the Security Council consider how to help end this
devastating conflict and support all of the people
of Ethiopia. I will not repeat the picture of suffering
outlined by our briefers — it is stark and it is real.
But after eight months of conflict, we remain deeply
concerned by all that we have heard and seen.
Instead, I want to briefly discuss three key
issues — the immediate humanitarian situation,
human rights concerns and the need for conflict
resolution — so that Ethiopia can move on from this
most tragic of conflicts.

21-178677/19

S/PV.8812

Peace and security in Africa

But before I go any further, I want to pay tribute
to the 12 humanitarian workers — and I am sure that
I speak for every member of the Council — who have
been killed since the conflict began. The protection of
humanitarian workers, their offices and their equipment
is a central tenet of international humanitarian law.
Their work is especially vital in Tigray, where — as the
Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs
has outlined and the Integrated Phase Classification
data shows — at least 353,000 people are now in famine
conditions. People have died from hunger, people are
dying from hunger and people will continue to die
unless they get the help they need now. This is a humanmade famine and we need to act.
In that regard, the United Kingdom welcomes
the unilateral ceasefire declared by the Government
of Ethiopia. All sides — the Federal Government of
Ethiopia, the Tigray Defense Forces, the Amhara militias
and the Eritrean Defence Forces have an opportunity to
end the cycle of violence and suffering. We urge them to
take it, and we call on the Eritrean forces to withdraw,
as requested by the Ethiopian Government.
Our immediate priority has to be for humanitarian
assistance to get through to those who require it.
The restoration of basic infrastructure, including
electricity, communications and banking services, and
ensuring food and other needed goods can reach Tigray
is essential to prevent further loss of life. Enabling
humanitarian agencies to get visas for their staff and
import communications equipment so they can operate
effectively is imperative. Indeed, we have heard
that today. Denial of humanitarian access is a direct
violation of international humanitarian law.
At the same time, we, the international community
and United Nations agencies, must be ready to respond.
The response to date, frankly, has been insufficient.
The ceasefire gives us the opportunity to address this
and urgently increase the amount of aid reaching the
starving people of Tigray. In that regard, the United
Kingdom has already allocated £47.7 million. A full
and sustained ceasefire will give all parties time and
space to address the root causes of this conflict through
both dialogue and, importantly, reconciliation and to
initiate an inclusive political process.
The United Kingdom welcomes and endorses the call
of Chairperson Faki of the African Union Commission
for all parties to uphold their responsibilities under
international law to protect civilians. He is, of course,
8/19

02/07/2021

right that a comprehensive and all-encompassing
permanent ceasefire is absolutely necessary to pave the
way for sustainable peace in Tigray. We will support
the African Union in its efforts in pursuit of peace
and stability in Tigray, Ethiopia and the wider region.
Further, we encourage the United Nations system to
consider how it can also assist as the situation develops,
as part of a joined-up process and coherent strategy.
Finally, Special Representative Patten and High
Commissioner Bachelet have highlighted serious
allegations of human rights abuses and violations.
They have also described systematic sexual violence,
which, as the Prime Minister’s Special Representative
on Preventing Sexual Violence in Conflict, I have
been particularly moved by. The United Kingdom
is supporting the International Committee of the
Red Cross and United Nations agencies to provide
essential services to survivors of sexual violence, and
an extra £16.7 million in funds were announced in
June, which will support and drive accountability. In
addition, this week we deployed an expert to advise
on support for the safe collection and preservation of
evidence — and this is vital and imperative — in order
to bring the perpetrators of sexual violence to justice at
the appropriate time.
The United Kingdom welcomes the proposed
inquiry of the African Commission on Human and
Peoples’ Rights, and it fully supports the ongoing
joint investigation between the Office of the United
Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights and the
Ethiopian Human Rights Commission. We will also
co-sponsor a draft resolution on Tigray at the Human
Rights Council in Geneva this month.
Transparency and accountability will be vital
if Ethiopia is truly to move past this most tragic of
conflicts. We collectively owe that to the victims. We
owe it to the survivors. Our message is clear: it is time
for all sides to put down their weapons; it is time to
allow unrestricted access for humanitarian aid; and it is
time now to put the interests of Ethiopian people first.
I hope that the Council can now work constructively
with the African Union and partners to ensure progress
on these most critical of issues and turn around the
situation for the sake of the people of Tigray and for the
sake of all Ethiopians.
Ms. Byrne Nason (Ireland): I thank Rosemary
DiCarlo and Ramesh Rajasingham for their insightful,
yet deeply troubling, briefings today.
21-17867

02/07/2021

Peace and security in Africa

Ethiopia is a long-standing and important partner
for Ireland. For that reason, the deteriorating crisis
in the Tigray region and its severe humanitarian
consequences are of genuine and deep concern to us.
It is a situation that we have consistently raised and
sought to have the Security Council address since we
joined the Council in January.
The Council’s voice matters on this issue. Today,
finally, we meet publicly and all Council members have
an opportunity to send a clear message to the parties on
the ground: this conflict must end. Humanitarian needs
must be urgently addressed.
We called for today’s meeting because it is clear
that a humanitarian catastrophe is unfolding in Tigray.
It is clear that the threat of famine looms and that
hundreds of thousands of people could already be
starving. It is clear that, without further and immediate
scaled-up action, many more will die. We all have a
responsibility to act immediately to save lives. Indeed,
our action is overdue.
The prospect of a large-scale famine in Ethiopia
today is real. The evidence that we heard today is
indisputable. The consequences of inaction are chilling
and all too predictable.
As the spectre of a large-scale famine again looms
for the people of Ethiopia, the international community
is ready to mobilize the necessary response. However,
the political steps needed to facilitate that response lie
with those who are party to this conflict. Leadership to
forge a path towards a political solution is needed.
The declaration by the Ethiopian Government of
a unilateral ceasefire is a welcome step. However, any
ceasefire must include actions that serve to improve
the humanitarian situation on the ground, not to
create further obstacles to the humanitarian response.
Reports that humanitarian access continues to be cut
off, including through the destruction of key routes
for humanitarian supplies, are deeply worrying and,
frankly, shocking. We urge all parties to the conflict
to cease hostilities, protect civilians and allow for
immediate, unimpeded and safe humanitarian access to
all parts of Tigray. We call on the Ethiopian authorities
to demonstrate their commitment to the ceasefire that
they declared by immediately facilitating humanitarian
access. In that regard, the next few days are absolutely
critical as the humanitarian response restarts. We also
call on the Government to establish a functioning
civil-military coordination mechanism, immediately

S/PV. 8812

restore essential services and reopen airspace for
humanitarian deliveries. Tigrayan forces must also
refrain from any actions that encourage conflict or
restrict humanitarian access.
Beyond the food security crisis, we are deeply
concerned about the wider humanitarian and human
rights situation. Reports last week of the air strike
on the village market of Togoga in northern Tigray,
killing and injuring hundreds of civilians, many of
them children, are alarming. We call on the Ethiopian
authorities to conduct an independent investigation into
the incident. Last week’s brutal murder of three staff of
Médecins sans Frontières underlines the dangers faced
by humanitarians. Humanitarian workers must never be
targets. Such outrageous attacks must cease. I pay tribute
to the efforts and the courage of humanitarian workers in
highly dangerous circumstances. We condemn reports
that international non-governmental organizations and
United Nations vehicles and their equipment have been
destroyed or appropriated in violation of international
humanitarian law. Humanitarian actors’ rights under
international humanitarian law need to be respected
in accordance with the obligations of all parties to
the conflict.
We remain horrified by the conflict-related
sexual violence and atrocities described by Special
Representative of the Secretary-General Patten. It is
clear that systematic abuses are being perpetrated by
armed actors in the conflict. The Council has demanded
that those and other violations end immediately. We
strongly support the work of High Commissioner
Bachelet Jeria and her Office and attach great
importance to the joint investigation with the Ethiopian
Human Rights Commission. Accountability must be
ensured for all violations of international humanitarian
law and international human rights law to counter
impunity, prevent further future violations and provide
justice for victims and survivors.
I began today by saying that we have an opportunity
to send a clear message to the parties on the ground.
Three months ago, Ireland said the same thing behind
closed doors and has repeated it since. Today I believe
that message should be threefold.
First, the Council should urge all parties to the
conflict to cease hostilities, protect civilians and
allow for immediate and safe humanitarian access
to all parts of Tigray. We also urge the Ethiopian
authorities to demonstrate their commitment to the

21-178679/19

S/PV.8812

Peace and security in Africa

ceasefire by facilitating unimpeded humanitarian
access immediately.
Secondly, all parties to the conflict must fully
respect international humanitarian law and human rights
law. Sexual violence and atrocities against civilians and
humanitarian workers must end. Humanitarians must
be allowed to do their job without interference.
Finally, and crucially, we need all Ethiopian
stakeholders to commit to a process of national dialogue
that promotes reconciliation and the unity of Ethiopia.
Ireland stands ready to support in any way that we can.
We look forward to seeing today’s announcement in
that regard followed through on and delivered quickly
and in full.
This is a critical moment for Ethiopia. The world
is watching. We urge all parties to recognize and to
meet their responsibilities, forging a way forward for
all Ethiopians. The Council, too, must step up and play
its part.
Mr. Kimani (Kenya): Allow me to congratulate
you, Mr. President, on your assumption of the presidency
of the Security Council for this month. I would also like
to congratulate Estonia on guiding the Council so ably
last month.
We make this statement united as the three African
members of the Security Council plus one (A3+1),
namely, Kenya, the Niger and Tunisia, as well as Saint
Vincent and the Grenadines. We are united in the
protection of the peace and security of Africa and the
interests of African peoples and States to be upheld in
the Security Council.
We take note of the briefings by Under-SecretaryGeneral Rosemary DiCarlo and Acting UnderSecretary-General Ramesh Rajasingham. We also
welcome the participation of Ethiopia and thank
them for their upcoming update to the Council on the
developments since we last met about two weeks ago
for an informal interactive dialogue.
We have been pained by the suffering that has been
experienced by our brothers and sisters in Ethiopia,
because each life matters and is sacrosanct. We send our
condolences to all the families that have lost members
to violence, including aid workers. We are outraged and
saddened by the pain of all the women and girls who
have suffered sexual violence. We condemn without
reservation the targeting of unarmed civilians. In doing
so, we call for all parties with the means to cause harm
10/19

02/07/2021

to cease any attacks on or threats to unarmed civilians.
We demand that the parties respect international law,
including humanitarian principles and the moral codes
that are at the core of Africa’s cultures and religions.
Throughout the past few months, while division
and violence have been experienced in Tigray, we have
argued for expanded and robust humanitarian access.
We have welcomed the Government’s resourcing of
a significant proportion of the humanitarian needs in
Tigray. We have urged the international humanitarian
community to move with speed and to scale up assistance.
We have applauded it and also been disappointed by
the continuing shortfalls in its response. We call again
for all States, international institutions, organizations
and individuals of good will to redouble their efforts
in Tigray.
We support the democratic aspirations of the
Ethiopian people. As such, we have argued that the
international community and the Security Council
should give the country space to undertake its most
recent elections. We have been gratified by the interim
reports, especially that of the African Union Election
Observation Mission, asserting that:
“Despite some operational, logistical, security,
political
and
coronavirus
disease-related
challenges, overall the pre-election and election day
processes were conducted in an orderly, peaceful
and credible manner.”
We hope that the election becomes the foundation of
a robust national conversation on peace, cohesion,
development and the celebration of diversity
and pluralism.
Today, the situation in Tigray remains of concern,
but there are clear opportunities for peace to emerge.
Behind closed doors, we have urged the Council to take
careful and responsible actions that will encourage
humanitarian outreach to suffering people, and not to
imperil the situation in Tigray. We again reiterate that
strong and sincere call.
We welcome the unilateral humanitarian ceasefire
by the Government of Ethiopia and stress that the
Council and the international community should
appreciate that decision by the Government as an
opportunity that must be capitalized on. We hope that it
can be translated into a permanent, comprehensive and
lasting ceasefire in order to extend humanitarian care
21-17867

02/07/2021

Peace and security in Africa

to every man, woman and child who needs it, in every
part of Tigray.
That ceasefire must be heeded and implemented.
We are particularly concerned about the potential
implications of the recent destruction of the bridge over
the Tekezé river, connecting Shire and Gondar. It is
indicative of a callous attitude to the needs of civilians
in crisis and that there are parties not observing a
ceasefire. We condemn the deliberate destruction
of civilian objects that are vital to the delivery of
humanitarian aid.
Those actions must be halted if we are to truly
implement the Silencing the Guns in Africa by 2020
initiative, which Africans have set out in our Agenda
2063, and to work as a region on ending all wars, civil
conflicts, gender-based violence and violent conflicts
and on preventing genocide.
We now call for all armed parties presently in
Tigray, or neighbouring it, to heed the voice of Africa
that calls for the silencing of the guns. We call on all
parties that have not pronounced on the cessation of
hostilities to do so without delay and to act accordingly
by ceasing all armed operations. They should allow full
humanitarian access to every part of Tigray. We further
call for the withdrawal of any and all non-Ethiopian
forces from Tigray and the standing down of all militias
from neighbouring federal states.
The silencing of the guns serves our continental
will and would allow Tigray’s farmers and traders to
return to their farms and shops so that they may recover
their livelihoods and reduce their dependency on the
outstretched hand of the humanitarians. We insist
on a ceasefire by all parties because we know from
experience that doing so will allow the deployment
of the tools available in Africa’s peace and security
architecture to help Ethiopia be at peace with itself.
The people and the Government of Ethiopia
appreciate the power of the instruments of dialogue
and reconciliation forged by Africans over the past few
decades. After all, most of the agreements that built
our peace and security architecture were forged in
Addis Ababa by our Heads of State and Government,
with Ethiopia’s constructive involvement. We now
recommend its tools to Ethiopia, to make use of them as
many of us have done. Doing so will show our peoples
and the world that we have processes and skills that can
indeed deliver African solutions to African challenges.

S/PV. 8812

The A3+1 therefore calls on all Ethiopian parties
in conflict in Tigray to cease hostilities and undertake
inclusive dialogue as a path to national reconciliation.
In our view, dialogue is strength. It is also at the core of
the African identity. We call on all Ethiopian parties to
embrace it and save the precious lives of the people of
Tigray, protect their national peace and once again be
an anchor of regional security.
As we have done in closed meetings, we reiterate
once again that the Council should always listen to
Africa when it comes to African issues. The Council
should also allow the continent the space to resolve
its challenges with the support of the international
community. We do not make that assertion because
we are infallible; rather, it is because Africa today has
a realizable vision of itself growing into a peaceful,
united, independent and prosperous community of
nations. We suffer the most from our challenges and
gain the most from solving them.
It is therefore critical that the Security Council as
a whole and its members understand that this debate
should encourage and support African solutions,
meaning, in this instance, Ethiopian solutions starting
in the order of ceasefire, humanitarian delivery,
dialogue, reconciliation and responsibility. Among the
tools Africa has built is an African Commission on
Human and Peoples’ Rights. We note the launch of a
commission of inquiry on Tigray on 17 June. We look
forward to its thorough investigations, which will allow
for the perpetrators of atrocities to be held to account.
We also look forward to its findings supporting the
cause of the Ethiopian people, establishing the truth of
what has happened in Tigray and using that truth to
build a stronger Ethiopia.
We as Africa will not agree now or in the future
for this debate to be turned into a platform that
undermines the people and State of Ethiopia. Now
is the time for careful diplomacy, the rapid scale-up
of the humanitarian response, prioritizing people,
appreciation of regional stability and the curbing of
misinformation and disinformation.
We recall the heights of greatness that the
civilization of Ethiopia, like others in Africa, has
achieved. We know that disruptions and destruction
have occurred in our history. We suffer our challenges
today, as Ethiopia is presently doing, but our spiritual
yearning for reconciliation and unity is unquenchable.

21-1786711/19

S/PV.8812

Peace and security in Africa

In saying that, we, the A3+1, conclude by
reaffirming our respect for and commitment to the
sovereignty and territorial integrity of Ethiopia. We
stand in solidarity with the Government and the people
of Ethiopia at this defining moment in their pursuit of
sustainable peace that is conducive to nation-building
and prosperity.
Mrs. Buenrostro Massieu (Mexico) (spoke in
Spanish): As this is the first meeting of the Security
Council under the presidency of France for July, I
convey to you, Sir, the full support of the delegation
of Mexico in carrying out this month’s work. I am also
grateful to Estonia for all its work during the month of
June. Mexico also expresses its thanks to the presidency
for convening this afternoon’s meeting and appreciates
the briefings by Under-Secretary-General DiCarlo
and Acting Under-Secretary-General Rajasingham.
We welcome the presence of Lord Tariq Ahmad of
Wimbledon, Minister of State for the Commonwealth,
the United Nations and South Asia, and the Permanent
Representative of Ethiopia.
After eight months of clashes, the situation in
Tigray is undoubtedly complex. The humanitarian
consequences are cause for great concern. The conflict
has already left thousands of people dead, displaced
millions and forced hundreds of thousands to flee,
some to the Sudan, and placed increased pressure
on that country, which is going through a fragile
transitional phase.
Tigray and other parts of Ethiopia are undergoing
the effects of the triple threat of climate shock, a plague
of locusts and the coronavirus disease pandemic.
With the conflict, we are at a crossroads. Continued
hostilities, leading to a second disruption of the
harvest season, together with the persistent hindrance
to humanitarian access, would greatly increase the
likelihood of widespread famine. The weakened
hospital infrastructure is at risk of collapse, thereby
increasing the danger of the spread of communicable
and preventable diseases. Ethnic and intercommunal
tensions could be exacerbated, and conflict could
spread not only to other parts of Ethiopia, but to the
rest of the Horn of Africa.
Mexico is concerned about and, as a country,
condemns all attacks on civilians and humanitarian
personnel. The attacks in Togoga, which resulted
in dozens of civilian casualties and more than 180
wounded, as well as attacks on personnel of Doctors
12/19

02/07/2021

Without Borders, are simply unacceptable, as is the
reported blockade of medical personnel seeking to
provide assistance to the wounded. Let us be frank and
clear — that represents an unacceptable violation of
international humanitarian law. It is as simple as that.
Given the many demands on the ground, it is
particularly outrageous that those whose role is to assist
the population are being targeted, which includes entering
offices and confiscating the telecommunications
equipment of United Nations agencies. It is therefore
crucial that there be accountability for what has
happened in the context of the conflict, especially
concerning the multiple allegations of violations of
international humanitarian and human rights law. An
immediate, impartial and independent investigation is
crucial to determining the facts and providing justice.
Mexico welcomes the 28 June announcement by the
Government of Ethiopia of a humanitarian ceasefire in
Tigray, and urges all other parties to the conflict to cease
all hostilities, guarantee unrestricted humanitarian
access regardless of ethnicity or political affiliations
and refrain from interfering with or damaging critical
infrastructure, such as communication facilities, bridges
and roads, which would cut off the area and undermine
the delivery of supplies. Mexico, my country, calls for
the withdrawal of Eritrean forces from Ethiopia.
The parties to the conflict must think about the
consequences of their actions during the past months
and acknowledge that there is no military solution.
Mexico calls on all parties to seek a settlement through
inclusive dialogue, with a view to beginning the process
of national reconciliation and reconstruction.
Lastly, it is also essential to ensure continued
regional and subregional involvement and mediation,
as well as the support of the Security Council for all
activities promoting political dialogue.
Mr. Dai Bing (China) (spoke in Chinese): At the
outset, I congratulate France on assuming the presidency
of the Security Council for this month, and I would
like to thank Estonia for having successfully presided
over the Council last month. I thank Under-SecretaryGeneral DiCarlo and Acting Under-Secretary-General
Rajasingham for their briefings. I welcome the presence
at this meeting of the Permanent Representative of
Ethiopia, Ambassador Taye Atskeselassie Amde.
Ethiopia is an anchor of stability in the Horn of
Africa and is vital to regional peace and security. A
21-17867

02/07/2021

Peace and security in Africa

peaceful and stable Ethiopia is the shared aspiration
of all Ethiopians, and other African countries and
the international community at large desire nothing
less. China has been closely following with concern
the situation in the Tigray region. The Government
of Ethiopia recently announced a unilateral ceasefire
in the state of Tigray to restore normalcy in farming
and humanitarian operations in the region, which
China welcomes.
We look forward to a comprehensive ceasefire in
Tigray and support the parties concerned to resolve
their differences through political dialogue so that
all people in Ethiopia, including those in the state of
Tigray, can enjoy peace and stability on their path
towards development and prosperity. China supports
the African Union’s continued constructive role and
welcomes the assistance extended to Ethiopia by the
Chairperson of the AU Commission, Mr. Moussa
Faki Mahamat.
For some time, the Government of Ethiopia has
been actively responding to the humanitarian needs
in Tigray, offering relief to the population in distress,
reopening the local economy, returning life to normal
and providing full humanitarian access with positive
results. Humanitarian operations in Tigray are
dogged by dire shortages of resources, which makes it
imperative for the international community to scale up
its emergency humanitarian assistance. In this process,
the humanitarian principles of the United Nations must
be fully respected.
The Chinese Government’s food aid will soon be
arriving, and coronavirus disease vaccines donated by
China to Ethiopia are also benefiting the Tigrayans.
China appreciates the tremendous amount of work done
by international humanitarian agencies to alleviate the
plight of the local population, strongly condemns the
attacks against humanitarian workers and notes that the
Government of Ethiopia has launched an investigation
into those attacks. Currently, Ethiopia’s effort to
keep peace and development on track continues to be
challenged in many ways.
China is also closely following the developments
in Tigray. However, the Tigray issue is by and large
an internal affair of Ethiopia, and we believe in the
wisdom and ability of the Ethiopian people to find an
appropriate solution. The international community,
while providing assistance, must fully respect the
sovereignty and leadership of Ethiopia, as the purpose

S/PV. 8812

of such assistance is to work together to help the country
overcome its difficulties and maintain peace and
stability in both Ethiopia and the region. When dealing
with this issue, the Security Council should carefully
and prudently calibrate the timing and approach taken
to ensure that whatever action the Council takes
contributes to improving the situation in Tigray, rather
than having the opposite effect. China stands ready to
work with the rest of the international community to
that end.
Mr. Jürgenson (Estonia): I thank Under-SecretaryGeneral DiCarlo and Acting Under-Secretary-General
Rajasingham for their briefings. I welcome the timely
holding of the first open Security Council on the
situation in Tigray.
The declaration of a ceasefire by the Ethiopian
Government is a welcome first step towards the
resolution of the conflict in Tigray. It is essential that
it be followed by the immediate cessation of hostilities
and that all parties adhere to international humanitarian
law and international human rights law. Urgent, safe and
unhindered humanitarian access is needed and essential
services such as electricity and telecommunications,
must be restored to enable humanitarian workers to
provide help.
The food insecurity situation in Tigray is
deteriorating every day, and some regions already face
famine. Food aid must be allowed to be delivered to
those in need without delay. For a sustainable solution
to food insecurity, the immediate cessation of hostilities
is vital to allow farmers to plant crops.
We condemn the violence against humanitarian
workers and their assets, as that is against international
humanitarian law. The brutal killings of three
representatives of Médecins Sans Frontières must be
investigated immediately and the perpetrators brought
to justice. There is also no justification for illegal
entry into the premises of humanitarian agencies or for
dismantling their communications equipment.
We are worried that the situation in Tigray continues
to be volatile and that civilians bear the brunt of the
conflict. We were reminded of that again last week
when an air strike near Mekelle killed approximately
80 civilians and injured approximately 200. Targeting
civilians and blocking medical aid are completely
unacceptable. We call for an urgent and independent
investigation into the incident.

21-1786713/19

S/PV.8812

Peace and security in Africa

Reports of continued violations and abuses of
international humanitarian law and international human
rights law, including widespread sexual and genderbased violence, are deeply worrisome. The commitment
of the Government of Ethiopia to engage with United
Nations mechanisms in investigating alleged violations
and abuses is welcome. We urge all parties to ensure
unfettered access to investigators.
We are concerned about numerous violations
committed by Eritrean troops and call for their
immediate withdrawal. The clearly destabilizing role of
Eritrean troops, including by obstructing humanitarian
aid, has been widely reported.
It important that the end of fighting not be
temporary, but followed by a comprehensive, inclusive
and credible political process, with the aim of national
reconciliation.
Finally, it is clear that the ongoing conflict in
Tigray constitutes a threat to international peace and
security, which is why it is vital that the issue remain a
priority on the Security Council’s agenda.
Mr. Tirumurti (India): I thank Under-SecretaryGeneral Rosemary DiCarlo and Acting UnderSecretary-General for Humanitarian Affairs and
Emergency Relief Coordinator Ramesh Rajasingham
for their briefings on recent developments in the Tigray
region in Ethiopia. I also welcome the presence of His
Excellency Lord Tariq Ahmad of Wimbledon and of the
Permanent Representative of Ethiopia at this meeting.
The people of the Tigray region in Ethiopia have
suffered during the eight-month-long fighting. The
announcement of a humanitarian ceasefire in the
Tigray region is therefore a welcome development.
We commend the Government of Ethiopia for taking
that decision and welcome the measures it has taken
to address the humanitarian situation. That positive
step should help ease tensions and the suffering of
the people. We hope that today’s meeting will help
de-escalate the situation on the ground and bring about
reconciliation and peace in the region.
We also believe that the presence of external armed
actors in the Tigray region militates against a return
to peace, and we call for an end to it. It is important
that all stakeholders respect the ceasefire, allow
humanitarian aid to reach all those in need and allow for
regular farming activities to take place. The ceasefire
period must be used for scaling up humanitarian aid
14/19

02/07/2021

immediately, which must reach those areas where access
has been difficult due to the violence. We continue
to urge all humanitarian agencies and the authorities
to scale up and coordinate to bridge the gaps on the
ground, especially since a cumulative set of factors has
made the situation worse.
We appreciate the fact that Ethiopian authorities
have not only provided humanitarian assistance but
have also granted humanitarian access to a majority
of areas under stress. We encourage them to continue
on that path. We also underscore the importance of
adhering to the United Nations guiding principles for
humanitarian assistance. We also call for the protection
of all humanitarian workers.
India calls for restraint and engagement by all
stakeholders in a spirit of dialogue and reconciliation.
We urge that the space provided by the humanitarian
ceasefire be used to open channels of communication,
pursue dialogue and find a peaceful and sustainable
solution. All stakeholders must desist from rhetoric and
threats, spreading misinformation and raising tensions
during the ceasefire. Instead, steps must be taken by all
stakeholders to disengage and reduce tensions and work
towards the restoration of normalcy in the lives of the
people in the affected region.
We call on the Ethiopian Government to sustain the
ceasefire and find a way to address the conflict in a
manner that serves the interests of all of its people, in
line with the federal constitutional provisions. We also
encourage the Government of Ethiopia to follow up on
its commitment to investigate all allegations of human
rights violations and to persist in efforts to hold the
perpetrators to account, in accordance with the law. We
look forward to an early conclusion of the investigation
by the Ethiopian Human Rights Commission and the
Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for
Human Rights.
In conclusion, India reiterates its strong commitment
to the unity, sovereignty, independence and territorial
integrity of Ethiopia.
Mr. Nebenzia (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): At the outset, we congratulate France on its
assumption of the presidency of the Security Council
for the month of July and thank Estonia for its able
leadership of the Council in June.
We listened closely to the briefings on the situation
in Tigray, delivered by Under-Secretary General
21-17867

02/07/2021

Peace and security in Africa

DiCarlo and the Acting Under-Secretary-General
for Humanitarian Affairs and Emergency Relief
Coordinator, Ramesh Rajasingham. We welcome
Lord Tariq Ahmad of Wimbledon and the Permanent
Representative of Ethiopia, Taye Atskeselassie Amde,
to today’s meeting.
At the outset, I would like to express our regret
about the format of today’s meeting and to caution our
colleagues against using it to further destabilize an
already complex situation in Tigray and weaken the
political position of federal authorities. We believe that
the topic being discussed today is an internal issue in
Ethiopia. Let us not forget that.
We are closely following developments in the
complex military and political situation. We believe that
the unilateral decision taken by the federal Government
of Ethiopia on 28 June to declare an immediate cessation
of hostilities in Tigray was a step in the right direction.
We hope that all opposing sides will demonstrate the
necessary political will to help stop the bloodshed,
improve the humanitarian situation and gradually
restore socioeconomic stability. That would also allow
crops to be planted and internally displaced persons to
return home.
We call on all partners of Addis Ababa to support
the steps taken by the Ethiopian Government to restore
peace in the region and for life to return to normal.
We also believe that, in order to resolve the conflict
in Ethiopia, Ethiopians themselves must play a leading
role — with assistance, first and foremost, from the
African community.
New regional developments should not distract
our attention from the serious socioeconomic issues in
Tigray. In recent months, the Government of Ethiopia
has made a substantial contribution to rebuilding
infrastructure that was destroyed and to meeting
humanitarian needs in the region. According to
information available, the Government has spent more
than $2.5 billion on those efforts.
We call on the Office for the Coordination of
Humanitarian Affairs and humanitarian agencies
present in the region to build on those efforts, pursuant
to General Assembly resolution 46/182 and in strict
compliance with the guiding principles for humanitarian
assistance. We expect the humanitarian community to
develop an objective assessment of the humanitarian
situation in Tigray and define the real needs of the
population in the region.

S/PV. 8812

We are aware that a group of Western States put
forward a draft resolution on the human rights situation
in Tigray at the forty-seventh session of the Human
Rights Council in Geneva. In our view, the draft
resolution is too geared towards blaming the leadership
of Ethiopia. While sharing the concern over the human
rights issues caused by the conflict in Tigray, we
believe that such a document should aim not at accusing
and punishing, but rather at preventing and helping to
overcome human rights violations, no matter what side
may commit them.
In conclusion, let me say that Russia is ready to
continue promoting normalization in Tigray. We are
convinced that politicizing this issue is unacceptable.
The situation in Tigray must remain an internal affair
of Ethiopia’s. Interference by the Security Council in
resolving the issue would be counterproductive.
Mr. Dang (Viet Nam): I congratulate you,
Mr. President, on assuming the presidency of the
Security Council for this month, and I thank Estonia
for an excellency presidency last month.
I would like to thank Under-Secretary-General
Rosemary DiCarlo and Acting Under-SecretaryGeneral Ramesh Rajasingham for their insightful
briefings. I welcome the Minister of State of the United
Kingdom and Ambassador Amde, the representative of
Ethiopia, to our meeting today.
The situation in the Tigray region of Ethiopia
has witnessed complicated developments over the
past months. It has resulted in multifaceted hardship
for millions of people. We share the concerns of the
international community, including those expressed
by the Secretary-General, about the alarming levels
of violence and killing of civilians, including women,
children and humanitarian workers, as well as the
destruction of civilian infrastructure indispensable
to the civilian population in Tigray. Those acts of
violence are totally unacceptable and run counter
to international humanitarian law. We call for an
immediate cessation of hostilities, the upholding of
responsibilities under international humanitarian law
and ensuring the protection of civilians, especially
women and children, with a view to quickly addressing
the mounting difficulties that the people have to face
after months of hostilities.
The ongoing humanitarian situation in Tigray
is of great concern. We welcome the efforts by the
Government of Ethiopia to help alleviate those

21-1786715/19

S/PV.8812

Peace and security in Africa

difficulties. The conflict is resulting in other systemic
issues that may lead to further deterioration, especially
the high risk of famine. Children are suffering the most.
UNICEF projects that 56,000 children under the age
of 5 in Tigray will need treatment this year for severe
acute malnutrition. In inaccessible parts of Tigray,
33,000 children will face imminent death unless they
are given immediate help.
In the face of such dangers, we call on all parties
to fulfil their obligations under humanitarian law to
prevent a famine from occurring. It is now important
to ensure the safe, effective and efficient delivery of,
and access to, humanitarian assistance in the Tigray
region and bordering areas. In that process, the needs
assessment and the delivery of humanitarian assistance
should take into account local specificities and take
place in consultation with the Government of Ethiopia.
While responding to humanitarian needs is an
urgent task, it is equally important to earnestly strive
for the peaceful resolution of differences among the
parties concerned. The current crisis is rooted in
complicated political, historical, ethnic and cultural
reasons. That background requires that the relevant
parties patiently engage in dialogue and reconciliation
rather than further hatred and differences.
It is high time for a compromise to be made towards
a comprehensive solution for Ethiopia’s sustained
stability and development, on the basis of the principles
of the international law and the Charter of the United
Nations. We call on Ethiopian authorities and all other
parties concerned to give the highest priority to the
interests of their people. The international community,
including the Security Council, should support all
efforts to that end, in full respect of the independence,
sovereignty, unity and territorial integrity of Ethiopia.
In that connection, we welcome the recent ceasefire
declaration by the Government of Ethiopia and expect
all parties to make it a long-term and comprehensive
one. Furthermore, we call on all parties concerned
to take advantage of this opportunity to engage
in constructive dialogue and refrain from further
bloodshed and confrontational rhetoric that might drive
the parties further apart. We believe that is the only
viable path for finding common ground and a peaceful
way out of the current crisis in Ethiopia.
The conflict and situation in Tigray have had certain
impacts on the region that require the relevant parties
to exercise self-restraint. Under the circumstances, the
16/19

02/07/2021

principles of non-interference in the internal affairs
of States and the settlement of disputes by peaceful
means should always be upheld. In that regard, we
support the constructive engagement of neighbouring
countries and regional organizations, especially the
African Union and the Intergovernmental Authority on
Development, in supporting the parties concerned to
promote dialogue, build trust and provide humanitarian
assistance for Ethiopia so as to help its people return to
normal life.
The efforts so far by various humanitarian agencies,
including those of the United Nations, are highly
commendable. We call on the international community
to continue to support the Ethiopian people in their
pursuit of peace, reconciliation and the reconstruction
of their country.
Ms. Juul (Norway): I too thank the briefers.
Eight months into the armed conflict in Tigray,
the situation remains critical and highly unpredictable.
Humanitarian needs are overwhelming. Up to 900,000
people are likely suffering from near-famine conditions,
with millions more at risk. Critical aid is being blocked,
and humanitarians are prevented from saving lives. The
current situation is extremely fluid, and information
is difficult to obtain. I would like to address four key
points in my intervention today.
First, we reiterate our call for unrestricted and
unconditional humanitarian access into and within all
parts of Tigray. We welcome the federal Government’s
declaration of a unilateral ceasefire on humanitarian
grounds and call on all parties to move towards a
permanent ceasefire. However, despite that positive
step, we have received credible reports from several
border crossings that humanitarian actors are still
being denied access. Let me be clear: the primary
responsibility for the protection of its citizens rests
with the State. The central Government of Ethiopia
must ensure humanitarian access into Tigray.
Humanitarian actors must immediately be allowed
to cross the front lines with personnel and supplies.
The restoration of basic infrastructure — electricity,
banking, telecommunications and access to fuel and
the Internet — is critical to scale up the humanitarian
response. All parties must comply with their obligations
under international humanitarian law, respect the
protected status of aid workers and civilians and refrain
from unacceptable destruction or removal of objects
that are indispensable for the survival of the population.
21-17867

02/07/2021

Peace and security in Africa

Secondly, impunity cannot be tolerated. We
condemn in the strongest terms the reported killings
of civilians and the widespread and systematic acts of
sexual and gender-based violence. All violations and
abuses of human rights and violations of international
humanitarian law should be documented and verified,
with a view to the future investigation and prosecution
of those responsible. Accountability for crimes and
gross violations, including individual accountability
under criminal law, must be ensured. That will be
key to reinstate public trust in justice and security
institutions and to lay the foundation for reconciliation
and sustainable peace. In that regard, welcome the joint
investigation by the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Human Rights and the Ethiopian
Human Rights Commission, as well as the independent
commission of inquiry of the African Commission
on Human and Peoples Rights, into alleged atrocities
in Tigray. We expect that all findings will be used to
ensure accountability.
Thirdly, the conflict in Tigray threatens regional
stability. We call on neighbouring States to refrain
from aggravating the situation. The continued presence
of Eritrean troops in Tigray is a threat to regional
peace and security and must end. We call for their
immediate withdrawal.
Fourthly, the conflict in Tigray cannot be resolved
by military means. The recent elections in Ethiopia took
place in very challenging conditions. But, as we can see
in this situation, elections alone cannot bring about a
democratic transition or resolve the political challenges
currently being faced. A meaningful, inclusive national
dialogue is needed to enable Ethiopia’s democratic
development and to reduce conflict across the country.
We strongly urge all actors in Tigray to work across
divides and prepare the ground for a possible dialogue.
A political solution is the only way to sustainable peace
in Tigray — and in Ethiopia as a whole.
The President (spoke in French): I shall now
make a statement in my capacity as the representative
of France.
I thank Ms. DiCarlo and Mr. Rajasingham for their
briefings. I would like to stress four points.
After eight months of conflict, the retaking of
Mekelle by Tigray forces shows that there will be no
military solution to the crisis. The announcement of a
ceasefire could be a major development if it is rapidly

S/PV. 8812

consolidated. We call upon all parties to act responsibly
by expressing without delay their commitment to a
permanent cessation of hostilities and all forms of
violence against the population. Eritrean forces must
immediately leave Ethiopian territory, in accordance
with the request made by Ethiopian authorities last
March. We take note of the information regarding the
redeployment of those forces to the border, which must
be quickly verified.
Secondly, it is urgent to ensure humanitarian
access. As the situation in Tigray grows more alarming
by the day, it is essential to address the immense needs
and restore electricity, communications and banking
services. We call for the lifting of all impediments,
particularly by reopening the Mekelle airport, the
granting of long-term visas to humanitarian personnel
and the authorization of satellite communications. Vital
infrastructure for the delivery of aid must be preserved.
France renews its condemnation of the deadly
attacks on Médecins Sans Frontières teams. At least
12 humanitarian workers have lost their lives since
the beginning of the conflict. Those crimes must not
go unpunished. The protection of humanitarian and
medical personnel is an obligation that applies to all
the parties.
Thirdly, preserving the unity and territorial
integrity of Ethiopia is a priority. The launching of
a national dialogue including representatives of all
parties and all regions must contribute to that. We call
on all political and military forces in Ethiopia to refrain
from any action that could add to instability.
Reconciliation also requires the fight against
impunity. It is imperative that the joint investigation by
the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner
for Human Rights and the Ethiopian Human Rights
Commission into the serious human rights violations
committed in Tigray continue. It is important
that credible judicial proceedings be conducted in
full transparency.
Finally, France is concerned at the impact of the
crisis on regional stability. We call upon countries in
the region to resolve their differences through dialogue
and to respond constructively to the mediation efforts
of the African Union.
I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.
I give the floor to the representative of Ethiopia.

21-1786717/19

S/PV.8812

Peace and security in Africa

Mr. Amde (Ethiopia): Let me begin by
congratulating you, Mr. President, on assuming the
presidency of the Security Council for the month of
July. I assure you of my delegation’s full support.
My country, Ethiopia, is undergoing a significant
transformation that requires delicate and contextdriven handling of its domestic affairs. In our bilateral
meetings with members of the Council and the
informal dialogue we had last month, we exchanged
views and concerns — all of which the Government of
Ethiopia approached and acted upon in a constructive
manner. Therefore, I am surprised by the rationale in
calling for this open meeting. We are fully cognizant
of the responsibility of the Council to work towards
international peace and security. The very first
requisite for that onerous responsibility is to encourage
dialogue and prevent escalation through constructive
engagement and the reinforcement of achievements.
This meeting has been called at a time when the
Government has taken bold measures and political
decisions to meet the needs and well-being of its people
affected by the law enforcement operation in Tigray.
That measure should have encouraged our friends to
give support and de-escalate the unhelpful pressure.
Equally, we wish to express our appreciation to
everyone for recognizing our resolve for peace behind
the difficult initiative we have taken.
Since the Council held the informal interactive
dialogue on the humanitarian situation in Ethiopia,
there are critical developments that deserve the
Council’s recognition and constructive outlook.
On 28 June, the Government of Ethiopia decided to
cease the active military engagement of the Ethiopian
National Defense Force in the Tigray region. That
decision for a humanitarian ceasefire was reached after
a concerted deliberation with various stakeholders and
partners. We hope that magnanimous and far-sighted
decision will not be wasted by the irresponsible conduct
of the Tigray People’s Liberation Front (TPLF) group,
which the Government of Ethiopia opted to tolerate for
the sake of the people of Tigray and to alleviate the
humanitarian situation in the region.
The decision to cease military operations is hoped
to create a conducive environment for humanitarian
operations in Tigray. It will also pave the way for an
inclusive national dialogue. The TPLF group that we
were pursuing continued its belligerence to protect a
few individuals. In furtherance of its agenda, it began
18/19

02/07/2021

conscripting young and elderly civilians, women and
men, to fight highly trained and armed men of their
country. That exposed people in Tigray to a military
confrontation they were not prepared for. Furthermore,
it posed a risk for disruption to the agricultural season.
The group’s ethnically charged tactics of pitting the
people against the Government have also been found to
be detrimental to our innate social fabric.
As a result, the Government of Ethiopia, as the
bearer of the primary responsibility to protect its
people, made a difficult political decision to suspend
active military operations in favour of safeguarding
the unity, sovereignty and territorial integrity of the
Ethiopian State.
We believe we have now created a space for
unfettered humanitarian assistance and the proper
conduct of the agricultural planting season. In addition,
we will augment humanitarian efforts in the region,
including the distribution of food and non-food
items from warehouses across Tigray. The National
Disaster Risk Management Commission and the five
humanitarian agencies deployed in all woredas of the
region are set to resume functioning. Furthermore,
we are in the process of adapting the humanitarian
assistance guidelines and coordination mechanism to
the new developments. Public services will also resume
once we create a situation for the safe operation of the
infrastructure and its operators.
Ethiopia faced the inevitable journey of addressing
the political underpinnings of what we had experienced
last November when our defense forces were attacked
from within. The immediate need lies in creating
an environment for the delivery of much-needed
humanitarian assistance. In that regard, the Government
will continue to exert maximum efforts and allocate the
available resources to that end.
We welcome and appreciate the concern expressed
by Council members for our compatriots in Tigray
who have regrettably sustained the burden of the law
enforcement operation due to the cowardly tactics of
the TPLF group.
It is important to underline that the wounding
and suffering of any Ethiopian is unacceptable.
The shortcomings in preventing that suffering are
not something that the Government belittles. In
the same vein, we take our responsibility to ensure
accountability and remedy those problems with
maximum seriousness. For absolute clarity, I would
21-17867

02/07/2021

Peace and security in Africa

like to reaffirm my Government’s firm commitment to
those core responsibilities of the State.
There certainly are internal as well as external factors
that play into the security challenges we are facing.
The external security threats against us — through no
fault of provocation on our part — are complicating our
internal political dynamics and distracting us from key
national priorities. I wish to implore the Council to act
with full awareness of the external challenges Ethiopia
is facing.
Following the organization of peaceful and
successful national elections this month, efforts are
now geared towards building a strong, united and
democratic country. In that connection, the Ethiopian
Government is developing a road map for inclusive
dialogue to ensure lasting peace and stability.
I want to reaffirm my Government’s resolve to
ensuring accountability for human rights abuses and
crimes committed in the Tigray region. We will make
sure that impunity is not tolerated. We remain committed
to working with all bilateral and multilateral partners
through genuine partnership and an understanding that
the Government of Ethiopia is more than capable of
overcoming those challenges. We encourage Council
members to play a constructive role in supporting
the Ethiopian Government in the implementation of
the humanitarian ceasefire. We again thank Council
members that have welcomed that positive gesture.
In contrast, I would like to make it clear that the
political pressure and hasty bilateral coercive measures
against Ethiopia are unacceptable and violate basic

S/PV. 8812

tenets of international law. Excessive pressure will
push this ancient country of 110 million people to the
precipice and deprive it of any possibility of recovery.
The people of Ethiopia are indeed watching and should
not perceive that our pronouncements are pushing them
to the abyss and endless political division. For Ethiopia,
this is a moment of introspection, a genuine revisiting
of our successes and challenges.
The main issue is how to heal our wounds. There is
unfinished grieving and mourning, such as with regard
to the Mai Kadra massacre by the TPLF youth group
and the suffering of the people of Wollega in Tigray,
who have been evicted from their ancestral land over
the past 30 years. Therefore, there needs to be proper
closure. The political culture of impunity should have
closure. We know that overcoming our own challenges
is what exults us as a nation. What would alleviate us
as a nation is our commitment and the commitment of
our people to stand for peace. We might be poor, but we
also have hope. We are people with cherished values.
For Ethiopia, hope is still alive.
In conclusion, I hope the Council will look at
the situation in my country in the right perspective,
understand the magnitude of the challenges we face
and recognize the important step we have taken
in that regard. What we really need at the moment
is the support, understanding and solidarity of the
international community. That is why I want to conclude
by appealing to international partners and friends of our
country to continue scaling up humanitarian support to
meet humanitarian needs across Ethiopia.
The meeting rose at 4.45 p.m.

21-1786719/19
