RESOLUTIONS ADOPTED ON THE REPORTS OF THE FOURTH COMMITTEE

CONTENTS
Page

742 (VIII). Factors which should be taken into account in deciding whether
a Territory is or is not a Territory whose people have not yet attained a full
measure of self-government (27 November 1953) (item 33) . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
743 (VIII). Educational conditions in Non-Self-Governing Territories (27
November 1953) (item 32) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
744 (VIII). Association of representatives from Non-Self-Governing Territories in the work of the Committee on Information from Non-Self-Governirtg
Territories (27 November 1953) (item 32) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
745 (VIII). Representation on the Committee on Information from Non-SelfGoverning Territories (27 November 1953) (item 32) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
746 (VIII). Employment of international staff from Non-Self-Governing and
Trust Territories (27 November 1953) (item 32) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
747 (VIII). Cessation of the transmission of information under Article 73 e of
the Charter in respect of the Netherlands Antilles and Surinam (27 November 1953) (item 34 (a)) .. . . . .. . . .. . . . .. . .. . . .. . . . . . .. .. . . .. . .. . .. ..
748 (VIII). Cessation of the transmission of information under Article 73 e
of the Charter in respect of Puerto Rico (27 November 1953) ( item 34 ( b))
749 (VIII). Question of South West Africa (28 November 1953) (item 36)..
750 (VIII). The Togoland unification problem (8 December 1953) (item 31)..
751 (VIII). Revision of the Questionnaire relating to Trust Territories (9 December 1953) (item 13) .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. . .. . .. .. .. . .. .. . . .. . .. .. ..
752 (VIII). Attainment by the Trust Territories of the objective of self-government or independence (9 December 1953) (item 13) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
753 (VIII). Educational advancement in Trust Territories: offers by Member
States of study and training facilities (9 December 1953) (item 13) . . . . . .
754 (VIII). Dissemination of information on the United Nations and on the
International Trusteeship System in Trust Territories (9 December 1953)
(item 13) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
755 (VIII). Attainment of independence by the Trust Territory of Somaliland
under Italian administralion by 1960 (9 December 1953) {item 13) . . . . . . . .
756 (VIII). Report of the Trusteeship Council (9 December 1953) (item 13)..
757 (VIII). Petitions from the Ngoa-Ekele Community, Cameroons under
French administration, concerning adjustment of their land complaint (9 December 1953) (item 13) .. .. .. . . . .. .. . .. .. .. . .. .. .. .. . . .. . .. . . .. .. ..
758 (VIII). Hearing of petitioners from the Trust Territory of the Cameroons
under French administration (9 December 1953) (item 13) . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
742 (VIII). Factors which should be taken into
account in deciding whether a Territory is or
is not a Territory whose people have not yet
attained a full measure of self-government

21
24
24
24
25
25
25
26
28
29
30
30
31
31
32
32
32

Territory has or has not attained a full measure of
self-government,
Having regard to the competence of the General
Assembly to consider the principles that should guide
the United Nations and the Member States in the implementation of obligations arising from Chapter XI
of the Charter and to make recommendations in connexion with them,
Having examined the report 1 of the Ad Hoe Committee on Factors (Non-Self-Governing Territories)
set up by resolution 648 (VII),

The General Assembly,
Bearing in mind the principles embodied in the Declaration regarding Non-Self-Governing Territories and
the objectives set forth in Chapter XI of the Charter,
Recalling the provisions of resolutions 567 (VI)
and 648 (VII), adopted by the General Assembly on
18 January and 10 December 1952 respectively, indicating the value of establishing a list of factors which
should be taken into account in deciding whether a

1

21

See document A/2428.

General Assembly-Eighth Session

22

1. Takes note of the conclusions of the report of the
Ad H oc Committee on Factors (Non-Self-Governing
Territories) ;
2. Approves the list of factors as adopted by the
Fourth Committee;
3. Recommends that the annexed list of factors
should be used by the General Assembly and the
Administering Members as a guide in determining
whether any Territory, due to changes in its constitutional status, is or is no longer within the scope of
Chapter XI of the Charter, in order that, in view of
the documentation provided under resolution 222 (III)
of 3 November 1948, a decision may be taken by the
General Assembly on the continuation or cessation of
the transmission of information required by Chapter
XI of the Charter;
4. Reasserts that each concrete case should be considered and decided upon in the light of the particular
circumstances of that case and taking into account the
right of self-determination of peoples;
5. Considers that the validity of any form of association between a Non-Self-Governing Territory and
a metropolitan or any other country essentially depends
on the freely expressed will of the people at the time
of the taking of the decision ;
6. Considers that the manner in which Territories
referred to in Chapter XI of the Charter can become
fully self-governing is primarily through the attainment of independence, although it is recognized that
self-government can also be achieved by association
with another State or group of States if this is done
freely and on the basis of absolute equality;
7. Reaffirms that the factors, while serving as a
guide in determining whether the obligations as. set
forth in Chapter XI of the Charter shall exist, should
in no way be interpreted as a hindrance to the attainment of a full measure of self-government by a Non·se!f-Governing Territory;
8. Further reaffirms that, for a Territory to be
deemed self-governing in economic, social or educational affairs, it is essential that its people shall have
attained a full measure of self-government;
9. Instructs the Committee on Information from
Non-Self-Governing Territories to study any documentation transmitted hereafter under resolution 222 (III)
in the light of the list of factors approved by the
present resolution, and other relevant considerations
which may arise from each concrete case of cessation
of information;
10. Recommends that the Committee on Information from Non-Self-Governing Territories take the
initiative of proposing modifications at any time to
improve the list of factors, as may seem necessary in
the light of circumstances.
459th plenary meeting,
27 November 1953.

its external sovereignty and for the corresponding acts m the
administration of its internal affairs.
2. Eligibility for membership in the United Nations.
3. General international relations. Power to enter into direct
relations of every kind with other governments and with international institutions and to negotiate, sign and ratify international instruments.
4. National defence. Sovereign right to provide for its national defence.

B. lntemal self-government
1. Form of government. Complete freedom of the people
of the Territory to choose the form of government which they
desire.
2. Territorial government. Freedom from control or interference by the government of another State in respect of the
internal government (legislature, executive, judiciary, and
administration of the Territory).
3. Economic, social and cultural jurisdiction. Complete
autonomy in respect of economic, social and cultural affairs.
Second part
FACTORS INDICATIVE OF THE ATTAINMENT OF OTHER SEPARATE
SYSTEMS OF SELF-GOVERNMENT

General

A.

1. Opinion of the population. The opinion of the population
of the Territory, freely expressed by informed and democratic
processes, as to the status or change in status which they desire.
2. Freedom of choice. Freedom of choosing on the basis of
the right of self-determination of peoples between several possibilities, including independence.
3. Voluntary limitation of sovereignty. Degree of evidence
that the attribute or attributes of sovereignty which are not
individually exercised will be collectively exercised by the
larger entity thus associated and the freedom of the population
of a Territory which has associated itself with the metropolitan
country to modify at any time this status through the expression
of their will by democratic means.
4. Geographical considerations. Extent to which the relations
of the Non-Self-Governing Territory with the capital of the
metropolitan government may be affected by circumstances
arising out of their respective geographical positions, such as
separation by land, sea or other natural obstacles; and extent
to which the interests of boundary States may be affected,
bearing in mind the general principle of good-neighbourliness
referred to in Article 74 of the Charter.
5. Ethnic and cultural considerations. Extent to which the
populations are of different race, language or religion or have
a distinct cultural heritage, interests or aspirations, distinguishing them from the peoples of the country with which they freely
associate themselves.
6. Political advancement. Political advancement of the population sufficient to enable them to decide upon the future
destiny of the Territory with due knowledge.

International status

B.

FACTORS INDICATIVE OF THE ATTAINMENT OF INDEPENDENCE

I. General interndtional relations. Degree or extent to which
the Territory exercises the •power to enter freely into direct
relations of every kind with other governments and with international institutions and to negotiate, sign and ratify international instruments freely. Degree or exter.t to which the
metropolitan country is bound, through constitutional provisions
or legislative means, by the freely expressed wishes of the
Territory in negotiating, signing and ratifyinJ international
conventions which may influence· conditions in the Territory.
2. Change of political status. The right of the metropolitan
country or the Territory to change the political status of that
Territory in the light of the consideration whether that Territory is or is not subject to any claim or litigation on the part
of another State.
3. Eligibility for membership in the United Nations.

A. International status
1. International responsibility. Full international responsibility of the Territory for the acts inherent in the exercise of

Internal self-government
Territorial government. Nature and measure of control or
interference, if any, by the government of another State in

ANNEX
List o / Factors
FACTORS INDICATIVE OF THE ATTAINMENT OF INDEPENDENCE OR OF OT)IER SEPARATE SYSTEMS OF SELFGOVERNMENT

First part

C.

1.

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fourth Committee
respect of the internal government, for example, in respect of
the following :
Legislature: The enactment of laws for the Territory by an
indigenous body whet1'er fully elected by free and democratic
processes or lawfully constituted in a manner receiving the free
consent of the population;
Executive: The selection of members of the executive branch
of the government by the competent authority in the Territory
receiving consent of the indigenous population, whether that
authority is hereditary or elected, having regard also to the
nature and measure of control, if any, by an outside agency on
that authority, whether directly or indirectly exercised in the
constitution and conduct of the executive branch of the government;
Judiciary: The establishment of courts of law and the selection of judges.
2. Participation of the population. Effective participation of
the population in the government of the Territory: (a) Is there
an edequate and appropriate electoral and representative system?
(b) Is this electoral system conducted without direct or mdirect interference from a foreign government? •
3. Economic, social and cultural jurisdiction. Degree of
autonomy in respect of economic, social and cultural affairs, as
illustrated by the degree of freedom from economic pressure as
exercised, for example, by a foreign minority group which, by
virtue of the help of a foreign Power, has acquired a privileged
economic status prejudicial to the general economic interest of
the people of the Territory; and by the degree of freedom and
lack of discrimination against the indigenous population of the
Territory in social legislation and social developments.

Third part
FACTORS INDICATIVE OF THE FREE .ASSOCIATION OF A TERRITORY ON
EQUAi. BASIS WITH THE METROPOLITAN OR OTHER COUNTRY AS
AN INTEGRAL PART OF THAT COUNTRY OR IN ANY OTHER FORM

General
1. 0 pinion of the population. The opinion of the population
of the Territory, freely expressed by informed and democratic
processes, as to the status or change in status which they
desire.
2. Freedom of choice. The freedom of the population of a
Non-Self-Governing Territory which has associated itself with
the metropolitan country as an integral part of that country
or in any other form to modify this status through the expression of their will by democratic means.
3. Geographical considerations. Extent to which the relations
of the Territory with the capital of the central government
may be affected by circumstances arising out of their respective
geographical positions, such as separation' by land, sea or other
natural obstacles. The right of the metropolitan country or the
Territory to change the political status of that Territory in the
light of the consideration whether that Territory is or is not
subject to any claim or litigation on the part of another State.
4. Ethnic and cultural considerations. Extent to which the
population are of different race, language or religion or have
a distinct cultural heritage, interests or aspirations, distinguishing them from the peoples of the country with which they
freely associate themselves.
5. Political advancement. Political advancement of the population sufficient to enable them to decide upon the future destiny of the Territory with due knowledge.
6. Constitutional considerations. Association by virtue of a
treaty or bilateral agreement affecting the status of the Territory, taking into account (i) whether the constitutional guarantees extend equally to the associated Territory, (ii) whether
there are powers in certain matters constitutionally reserved
to the Territory or to the central authority, and (iii) whether
there is provision for the participation of the Territory on a
basis of equality in any changes in the constitutional system
of the State.
A.

B. Status
I. Legislative representation. Representation without discrimination in the central legislative organs on the same basis
as other inhabitants and regions.

23

2. Participation of the popitlation. Effective participation of
the population in the government of the Territory: (a) Is there
an adequate and appropriate electoral and representative system? ( b) Is this electoral system conducted without direct or
indirect interference from a foreign government?•
3. Citizenship. Citizenship without discrimination on the
same basis as other inhabitants.
4. Government officials. Eligibility of officials from the
Territory to all public offices of the central authority, by appointment or election, on the same basis as those from other
parts of the country.

C.

Internal constittttional conditions

I. Sttffrage. Universal and equal suffrage, and free periodic
elections, characterized by an absence of undue influence over
and coercion of the voter or of the imposition of disabilities on
particular political parties.b
2. Local rights and status. In a unitary system equal rights
and status for the inhabitants and local bodies of the Territory
as enjoyed by inhabitants and local bodies of other parts of the
country; in a federal system an identical degree of self-government for the inhabitants and local bodies of all parts of the
federation.
3. Local officials. Appointment or election of officials in the
Territory on the same basis as those in other parts of the
country.
4. Internal legislation. Local self-government of the same
scope and under the same conditions as enjoyed by other parts
of the country.
5. Economic, social and cttlt1'ral jurisdiction. Degree of
autonomy in respect of economic, social and cultural affairs, as
illustrated by the degree of freedom from economic pressure as
exercised, for example, by a foreign minority group which,
by virtue of the help of a foreign Power, has acquired a
privileged economic status prejudicial to the general economic
interest of the people of the Territory; and by the degree of
freedom and lack of discrimination against the indigenous population of the Territory in social legislation and social developments.
• For example, the following questions would be relevant:
(i) Has each adult inhabitant equal power (subject to special
safeguards for minorities) to determine the character of the
government of the Territory?
(ii) Is this power exercised freely, i.e., is there an absence
of undue influence over and coercion of the voter and of the
imposition of disabilities on particular political parties?
Some tests which can be used in the application of this factor
are as follows :
(a) The existence of effective moasures to ensure the democratic expres-sion of the will of the people;
( b) The existence of more than one political party in the
Territory;
( c) The existence of a secret ballot;
(d) The existence of legal prohibitions on the exercise of undemocratic practices in the course of elections ;
(e) The existence for the individual elector of a choice between candidates of differing political parties ;
(f) The absence of "martial law" and similar measures at
election times ;
(iii) Is each individual free to express his political opinions,
to support or oppose any political party or cause, and to criticize
the government of the day?
b For example, the following tests would be relevant:
(a) The existence of effective measures to ensure the democratic expression of the will of the people;
( b) The existence of more than one political party in the
Territory;
( c) The existence of a secret ballot ;
(d) The existence of legal prohibitions on the exercise of
undemocratic practices in the course of elections;
(e) The existence for the individual elector of a choice between candidates of differing political parties ;
(f) T)le absence of "martial law" and similar measures at
election times ;
(g) Freedom of each individual to express his political
opinions, to support or oppose any political party or cause, and
to criticize the government of the day.
