UNITED
NATIONS

S
Security Council
Distr.
GENERAL
S/PRST/1995/10
9 March 1995
ORIGINAL:

ENGLISH

STATEMENT BY THE PRESIDENT OF THE SECURITY COUNCIL

At the 3506th meeting of the Security Council, held on 9 March 1995, in
connection with the Council’s consideration of the item entitled "The situation
in Burundi", the President of the Security Council made the following statement
on behalf of the Council:
"The Security Council has considered the reports of its Mission to
Burundi which visited Bujumbura on 10 and 11 February 1995 and welcomes the
observations and recommendations contained in the report of the Mission
(S/1995/163). It expresses its appreciation to the Mission members for
their efforts.
"The Security Council recalls its earlier statements on the situation
in Burundi, in particular that of 31 January 1995 (S/PRST/1995/5). It
remains deeply concerned that a climate of insecurity continues to prevail
in Burundi. It condemns the activities of those, both within and outside
the country, who seek to nullify the agreed power-sharing arrangements
contained in the Convention of Government of 10 September 1994 by resorting
to undemocratic methods such as intimidation and incitement to violence, as
well as guerilla activities and subversive political activity. Such
actions have threatened peace, stability and national reconciliation.
"The Security Council reaffirms its support for the Convention of
Government and for the coalition Government established under it. In this
connection, it notes the appointment of the Prime Minister and his Cabinet
and urges all parties in Burundi to work together to ensure stability in
the country.
"The Security Council reaffirms the view that impunity is a
fundamental problem in Burundi, one which seriously endangers security in
the country, and stresses the importance it attaches to assistance being
given to help strengthen the national judicial system. In this context, it
underlines the role that could be played by an international commission of
inquiry into the 1993 coup attempt and into the massacres that followed,
established in accordance with the Convention of Government.

95-06767 (E)

090395

/...

S/PRST/1995/10
English
Page 2

"The Security Council strongly reaffirms its support for the
implementation of the provisions of the Convention of Government calling
for the holding of a national debate with the participation of all segments
of the society in Burundi, as a means of fostering political dialogue.
"The Security Council underlines the importance of assisting the
Government of Burundi in its efforts to restore stability and promote
national reconciliation. In this context, it encourages the SecretaryGeneral, in consultation with the Government of Burundi, to augment the
United Nations presence in the country, in order to assist the Government
of Burundi in strengthening the national judicial system, training civilian
police forces and establishing an effective administrative presence in the
provinces. It commends the important role played by the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General.
"The Security Council reiterates that improving the security situation
in Burundi must be given high priority. It encourages the High
Commissioner for Human Rights, in consultation with the Government of
Burundi and in close coordination with the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, to reinforce the office he has established in Burundi.
Consideration could also be given to the role human rights monitors could
play.
"The Security Council also recognizes the significant contribution
made by the Organization of African Unity (OAU) military observers. It
encourages the OAU, in consultation with the Government of Burundi, to
further increase their number and calls upon the international community to
assist the OAU in this regard.
"The Security Council further calls on all parties in Burundi to
cooperate with international observers and other personnel by ensuring
unimpeded access to all parts of the country.
"The Security Council requests the Secretary-General to continue to
keep it fully informed of developments in Burundi. The Security Council
will remain actively seized of the matter."

-----
