S/2017/902

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
25 October 2017
Original: English

Implementation of Security Council resolutions 2139 (2014),
2165 (2014), 2191 (2014), 2258 (2015) and 2332 (2016)
Report of the Secretary-General

I. Introduction
1.
The present report is the forty-fourth submitted pursuant to paragraph 17 of
Security Council resolution 2139 (2014), paragraph 10 of resolution 2165 (2014),
paragraph 5 of resolution 2191 (2014), paragraph 5 of resolution 2258 (2015) and
paragraph 5 of resolution 2332 (2016), in which the Council requested the
Secretary-General to report, every 30 days, on the implementation of the resolutions
by all parties to the conflict in the Syrian Arab Republic.
2.
The information contained herein is based on data available to agencies of the
United Nations system 1 and from the Government of the Syrian Arab Republic, as
well as from other Syrian and open sources. Data from agencies of the United
Nations system on their humanitarian deliveries have been reported for the period
from 1 to 30 September 2017.

II. Major developments
Box 1
Key points in September 2017
1.
Despite the reduction in civilian casualties and damage to civilian
infrastructure seen following the range of ceasefire and de -escalation agreements
that were reached since 4 May, military activities and instance s of significant
military escalation were reported in many areas, including across Idlib governorate
and eastern Ghutah, in Rif Dimashq governorate.
__________________
1

17-18406 (E)

Inputs provided from the Office of the United Nations High Commissi oner for Human Rights,
the United Nations Children’s Fund, the International Organization for Migration, the World
Food Programme, the World Health Organization, the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees, the United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees
in the Near East, the United Nations Population Fund, the Food and Agriculture Organization of
the United Nations, the United Nations Monitoring Mechanism for the Syrian Arab Republic, the
United Nations Mine Action Service and the Department of Political Affairs and the Office for
the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs of the Secretariat.

271017

*1718406*

S/2017/902

2.
As at the end of the reporting period, the United Nations estimated that 8,000
civilians remain trapped in Raqqah city. Fifty-eight people were reportedly killed by
airstrikes or gunfire during the month of September. At least 146 civilians have
reportedly been killed by landmines alone since June while trying to flee.
3.
On 5 September, the Syrian Ministry of Defence announced that Government
forces had broken the three-year-long siege imposed by the Islamic State in Iraq and
the Levant (ISIL) on the besieged parts of Dayr al-Zawr city, where 93,500 people
had been trapped and were relying on air drops for basic assistance.
4.
Military operations in Dayr al-Zawr governorate continued to impact civilians.
According to the displacement monitoring tracker of the United Nations and its
partners, air strikes and clashes resulted in over 100,000 people bei ng displaced,
mostly to other parts of Dayr al-Zawr governorate, with about 25,000 people
moving to Raqqah and Hasakah governorates. Many of those who remain in Dayr
al-Zawr cannot be reached with humanitarian assistance owing to the proximity of
fighting or the fact that areas continue to be under ISIL control.
5.
The United Nations and its partners received credible reports of eight attacks
that impacted health-care facilities and personnel in September, and two attacks that
impacted schools.
6.
In September, humanitarian inter-agency cross-line convoys reached 34,000
people in the besieged locations of Fu’ah, Kafraya, Yarmouk, East Harasta, Misraba
and Mudayra. The total number of people reached under the plan is 280,500, or
23 per cent of the overall number of people to whom access was originally requested
under the plan.
7.
The United Nations estimates that, as at September 2017, some 2.98 million
people are living in hard-to-reach and besieged locations in the Syrian Arab
Republic. That number includes 419,920 people (down from 513,420) living in 10
besieged locations throughout the country. Dayr al-Zawr city, in Dayr al-Zawr
governorate, has been formally removed from the United Nations list of besieged
locations. Ninety-five per cent of the total besieged population is besieged by the
Syrian Government forces.

3.
Following the sixth round of talks, held in Astana on 14 and 15 September
2017, the guarantors of de-escalation areas (the Russian Federation, Turkey and the
Islamic Republic of Iran) reached an agreement on operationalizing the Idlib
de-escalation area. On 19 September, Hay’at Tahrir Al -Sham, led by Jabhat Fath
al-Sham (former Nusrah Front), which is designated as a terrorist organization by
the Security Council, launched an offensive from Idlib on positions of the
Government of the Syrian Arab Republic in northern Hama. The attack prompted a
sustained aerial campaign in north-western Syrian Arab Republic by the Syrian
Government forces, supported by the Russian Federation. T he United Nations
received reports of daily airstrikes and ground-based strikes being launched
throughout the governorate, in which a significant number of civilians were killed
and injured, including women and children. Civilian infrastructure, including
medical facilities, were also reportedly severely affected by the strikes according to
information received by the United Nations. Tens of thousands of people were also
displaced within the governorate owing to the attacks. The Russian -Turkish summit
of 29 September resulted in a recommitment to the ceasefire in Idlib.
4.
In Raqqah city, the advance of the Syrian Democratic Forces, backed by the
United States-led international counter-ISIL coalition and led by the Kurdish
People’s Protection Units towards the centre of the city, continued to result in the
2/21

17-18406

S/2017/902

death and displacement of civilians. The Syrian Democratic Forces control
approximately 80 per cent of Raqqah, with an estimated 8,000 civilians still trapped
in the ISIL-controlled areas of the city at the end of the reporting period, according
to the United Nations. The part of Raqqah city controlled by Syrian Democratic
Forces remains largely empty of civilians. Fifty-eight people were reportedly killed
by airstrikes or gunfire during the month. At least 146 civilians have reportedly
been killed by landmines alone since June while trying to flee the city. Those who
remain continue to face a number of serious protection concerns and are at risk of
being killed by air strikes, mortar and artillery shelling, snipers and mines, or by
being used as human shields. Those trapped inside also face nearly depleted food
stocks and limited access to medical facilities, as facilities still in service are
reportedly being reserved for ISIL fighters.
Figure I
Key dates in September 2017

Syrian forces announce
that the siege of parts of
the city of Dayr al-Zawr
is broken
Dayr al-Zawr is broken

14–15 September
Sixth round of talks in
Astana

19 September
Four attacks against
medical facilities in
Idlib reported

26 September
Airstrike on Wadi
Azeeb reportedly kills
50 fleeing ISIL fighters
in eastern Hama

5.
Military operations in Dayr al-Zawr governorate continued to impact civilians.
According to a displacement monitoring tracker of the United Nations and its
partners, air strikes and clashes resulted in more than 100,000 pers ons being
displaced, mostly to other parts of Dayr al-Zawr, with about 25,000 persons moving
to Raqqah and Hasakah governorates. Many of those who remain in Dayr al -Zawr
cannot be reached owing to the proximity of fighting or the fact that areas continue
to be under ISIL control. Most of those who fled north into Raqqah and Hasakah
governorates are arriving at receiving points for security screening in Abu Khashab
and Malha, before moving to camps in Ayn Isa or Arishah in Raqqah and Hasakah
governorates, respectively. Throughout the reporting period, about 700 to 800
internally displaced persons entered each camp every day. While humanitarian
partners are responding in those locations, additional support is needed, in particular
at the receiving points, where thousands of people are gathered while waiting for
security screenings.
6.
On 5 September, the Syrian Ministry of Defence announced that government
forces had broken the three-year-long ISIL-imposed siege of the besieged parts of
Dayr al-Zawr city, where 93,500 people had been trapped and were relying on air
drops for basic assistance. On 6 and 10 September, food, health and other supplies
reached Dayr al-Zawr. On 14 September, the first United Nations supplies arrived in
Dayr al-Zawr city by truck. The United Nations supplies, delivered by the Syrian
Arab Red Crescent, consisted of life-saving items such as wheat flour, hygiene kits,
solar lamps, plastic sheeting and kitchen sets for 15,000 families. Additional
convoys were deployed on 15, 20 and 27 Septe mber. The area, however, remains a
front line, with ongoing hostilities leaving sustained access to Dayr al -Zawr city
vulnerable to security incidents.

17-18406

3/21

S/2017/902

7.
Ongoing military confrontations and airstrikes in the Uqayribat subdistrict of
Hama governorate against ISIL positions have led to civilian deaths and
displacement. Initial displacement following the fighting in August left about 8,200
internally displaced persons trapped in the Wadi al-Adhib area. An additional 4,500
civilians had not managed to leave several villages under ISIL control, south-west
of Wadi al-Adhib, later overtaken by Syrian Government forces. The internally
displaced persons were without access to humanitarian or medical assistance for
more than a month and several reports of malnutrition cases and deaths owing to a
lack of medical care have been received. On 10 September, the Office of the United
Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights (OHCHR) received reports that
about 28 individuals, including 5 women and 13 children (of whom 7 we re girls and
2 were boys under 3 months of age), were detained near Wadi al -Adhib while trying
to flee ISIL-held areas towards government-controlled areas. Their whereabouts
remain unknown. On 26 September, shelling in Wadi al-Adhib reportedly killed
50 people.
8.
In Rif Dimashq governorate, fighting and airstrikes continued in Jawbar and
eastern Ghutah between non-State armed opposition groups as well as between
those groups and the Syrian Government forces. Shelling and armed clashes in
Duma, Harasta, Misraba, Mudayra, Kafr Batna and Ayn Tarma reportedly resulted in
civilian deaths. Ground-based strikes and armed clashes in both Jawbar and Ayn
Tarma were reported to the United Nations on a daily basis. The medical facility in
Mudayra was reportedly hit by ground-based strikes on 13 September. The situation
resulted in the closure of schools and the suspension of commercial traffic into the
area, which further increased prices for basic goods. Bread in eastern Ghutah is now
reportedly over 20 times more expensive than in Damascus.
9.
During the reporting period, an estimated 50,000 to 55,000 Syrians remained
stranded along the Syrian-Jordanian border, in an area known as the berm. The last
cycle of aid assistance to that area was halted over four months ago , on 15 June,
with the situation of those stranded having continuously deteriorated. The United
Nations has continued to urgently seek emergency humanitarian access to make
possible the delivery of food and essential non-food assistance in the immediate
term.
Protection
10. Air and ground-based strikes continued to kill and injure civilians in
significant numbers. As in the past, the high level of civilian casualties remains a
strong indication that violations of the prohibition on launching indiscrim inate
attacks and of the principles of proportionality and precaution are continuing.
Children have been particularly affected by the fighting and, in some incidents, have
constituted the majority of the casualties.
11. Fighting continued to affect civilian infrastructure, including medical
facilities, schools, markets and places of worship. On the basis of information
received by OHCHR, civilian casualties occurred in various governorates (see
annex), in possible violation of international humanitarian la w. OHCHR has
documented alleged incidents by many parties to the conflict, including government
forces and their allies, non-State armed opposition groups and Security Councildesignated terrorist groups.
12. Despite the call made to the Syrian authorities in Human Rights Council
resolution 19/22 to cooperate with OHCHR, including through the establishment of
a field presence with the mandate to protect and promote human rights, further
reporting by the Office remains curtailed by the denial of its access to the Syrian
Arab Republic.
4/21

17-18406

S/2017/902

13. The United States Department of Defense publicly confirmed that in
September, the United States-led coalition carried out 1,302 strikes against ISIL
targets in the governorates of Hasakah, Raqqah and Dayr al-Zawr. Nearly 90 per
cent of the strikes (or 1,171 air strikes) were reported to have been in the vicinity of
Raqqah city. In addition, the coalition reported that it had conducted airstrikes near
Mayadin on 4 and from 12 to 14 September.
14. The Ministry of Defence of the Russian Federation issued regular statements
on the launching of attacks, including through the use of cruise missiles launched
from the sea, and statements on airstrikes against ISIL targets in Dayr al -Zawr and
Hama governorates, and against Hay’at Tahrir Al-Sham targets in Idlib and Hama
governorates. The Ministry noted that on 5 September, Kalibr cruise missiles were
fired in support of the Syrian army’s offensive in Dayr al-Zawr, and that Russian
aircraft conducted more than 100 combat sorties. On 6 September, the Commander
of the Russian force grouping in the Syrian Arab Republic stated that 1,417 combat
sorties had been carried out in the previous two weeks, making 2,687 strikes on
command centres, camps and manpower concentrations. On 14 September, the
Ministry of Defence stated publicly that earlier that day, submarines had fired
Kalibr cruise missiles against targets in ISIL-held areas to the south-east of Dayr
al-Zawr.
15. On 12 September, the Ministry of Defence of the Russian Federation public ly
stated that Russian Aerospace Defence Forces were conducting 24 -hour air
reconnaissance to detect and eliminate targets, highlighting the fact that on
11 September, the Forces had flown more than 50 sorties, eliminating about 180
targets. On 26 September, the Ministry stated that cruise missiles had been fired at
Hay’at Tahrir Al-Sham and ISIL targets in Idlib and Dayr al-Zawr governorates.
16. On 18 September, the Ministry of Defence of the Russian Federation issued a
statement saying that the Aerospace Forces had provided support to Syrian
Government troops in taking control of a number of positions near Hussiyah and
Sawwanat, Hama governorate, and had used unmanned aerial vehicles to detect and
eliminate targets.
17. The United Nations and its health partners received credible reports of eight
attacks that affected health-care facilities and personnel in September, of which five
have been verified and three are currently being verified. On 9 September, one
hospital in Raqqah city was impacted, leading to significant structural damage. On
19 September, four incidents were reported. An attack on a hospital in Kafr Nubl
subdistrict, Idlib governorate, resulted in partial damages to the facility. Another
attack on a hospital in Khan Shaykhun subdistrict, Idlib governorate, resulted in
damages to the facility, as well as damage to several ambulances belonging to the
local ambulance system parked near the hospital. An attack on a hospital
specializing in maternity and paediatric services in Haysh subdistrict, Idlib
governorate, resulted in structural damages to the facility. According to initial
reports, one female administrative staff member was killed and another staff
member was severely injured. Two paramedics were also reportedly killed after an
airstrike on two ambulances near Atshan, in northern rural Hama; the two
ambulances were destroyed.
18. Educational facilities also continued to be affected by the fighting. On 21 and
25 September, in Dar al-Kabirah village, Idlib governorate, the Dar al-Kabirah
School was allegedly destroyed owing to shelling and airstrikes. In addition, on
24 September, the Risalah School in Habit town, Idlib governorate, was allegedly
targeted by airstrikes. It was also reported that most school activities had been
suspended for a period of three days throughout Idlib owing to attacks on schools in
the area.
17-18406

5/21

S/2017/902

Humanitarian access
Box 2
Key points for humanitarian access
1.
In September, United Nations humanitarian agencies and partners continued to
reach millions of people in need through all available access modalities, including
from within the Syrian Arab Republic, in collaboration with the Syrian authorities.
Regular programming resulted in the delivery of humanitarian assistance to millions
of people in need, including some 2.6 million people who received food assistance
during the month through more than 1,700 deliveries.
2.
Cross-border activities remain a vital part of the humanitarian response in the
Syrian Arab Republic. Since the adoption of Security Council resolution 2165
(2014) in July 2014, assistance has been delivered from Turkey to millions of
Syrians in various parts of Aleppo, Idlib, Ladhiqiyah and Hama governorates, and
from Jordan to Dar‘a, Qunaytirah and Suwayda’ governorates. In September alone,
410 trucks in 24 consignments delivered much needed life-saving assistance to more
than 1 million people in need in northern and southern areas of the Syrian Arab
Republic.
3.
Dayr al-Zawr city, in Dayr al-Zawr governorate, has been formally removed
from the United Nations list of besieged locations.
4.
In September five humanitarian inter-agency cross-line convoys delivered
much-needed assistance to 34,000 people. The total number of people reach ed under
the August-September plan is 280,500, or 23 per cent of the overall number of
people to whom access was originally requested under the plan.
5.
The removal and delisting of medical supplies from inter -agency cross-line
convoys remained a major challenge, with supplies sufficient for more than 22,284
treatments removed or not allowed to be loaded in September (see table 2). That
brings the total number of medical items removed or not allowed to be loaded to
more than 620,000 since the beginning of the year.

19. After three years of besiegement by ISIL, Syrian Government forces gained
access to Dayr al-Zawr city in early September. New commercial and humanitarian
routes have been opened and the United Nations, through its partner, the Syr ian
Arab Red Crescent, has been able to reach the area by road. As a result, Dayr
al-Zawr city has been removed from the United Nations list of besieged locations
and the United Nations was able to end the airdrops which, through 309 high altitude rotations since April last year, dispatched more than 6,030 metric tons of
food and supplies to those in need inside Dayr al-Zawr city.
20. The United Nations estimates that, as at September 2017, about 419,920
people (down from 513,420) are living in 10 areas under siege (see table 1). That
means that the area is assessed by the United Nations as being surrounded by armed
actors, with the sustained effect that humanitarian assistance cannot regularly enter,
and civilians, the sick and the wounded cannot regularly exit. Of the 10 besieged
locations, 7 areas are besieged by the Government (95 per cent of the total besieged
population), 1 by both the Government and non-State armed opposition groups
(3 per cent of the total besieged population) and 2 by non-State armed opposition
groups (2 per cent of the total besieged population). In addition to those in besieged
locations, about 2.56 million people are estimated to be living in hard -to-reach
locations. That figure is down from the previous estimate of 2.9 million people as a

6/21

17-18406

S/2017/902

result of movements and further access improvements in Aleppo, Raqqah and
Hasakah governorates.
Table 1
Besieged locations, September 2017
Governorate

Location

Population

Damascus

Yarmuk

12 520

Government of the Syrian
Arab Republic and non-State
armed opposition groups

Idlib

Fu‘ah

5 900

Non-State armed opposition
groups

Idlib

Kafraya

2 200

Non-State armed opposition
groups

Damascus

Qabun

2 500

Government of the Syrian
Arab Republic

Rif Dimashq/
Damascus

Irbin and surrounding area (Irbin,
Zamalka and Jawbar)

49 300

Government of the Syrian
Arab Republic

Rif Dimashq

Harasta area (Harasta, Mudayra and
Misraba)

59 000

Government of the Syrian
Arab Republic

Rif Dimashq

Duma area (Duma, Shaffuniyah and
Hawsh al-Dawahirah)

150 100

Government of the Syrian
Arab Republic

Rif Dimashq

Kafr Batna area (Kafr Batna, Saqba,
Ayn Tarma, Hammurah, Jisrayn,
Aftris, Hazzah, Hawsh al-Ash‘ari,
Bayt Siwa and Muhammadiyah)

125 600

Government of the Syrian
Republic

Rif Dimashq

Nashabiyah area (Nashabiyah, Bayt
Nayim, Salihiyah, Utaya and
Hazrama)

9 300

Government of the Syrian
Arab Republic

Rif Dimashq

Bait Jinn

3 500

Government of the Syrian
Arab Republic

Total

Besieged by

419 920

21. The delivery of humanitarian assistance to people in need remained extremely
challenging in many areas of the country as a result of active conflict, shifting
conflict lines, administrative impediments and deliberate restrictions imposed on the
movement of people and goods by the parties to the conflict. In p articular, access by
the United Nations and its partners to those people living in besieged and hard -toreach locations remains a critical concern.
22. The United Nations inter-agency convoy plan for August and September
requested access to 36 locations in besieged and hard-to-reach areas, seeking to
reach 1,231,000 people. Inter-agency convoys are prepared for areas with
multisectoral needs where access is limited, to ensure that United Nations support is
needs-based. In September, only five inter-agency convoys could be dispatched to
besieged and hard-to-reach locations, reaching 34,000 people in need (see table 4
for a list of inter-agency convoys sent in September). That brings the total number
of people reached under the August-September plan to 280,500, or 23 per cent of
the overall number of people to whom access was originally requested under the
bimonthly plan. That number does not include convoys carrying supplies delivered
by other humanitarian actors.
23. Individual agencies continued to submit requests for single-agency deliveries
during the reporting period to locations throughout the country. Single -agency
17-18406

7/21

S/2017/902

deliveries take place in areas where access is possible; there are therefore fewer
concerns about the ability of the United Nations to address assessed needs in those
areas. In September, the World Food Programme (WFP) submitted 1,715 official
requests to obtain facilitation letters for the transport of food assistance to targeted
locations throughout the country, all of which were approved. The Office of the
United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR) submitted 47
facilitation letters for the movement of core relief items and livelihood kits, of
which 46 were approved. Moreover, both international and Syrian non -governmental
organizations (NGOs) continued to undertake needs assessments and to provide
support (including medical, educational, psychosocial and protection services) in
besieged and hard-to-reach locations, under extremely challenging circumstances
and in accordance with humanitarian principles.
Figure II
United Nations inter-agency cross-line humanitarian operations: percentage of
people reached each month in besieged areas

24. During the reporting cycle, the majority of agencies of the United Nations
system and United Nations partners continued to be unable to gain access to
populations in need in areas of the country controlled by ISIL, as all plans to deliver
assistance to those areas have been suspended as a result of continued security
concerns. That state of affairs has prevented the United Nations and its humanitarian
partners from reaching Raqqah city and most of Dayr al -Zawr governorate, as well
as pockets of rural Homs and rural Hama.
25. Land deliveries to the north-eastern governorates through the Aleppo-Manbij
route proceeded in a regular manner in September. Through those deliveries, the
United Nations provided food and nutrition assistance to nearly 390,000 people in
Hasakah and Raqqah governorates, as well as to accessible parts of north -western
Dayr al-Zawr governorate. Increased deliveries through that route enabled the
United Nations to respond to the immediate needs of families fleeing violence in
Raqqah city, where an estimated 8,000 people — more than half of whom are
children — were facing deteriorating humanitarian, health, living and security
conditions. Displacement continued to be reported daily owing to heavy airstrikes
and fierce fighting, with about 300,000 persons already displaced in Raqqah
governorate since November 2016. The United Nations and its partners have been
responding at scale to the needs, providing assistance to displaced persons and host
communities in at least 58 sites, camps and/or areas of high concentrations of
internally displaced persons in Raqqah, Aleppo, Hasakah a nd Dayr al-Zawr
governorates.

8/21

17-18406

S/2017/902

Figure III
United Nations inter-agency cross-line humanitarian operations by land,
September 2017

34,000 people reached
Cross-line
People reached in

People reached in

hard-to-reach areas

besieged areas

0

34,000

0%

8%

People reached in
hard-to-reach areas

People reached in
besieged areas

convoys

5

Airdrops

309

2

Number of people in hard-to-reach areas:
2.56 million
Number
419,920

of

people

in

besieged

areas:

Life-saving and life-sustaining medical items sufficient for more than 22,284
treatments were rejected or removed from convoys in September by the Syrian
authorities according to WHO and other health partners. Details regarding the
treatments and supplies removed are shown in table 2. Additional medica l supplies
were scheduled to be delivered as part of the bimonthly inter -agency convoy plan,
however only five inter-agency convoys were able to proceed in September.
Furthermore, since the beginning of 2017, WHO has submitted 10 single -agency
requests to the Government of the Syrian Arab Republic to gain access to 14
locations in 6 governorates. The Government has approved nine requests and one
has been rejected.
Table 2
Medical supplies removed from humanitarian convoys in September 2017
Location

Number of
treatments

Types of supplies

Yarmouk

862

Atropine, psychotropic medicines and medicines for other
common symptoms in palliative care and medical equipment,
including ultrasound systems

Fu’ah and Kafraya

262

Minor surgery instruments, surgical kits and medical
consumables from burn kits and pneumonia B kits

East Harasta,
Misraba, Mudayra

21 160

Phenobarbital, amitriptyline, hydrochloride, haloperidol,
gastro-resistant sodium valproate, ketamine hydrochloride,
carbamazepine and beclomethasone dipropionate nasal spray

__________________
2

17-18406

Airdrop operations to Dayr al-Zawr city were discontinued in early September, as recent military
developments in and around the city enabled the United Nations and its partners to resume land
access.
9/21

S/2017/902

Humanitarian response
26. In September United Nations humanitarian agencies and partners continued to
reach millions of people in need through all available access modalities, including
(a) regular programming from within the Syrian Arab Republic, where humanitarian
deliveries reach those in need without crossing conflict lines, (b) cross -line
convoys, where assistance from Damascus is delivered across conflict lines, and
(c) cross-border deliveries, where assistance is provided to those in need from
Jordan and Turkey (see table 3). In addition to the United Nations and its partners,
NGOs continued to deliver life-saving assistance to people in need. Moreover, the
Government continued to provide basic services both in areas under its control and
in many areas beyond its control. Local authorities in many areas controlled by
non-State armed opposition groups also continued to provide services when
possible.
Table 3
People reached by the United Nations and other organizations through all
modalities in September 2017
Organization

Number of people reached

Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations

22 674

International Organization for Migration

44 556

Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees
United Nations Children’s Fund

225 631
>1 500 000

United Nations Development Programme

116 125

United Nations Population Fund

497 985

United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in
the Near East
World Food Programme
World Health Organization

438 000
>3 300 000
805 095

27. During the reporting period, cross-border deliveries continued from Turkey
and Jordan into the Syrian Arab Republic under the terms of Security Council
resolutions 2165 (2014), 2191 (2014), 2258 (2015) and 2332 (2016) (see figure IV
for details). In line with those resolutions, the United Nations notified the Syrian
authorities in advance of each shipment, including its content, destination and
number of beneficiaries.
28. Since cross-border operations began in July 2014, following the adoption of
resolution 2165 (2014), the United Nations has conducted more than 640 crossborder consignments, with more than 16,424 trucks (11,580 via Bab al -Hawa and
1,554 via Bab al-Salam from Turkey; and 3,290 via Ramtha from Jordan). Through
those operations, the United Nations and its partners delivered health assistance
sufficient for nearly 15 million treatments (including vaccinations for more than
2 million people), non-food items for nearly 4 million people and water, sanitation
and hygiene supplies for 3 million people. Moreover, in the last two years, nearly
1 million people have received food assistance in areas of northern and southern
Syrian Arab Republic through cross-border operations each month. Assistance has
been delivered to various parts of Aleppo, Idlib, Ladhiqiyah and Hama go vernorates
from Turkey, and Dar‘a, Suwayda’ and Qunaytirah governorates from Jordan. Those
operations complement the critical role played by international and Syrian NG Os
that provide assistance and services to millions more from neighbouring countries.

10/21

17-18406

S/2017/902

29. In September, for example, the Organization delivered food assistance for
more than 852,000 people through cross-border deliveries from Turkey and Jordan.
The United Nations and its partners also provided a total of 268,000 medical and
health treatments to 140 health facilities in northern and southern Syrian Arab
Republic through cross-border operations. More than 473,000 people in southern
Syrian Arab Republic benefited from improved access to clean water through
maintenance operations of water and sanitation systems. Of those, 22,086 people
benefited from humanitarian and emergency water, sanitation and hygiene
interventions, such as household water treatment, distribution of hygiene kits, water
trucking and latrine installations, improving access to adequate sanitation. In
addition, United Nations nutrition partners continued to provide services to more
than 9,400 beneficiaries in 17 communities in Dar‘a and Qunaytirah governorates.
More than 168 cases of moderate acute malnutrition and severe acute malnutrition
were treated through the Organization’s therapeutic and supplementary nutrition
programme. More than 3,800 children under 5 years of age received preventive
nutrition services (micronutrient powder) and an additional 1,677 children were
reached with structured and sustained child protection and psychosocial support
services. Moreover, the United Nations Population Fund and its implementing
partners assisted 27,822 people in hard-to-reach locations throughout the Syrian
Arab Republic, providing services relating to reproductive health and gender -based
violence.
30. The United Nations Monitoring Mechanism for the Syrian Arab Republic
continued its operations during the reporting cycle, monitoring 410 trucks used in
24 consignments by seven United Nations entities in September, confirming the
humanitarian nature of each and notifying the Syrian authorities after each
shipment. The Mechanism continued to benefit fro m the excellent cooperation of
the Governments of Jordan and Turkey. Mechanism monitoring is further supported
by additional monitoring mechanisms in place for the delivery of cross -border
assistance. The Organization provides to the Government of the Syrian Arab
Republic a 48-hour notice for all shipments. Once in the country, the United Nations
partners that deliver aid ensure that shipments arrive at warehouses. Independent
third-party companies contracted by the Organization ensure independent
verification of the assistance arriving at the warehouse of the NGO and further
monitor the distribution and/or service provision of the assistance.
Figure IV
Number of beneficiaries assisted by the United Nations and its partners by
cluster through cross-border humanitarian deliveries, September 2017
(Thousands)

17-18406

11/21

S/2017/902

Table 4
Inter-agency cross-line humanitarian convoys in September 2017
Requested target
(number of beneficiaries)

Number of beneficiaries
reached Type of assistance

Date

Location

6 September

Fu’ah and Kafraya

12 000

7 000 Multisectoral

6 September

Yarmouk

11 050

2 000 Multisectoral

23 September

East Harasta

18 500

12 250 Multisectoral

23 September

Misraba

14 000

9 750 Multisectoral

23 September

Mudayra

4 500

3 000 Multisectoral

31. During the reporting period, WHO, UNICEF and their implementing partners
launched the second round of the measles vaccination campaign. The campaign was
implemented in schools in coordination with the Syrian Ministry of Health and the
Syrian Ministry of Education. Special guidelines were followed in hard -to-reach
areas in coordination with the Syrian Arab Crescent. The effort reached all
governorates, except Idlib and Raqqah, where local authorities did not agree on the
implementation of the campaign. The activity targeted children from 6 to 12 years
of age enrolled in schools, as well as drop-out children from the first round of the
campaign in May, with an estimated target of 3,364,755 children. The vaccines were
procured by UNICEF and distributed to all governorates in coordination with the
Ministry of Health. Preliminary results indicate that 2,286,861 children were
reached during the campaign (with a coverage rate of 63 per cent). Information on
eastern Ghutah and Dayr al-Zawr is still pending, as the measles campaign was
extended in those locations for an additional week for security reasons.
32. In late July, the United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine
Refugees in the Near East (UNRWA) started the third round of its cash assistan ce
programme for 2017, which concluded on 14 September. During that period,
408,787 Palestine refugees received cash assistance covering two months’ worth of
aid. In addition, the third round of the Agency’s food assistance programme is
ongoing, with more than 147,529 Palestine refugees having already received food
parcels.
33. Throughout September, the Russian Federation sent to the United Nations
information bulletins from the Russian Centre for Reconciliation of Opposing Sides
in the Syrian Arab Republic, which outlined the provision of bilateral relief
assistance. Other Member States also continued to provide bilateral and other forms
of humanitarian assistance.
Humanitarian financing
34. As at 27 September, the humanitarian response plan for the S yrian Arab
Republic was 36.8 per cent funded, with $1.23 billion of $3.35 billion received
under the plan. The largest donor continues to be Germany ($313 million). The
United States and the European Union have also provided more than $100 million in
aid each ($172 million and $115 million, respectively).

12/21

17-18406

S/2017/902

Figure V
Humanitarian response plan funding, 27 September 2017
(Millions of United States dollars)
Percentage of
total funded

Food security and agriculture

35%

Non-food items and shelter

17%

484.6

Health

26%

464.9

Water, sanitation and hygiene

11%

287.0

Protection and community services

39%

249.9

Education

19%

218.7

Early recovery and livelihoods

8%

161.9

Coordination and common services

10%

65.5

Nutrition

62%

56.7

Camp coordination and camp management

6%

32.6

Logistics

77%

16.5

Emergency telecommunications

64%

0.9

Funding reported
on Financial
Tracking Service

Unmet

1 312.1

Funding received

$1.23 billion
37 per
cent

63 per
cent
Unmet
requirements

$2.12 billion

$3.35 billion
Total funding
requirements

Cluster not yet specified

Visas and registrations
35. A total of 67 new United Nations visa requests were submitted to the
Government of the Syrian Arab Republic in September. Of those, 25 were approved
in September, 1 was denied and 41 remain pending. Of the 131 new visa
applications submitted in earlier months, 91 were approved in the past few months,
30 remain pending and 10 were denied. Moreover, a total of 73 United Nations visa
renewal requests were submitted in September, of which 49 were approved and 24
remain pending. An additional 25 requests for visa renewals submitted in earlier
months were also approved and none remain pending.
36. A total of 23 international NGOs are registered with the Government of the
Syrian Arab Republic to operate in the country. Moreover, some 220 national NGOs
are authorized by the Syrian Arab Republic to operate through 315 branches
countrywide. That figure represents an increase of three national NGOs which are
authorized by the Syrian Arab Republic to partner with certain agencies of the
United Nations system.
Safety and security of humanitarian personnel and premises
37. Since the start of the conflict, dozens of humanitarian workers have been
killed, including 21 staff members of the United Nations or agencies of the United
Nations system, of whom 17 were UNRWA staff members, 65 were staff members
and volunteers of the Syrian Arab Red Crescent and 8 were staff members and
volunteers of the Palestine Red Crescent Society. In addition, many staff members
of international and national NGOs are reported to have been killed.
38. A total of 27 staff members of agencies and programmes of the United Nations
system (1 staff member of the United Nations Development Programme and 26
UNRWA staff members) are detained or missing.
17-18406

13/21

S/2017/902

III. Observations
39. I welcome the persistent and determined efforts of the Astana guarantor s and
other Member States to reduce violence in the Syrian Arab Republic. However, the
renewed heavy fighting, including airstrikes, witnessed during September
demonstrates the precarious security situation on the ground. I strongly reemphasize
that there is no military solution to the conflict in the Syrian Arab Republic. It
remains essential to ensure that de-escalation arrangements realize their potential to
create conditions conducive to United Nations-facilitated negotiations guided by
Security Council resolution 2254 (2015) and the Geneva communiqué of 30 June
2012.
40. There is also an expectation that progress in de-escalation will result in
increased humanitarian access. The increase in access has yet to be realized, with
only 34,000 people reached through inter-agency cross-line convoys in September.
That figure represents less than 3 per cent of those individuals for whom access was
requested in August and September. The inability to reach those i ndividuals in need,
owing largely to bureaucratic impediments as well as insecurity, shows the
importance of preserving all possible humanitarian access modalities. Cross -border
assistance, as authorized under Security Council resolution 2165 (2014) and
subsequent resolutions, continues to be a critical element of the humanitarian
response in the Syrian Arab Republic.
41. There are millions of people in need in the north-west and southern areas of
the Syrian Arab Republic that are regularly reached by cross-border deliveries.
United Nations deliveries ensure that those populations are consistently reached.
The humanitarian nature of cross-border assistance is verified by the United Nations
Monitoring Mechanism and its deliveries are confirmed on the ground by third party monitors. United Nations humanitarian deliveries are further augmented by
humanitarian partners and, importantly, their work to provide essential basic
services, such as emergency education and health services, to populations that
would otherwise be left without any such assistance. It is vital that the modalities
set out under resolution 2165 (2014) and subsequent resolutions be renewed before
their expiration on 10 January 2018 in order to ensure that those persons in need in
the north-western and southern areas of the Syrian Arab Republic continue to be
regularly reached with life-saving assistance.
42. I remain deeply concerned about the reported harm to civilians and civilian
infrastructure throughout the country. Civilians must be spared and protected. I
reiterate my call that all those conducting military operations in the Syrian Arab
Republic must do so in compliance with international humanitarian law. The
obligation to spare civilians and civilian objects remains for those fighting ISIL.
43. During the high-level week of the General Assembly in September, my Special
Envoy for Syria and I had a range of contacts and consultations wi th Syrian,
regional and international stakeholders. During those interactions, my Special
Envoy stressed that de-escalation arrangements must not lead to a de facto partition
of the Syrian Arab Republic and emphasized that genuine negotiations in Geneva on
the political future of the Syrian Arab Republic were key to averting that scenario.
44. Accountability is central to sustainable peace. I reiterate my call that the
situation in the Syrian Arab Republic be referred to the International Criminal
Court. I also call upon all Member States, all parties to the conflict, civil society and
the United Nations system as a whole to cooperate fully with the International,
Impartial and Independent Mechanism to Assist in the Investigation and Prosecution
of Persons Responsible for the Most Serious Crimes under International Law
Committed in the Syrian Arab Republic since March 2011.
14/21

17-18406

S/2017/902

45. I support the intention of my Special Envoy to convene the eighth round of
intra-Syrian talks in Geneva as soon as possible, to be guided by Security Council
resolution 2254 (2015) and the Geneva communiqué. Ultimately, an inclusive
political process convened under the auspices of the United Nations, together with
the backing of the international community, is the only course that can provide a
lasting solution to the Syrian conflict and bring an end to the tremendous suffering
of the Syrian people.

17-18406

15/21

S/2017/902

Annex
Incidents affecting civilians recorded by the Office of the
United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights in
September 20171
Rif Dimashq and Damascus governorates
• On 5 September, several ground-based strikes hit a residential area in the
western part of Misraba. Shortly thereafter, ground -based strikes hit the area
again, reportedly killing six civilians and wounding at least four other
civilians.
• On 9 September, a boy was allegedly hit by a sniper in the eastern part of
Harasta, near Duma.
• On 11 September, in the morning, ground-based strikes hit a residential area in
Mudayra and allegedly killed 3 civilians, including a child, and wounded at
least 12 other civilians, including women.
• On 13 September, a hospital in Kafr Batna was hit by a ground -based strike,
allegedly injuring a woman who was receiving medical care, and partly
damaging the facility.
• On 14 September, a journalist was reportedly shot in the cross -fire between
non-State armed opposition groups in the northern part of Hamuriyah. The
journalist was transported to a field hospital but reported ly died on
16 September.
• On 17 September, clashes reportedly erupted between non-State armed
opposition groups in the vicinity of a checkpoint in Kafr Batna. At least two
civilians were allegedly hit by bullets in the cross -fire; one reportedly died.
• On 18 September, ground-based strikes hit a residential area in Duma,
reportedly killing a girl and injuring several other civilians.
• On 24 September, several ground-based strikes hit a residential area in Duma,
causing a fire in a building in Humayrah which reportedly killed one child and
wounded another, who died on 26 September.
• On 25 September, armed clashes between non-State armed opposition groups
and government forces in the area of Ayn Tarma allegedly killed a male nurse,
who was reportedly hit by a stray bullet when he was standing near the
medical facility where he worked.
• On 26 September, ground-based strikes hit residential areas in Harasta,
reportedly killing a male civilian and injuring several other civilians.
• On the same day, three airstrikes allegedly hit residential areas in Duma and
allegedly killed a boy and another civilian, and injured scores of others.
Reportedly, airstrikes hit a centre for persons with disabilities located in
Duma, killing two disabled male civilians.
__________________
1

16/21

In line with Security Council resolution 2258 (2015), the present description of developments on
the ground and the incidents that occurred during the month that the Office of the United Nations
High Commissioner for Human Rights has been able to corroborate, relates to compliance with
Council resolutions 2139 (2014), 2165 (2014) and 2191 (2014) by all parties in the Syrian Arab
Republic. The information is provided without prejudice to the work of the Task Force on the
Ceasefire of the International Syria Support Group. The reporting is not a comprehensive listing
of all violations of international humanitarian law and violations and abuses of international
human rights law that took place in the Syrian Arab Republic during the reporting period.
17-18406

S/2017/902

Dar‘a and Suwayda’ governorates
• On 12 September, a journalist covering the military operations of the Southern
Front was reportedly killed by a sniper in the opposition -controlled Dar‘a city
area of Dar‘a al-Balad.
• On 24 September, ground-based strikes hit a residential area in Dar‘a al-Balad,
allegedly killing two civilians and injuring several others.
• On 25 September, ground-based strikes hit the government-controlled Dar‘a
neighbourhood of Sabil and allegedly killed a child. The same day, groundbased strikes hit Dar‘a al-Balad, reportedly killing a woman and injuring at
least two other civilians.
Idlib governorate
• On 18 September, three individuals previously sentenced to death by a Hay'at
Tahrir Al-Sham-run court in Sarmin for the killing of the seven White Helmet
volunteers in August were publicly executed by the group.
• On 19 September, several airstrikes hit a maternit y and paediatrics hospital in
Haysh subdistrict, reportedly killing a female cleaning staff and injuring 3
medical staff (the hospital director and 2 female nurses) as well as 10 patients.
• On 19 September, airstrikes hit a hospital in Khan Shaykhun city, allegedly
injuring one civilian and causing significant damage, including the destruction
of generators and critical medical material. Two ambulances parked next to the
hospital were also destroyed.
• On 19 September, the National Hospital of Kafr Nubl and a White Helmet
centre were also hit; the hospital sustained significant material damage.
• On the same day, a male civilian who was standing next to a medical unit in
Ma‘arrat al-Nu‘man was reportedly killed when an airstrike hit the facility.
• On 20 September, several airstrikes hit residential areas in Jarjanaz town, in
Ma‘arrat al-Nu‘man, as well as Abu Bakr Siddik mosque, reportedly killing
six civilians, including a woman and her four children, and injuring five
others.
• On 21 September, airstrikes hit a residential area in the western neighbourhood
of Khan Shaykhun city, allegedly killing three civilians: a woman, her husband
and their daughter. The victims were displaced from Khattab town in Hama
governorate.
• On 21 September, airstrikes hit residential areas in Khan Shaykhun city,
reportedly killing 6 civilians (3 children and 3women) and injuring 15 others.
Further airstrikes hit residential areas of Habit village, allegedly injuring three
civilians, including a child.
• On 22 September airstrikes hit an agricultural area in Kafr Sajnah, in Ma‘arrat
al-Nu‘man, allegedly killing a six-year-old child.
• On 23 September, airstrikes hit residential areas in Mardikh town in Saraqib,
reportedly killing seven male civilians, six of whom were displaced from
Darayya and one from Kafr Susah, in Damascus. The incident allegedly
injured several others providing first response support when further airstrikes
hit the same location.

17-18406

17/21

S/2017/902

• On 23 September, airstrikes hit agricultural lands in the eastern neighbourhood
of Khan Shaykhun city, allegedly killing three civilians — two of them women
from the same family — and injuring another woman.
• On 23 September, airstrikes hit residential areas in Idlib city, reportedly killing
a male civilian displaced from Mu’addamiyah al-Sham, in Rural Damascus
governorate.
• On 24 September, airstrikes hit residential areas of Shaykh Sindiyan village,
allegedly killing four civilians, including one woman.
• On the same day, airstrikes hit agricultural lands north of Khan Shaykhun,
reportedly killing a pregnant woman and injuring five civilians, three of whom
were women.
• On 25 September, airstrikes hit a market and residential areas in Jisr
al-Shughur city, reportedly killing 19 civilians, including 4 women and 2
children, and injuring no fewer than 42 others, including women and children.
• On the same day, airstrikes hit residential areas southwest of Jisr al-Shughur,
reportedly killing one woman and injuring five civilians, including two
women, all from the same family.
• On the same day, air and ground-based strikes hit residential areas of Bdama,
allegedly killing two civilians, including a boy, and injuring six civilians.
• On the same day, in the morning, airstrikes hit residential areas of Shanuriyah
in Bdama subdistrict, reportedly killing a child and injuring four other
civilians.
• On the same day, airstrikes hit residential areas in Bashiriyah, in Jisr
al-Shughur, allegedly killing three civilians (a woman and two civilian men
from the same family) and injuring four other civilians, including three
women.
• On the same day, in the morning, airstrikes hit residential areas of Kufayr
village south of Jisr al-Shughur, reportedly killing two civilians (including one
woman) and injuring three others.
• On 26 September in the morning, airstrikes hit residential areas in Qadiriyah Qayqun in Jisr al-Shughur, allegedly killing four civilians, including two boys,
and injuring six others.
• On the same day, airstrikes hit a hospital west of Kafr Nubl. The hospital
sustained significant material damage.
• On the same day, airstrikes hit a mosque in Bdama in Jisr al-Shughur,
reportedly injuring six civilians and destroying the mosque.
• On the same day, airstrikes hit residential areas of Mishmishan village, in Jisr
al-Shughur, allegedly killing a civilian woman and injuring five other
civilians.
• On the same day, airstrikes hit residential areas in Janudiyah town in Jisr
al-Shughur, reportedly killing one male civilian and injuring six other
civilians.
• On the same day, airstrikes hit an elementary school in Jisr al -Shughur city
allegedly causing significant material damage. The school had not been
operational.

18/21

17-18406

S/2017/902

• On the same day, airstrikes hit Sanjar subdistrict in Ma‘arrat al-Nu‘man in the
morning, reportedly killing a civilian woman and injuring seven other
civilians.
• On 27 September, airstrikes hit residential areas of Qanniyah village north of
Jisr al-Shugur, allegedly injuring 14 civilians, 1 of whom was a woman.
• On the same day, airstrikes hit residential areas in Ya ‘qubiyah village north of
Jisr al-Shughur, in the morning, reportedly killing a one-year-old girl.
• On the same day, airstrikes hit a medical facility in Bashiriyah in Jisr
al-Shughur, allegedly causing significant damage and putting it out of service.
• On 28 September, airstrikes hit residential areas in Buzayt vi llage in Jisr
al-Shughur, reportedly killing two women.
• On the same day, airstrikes hit residential areas of the farming village of Hamu
in Jisr al-Shughur, allegedly killing seven civilians (three women (one
elderly), a girl and three boys).
• On 29 September, several airstrikes hit residential areas in Armanaz town in
the evening, allegedly killing 28 civilians, including 7 women and 5 children.
• On 30 September, airstrikes hit residential areas of Salqin, reportedly killing
19 civilians, including 4 women, 7 boys and 4 girls, and injuring a number of
other civilians.
Hama governorate
• On 21 September, ground-based strikes hit the Government-held area of
Ruhjan, reportedly killing three civilians (two women and a child) who were
attempting to cross from areas held by the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant
(ISIL) into other opposition-controlled areas in the north of the governorate.
• On 24 September, ground-based strikes hit Salamiyah in the afternoon,
reportedly killing five civilians (two women and three children) from the same
family and injuring two others, including a woman.
• On 26 September, ground-based strikes hit a group of internally displaced
persons near the Wadi al-Athib area who were awaiting evacuation, reportedly
killing at least 50 of them.
Dayr al-Zawr governorate
• On 10 September, airstrikes reportedly hit a crossing point in Bulil town,
approximately 35 kilometres south-east of Dayr al-Zawr city, and allegedly
killed 32 civilians and injured 9 others, including 2 women.
• On 14 September, airstrikes hit residential areas of Jdidat Bikara town in the
morning, reportedly killing at least 15 civilians, including 3 women, and
injuring at least 10 others.
• On 14 September, airstrikes hit residential areas as well as a hospital, medical
centre and an Internet shop in the morning, in Mayadin city, reportedly killing
at least 10 civilians, including 2 siblings, a girl and a boy. The United States led coalition reported on 29 September that it had conducted airstrikes near
Mayadin from 12 to 14 September, killing three senior ISIL officials.
• On 14 September, airstrikes hit the town of Khasham, reportedly killing nine
civilians, including a woman and six children, four of whom were girls.

17-18406

19/21

S/2017/902

• On 14 September, airstrikes hit residential areas in Lower Buqrus town,
allegedly killing six civilians, including three girls and a woman, and injuring
a number of others.
• On 14 September, airstrikes hit a crossing point in Tabiyat Shamiyah town, on
the western bank of the river, reportedly killing five civilians, including two
women.
• On 14 September, airstrikes hit a school hosting internally displaced persons in
Zabari town, with no reports of civilian casualties.
• On 16 September, airstrikes hit residential areas in Mahkan town, reportedly
killing at least 12 civilians, including a father, a mother and a number of their
children.
• On 16 September, airstrikes hit residential areas of Mayadin city, reportedly
killing at least one woman and injuring another one, together with a number of
children.
• On 16 September, airstrikes hit a crossing point in Bulil, killing at least five
males, reported to be civilians, who were attempting to cross the river.
• On 17 September, ground-based strikes hit residential areas of Lower
Khasham town, reportedly killing five women.
• On 17 September, airstrikes hit residential areas in Albu Kamal, reportedly
killing eight civilians, including two women and four boys. The United States led coalition publicly announced that on the same day, it had launched three
strikes near Albu Kamal, engaging an ISIL tactical unit and destroying a
logistics node and an ISIL headquarters.
• On 19 September, ground-based strikes hit Mazlum village in Khasham town,
to the east of Dayr al-Zawr, reportedly killing seven civilians, including a
woman and two of her children.
• On 25 September, airstrikes hit residential areas in ISIL -controlled Albu
Kamal city, close to the Hanaa Hospital, in eastern rural Dayr al -Zawr,
reportedly killing 11 civilians, including 3 women and 4 children. The United
States-led coalition publicly announced that on the same day, it had launched
one strike near Albu Kamal, destroying an ISIL staging area.
Raqqah governorate
• On 2 September, airstrikes hit the road next to Na‘im Square in Raqqah city,
reportedly killing three civilians, including a woman, all from the same family,
as well as a pharmacist, his wife and his brother. The United States -led
coalition publicly announced that on the same day, it had launched a t otal of
45 strikes near Raqqah, engaging 28 ISIL tactical units.
• On 4 September, in the morning, airstrikes hit residential areas of Raqqah city,
reportedly killing nine civilians, including six women, and injuring a number
of others. Most of the victims were from the same family. The United Statesled coalition publicly announced that on the same day, it had launched a total
of 41 strikes near Raqqah, engaging 17 ISIL tactical units.
• On 22 September, five civilians, including two women, from the same family,
were reportedly killed as a result of gunfire while attempting to leave Raqqah
city. The victims were originally from Dayr al-Zawr. The United States-led
coalition publicly announced that on the same day it had launched a total of
39 strikes near Raqqah, engaging three ISIL tactical units.

20/21

17-18406

S/2017/902

• On 26 September, airstrikes hit a residential building in the ISIL -controlled
neighbourhood of Badu in Raqqah city and allegedly killed at least 41
civilians, including 14 women and 9 children, and injured at least 7 other
civilians. The United States-led coalition publicly announced that on the same
day, it had launched a total of 42 strikes near Raqqah, engaging 16 ISIL
tactical units.

17-18406

21/21
