S/PV.8297

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-third year

8297th meeting

Wednesday, 27 June 2018, 3 p.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Nebenzia/Mr. Safronkov. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Russian Federation)

Members:

Bolivia (Plurinational State of). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Côte d’Ivoire . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Equatorial Guinea. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ethiopia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kazakhstan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kuwait. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Netherlands. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Peru. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Poland . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Sweden . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Llorentty Solíz
Mr. Ma Zhaoxu
Mr. Djédjé
Mr. Esono Mbengono
Mr. Alemu
Mr. Delattre
Mr. Tumysh
Mr. Alotaibi
Mr. Van Oosterom
Mr. Tenya
Ms. Wronecka
Mr. Orrenius Skau
Ms. Pierce
Mr. Cohen

Agenda
Non-proliferation
Letter dated 12 June 2018 from the Security Council Facilitator for the
implementation of resolution 2231 (2015) addressed to the President of the
Security Council (S/2018/601)
Fifth report of the Secretary-General on the implementation of Security Council
resolution 2231 (2015) (S/2018/602)
Letter dated 21 June 2018 from the Security Council Facilitator for the
implementation of resolution 2231 (2015) addressed to the President of the
Security Council (S/2018/624)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

18-19989 (E)
*1819989*

Non-proliferation

S/PV.8297

The meeting was called to order at 3.20 p.m.

General for Political Affairs; His Excellency Mr. João
Vale de Almeida, Head of the Delegation of the European
Union to the United Nations; and Ambassador Karel
van Oosterom, Permanent Representative of the
Netherlands, in his capacity as Security Council
Facilitator for the implementation of resolution 2231
(2015.).

Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Non-proliferation
Letter dated 12 June 2018 from the
Security Council Facilitator for the
implementation of resolution 2231
(2015) addressed to the President of the
Security Council (S/2018/601)

I now give the floor to Ms. DiCarlo.

Fifth report of the Secretary-General on the
implementation of Security Council resolution
2231 (2015) (S/2018/602)
Letter dated 21 June 2018 from the
Security Council Facilitator for the
implementation of resolution 2231
(2015) addressed to the President of the
Security Council (S/2018/624)
The President (spoke in Russian): In accordance
with rule 37 of the Council’s provisional rules of
procedure, I invite the representative of Germany to
participate in this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the following
briefers to participate in this meeting: Ms. Rosemary
DiCarlo, Under-Secretary-General for Political Affairs;
and His Excellency Mr. João Vale de Almeida, Head
of the Delegation of the European Union to the United
Nations.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I wish to draw the attention of Council members to
the following documents: S/2018/601, which contains
a letter dated 12 June 2018 from the Security Council
Facilitator for the implementation of resolution 2231
(2015) addressed to the President of the Security
Council; S/2018/602, which contains the fifth report
of the Secretary-General on the implementation of
Security Council resolution 2231 (2015); and S/2018/624,
which contains a letter dated 21 June 2018 from the
Security Council Facilitator for the implementation of
resolution 2231 (2015) addressed to the President of the
Security Council.
At this meeting, the Security Council will hear
briefings by Ms. Rosemary DiCarlo, Under-Secretary2/21

27/06/2018

Ms. DiCarlo: Nearly three years ago, the Security
Council unanimously adopted resolution 2231 (2015)
to endorse the Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action
(JCPOA) on the Iranian nuclear issue. The SecretaryGeneral and the international community welcomed the
Plan as a major achievement in nuclear non-proliferation.
Since implementation day, 16 January 2016, the
International Atomic Energy Agency has reported
11 times to the Security Council that Iran has been
implementing its nuclear-related commitments under
the JCPOA. Notwithstanding the continued adherence
of Iran to its nuclear-related commitments, the
agreement is unfortunately at a crossroads.
On 8 May, the United States of America announced
its withdrawal from the agreement. The SecretaryGeneral deeply regrets this setback to the JCPOA and
believes that issues not directly related to the Plan
should be addressed without prejudice to preserving the
agreement and its accomplishments. At the same time,
the Secretary-General calls on Iran to consider carefully
the concerns expressed by Member States about Iranian
activities that are allegedly contrary to the restrictive
measures contained in annex B to the resolution.
I thank you, Sir, for the opportunity to brief the
Security Council on the fifth report of the SecretaryGeneral on the implementation of resolution 2231
(2015) (S/2018/602). As guided by the Security Council,
and consistent with our last four reports, the one before
members today focuses on annex B to the resolution.
First, on the implementation of the nuclearrelated provisions, I am pleased to report that the
procurement channel continues to function effectively.
Thirteen additional nuclear-related proposals have
been submitted to the Security Council for approval,
bringing the total number of proposals to 37 since
implementation day. However, in this reporting period,
the Secretariat received information from two Member
States on the supply, sale, transfer or export to Iran of
dual-use items that may have been undertaken contrary
18-19989

27/06/2018

Non-proliferation

to the resolution. The Secretariat has contacted the
relevant Member States, which have informed us that
they have initiated internal reviews. Iran, in its response
to the Secretariat stressed that it is the “responsibility
of the exporting State to seek approval through the
procurement channel”, and encouraged more outreach
activities to address the lack of awareness among some
Member States. The Secretary-General will report back
on this issue to the Council in due course.
Secondly, in terms of ballistic missile-related
provisions, the report reflects information provided
by Israel and Iran to the Secretary-General and the
Security Council on two ballistic missile launches by
Iran in January, as well as our findings on the ballistic
missiles launched by the Houthis into Saudi territory.
Since our last report (S/2017/1030), Saudi authorities
have brought to the attention of the Secretariat nine
additional launches of ballistic missiles by the Houthis,
which in their assessment were Iranian Qiam-1 missiles.
The Secretariat was invited to examine the debris
of three of those additional missiles. We provided
preliminary observations, in our last report, from our
examination of the debris of the missiles launched into
Saudi Arabia on 22 July and 4 November 2017.
Based on the information and material analysed, the
Secretariat assesses that the debris of the five missiles
launched at Yanbu‘ and Riyadh since July 2017 share
key design features with the Iranian Qiam-1 ballistic
missile. It is also our assessment that some component
parts of the debris were manufactured in Iran. We could
confirm that subcomponents of the guidance system
in these missiles were produced between 2002 and
2010. We note that the production-date range of these
subcomponents is incompatible with Scud missiles
known to be in Yemeni stockpiles prior to the outbreak
of the current conflict in early 2015. However, we are
at present unable to determine whether such missiles,
or parts thereof, or related technology, may have been
transferred from Iran after 16 January 2016, the date
when annex B provisions came into effect.
The report also reflects information received from
Israel regarding the possible presence of an Iranian
drone in Syria, which was reportedly downed after
entering Israeli airspace on 10 February. The Secretariat
did not have the opportunity to examine its debris, but
images provided by Israeli authorities show that its
wing configuration appears to be consistent with that of
an Iranian drone unveiled in October 2016. The report
further notes that, according to Iranian media outlets,

S/PV. 8297

several Iranian drones have been deployed in Syria.
The Secretariat has no information as to the owner and
operator of those drones.
Thirdly, as detailed in the report, the Secretariat
examined arms and related material that was seized in
Bahrain after 16 January 2016, and obtained additional
information on the unmanned surface vessel, laden
with explosives, that was recovered by the United Arab
Emirates. In both cases, the Secretariat is confident
that some of the arms and related material it examined
were manufactured in Iran. However, we are unable
to confirm whether those items were transferred from
Iran after 16 January 2016.
The report also notes the 21 May statement of the
political leader of Hamas in the Gaza Strip that Iran
has provided the Al-Qassam Brigades and other armed
groups in Gaza with money, military equipment and
expertise. That statement suggests that transfers of
arms and related material from Iran may have been
undertaken contrary to the provisions of annex B.
Fourthly, the report highlights the participation of
Iran’s Defence Industries Organization for the third
year in a row in an arms and defence exhibition in
Iraq. It provides information on the foreign activities of
Khatam al-Anbiya Construction Headquarters in Syria.
Since both entities are on the 2231 list their funds, other
financial assets and economic resources on the Iraqi
and the Syrian territories should have been frozen.
The report also provides information on additional
travel by Major General Qasem Soleimani. The
Secretary-General has reiterated his call upon all
Member States in the region to take the steps necessary
to fully implement their obligations in relation to
resolution 2231 (2015).
In closing, I would like to acknowledge the
leadership of Ambassador Van Oosterom of
the Netherlands in his role as Facilitator for the
implementation of the resolution. I also thank the
Coordinator of the Procurement Working Group of
the Joint Commission for our excellent cooperation. I
would like to assure them and the Security Council of
our fullest support for the continued implementation of
resolution 2231 (2015).
The President (spoke in Russian): I thank
Ms. DiCarlo for her briefing.
I now give the floor to Mr. Vale de Almeida.

18-199893/21

S/PV.8297

Non-proliferation

Mr. Vale de Almeida: I thank you, Mr. President,
for giving me the floor and the opportunity to brief
the Security Council. I am honoured to once again
address the Council on behalf of Federica Mogherini,
High Representative of the European Union for
Foreign Affairs and Security Policy, in her capacity as
Coordinator of the Joint Commission established by the
Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action (JCPOA).
First, I would like to thank Secretary-General
António Guterres and the Ambassador of the
Netherlands, Facilitator for the implementation of
resolution 2231 (2015), for their excellent cooperation.
Let me also express my gratitude to our colleagues of the
Secretariat and the Security Council Affairs Division
for their unwavering support, in particular regarding
the running of the procurement channel. I would also
like to note my appreciation for their work in the
preparation of the latest report of the Secretary-General
(S/2018/602) on the implementation of resolution 2231
(2015). Last, but not least, I would like to thank UnderSecretary-General DiCarlo for her briefing today.
We are in a difficult situation, which had not been
foreseen back in July 2015 when resolution 2231 (2015)
was unanimously adopted by the Security Council
(see S/PV.7488). While the International Atomic
Energy Agency (IAEA) has confirmed as recently as
24 May — for the eleventh time in a row — that Iran is
respecting its nuclear-related commitments under the
JCPOA, United States President Trump announced on
8 May that the United States will withdraw from the
agreement. The European Union (EU) and all other
remaining JCPOA participants have expressed deep
regret at that decision, including at the last meeting of
the Joint Commission on 25 May.
The preservation of the JCPOA is a key security
interest not only for the European Union, but also
for the international community as a whole. The
unanimous endorsement of the JCPOA by the Security
Council confirmed the importance of the JCPOA in
ensuring the exclusively peaceful nature of Iran’s
nuclear programme. The recent messages of support
expressed by an overwhelming number of partners
around the world — in Africa, Asia, Latin America and
in the Pacific — are yet another signal that the JCPOA
needs to be preserved and fully implemented.
The full implementation of the JCPOA will prevent
a nuclear arms race in the region. Such an arms race is
in no one’s interests. There is no positive alternative
4/21

27/06/2018

to the JCPOA, which is the fruit of more than 12 years
of negotiations and constitutes a 104-page document
that is endorsed at the highest level by the international
community. Undoubtedly, it remains the standard of
a multilateral nuclear non-proliferation agreement to
which other initiatives still have to live up.
The EU has taken the position that, as long as
Iran implements its nuclear-related obligations, we
will remain firmly committed to the full and effective
implementation of the JCPOA. That has also been
echoed by the other remaining participants at the highest
level, and in that regard I would like to express sincere
thanks to the Russian Federation and the People’s
Republic of China for their unwavering commitment
to the nuclear deal. Their support in facing the global
challenge of nuclear proliferation through the hard
work of multilateral diplomacy cannot be overstated.
The remaining parties to the JCPOA have held a
number of discussions on how to preserve the deal.
We recognize that sanctions-lifting is an essential part
of the agreement, and the Iranian people have a very
understandable expectation that the benefits of the deal
will continue to be felt. The European Union, together
with its partners, will continue to employ its best
efforts to preserve legitimate financial and trade flows,
preserving the interests of businesses acting in good
faith and with the endorsement of the Security Council.
The measures that we are putting in place at home are
designed to allow those businesses and investors to
continue to do their work, as governed by international
and European law.
We are of course aware that within Iran a difficult
debate is being held on the JCPOA and on the benefits
that it brings to the country and its citizens. I am
convinced that those benefits continue to be tangible,
even though I cannot hide the fact that there will be
a number of companies that do not see themselves in
a position to continue their current engagements in
Iran. The European Union continues to explore with
Iran the possibilities of preserving legitimate trade
and investment and continuing our overall bilateral
cooperation, which has taken place since 2016.
On the nuclear side, under the JCPOA Iran
is undergoing the most rigorous monitoring and
verification regime in the world. The IAEA issued
on 24 May, as I mentioned earlier, its eleventh report
since implementation day, which acknowledges once
again Iran’s full compliance with its commitments
18-19989

27/06/2018

Non-proliferation

undertaken under the JCPOA. That is further reflected
by the large number of inspections on the ground. It
goes without saying that, at this juncture, it is critical to
strictly follow the terms of the deal. That is essential to
upholding the agreement and continuing to build trust.
While
the
JCPOA
deals
with
nuclear
non-proliferation aspects, a number of serious issues
outside of the deal continue to cast a shadow over our
overall relationship with Iran. I regret that I have to
stress again that the situation in the region has clearly
worsened over the past few months.
Regarding the situation in Yemen, the European
Union is seriously concerned about the recent
intensification of military operations, in particular
in Al-Hudaydah, and we have urged all parties to the
conflict to ensure the protection of civilians and fully
respect international humanitarian law. The European
Union has also engaged in a regional dialogue with
the stakeholders to urge the parties to support the
Special Envoy of the Secretary-General for Yemen and
resume political negotiations. We note with concern the
findings of the Secretary-General’s report and the Panel
of Experts on Yemen report (see S/2018/68) regarding
the proliferation of ballistic missiles and technology.
Those actions feed regional tensions and threaten the
safety and stability of Yemen’s neighbours, freedom of
navigation and global sea trade.
As the Council is aware, the European Union has a
long-standing track record of expressing its concern at
the regional military build-up, including Iran’s missile
programme. We have repeatedly called upon Iran to
refrain from activities that may deepen mistrust, such
as ballistic missile tests, which are inconsistent with
resolution 2231 (2015) and the statements associated
with it.
The situation in the region, including the
proliferation of ballistic missiles, needs to be addressed
as a priority. But those issues are distinct from the
JCPOA. Dismantling a nuclear deal that is working
would certainly not put us in a better position to
discuss other issues. Walking away from a robust
non-proliferation agreement will not provide a solution
to regional tensions or ballistic missile proliferation.
In addition to Iran’s nuclear obligations, which
are laid out in annex 1 of the JCPOA, and to elements
related to sanctions-lifting, contained in annex 2, allow
me to reiterate the need to further engage on the basis
of annex 3 of the JCPOA, which foresees civil-nuclear

S/PV. 8297

cooperation. The European Union sees this annex as
key to the overall balance of the agreement and essential
to the overall objective of ensuring the exclusively
peaceful nature of the Iranian nuclear programme.
We continue to engage with Iran in a number
of concrete projects focused on nuclear safety and
research, and we look forward to a civil nuclear liability
seminar, to take place in Vienna in mid-July, and to
the third high-level seminar on nuclear cooperation and
governance, scheduled for November, building further
on the concept that civil-nuclear cooperation and
adherence to international norms on nuclear governance
have to go hand in hand. While implementing projects
on the ground and conducting research, Iran is also
taking steps towards its accession to the international
nuclear regulatory framework. Those steps need to be
encouraged and supported further. All of the foregoing
are significant measures that enhance the credibility
of the international community with respect to the
peaceful nature of the Iranian nuclear programme.
Let me continue in this spirit by focusing on the
reporting related to annex B of resolution 2231 (2015),
in particular on the work of the Procurement Working
Group, which is responsible for reviewing proposals by
States seeking to engage in activities with Iran that are
for nuclear and non-nuclear civilian end uses.
The procurement channel is a key pillar of the
JCPOA. The procurement channel and the Procurement
Working Group will continue their activity in the same
spirit as our continued implementation of the other
parts of the JCPOA. Since implementation day, the
Procurement Working Group has been in full operation,
with the EU reaching out and coordinating its meetings
with the aim of promoting the Channel as the only
mechanism for legitimate transfers of Nuclear Suppliers
Group-listed items to Iran. After the United States
withdrawal, the Group met twice in the new format of
E3/EU+2 and Iran, and mandated the Working Group
Coordinator to continue the work of the Channel as the
only alternative to attempts for irregular transfers. It is
a fact that confidence in the Channel can be built only
if new proposals are officially received and reviewed. I
therefore find it positive that the Channel currently has
five proposals under review.
Transparency remains a guiding principle and
cornerstone of the JCPOA. According to paragraph
6.10 of annex 4, the Joint Commission reports to the
Security Council every six months on the status of

18-199895/21

S/PV.8297

Non-proliferation

27/06/2018

the Procurement Working Group’s decisions and on
any implementation issues. In that context, on 8 June
the Coordinator of the Procurement Working Group
submitted to the Facilitator, on behalf of the Joint
Commission, its fifth biannual report. The report
aims to provide the Facilitator and Security Council
members with an overview of the work undertaken
by the Procurement Working Group from 1 December
2017 to 12 June 2018. The report has been circulated in
document S/2018/601.

again calls on the international community to support
this internationally endorsed common engagement.
All remaining signatory parties need to implement
the JCPOA in full and resolution 2231 (2015) in all
its dimensions. We need to continue to build on this
achievement of multilateral diplomacy, which is the
best hope for security and stability in the region. As
ever, the Coordinator of the Joint Commission stands
ready to work with United Nations bodies and Member
States in order to support the objectives of the JCPOA.

During this period, the Procurement Working Group
continued to discuss relevant topics, including end use,
common outreach messaging and procedural aspects
relevant to the smooth processing of the proposals. It
also intensified efforts to be as transparent as possible,
without compromising confidentiality, by reaching
out to United Nations Member States and promoting
a better understanding of its aims, objectives and its
review process, which are embedded in the JCPOA’s
multilayered system of checks and balances.

The President (spoke in Russian): I thank Mr. Vale
de Almeida for his briefing.

Impressive outreach activities have been conducted
over the past few years, and countries around the world
are aware of the procedures of the channel. Therefore,
it is regrettable, as reported by the Secretary-General,
that some exports of listed items have been undertaken
contrary to the provisions of paragraph 2 of annex B
to resolution 2231 (2015). We see the need to further
familiarize countries and potential exporters with the
procurement channel. To that end, our outreach efforts
will continue, together with colleagues from the Security
Council secretariat and the Facilitator. Member States’
governmental export-control stakeholders should
continue supporting the engagement of their companies
in any new transfers, through only the official channels.
Noting the challenges relating to the procurement
channel in the wider JCPOA framework, we have no
time for complacency. Immediate action is required to
find a sustainable solution on overall trade with Iran,
since that would also have an important impact on the
procurement channel.
I wish to conclude my briefing with two further
comments. Should the momentum on the JCPOA’s
preservation and implementation be lost, that would be
very detrimental to Iran, all other remaining JCPOA
parties and the wider international community, and
it would damage the trust in the effectiveness of
multilateral diplomacy and the non-proliferation
architecture. That is why the European Union once
6/21

I now give the floor to Ambassador Van Oosterom.
Mr. Van Oosterom (Netherlands): I now speak
in my capacity as Security Council Facilitator for the
implementation of resolution 2231 (2015).
In July 2015, the Security Council adopted
resolution 2231 (2015) (see S/PV.7488). Three months
later, the Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action (JCPOA)
came into effect. The agreement aims to ensure that
the Iranian nuclear programme remains exclusively
peaceful. Resolution 2231 (2015) replaced previous
Security Council resolutions on the Iranian nuclear
issue and urged the full implementation of the JCPOA.
It also established specific restrictions in relation to
Iran. As Security Council Facilitator for the resolution,
I have aimed to support and improve its implementation.
I have built on the excellent work of Italy, which we
succeeded as Facilitator in the context of our split term
on the Council.
I consider three issues that we facilitate to be key
to my role and that of the format: first, talks; secondly,
transparency; and thirdly, trade.
My first point concerns talks. Our ambition
is to facilitate talks about the implementation of
resolution 2231 (2015). As Facilitator, I have facilitated
communication among all parties, discussion of the
Security Council in the 2231 format and smooth
correspondence within the format. On 20 June,
the Security Council met in the 2231 format and,
during the format review, discussed the findings and
recommendations contained in the fifth report of the
Secretary-General (S/2018/602) on resolution 2231
(2015) prior to its public release. We had an open
discussion on recent developments. In her statement,
Under-Secretary-General DiCarlo has just elaborated
on the findings and recommendations in the report.
18-19989

27/06/2018

Non-proliferation

During the reporting period, two Member States
sent communications to the Council alleging transfers
and activities by Iran that fall under the restrictions
of resolution 2231 (2015). Those communications are
listed in detail in my report (see S/2018/624), together
with all replies received from the Permanent Mission of
Iran, as well as a letter from the Minister for Foreign
Affairs of Iran, Javad Zarif. The letter was sent in
reaction to the withdrawal of the United States from
the JCPOA and the reimposition of all United States
sanctions that had been lifted or waived in connection
with the JCPOA.
I will now turn to my second point — the facilitation
of transparency concerning the work of the 2231 format.
My report gives a comprehensive overview of the work
of the format during the past half-year, including the
monitoring of the implementation of resolution 2231
(2015). It includes the relevant communications, as well
as key aspects of the functioning of the procurement
channel. It is also my intention to give an open briefing
to the wider United Nations membership on the
implementation of resolution 2231 (2015) in the next
reporting period. The goal of such a briefing would be
to raise awareness among Member States of resolution
2231 (2015), particularly of the procurement channel,
as just described by the Head of Delegation of the
European Union.
That brings me to my third point — the facilitation
of trade by encouraging the use of the procurement
channel. The Channel reviews proposals by States
seeking to participate in or permit certain transfers of
nuclear and dual-use goods, technology or services to
Iran. On 27 April, the 2231 format received a briefing
from the Coordinator of the Procurement Working
Group of the Joint Commission on the procurement
channel. Since the beginning of 2016, 37 proposals for
the procurement channel have been submitted by five
Member States from three different regional groups.
Those include States that are not participants in the
JCPOA. On average, proposals were processed in fewer
than 51 calendar days. Following the withdrawal of
the United States from the JCPOA, the Council has
continued to receive proposals through the Channel,
and the review of those proposals continues.
In conclusion, the unanimous adoption of resolution
2231 (2015), which endorsed the JCPOA, marked a
fundamental shift concerning the Iranian nuclear issue.
As Security Council Facilitator for the resolution, I
have aimed to support and improve its implementation

S/PV. 8297

through the facilitation of talks, transparency and
trade. In that effort, I would also like to thank the
Secretariat for its hard work in support of both myself
and the format. We commend the leadership of UnderSecretary-General DiCarlo and Ambassador Vale de
Almeida and their cooperation.
The President (spoke in Russian): I thank
Ambassador Van Oosterom for his briefing.
I shall now give the floor to those members of the
Council who wish to make statements.
Mr. Cohen (United States of America): I thank
Under-Secretary-General DiCarlo, Ambassador Van
Oosterom and Ambassador Vale de Almeida for their
briefings today.
As has been noted, on 8 May, President Trump
announced that the United States would end its
participation in the Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action
(JCPOA) on Iran’s nuclear programme and instead
pursue a comprehensive policy to both deny Iran all
paths to a nuclear weapon and to counter the totality of
the regime’s malign activities.
The report of the Secretary-General (S/2018/602)
shows that Iran continues to destabilize the region
through its support for terrorist groups and proxy
forces. The findings and information presented in the
Secretary-General’s report paint a deeply troubling
picture of the scope of this behaviour. We are
particularly concerned by the detailed reporting that
confirms numerous Iranian arms embargo violations
across the Middle East and that certain nuclear
dual-use items have been shipped to Iran outside of
the agreed channels and without the required Security
Council approval.
It is clear from the report that Iran bears responsibility
for providing the Houthis with five ballistic missiles
that they launched at civilian targets in Saudi Arabia.
The United Nations also finds that seized weapons it
inspected in Bahrain were manufactured in Iran, and
confirms that an unmanned explosive boat recovered by
the United Arab Emirates had systems with coordinates
showing that it had been in Iranian territorial waters and
that at least some of its components were manufactured
in Iran. The report describes Iranian drones recovered
in Yemen and Syria, and cites a televised interview
with Hamas political leader Yahya Sinwar, in which he
states that the Islamic Republic of Iran provided armed
groups in Gaza with “money, [military] equipment, and

18-199897/21

S/PV.8297

Non-proliferation

expertise” (S/2018/602, para. 13) before and after the
2014 Israel-Gaza conflict.
Those unacceptable violations provide us with
concrete evidence of how Iran is destabilizing the
region and, in particular prolonging the violence in
Yemen. Adding up all of these data points leads to one
unmistakable conclusion — that Iran continues to send
weapons across the Middle East, in blatant violation of
the Council’s resolutions. If there was ever any doubt
regarding Iran’s clear threat to international peace and
stability, the findings of the report should lay it to rest.
The only question remains, when confronted with
all of the information presented by the SecretaryGeneral in this and other reports: How will the States
members of the Council respond? At a minimum, Iran
has violated the provisions of resolutions 2231 (2015),
2216 (2015), 1701 (2006) and 1559 (2004). In those
resolutions, we, the members of the Council, prohibited
Iran from exporting weapons, and we prohibited the
supply of weapons to the Houthis and to Hizbullah.
Iran has defied and violated those resolutions, in many
cases openly. When confronted with a country that
continually violates the Council’s resolutions, it is
imperative that we pursue meaningful consequences.
That is why we urge members of the Council to join us
in the imposition of sanctions that target Iran’s malign
behaviour in the region. The United States stands ready
to work with the members of the Council to take real
action against the threat that Iran poses.
The United States will continue to work with
Member States and the Secretariat to shine a spotlight
on Iran’s behaviour. Reports like the one we are
considering today are critical, and we encourage
everyone to read it. With the reimposition of our
sanctions, the United States is taking a stand. We have
declared that Iran’s actions will not go unchallenged,
and we have shown that we will follow through. The
United States is taking decisive action to ensure that
Iran faces consequences as long as it remains bent on
sowing instability. We urge the members of the Council
to join us.
Standing up to Iran’s destabilizing behaviour is
a mission that all of us should have and share. When
we look out at the region, we see Iran supporting the
Houthis, Iran supporting Hizbullah, Iran supporting
Hamas and Iran supporting the Al-Assad regime. Iran
repeatedly comes up when we gather to discuss mass
atrocities, humanitarian catastrophes or the launching
8/21

27/06/2018

of ballistic missiles. As long as Iran is the common
denominator in so many conflicts across the region,
we must respond. Any Member State concerned about
promoting peace in the Middle East should do the same.
Mr. Delattre (France) (spoke in French): Let
me begin by thanking the Russian presidency of the
Council for convening this important meeting. I also
thank Under-Secretary-General Rosemary DiCarlo,
our colleague of the Netherlands and the observer of the
European Union for their very informative briefings.
I would also like to commend the factual and
balanced nature of the Secretary-General’s report
(S/2018/602), which has been submitted to us and whose
scope fully corresponds to his mandate.
The Security Council’s responsibilities are
measured by the variety and complexity of international
peace and security issues it has to deal with, including
non-proliferation. We spoke briefly about this issue
two days ago during the debate on North Africa and
the Middle East (see S/PV.8293), where the challenges
are immense. In this context, the Iranian nuclear issue
is a textbook case; it confirms the role of impetus and
monitoring that the Security Council can and must play.
This was demonstrated by the unanimous adoption
of resolution 2231 (2015), on 20 July 2015, which
sealed the agreement reached in Vienna, the Joint
Comprehensive Plan of Action (JCPOA), of which the
Council is the guarantor.
The JCPOA is the result of the perseverance of the
international community and a common will to provide
a robust response to our shared security interests. The
JPCOA also embodies the pragmatic and demanding
multilateralism to which my country is deeply
committed. The collapse of this major achievement
would mark a serious step backwards for the region, for
the non-proliferation regime, and for all of our security,
which would potentially have serious consequences.
This is why I want now to renew with force the
commitment reaffirmed by President Macron alongside
his British and German partners, and supported by the
other Europeans, on 8 May. France, which has worked
tirelessly throughout the negotiations to ensure the
robust nature of this agreement, remains determined to
ensure its implementation and preserve it.
In this regard, we have noted with regret and concern
the decision of the United States to withdraw from the
JCPOA. However, the agreement remains in place, and
this decision should not affect the implementation by
18-19989

27/06/2018

Non-proliferation

the parties to this agreement of their commitments.
France will continue to work with the parties involved
in this collective framework. Let us be clear — as
long as Iran fulfils its nuclear commitments under the
JCPOA, France will meet its own. We are therefore
determined to ensure as far as possible the maintenance
of the economic relations with Iran permitted by the
agreement. The agreement was designed specifically to
ensure that Iran’s nuclear programme is not diverted for
military purposes. That founding goal continues to be
met, as the Secretary-General recalls in his report. In
accordance with its mandate, the International Atomic
Energy Agency reconfirmed in its report of 24 May
that Iran is in compliance with its commitments under
the JCPOA.
I now come to my third point, which concerns
resolution 2231 (2015) and the report before us. Our
collective commitments do not end with the JCPOA
framework. For its part, Iran must respect all its
commitments under the resolution, including those
under annex B. However, the Secretary-General’s
report identifies various elements of Iran’s continued
non-compliance with several of its provisions, which
are sources of significant concern. I would refer to
Iran’s ballistic activities and the transfer of ballistic
capabilities and technologies, in particular to the
Houthis, as documented in the report of the SecretaryGeneral. The Security Council has on several occasions
condemned the firing of ballistic missiles against Saudi
Arabia. This aspect is in addition to the information
reported on seizures of weapons of probable Iranian
origin and elements relating to violations of asset
freezes and travel bans. However, I recall that all
States, first and foremost Iran, must comply with those
provisions of resolution 2231 (2015). In particular, any
activity involving the transfer of assistance, missiles,
technologies and ballistic capabilities to State or
non-State actors is contrary to Security Council
resolutions and must cease immediately.
In conclusion, I recall the importance of the JCPOA,
which is both an essential instrument of the international
non-proliferation regime and one of the cornerstones
of stability in the region as a whole. Anything that
weakens it therefore poses a direct risk to our collective
security. The assurances given to us by the JCPOA in
the nuclear field should enable us to address other issues
of concern for regional security. This is the thrust of
President Macron’s proposal to engage in discussions
towards a broader four-pillar agreement that preserves

S/PV. 8297

the JCPOA, provides a long-term framework for Iran’s
nuclear programme, constrains the most destabilizing
developments in Iran’s ballistic activities, and ensures
that Iran ceases to play a destabilizing role in the
region. I would assure Council members of France’s
full and clear commitment, alongside our partners, on
these points, as well as on the implementation of all
our commitments.
Mr. Tumysh (Kazakhstan): At the outset, I would
like to thank the Under-Secretary-General for Political
Affairs, Ms. Rosemary DiCarlo; the Facilitator for the
implementation of resolution 2231 (2015), Ambassador
Karel van Oosterom; and the Head of the European
Union Delegation, Ambassador João Vale de Almeida,
for their informative briefings. I would also like to
welcome to the Security Council today Ambassador
Christoph Heusgen, Permanent Representative of
Germany, and cordially wish him and his country every
success as an incoming member of the Security Council.
Kazakhstan supports the Secretary-General in
pointing out that the Joint Comprehensive Plan of
Action (JCPOA) is the culmination of 12 years of
intensive diplomatic efforts aimed at achieving a
comprehensive, long-term and proper solution of
the Iranian nuclear problem. The extremely long and
difficult multilateral negotiation process was a credit
to the international community. My country has made
a significant contribution to the process by organizing
two rounds of negotiations between the E3+3 and Iran
in Almaty in 2013.
Kazakhstan firmly and consistently supports the
JCPOA on account of the following features. First, it
is recognized by many as an unprecedented — and
the only — way to ensure the exclusively peaceful
nature of the Iranian nuclear programme. We consider
it to be an important factor in securing the regime of
non-proliferation of nuclear weapons and strengthening
regional and global peace and security.
Secondly, this historic nuclear deal is valuable as it
fulfils its mission to, at a minimum, convince Iran stop
enriching the uranium needed for nuclear weapons. It
has given International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA)
inspectors access to facilities in Iran and put the nuclear
programme under international control. IAEA reports
confirm that Iran is in compliance with all requirements
under the JCPOA.
Thirdly, the JCPOA is a truly practical and
successful example of solving the most difficult issues

18-199899/21

S/PV.8297

Non-proliferation

through negotiations, as it was developed and adopted
through dialogue and in an atmosphere of trust.
We share the position of the Secretary-General
and the overwhelming majority of States in regretting
the decision by the United States to withdraw from the
JCPOA and impose unilateral sanctions against Tehran.
We believe that the concerns of the United States about
Iran’s ballistic activities and other issues should not
prejudice or impede putting this multilateral agreement
into effect. Furthermore, we would still like to see the
fifth report (S/2018/602) presented in its most complete
and comprehensive form, namely, by including both
annexes of resolution 2231 (2015). Due attention
has not been given to the content and provisions of
annex A, which is the JCPOA. In order to give greater
importance and proper political significance to the
JCPOA, we suggest that resolution 2231 (2015), with
both its annexes, be fully covered in future.

27/06/2018

Ms. Pierce (United Kingdom): I wish to thank
our three briefers today. This is an important issue,
so I thank you, Mr. President, for having convened
this debate.
For the United Kingdom’s part, we welcome the
thorough and well-evidenced report on the ongoing
implementation of resolution 2231 (2015) (S/2018/602).
We are aware of the criticism that has been made of the
report in some quarters, but we consider the scope and
the methodology of the report to be both appropriate
and robust. We offer our thanks to the Secretariat for
its continued work to ensure the proper implementation
of this resolution of such importance for regional and
international peace and security.
My intervention, like the issue itself, comes in two
halves: what happens with the Joint Comprehensive
Plan of Action (JCPOA) and what happens in respect of
the region and regional stability.

At the same time, we recall that the Security Council,
in paragraph 2 of resolution 2231 (2015), calls on all
Member States as well as regional and international
organizations to support the implementation of the
JCPOA and refrain from actions that undermine the
realization of the commitments under that agreement.

With respect to the JCPOA, we join the SecretaryGeneral and my French colleague in regretting the
United States decision to leave the Joint Comprehensive
Plan of Action and to reimpose United States sanctions
on Iran. For the United Kingdom’s part, we remain
committed to the nuclear deal. It is an essential part
of the global non-proliferation architecture, and,
furthermore, the deal is working. As we have just
heard, the latest report of the International Atomic
Energy Agency (IAEA) confirms that Iran continues
to comply with its nuclear obligations under the deal,
as indeed it has since implementation day. This is
consistent with the previous 10 IAEA reports, and we
believe that it demonstrates the Iranian commitment to
the nuclear deal.

To conclude, I would like to congratulate the
Facilitator, Ambassador Karel van Oosterom of the
Netherlands, on his first briefing and to commend his
committed and tireless efforts to ensure that resolution
2231 (2015) fulfils its objectives. We support his
endeavours to consistently maintain transparency,
a constructive and inclusive approach and optimal
operationalization of the 2231 format.

We expect this commitment to continue. We expect
Iran to continue to abide by its obligations under the
deal. In return, the United Kingdom, together with the
remaining participants in the deal, will take the steps
necessary to ensure that Iran continues to receive
economic benefits from sanctions relief. We welcome
the update on the activities of the procurement channel.
The United Kingdom fully supports and remains
committed to the procurement channel process.

Kazakhstan will continue to advocate for
preserving and further implementing the agreement, to
which we do not see any alternative. We are convinced
that political and diplomatic solutions are the only
way to resolve all the issues pertaining to the Iranian
nuclear programme.

While the JCPOA remains vital for our national
security, and indeed for the stability of the Middle
East, it is only one part of the efforts towards long-term
stability and peace in the region. The United Kingdom
shares the Secretary-General’s view that issues not
directly related to the nuclear deal should be addressed

In addition, we note that notifications by some States
Members of the United Nations in the report do not
contain complete and irrefutable evidence that proves
that Iran has violated the provisions of resolution 2231
(2015). They require further consideration, thorough
investigation and closer and clearer coordination
between the Council and the Secretariat so as to be able
to effectively respond to such allegations.

10/21

18-19989

27/06/2018

Non-proliferation

S/PV. 8297

without prejudice to preserving the agreement. We
believe that these issues can most effectively be
addressed while the nuclear deal remains in place.

finances into such adventures retards its own ability
to modernize its economy and deliver services to
its people.

I will now turn to the second half of today’s
debate: the regional picture. I listened very carefully
to the briefing given by the Under-Secretary-General
in particular, but also by the two other speakers. It is
true that the Secretary-General’s latest report contains
concerning reports of attempted shipments to Iran of
certain dual-use items without the necessary prior
approval from the Security Council. We call on the
United Nations to investigate these alleged transfers
further and to report its findings to the Council.

After 9/11, which struck this city, I worked very
closely with the Iranian Government. We were on the
same side in combating terrorism. It is a matter of
lasting regret that Iran has chosen a different course of
action in the intervening years. What I would like to do
is to join others in taking the opportunity today to urge
Iran to refrain from the destabilizing behaviour that
the report outlines and that we have talked about today,
and in particular to make a material contribution to the
political process in Yemen that the United Nations is so
bravely undertaking.

We also note the Secretary-General’s assessment
that ballistic-missile technology used by the Houthi
in Yemen was transferred from Iran, as previously
set out in the Yemen Panel of Experts report (see
S/2018/68). This chimes with our own assessment.
The United Kingdom considers these transfers to be
in contravention of resolutions 2231 (2015) and 2216
(2015). The proliferation of missile technology is
destabilizing for the region and needs to cease, in the
interest of Iran, in the interest of regional stability, and
in the interest of international peace and security.
In addition, we remain concerned by Iran’s testing
of missiles that are designed to be capable of delivering
a nuclear warhead.
It was not my intention today to talk about the
wider Iranian role in the region, but I would just like to
echo what my United States colleagues said about some
of the activities undertaken by Iran in places such as
Lebanon and Syria.
I should like to be very clear about the United
Kingdom’s position. Iran is an ancient, respected and
mature civilization. It has legitimate security interests
in the region and deserves a proper place in the global
multilateral system. However, the way it pursues and
prosecutes these interests is too often destabilizing and
too often threatening to its neighbours and threatening
to others, including those of us in Europe. Supplying
missiles for attacks on regional neighbours has no
legitimacy. Transferring threatening technology has
no legitimacy, nor does importing dual-use equipment
without the Security Council’s prior approval. And
while we recognize Iran’s national security interests,
there is no legitimacy or justification for Iran testing
missiles that are designed to be capable of delivering a
nuclear warhead. Furthermore, diverting Iran’s public

To conclude, the United Kingdom’s position on
the Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action is clear. It is a
critical agreement that makes the world a safer place.
It is vital for our security, and we remain committed to
it. To that end, the United Kingdom, and, we believe,
our European partners, will continue to work with the
remaining parties to the deal to maintain it.
Mr. Alemu (Ethiopia): I should like to start by
thanking Under-Secretary-General Rosemary DiCarlo,
Ambassador Karel van Oosterom and Ambassador Vale
de Almeida for their briefings on the implementation of
resolution 2231 (2015). I wish also to acknowledge the
presence here with us of our colleague the Permanent
Representative of Germany, whose country has a critical
role in the implementation of the Joint Comprehensive
Plan of Action (JCPOA).
We note from the report of the Secretary-General
(S/2018/602) that the Islamic Republic of Iran continues
to adhere to its nuclear-related commitments and the
Secretary-General has not received any report on the
supply, transfer or export to Iran of nuclear or dual-use
items, materials, equipment, goods or technology.
We also note that the International Atomic Energy
Agency (IAEA) continues to monitor and verify the
implementation of the nuclear-related commitments by
the Islamic Republic of Iran. The continued cooperation
of the IAEA with the Islamic Republic of Iran and
the JCPOA-participating States will also remain very
critical for the full implementation of the nuclearrelated commitments under the JCPOA.
We welcome the smooth cooperation between the
Security Council and the Joint Commission as indicated
in the report of the Facilitator (see S/2018/601). We also
welcome the continued work of the procurement channel

18-1998911/21

S/PV.8297

Non-proliferation

in approving the proposal submitted to it. The planned
open briefing to the wider United Nations membership
on the implementation of resolution 2231 (2015) by
the Facilitator is commendable as it will contribute
to fostering awareness particularly with the activities
set forth in paragraph 2 of annex B to resolution 2231
(2015) and the procurement channel.
We share the view of the Secretary-General that the
JCPOA is
“a major achievement in nuclear non-proliferation
that has contributed to regional and international
peace and security.” (S/2018/602, para. 3)
However, we recognize the challenges and difficulties
in the broader implementation of resolution 2231
(2015), particularly the reported activities allegedly
undertaken by the Islamic Republic of Iran contrary to
the restrictive measures set out in annex B to resolution
2231 (2015) and the key findings included in the
reports of the Secretary-General and the Facilitator.
While awaiting further information on those reported
activities allegedly undertaken by the Islamic Republic
of Iran, we share the view expressed by the SecretaryGeneral that the Islamic Republic of Iran needs to
carefully consider these concerns, as they have the
potential to impact the context within which the JCPOA
is being implemented.
It is also worth noting the difficulty associated
with the withdrawal of the United States from the
JCPOA. We share the view of the Secretary-General,
highlighted in his report, that it is a setback to the
Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action. In that regard,
we appreciate the commitment of the remaining
participating countries, including the Islamic Republic
of Iran, to fully implement the JCPOA. It is critical
for the remaining JCPOA participants to continue to
address challenges associated with the withdrawal and
contribute to the full implementation of the JCPOA and
the satisfactory conclusion of the issue.
I would like to end my remarks by encouraging
the remaining participating countries to continue to
work together to address some of the challenges aimed
at ensuring the full implementation of resolution 2231
(2015).
Mr. Ma Zhaoxu (China) (spoke in Chinese): First
of all, I would like to thank Under-Secretary-General
DiCarlo, Ambassador Van Oosterom and Ambassador
12/21

27/06/2018

Vale de Almeida for their briefings and to express my
appreciation for their work.
The Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action (JCPOA)
on Iran’s nuclear programme represents an important
achievement of multilateralism and a success story in
addressing international and regional hotspot issues
through political and diplomatic means. It has played
an important role in upholding the international nuclear
non-proliferation regime and promoting peace and
stability in the Middle East. As such, it is generally
welcome by the international community.
The International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA)
has reported 11 times in a row that Iran has been
implementing its nuclear-related commitments under
the JCPOA. The coordination between the Security
Council and the Procurement Channel is working as
expected. The experience in the past three years has
fully shown that the JCPOA is an effective agreement.
China commends the efforts of all the parties
concerned to implement the JCPOA and expresses
regret with regard to the withdrawal of the United
States from the agreement. China calls on all parties
to assume a responsible attitude, bear in mind the
long-term and broader situation, commit to patiently
engaging in dialogue and cooperation in order to
preserve the seriousness and authority of the JCPOA,
and resolve issues through dialogue and negotiation.
The report of the Secretary-General (S/2018/602)
is an important component of the implementation of
resolution 2231 (2015) and the JCPOA. The report
welcomes the commitment of the parties concerned
to maintain the full implementation of the JCPOA and
reflects Iran’s effort to implement the agreement in an
objective manner, which China acknowledges.
China has also noted that, in his report, the
Secretary-General expressed his deep regret with regard
to the withdrawal of the United States from the JCPOA.
In the meantime, China believes that the report of the
Secretary-General should reflect the implementation
efforts in an objective, balanced and comprehensive
manner, and take the legitimate concerns of Iran into
a consideration. The Secretariat should act in strict
accordance with its mandates and functions.
China appreciates the work done by Ambassador
Van Oosterom and his team in his capacity as Facilitator
of the implementation of resolution 2231 (2015). China
has taken note of the report submitted by the Joint
18-19989

27/06/2018

Non-proliferation

Commission to the Security Council on the work of the
Procurement Working Group, and will continue to take
an active part in the work of the Joint Commission and
the Procurement Working Group.
China consistently stands for the settlement of the
Iranian nuclear issue through political and diplomatic
means and is committed to the strengthening of the
international nuclear non-proliferation regime and
the maintenance of international and regional peace
and stability. China will objectively, impartially and
responsibly maintain its dialogue with all parties
concerned to continue to preserve and implement
the JCPOA.
Mr. Djédjé (Côte d’Ivoire) (spoke in French):
I would like to thank Ms. Rosemary DiCarlo
and Mr. João Vale de Almeida for their edifying
briefings. I also congratulate our colleague
Ambassador Karel van Oosterom for the work he has
done in his capacity as the Facilitator entrusted by the
Security Council to promote the implementation of
resolution 2231 (2015).
Almost three years after its adoption by Germany,
France, the United Kingdom, China, the United States
of America, the Russian Federation, the European
Union and the Islamic Republic of Iran, the Joint
Comprehensive Plan of Action (JCPOA), which in the
view of my delegation is one of the best achievements
in the field of nuclear non-proliferation, has reached
an impasse.
In adopting resolution 2231 (2015), the Security
Council sought, inter alia, to guarantee the exclusively
civilian character of Iran’s nuclear programme,
in accordance with article IV of the Treaty on the
Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons (NPT). My
delegation believes that this agreement constitutes a
solid foundation for the implementation of the NPT
and that bringing it into question is likely to undermine
the collective efforts of the international community to
find a peaceful solution to the Iranian nuclear issue.
Moreover, it calls on all stakeholders to resolve all
disagreements relating to the implementation of the
provisions of the JCPOA through negotiations within
the Joint Commission provided for in annex 4 of
the agreement.
The International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA),
the function and findings of which play a pivotal
role in the Iranian dossier, has admirably discharged
its obligations since 2015, as demonstrated by the

S/PV. 8297

11 reports that it has issued since then. In its most
recent reports, the IAEA has once again pointed out
the successful implementation of the 2015 agreement
owing to the frequent inspections in Iran, which have
confirmed limited uranium enrichment exclusively
for civilian use and the provisional implementation of
its Additional Protocol to its Safeguards Agreement.
The IAEA, which has not discovered any violation
concerning restrictions placed on Iran’s ballistic
missile-related activities, pursuant to paragraph 3 of
annex B of Resolution 2231 (2015), has also indicated
the non-diversion of declared nuclear material and the
absence of undeclared nuclear material and activities.
Furthermore, the successful implementation of the
Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action was just reaffirmed
by the 12 June fifth semi-annual report (S/2018/602)
of the Secretary-General on the implementation of
the provisions of resolution 2231 (2015). My country
welcomes its recommendations concerning the
strengthening of capacities of States Members to better
avail themselves of the procurement channel and the full
compliance of States of the region with their obligations
pursuant to resolution 2231 (2015). In that light, Côte
d’Ivoire believes that Iran’s implementation of the
Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action is satisfactory,
although, as with all agreements, there is still room
for improvement.
My delegation believes that it is essential that all
concerns involving the implementation of the Plan of
Action be addressed through mechanisms established
for that purpose, in particular within the framework of
the Joint Commission provided for in annex 4 of the
agreement. My country therefore urges all parties to the
Iranian nuclear agreement to return to the negotiating
table, and calls on them to respect their respective
commitments fully, while at the same time keeping
in mind the importance of strengthening international
security through the comprehensive implementation of
the agreement, which has led to significant progress
concerning the Iranian issue. Moreover, Côte d’Ivoire
calls on the Islamic Republic of Iran to pay particular
attention to the concerns raised by other States,
especially the countries of the Middle East region, and
to increase its cooperation with the IAEA. It also calls
on Iran to comply with the travel ban and asset freeze
provisions of the relevant Security Council resolutions
in good faith.
In conclusion, my delegation believes that, with
regard to the Iranian dossier, the effectiveness of the

18-1998913/21

S/PV.8297

Non-proliferation

Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action, as well as the
IAEA verification regime, has made the agreement
into a diplomatic success, which the international
community must work arduously to preserve. In that
regard, it welcomes all initiatives aimed at finding a
peaceful and lasting solution that is satisfactory for all
those who have a stake in the Iranian nuclear issue.
Ms. Wronecka (Poland): I would like to thank
all of today’s briefers — Under-Secretary-General
Rosemary DiCarlo; Ambassador João Vale de Almeida;
and Ambassador Karel van Oosterom, in his capacity
as Security Council Facilitator for the implementation
of resolution 2231 (2015) — for their respective reports.
We believe that it is in our common interest to
stabilize the situation in the Middle East, reduce
tension in the region and, most important, prevent the
further proliferation of nuclear weapons. In our view,
the Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action (JCPOA) is
an important step towards achieving the objective
of a nuclear non-proliferation, as it provides the
international community with verification mechanisms
to monitor the Iranian nuclear programme. Moreover,
it has become an important element of the global
non-proliferation architecture.
Poland welcomes the fifth semi-annual report
(S/2018/602) of the Secretary-General on the
implementation of resolution 2231 (2015). We note
that the International Atomic Energy Agency has
reported that Iran is implementing its nuclear-related
commitments under the JCPOA and the fact that the
Agency itself continues to verify the non-diversion of
declared nuclear material and the absence of undeclared
nuclear material and activities in Iran.
We call on Iran to continue to implement the
Additional Protocols to its Safeguards Agreement.
It is important for Iran to continue to abide by the
terms of the JCPOA. The recent declaration by Iran
about increasing its capacity to produce uranium
hexafluoride does not constitute a violation of the
agreement, but neither does it contribute to building
confidence. At the same time, Poland shares concerns
about Iranian activities undertaken that run contrary
to the provisions of annex B contained in resolution
2231 (2015), as accurately reported by the SecretaryGeneral. The JCPOA does not explicitly prohibit
the development of delivery systems, or address the
question of Iranian influence in the region, which some
countries perceive as negative. In that connection, Iran
14/21

27/06/2018

should refrain from actions that are not in spirit of the
JCPOA and could undermine the implementation of
commitments under the Plan. The series of short- and
medium-range ballistic missile tests conducted by Iran
and reported missile transfers, as well as some of Iran’s
other activities in the region, are a source of concern for
us. They risk deepening mistrust and are inconsistent
with the spirit of resolution 2231 (2015).
We recognize the procurement channel and the
Procurement Working Group as essential parts of the
JCPOA and a significant transparency measure under
the Plan. Poland supports the procurement channel and
believes that its proper functioning ensures conformity
of the relevant transfers in connection with the JCPOA
and resolution 2231 (2015) and contributes to supporting
the non-proliferation regime.
Last but not least, I would like to thank Ambassador
Karel van Oosterom for his balanced and scrupulous
report. I would like to recognize his diligent efforts in
facilitating the important, yet challenging, format of the
Security Council by — as he described — promoting
talks, transparency and trade in order to fully implement
resolution 2231 (2015).
Mr. Van Oosterom (Netherlands): I am now
speaking in my national capacity.
First, let me welcome our German colleague to the
Security Council. I will make three points concerning,
first, the Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action (JCPOA);
secondly, Iran’s ballistic missile programme and its
role in the region; and, thirdly, the implementation of
resolution 2231 (2015).
Let me turn to my first point — the JCPOA. The
JCPOA is a major diplomatic accomplishment and a key
non-proliferation achievement. It has been unanimously
endorsed by the Security Council via resolution 2231
(2015). For the Kingdom of the Netherlands, preserving
that robust and effective agreement is a clear priority.
It is crucial for the security of the region, Europe and
the entire world, and the JCPOA has been delivering on
its objective, which is to prevent Iran from developing
nuclear weapons — an obligation it also has under
the Non-Proliferation Treaty. The JCPOA is based on
solid verification. Inspectors from the International
Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) spend more than
3,000 calendar days per year on the ground in Iran and
monitor more than 25 locations in Iran on a 24/7 basis.
That is an important IAEA endeavour to which my
country has contributed more than €1.5 million. The
18-19989

27/06/2018

Non-proliferation

inspection regime has resulted in eleven consecutive
IAEA reports, which confirm that Iran is living up to
its commitments under the JCPOA.
It is in that light that we deeply regret the decision
of the United States to withdraw from the agreement.
We believe that this international agreement effectively
blocks the route to an Iranian nuclear weapon. It is better
than any alternative. That is why we call on the JCPOA
participants to remain committed to the agreement.
That brings me to my second point, the position of
Iran. Whereas Iran fulfils its nuclear commitments, the
Kingdom of the Netherlands shares the concerns voiced
by others today about its ballistic missile programme
and its destabilizing role in the region. Iran mingles
in the internal affairs of other countries and supports
armed groups. We strongly condemn any Iranian
involvement in the missiles fired on Saudi Arabia by
the Houthis from Yemen. We also note with concern the
continuation of arms transfers, as well as violations of
the asset freeze and travel ban, in violation of resolution
2231 (2015). We call on Iran to refrain from any such
activities, to fully implement resolution 2231 (2015)
and to engage in serious dialogue on these concerns
outside the framework of the JCPOA.
As long as Iran remains committed to the JCPOA,
the international community should do so as well.
Therefore, as my third point, I wish to call on the
entire international community to continue to support
and implement resolution 2231 (2015), including the
JCPOA. The international community should ensure
that Iran continues to benefit from the agreement as
was foreseen, including trade — if appropriate, via the
procurement channel. The Kingdom of the Netherlands
will continue to play its part to ensure the full
implementation of resolution 2231 (2015) — nationally,
as a member of the European Union, and as a facilitator
for resolution 2231 (2015) here in New York this year.
In conclusion, the Kingdom of the Netherlands
sees it as a clear priority that the JCPOA participants,
including Iran and the wider international community,
remain committed to resolution 2231 (2015), including
the JCPOA — especially now that the agreement faces
serious challenges. At the same time, Iran should address
international concerns regarding its ballistic missile
programme and its destabilizing role in the region.
The JCPOA showed that the international
community can come together and solve even the
most complex of issues. It showed that it is possible to

S/PV. 8297

overcome differences through dialogue and diplomacy.
It is a clear example of effective multilateralism.
Ensuring the continued implementation of resolution
2231 (2015) is in the interest of the Iranian people, of
the region and of us all.
Mr. Esono Mbengono (Equatorial Guinea) (spoke
in Spanish): At the outset, my delegation would like to
express its gratitude to Ms. Rosemary DiCarlo, UnderSecretary-General for Political Affairs; Ambassador
Karel van Oosterom of the Netherlands, as Facilitator
for the implementation of resolution 2231 (2015); and
Mr. João Vale de Almeida, Head of the Delegation of the
European Union to the United Nations, on behalf of the
High Representative of the European Union for Foreign
Affairs and Security Policy, as Coordinator of the Joint
Commission, for their comprehensive briefings.
Almost three years ago (see S/PV.7488), the
Security Council unanimously adopted resolution 2231
(2015), which endorsed the Joint Comprehensive Plan
of Action (JCPOA), thereby marking a fundamental
change in its consideration of Iranian nuclear issues
and building a bridge to foster trust in the exclusively
peaceful nature of the Iranian programme. The
Government of Equatorial Guinea shares the positive
view of the Secretary-General on this agreement in
his report (S/2018/602). We also applaud the efforts of
the International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) in
monitoring the agreement, as it has made apparent that
the successes and the work of the last 20 years have
been worth it.
The Islamic Republic of Iran has shown its
total commitment, pursuant to the JCPOA, to
the implementation of resolution 2231 (2015).
My Government welcomes that achievement, as
characterized by the IAEA. Like the Secretary-General
in his report on the implementation of resolution 2231
(2015), we encourage the authorities of the Islamic
Republic of Iran to conduct an in-depth review of the
concerns of the Commission and other States with
regard to the use of ballistic missiles. Even though that
issue is not covered in the Plan, it affects the overall
perception of the Plan, which is key to the effective and
efficient implementation of resolution 2231 (2015).
On 8 May, President Donald Trump announced the
withdrawal of the United States from the Plan and the
reimposition of all sanctions that his country had lifted
on Iran. Although that decision is a regrettable setback
to significant progress in the implementation of the

18-1998915/21

S/PV.8297

Non-proliferation

Plan, the Government of Equatorial Guinea urges all
parties to continue carrying out their responsibilities
and obligations, thereby preserving an agreement that
has contributed to regional and international peace
and security.
Iranian authorities must abstain from any activity
that could undermine the full implementation of the
resolution 2231 (2015). We encourage all parties to
the Plan to continue honouring it. Any discrepancy
with regard to the implementation of the Plan must be
resolved through negotiations.
Finally, we wish to stress once again our
understanding that the agreement ensures the peaceful
uses of the Iranian nuclear programme and helps
consolidate the nuclear non-proliferation regime in
the region.
Mr. Llorentty Solíz (Bolivia) (spoke in Spanish):
My delegation wishes to thank the Under-SecretaryGeneral for Political Affairs, Ms. Rosemary DiCarlo,
and the Head of the Delegation of the European Union to
the United Nations, Mr. João Vale de Almeida, for their
briefings. We also thank the Permanent Representative
of the Netherlands, Mr. Karel van Oosterom, for the
detailed information he provided in relation to his work
as Facilitator for the implementation of resolution 2231
(2015). Finally, we welcome the participation of the
Permanent Representative of Germany in this session.
I begin by stressing that Bolivia is part of the first
densely populated region of the world that is completely
free of nuclear weapons and, as provided for in the
Treaty for the Prohibition of Nuclear Weapons in Latin
America and the Caribbean, we have assumed the
responsibility of contributing, to the best of our ability,
to ending the arms race — especially nuclear — and to
consolidating international peace and security. In that
regard, we attend this meeting convinced that we have
an obligation to the international community to join
forces so that the Middle East can join the five nuclearweapon-free zones of the world.
Bolivia firmly reaffirms its commitment to the
implementation of resolution 2231 (2015), in the
understanding that it represents an unmistakable
diplomatic achievement with respect to nuclear
non-proliferation and a manifestation of the capacity
of States when we are committed to multilateralism
and international law. In that context, we reiterate the
right of the peoples of the world, without exception, to
research, produce and use nuclear energy for peaceful
16/21

27/06/2018

purposes, in accordance with articles I and II of the
Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons
and the principles laid down by the International
Atomic Energy Agency.
My delegation believes that the 12 years of intense
diplomatic activity that led to an agreement on the
Iranian nuclear issue and that resulted in the Joint
Comprehensive Plan of Action, which the Security
Council endorsed through the unanimous adoption
of resolution 2231 (2015), cannot be postponed by
the unilateral decision of one State that jeopardizes
the implementation of the Plan. In that order of
priorities, like many other representatives, we regret
the announcement on 8 May by the United States
Government of its withdrawal from the agreement and
its reimposition of the unilateral sanctions that had been
lifted or had been subject to exemptions, in accordance
with the JCPOA. Bolivia categorically condemns
unilateral sanctions, which are a flagrant violation of
multilateralism and a serious threat to the international
order, constituting as they do illegal measures that
impose one State’s jurisdiction and internal legislation
on another’s, violating the principles of equality,
sovereignty and the territorial integrity of States. We
are concerned about the possibility that that decision
could affect the Plan of Action, with consequences
that would have implications for the whole world, not
just the Middle East. In that regard, we believe that
we should be able to create a climate of mutual trust
among States given the denuclearization proposals that
are currently being negotiated, as is the case with the
Korean peninsula.
Despite all of this, we want to emphasize the
decision of the Government of the Islamic Republic
of Iran to continue to abide by its commitments under
the JCPOA. We also commend the support of the other
signatories to the JCPOA to the non-proliferation
of nuclear weapons in the region, as expressed on
25 May in Vienna, and to the continuing, full and
effective implementation of the Plan of Action. In that
regard, it is the responsibility of the Security Council
to uphold the agreement exactly as it was envisaged,
guaranteeing reciprocal commitments for its full goodfaith implementation in a constructive atmosphere
based on mutual respect. In that context, the Council
members are the main guarantors preventing any action
that could undermine the Plan of Action. We support
any initiative of the Secretary-General that ensures the
validity of the JCPOA.
18-19989

27/06/2018

Non-proliferation

As on other occasions, we are interested in seeing
more in-depth information in future reports regarding
annex A, since annexes A and B are both integral and
complementary to the effective implementation of
resolution 2231 (2015).
Finally, as a peaceful country, Bolivia reaffirms its
commitment to preventive diplomacy, multilateralism,
non-interference and respect for the sovereignty,
independence and territorial integrity of States, in
the understanding that those are universal principles
recognized by the international community.
Mr. Tenya (Peru) (spoke in Spanish): We would
like to express our gratitude for the convening of
this meeting and for the briefings by Mrs. Rosemary
DiCarlo, Under-Secretary-General for Political Affairs,
Ambassador Karel van Oosterom, in his capacity as
Facilitator for the implementation of resolution 2231
(2015), and Ambassador João Pedro Vale de Almeida.
We also welcome the presence of the Permanent
Representative of Germany at today’s meeting.
As a country committed to multilateralism,
international law and the principle of the peaceful
settlement of disputes, Peru gives high priority to
safeguarding the nuclear non-proliferation regime,
including as it concerns delivery systems, as well as to
promoting disarmament and arms control. We therefore
affirm the importance of the implementation of the Joint
Comprehensive Plan of Action (JCPOA) for the Iranian
nuclear programme, achieved thanks to the unity that
the members of the Council were able to maintain with
regard to that issue for years and adopted unanimously
under resolution 2231 (2015), which is still in force.
In the circumstances, we would like to commend
the commitment of the parties to preserving the
agreement and the need to safeguard it. We express
our appreciation and support for the verification and
monitoring work of the International Atomic Energy
Agency. We also want to underline the importance of
ensuring that Iran continues to fulfil its obligations
in that sensitive area. We take due note of the Iranian
compliance, as mentioned by the Secretary-General in
his fifth biannual reports (S/2018/601, S/2018/602 and
S/2018/624) on the implementation of the JCPOA. We
also emphasize the importance of duly investigating
the allegations mentioned in the most recent report
(S/2017/1030) on the alleged violations of paragraph 2
of annex B to resolution 2231 (2015).

S/PV. 8297

We also underscore the importance of continuing
to verify that in accordance with paragraph 3 of annex
B to resolution 2231 (2015), Iran does not undertake
any ballistic-missile-related activity aimed at
launching nuclear weapons, including launches that use
such ballistic-missile technology. We believe that the
Iranian ballistic-missile programme has the potential
to increase regional tensions. We therefore believe
that it is important that the Iranian authorities act
with extreme prudence. We are particularly concerned
about the reports of the alleged delivery of missiles or
ballistic technology to the Houthis in Yemen. In that
regard, we support the Secretary-General’s proposal to
conduct additional outreach and training activities for
Member States on the procedures and requests that must
be submitted through the Procurement Working Group.
We also believe it appropriate to recall the
obligations of all States, pursuant to resolution 2231
(2015), with regard to the bans on travel and the
transfer of arms and related materiel, and the freezing
of assets of the persons and entities listed in the
resolution’s attachments.
In conclusion, I affirm Peru’s commitment to the
non-proliferation regime, the need to maintain the
unity of the Council around its responsibility to ensure
the full effectiveness of that regime and its importance
for maintaining international peace and security.
Mr. Alotaibi (Kuwait) (spoke in Arabic): I
would like to thank Mrs. Rosemary DiCarlo, UnderSecretary-General for Political Affairs, for her briefing
on the biannual report of the Secretary-General on the
implementation of resolution 2231 (2015) (S/2018/602).
I would also like to thank my colleague the Permanent
Representative of the Netherlands, in his capacity as
Facilitator for the implementation of resolution 2231
(2015), and the observer of the European Union for
their briefings. And we welcome the participation of the
Permanent Representative of Germany in this meeting.
We meet today on the agenda item of nuclear
non-proliferation to discuss the implementation of
resolution 2231 (2015), against the backdrop of the
reports under consideration (S/2018/601, S/2018/602
and S/2018/624), and in the wake of the recent
developments with regard to the Joint Comprehensive
Plan of Action (JCPOA) and the decision of the United
States to withdraw from it. My delegation has reviewed
the three reports before us, including the content
of the Secretary-General’s report (S/2018/602) on

18-1998917/21

S/PV.8297

Non-proliferation

Iran’s implementation of its commitments regarding
its nuclear programme. We welcome its assertions
about that implementation in accordance with the
nuclear agreement, as mentioned in the reports of the
International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) that have
been submitted to the Security Council since January
2016 (see S/2018/624). In that regard, we affirm that
Iran should continue to meet all its commitments
under the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear
Weapons and the IAEA Safeguards Agreement. Iran
should also quickly ratify the Additional Protocol in
order to maintain its position as a non-nuclear State.
The State of Kuwait supports all ongoing efforts to
ensure security and stability in the region, which has
long endured turbulence and war. However, we want
to emphasize our firm position on all non-proliferation
issues in general, and specifically on declaring the
Middle East a zone free of weapons of mass destruction.
Nearly three years ago, the State of Kuwait welcomed the
adoption of the agreement on Iran’s nuclear programme
under the JCPOA (see S/PV.7488), although we believe
that it does not address all the concerns of the region.
However, in the spirit of cooperation and support for
diplomatic efforts, at the time we expressed the hope
that the agreement would help to promote security
and stability in the Middle East. Notwithstanding the
deteriorating security situation in the Middle East, the
ongoing interference in the region’s internal affairs
and the destabilization of security and stability at
the regional level, we believe that it is important to
support and encourage all the parties to the agreement
to uphold it and implement its provisions. The State
of Kuwait respects and abides by Council resolutions.
Nonetheless, the grounds for the withdrawal of the
United States from the JCPOA must be highlighted
in order to address all the regional and international
concerns related to that agreement.
We are concerned about the findings of the
Secretariat involved in the implementation of resolution
2231 (2015) pertaining to the ballistic missiles fired at
Saudi Arabia from Yemen, as well as the issues related
to the transfer of arms and military equipment to other
States in the region. Although the Secretariat was
unable to determine dates for the arms transfers that
are mentioned in the report, it remains a very serious
issue that threatens security and stability in the region.
In that regard, we reiterate our condemnation in the
strongest terms of firing ballistic missiles at the sister
Kingdom of Saudi Arabia, as they are a threat to its
18/21

27/06/2018

national security and the civilian facilities of our sister
countries in the Gulf.
We underscore the position of the League of Arab
States in its last summit, which calls for maintaining
security and stability in the countries of the region,
ensuring the safety of their peoples, committing to
non-interference in the internal affairs of States,
respecting their sovereignty and maintaining good
neighbourliness, in accordance with international
instruments and norms. Meanwhile all acts of
provocation that undermine trust and threaten security
and stability in the region must cease.
In conclusion, the State of Kuwait reaffirms that
the Security Council should continue to shoulder
its responsibilities.
Mr. Orrenius Skau (Sweden): I too would like to
thank Under-Secretary-General DiCarlo, Ambassador
Van Oosterom and Ambassador Vale de Almeida
for their useful briefings and reports to the Security
Council today.
We welcome the Secretary-General’s report on the
implementation of resolution 2231 (2015) (S/2018/602),
which endorses the Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action
(JCPOA) on Iran’s nuclear programme. The nuclear
agreement with Iran was negotiated over a period of 12
years and was a success for diplomacy and the peaceful
resolution of conflicts. It has also been endorsed by the
Security Council. As we have consistently stated, its
continued implementation is crucial. The agreement
has ensured the exclusively peaceful nature of the
Iranian nuclear programme, which in itself contributes
to stability in the region and beyond. In that regard,
we note that Iran continues to fulfil its nuclear-related
obligations, according to the most recent report of the
International Atomic Energy Agency.
It is for that reason that as we have stated previously,
we deeply regret the decision by the United States to
withdraw from the agreement. Its withdrawal poses
a serious risk to the international peace and security
architecture and could have negative repercussions for
global non-proliferation efforts. The European Union
(EU) is unified in its full support for the deal and
its implementation. Sweden and the EU will work to
preserve the JCPOA. It is vital to ensure that the deal
continues to be respected and that Iran continues to
fulfil its commitment.
18-19989

27/06/2018

Non-proliferation

We remain seriously concerned about reported
violations by Iran of the arms embargo and the travel
ban put in place under resolution 2231 (2015). Any new
information pertinent to such cases should be verified
by the Secretariat. We have also expressed our concern
about the previously reported ballistic-missile launches,
which we believe to be inconsistent with resolution
2231 (2015). We echo the Secretary-General’s call on
all Member States of the region to take the necessary
steps to fully implement their obligations in relation to
resolution 2231 (2015), including those on the travel ban,
as well as on asset freezes on individuals and entities
on the list maintained pursuant to the resolution. We
would appreciate further information in future reports
with regard to the reported seizure and transfer of
dual-use items to Iran without the prior approval of the
Security Council.
There is strong EU support for broad relations and
dialogue with Iran, including on regional issues, the
worrisome human rights situation and the principles
of the rule of law. All actors in the region, including
Iran, must come together to de-escalate tensions and
contribute to finding political solutions to the ongoing
conflicts and crises in the region. However, those
matters should be treated as separate from the JCPOA
and resolution 2231 (2015).
The President (spoke in Russian): I shall now make
a statement in my capacity as the representative of the
Russian Federation.
We would like to thank Under-Secretary-General
Rosemary DiCarlo for presenting the biannual report
of the Secretary-General on the implementation of
resolution 2231 (2015) (S/2018/602). We also note the
effective work being done by Mr. Karel van Oosterom,
Permanent Representative of the Netherlands, as
Facilitator for the implementation of resolution 2231
(2015). We would also like to thank Mr. Vale de Almeida
for his briefing.
We fully agree with the Secretary-General in
his report when he states that he deeply regrets
the withdrawal of the United States from the Joint
Comprehensive Plan of Action (JCPOA) and points
out that issues not within the scope of the agreement
should not be used as a pretext for dismantling it. In
that regard, we would like to recall that the Russian
Federation has frequently taken the floor in the Council
to condemn the irresponsible attempts by the United
States to torpedo the JCPOA and has expressed the

S/PV. 8297

hope that reason would nonetheless prevail and issues
of global security and stability would no longer be held
hostage to Washington’s internal political processes.
Now, following the withdrawal of the United States
from the agreement, we are obliged to conclude that our
calls went unheeded and that the unique potential of the
JCPOA, which has not been allowed to function at full
strength, is under threat. Furthermore, the step taken
by the American side will do serious harm both to the
nuclear non-proliferation regime and to the interests of
security in the Middle East.
Considering the significance that the unilateral
actions by the United States have for the implementation
of resolution 2231 (2015) and the JCPOA, we were
astonished that the report mentions it only in passing.
It is simply unfathomable that it was possible to draft
a document entitled “Implementation of resolution
2231 (2015)” with no mention whatever of the fact that
Washington’s reimposition of unilateral sanctions is
a direct violation not only of its obligations under the
JCPOA, but also of resolution 2231 (2015).
It is also striking that in referencing the resolution’s
call to all Member States to support the implementation
of the JCPOA and refrain from actions that could
undermine it, the report completely ignores the public
statements by the leadership of the United States and
a number of other countries that fly in the face of that
position. We are surprised at the complete absence in
the report of any mention that Tehran has started a
dispute-settlement process under the JCPOA related to
the irresponsible actions of the United States, which the
Security Council and the Secretary-General were duly
informed in a letter of 11 May from the Minister for
Foreign Affairs of Iran. In general, the report is overtly
unbalanced and more like a collection of unproven
accusations about Iran than an attempt to paint an
objective picture of the situation concerning the
implementation of resolution 2231 (2015), an approach
that is all the more incomprehensible considering that
none of the examples of Tehran’s alleged violations of the
resolution have been confirmed, owing to insufficient
information and the lack of a firm body of proof.
We are once again compelled to point out that it is
unacceptable for the Secretariat to carry out any socalled investigations of potential violations of resolution
2231 (2015) without a clear mandate from the Security
Council, as provided for in paragraph 6 of the note by
the President dated 16 January 2016 (S/2016/44). We
again emphasize that Secretariat staff do not have the

18-1998919/21

S/PV.8297

Non-proliferation

27/06/2018

qualifications or expertise for analysing and evaluating
missile systems or conventional weapons. In our view,
therefore, the technical information in the report on the
study of the missile components in Saudi Arabia that
were fired from Yemen proves nothing and is simply
groundless, while there was no independent expert
analysis of the Secretariat’s conclusions. On top of that,
the very fact and the timeline of Iran’s alleged transfers
of the ballistic-missile systems or their components to
the Houthis have not been established, as the report
emphasizes. The report therefore indicates an absence
of any of the elements that constitute a violation. The
same applies to the Secretariat’s illegitimate inspections
in Bahrain and the United Arab Emirates.

been confirmed not just by the International Atomic
Energy Agency but also by the Secretariat, which, as
can be seen from the report, has no verified proof to
the contrary.

In the absence of any facts pointing to a violation
of the requirements of resolution 2231 (2015), the need
for the inclusion in the report of a reference to the
facts of the participation of Iran’s Defence Industries
Organization in a foreign arms exhibition in Iraq,
or of a memorandum of understanding between the
Iranian construction company Khatam al-Anbiya
and the Syrian authorities, raises serious questions.
We must continue to insist that the report should not
contain information from open sources or references
to unverified or unverifiable information provided by
individual countries, especially when it is not even being
brought to the attention of the members of the Security
Council. We believe such practices are completely
unacceptable and consider them malicious attempts to
create a groundlessly negative climate around Iran by
circumventing the Council.

I give the floor to the representative of Germany.

In connection with all of this, we would like to
remind the Secretariat yet again that paragraph 7 of
the note by the President of 16 January 2016 provides
for semi-annual reports on the implementation of
resolution 2231 (2015) as a whole, not its individual
parts. We hope that future reports will be prepared
strictly in line with the existing mandate and that all
activities that run counter to the Council’s decisions, in
particular the entry into force of the unilateral measures
announced by the United States on 8 May, will receive
due attention.
At this point, the only way of preserving the
agreement is the conscientious implementation by all
the remaining States participating in it of the obligations
they voluntarily undertook. In that context, I would like
to note that there is clear evidence in the SecretaryGeneral’s report of Iran’s inarguable compliance with its
commitments under the JCPOA, which has consistently
20/21

In conclusion, I would like to state that the Russian
Federation remains committed to the unconditional
and comprehensive implementation of the provisions
of resolution 2231 (2015) and the Joint Comprehensive
Plan of Action. Despite the withdrawal of the United
States, the implementation of the JCPOA by all of its
remaining participants is currently continuing in full.
I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.
Mr. Heusgen (Germany): I thank the Security
Council for inviting Germany to this discussion today.
We are participating here as part of the 4+2 group that
negotiated the Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action
(JCPOA) and also as part of the Joint Commission that
is overseeing the implementation of the JCPOA.
I would like to echo others’ thanks for the briefings
by Under-Secretary-General DiCarlo, the Head of the
Delegation of the European Union, and our colleague the
representative of the Netherlands. We are particularly
grateful to Karel van Oosterom for the work that he has
put into this.
We welcome the report of the Secretary-General
(S/2018/602) and do not believe that it is malicious. We
think it is constructive, and that its concentration on
annex B is legitimate. I also support the proposal that
perhaps next time around it should focus more on annex
A, but I think it is legitimate that while looking at the
overall picture, the report should concentrate on annex
B, because we believe that there are serious things to
report in that regard.
But before I come to annex B, I would also like to
address generally the question of the JCPOA, endorsed
by resolution 2231 (2015). On that topic I can be brief.
Indeed, I can only echo the words of everybody around
the table, with one exception, and that is that they all
support the JCPOA and regret that the United States
has left it. We believe that the JCPOA builds on and
strengthens the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of
Nuclear Weapons. It prevents a potential nuclear arms
race in the region. It is essential for our national and
European security that there not be nuclear proliferation
or a nuclear arms race in the region. We believe that the
18-19989

27/06/2018

Non-proliferation

European security situation has become worse. We also
believe that leaving the JCPOA undermines effective
multilateralism and the rules-based international
order, of which the nuclear-non-proliferation regime
is a very important pillar. It is therefore clear to us
that Germany, together with its European partners,
will remain committed to the JCPOA as long as Iran
is in compliance, and we urge Iran to abide by all the
nuclear-related restrictions that it is committed to
under the JCPOA. The latest report of the International
Atomic Energy Agency has just confirmed that it has
been doing so.
I will now to turn to annex B. In our view, its full
and effective implementation is very important for the
maintenance of regional and international security.
We encourage everyone to ensure respect for annex B
and compliance with it. The findings of the SecretaryGeneral on arms transfers and ballistic-missile
activities, which are documented in the report, give rise

S/PV. 8297

to serious concerns. In that regard, we are particularly
concerned about the missile attacks on Saudi Arabia,
Iran’s non-compliance with the arms embargo against
Yemen and the transfer to Yemen of ballistic-missile
technology. The report also points to Iranian arms
deliveries in the Middle East. We call on Iran to put
a stop to all of this, as such actions violate binding
provisions of annex B of resolution 2231 (2015).
Germany is also deeply concerned about the
development of Iran’s ballistic-missile programme, and
we call on Iran to end the programme and all testing.
Iran’s arms-transfer and missile-programme activities
in the region are destabilizing and have negative effects
for European security. Instead of investing in violations
of resolution 2231 (2015), we again appeal to Iran to
invest in building trust in the region and in abiding by
the resolution.
The meeting rose at 5.20 p.m.

18-1998921/21
