S/2010/509

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
4 October 2010
Original: English

Letter dated 4 October 2010 from the President of the
Security Council addressed to the Secretary-General
I have the honour to inform you that the members of the Security Council have
agreed to send a mission to Uganda and the Sudan from 4 to 10 October 2010. The
mission will be led by Ambassador Ruhakana Rugunda of Uganda (Uganda),
Ambassador Mark Lyall Grant of the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern
Ireland (El Fasher) and Ambassador Susan Rice of the United States of America
(Juba). Ambassador Rice and Ambassador Grant will co-lead the mission visit to
Khartoum. The members of the Council have agreed on the terms of reference of the
mission, which are annexed hereto.
The composition of the mission is as follows:
Ambassador Ruhakana Rugunda (Uganda), co-head of Mission
Ambassador Mark Lyall Grant (United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland), co-head of Mission
Ambassador Susan Rice (United States of America), co-head of Mission
Ambassador Christian Ebner (Austria)
Ambassador Ivan Barbalić (Bosnia and Herzegovina)
Ambassador Maria Luiza Viotti (Brazil)
Ambassador Li Baodong (China)
Minister Martin Briens (France)
Ambassador Alfred Moungara Moussotsi (Gabon)
Ambassador Tsuneo Nishida (Japan)
Ambassador Nawaf Salam (Lebanon)
Ambassador Claude Heller (Mexico)
Minister Bulus Paul Zom Lolo (Nigeria)
Ambassador Vitaly Churkin (Russian Federation)
Ambassador Ertuğrul Apakan (Turkey)
I should be grateful if you could have the present letter and its annex
circulated as a document of the Security Council.
(Signed) Ruhakana Rugunda
President of the Security Council

10-56662 (E) 061010

*1056662*

S/2010/509

Annex
Security Council mission to Uganda and the Sudan,
4 to 10 October 2010
Terms of reference for Kampala
Led by Ambassador Ruhakana Rugunda (Uganda)
1.
To reiterate the support of the Security Council to the improvement of
relations among the countries of the region and to encourage them to strengthen
cooperation in all fields.
2.
To emphasize the support of the Security Council for action against armed
groups in the region, particularly the Lord’s Resistance Army.
3.
To reiterate the support of the Security Council for the Djibouti Peace Process
and for the African Union Mission in Somalia (AMISOM) in the stabilization of
Somalia.
4.
To stress the firm commitment of the Security Council to the cause of peace in
the Sudan, the full implementation of the Comprehensive Peace Agreement and
successful negotiation of a comprehensive and inclusive peace agreement for
Darfur.
5.
To examine the important contribution by the regional service centre in
Entebbe to the work of United Nations missions in the region.
Terms of reference for the Sudan
Led by Ambassadors Susan Rice (United States of America) and Mark Lyall Grant
(United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland)
1.
To reaffirm the commitment of the Security Council to and the support of the
international community for the Sudanese parties’ full and timely implementation of
the Comprehensive Peace Agreement, and to encourage a peaceful, comprehensive
and inclusive resolution for the situation in Darfur. To reaffirm the support of the
Security Council for the Sudanese parties in working to make unity attractive and in
respecting the right to self-determination of the people of South Sudan through
credible, peaceful, free and timely referenda on 9 January 2011 that reflect the will
of the Sudanese people of these areas and to hold popular consultations, in
accordance with the terms of the Comprehensive Peace Agreement, and for all
parties and States to respect the outcome.
2.
To emphasize the importance of the partnership between the United Nations
and the African Union for the international support to the Sudanese peace processes.
To express support for the work of the African Union High-level Implementation
Panel and the engagement of other regional and international partners of the Sudan.
3.
To stress that full and successful implementation of the Comprehensive Peace
Agreement is essential to sustainable peace and stability throughout the Sudan,
including Darfur, and in the region, and to encourage increased cooperation between
the National Congress Party and the Sudan People’s Liberation Movement in
carrying out their responsibilities to fully implement the Comprehensive Peace
Agreement, including through successful and timely completion of negotiations on
post-referendum arrangements.

2

10-56662

S/2010/509

4.
To assess ongoing preparations for the referenda, and to reiterate that,
regardless of the results, both parties to the Comprehensive Peace Agreement will
need to work cooperatively to resolve critical issues and that the United Nations will
continue to play an important role in supporting and promoting this dialogue,
including through the recently designated United Nations High-Level Panel for the
Referenda to be led by President Benjamin Mkapa.
5.
To reiterate the support of the Security Council for the United Nations Mission
in the Sudan (UNMIS), to assess its performance and review the assistance provided
by the Mission, within its current mandate and capabilities, to the implementation of
the Comprehensive Peace Agreement and the contingency planning being developed
by the Mission in view of the upcoming referenda, as well as the planning developed
for its post-referenda presence in the Sudan, and to underline the importance of full
and unhindered access for the Mission, to all sites within its area of responsibility.
6.
To emphasize the importance of addressing the challenges faced by South
Sudan, including insecurity, humanitarian and development needs and capacitybuilding, irrespective of the outcome of the referendum.
7.
To emphasize the importance of continuing efforts to support the people of the
Sudan, democratic governance, rule of law, accountability, equality, respect for
human rights, justice and establishment of the conditions for conflict-affected
communities to build strong, sustainable livelihoods.
8.
To stress the responsibility of all central and local authorities of the Sudan for
the safety of members of peacekeeping missions, humanitarian workers and all
working under local contracts.
9.
To express the deep concern of the Security Council about the upsurge in
violence in Darfur, the number of civilian casualties and victims of sexual and
gender-based violence, the recruitment of children by armed groups, the illegal arms
flow into Darfur, and the continued restrictions on humanitarian access. To
underline its concern for the security of civilians, humanitarian aid workers and
peacekeepers in Darfur, and to reiterate the vital importance of the protection of
civilians and of maintaining full, safe and unhindered access for humanitarian
workers to the population in need of assistance.
10. To reiterate the support of the Security Council for the African Union-United
Nations-led peace process and the work of the Joint African Union-United Nations
Chief Mediator, Mr. Djibril Bassolé, including the principles guiding the
negotiations, and the urgent need for achieving substantive progress. To urge all
rebel groups to join the Doha peace process without preconditions or further delay
and to call on all parties to immediately cease hostilities and engage constructively
in negotiations with a view to finding a lasting peace in Darfur.
11. To reiterate the support of the Council for the African Union-United Nations
Hybrid Operation in Darfur (UNAMID) and its personnel, and to reiterate its call on
the Government of the Sudan and all relevant parties to cooperate fully with the
mission; to assess the performance of UNAMID and to review the challenges it
faces in carrying out its mandate, giving priority to the protection of civilians and
the facilitation of humanitarian delivery, as well as the priority given to the
continuing efforts of UNAMID to promote the engagement of all Darfurian
stakeholders in support of and to complement the African Union-United Nations
political process in Darfur.

10-56662

3

S/2010/509

12. To welcome improved relations between the Governments of the Sudan and
Chad following the agreement of 15 January 2010 to normalize their bilateral
relations and the establishment of a joint border monitoring mechanism, and to
encourage continued cooperation and strengthening of relations.
13. To underline the need to ensure that Security Council resolutions are
implemented.

4

10-56662
