UNITED NATIONS

.

SECURITY

COUNCIL

OFFICIAL

RECORDS
UN LIBRARY

FORTIETH

YEAR

‘-

MAR1 7 1995
UN/SA C~LLECI”~-+JN

262Sd

MEETING:

17 OCTOBER 1985

NEW YORK

CONTENTS

.. .. ... ... ... ... .. ... ... ... ... .. ... ..

1

Statement by the President . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

1

I%-ovisional agenda (S/Agenda/2623)
The question of South Africa:

Adoption of the agenda . . . . . ..p..................................*.*...

1

The situation in the Middle East:
Report of the Secretary-General on the United Nations Interim Force in
Lebanon (SL17557) . . . . . . . . . . ..*..............................*.y..

1

SjPV.2623

NOTE
Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined
kith‘I?gures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United Nations
document.
Documents of the Security Council (symbol S/ . . . ) are normally published in
quarterly Supplements of the Official Records of the Security Council The date of the
document indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which information about
it is given.
The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a system _
adopted in 1964, are ,published in yearly volumes of Resolutions and Decisions of the
Security Council The ne,w system, which has been applied retroactively to resolutions
adopted before 1 January 1965, became fully operative on that date:
.
I i,
..
..
’ I”.
I I
, I( . i.4
,‘.
‘. (
,,’

2623rd MEETING
Held in New York on Thursday,

17 October

President: Mr. Vernon A. WALTERS
(United States of America).

‘Ihe situation ‘in the Middle East:
Report of the Secretary-General on the United Nations
Interim Force in Lebanon (S/17557)

Present: The representatives of the following States:
Australia, Burkina Faso, China, Denmark, Egypt, France,
India, Madagascar, Peru, Thailand, Trinidad and Tobago,
Ukrainian
Soviet Socialist Republic, Union of Soviet
Socialist Republics, United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland, United States of America.

2. The PRESIDENT:
I should like to inform members of
the Council that I have received a letter from the representative of Lebanon in which he requests to be invited to
participate in the discussion of the item on the agenda. In
accordance with the usual practice, I propose, with the
consent of the Council, to invite that representative to
participate in the discussion without the right to vote, in
accordance with the-relevant provisions of the Charter and
rule 37 of the provtsronal rules of procedure.

Provisional agenda (WAgendaI2623)
1. Adoption

of the agenda

2. The. situation in the Middle East:
Report of the Secretary-General on the United
Nations Interim Force in Lebanon (S/17557)

At the invitat& of the President, Mr. El-Turk (Lebanon)
took a place at ihe Council table.
~.$:’
3. The PRESIDENT:
Members of the Council have
before them the report of the Secretary-General on the
United Nations Interim Force in Lebanon (UNIFIL) for
the period from 12 April to 10 October 1985 [S/17557’J.
Members of the Council also have before them document
S/17526, which contains the text of a letter dated 3 October 1985 from the representative of Lebanon to the
Secretary-General, and S/17567, which contains the text
of a draft resolution prepared in the course of the Council’s consultations.

The meeting was calfed to order at 12.10 p.m.
‘IIe

1985, at 11.30 a.m.

question of South Africa:
Statement by the President

1, The PRESIDENT: At the outset of this meeting I wish
to make the following statement on behalf of the members
of the Security Council:
“The members of the Security Council have learned
with indignation and the gravest concern of the South
African authorities’ intention to implement the death
sentence imposed on Malesela Benjamin Moloise, in
spite of the Council’s appeals in this regard.

4. It is my understanding that the Council is ready to
proceed to the vote on the draft resolution before it. Unless
I hear any objection, I shall now put it to the vote.
A vote was taken by a show of ha&.

“The members of the Council once again draw the
attention of the South African authorities to the Council President’s statement of 20 August 1985 [S/Z7408)
and Council resolution 547$ (1984), which, inter alia,
called upon the South African authorities not to carry
out the execution of Mr. Moloise.

In favour: Australia, Burkina Faso, China, Denmark,
Egypt, France, India, Madagascar, Peru, Thailand, Trinidad and Tobago, United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland, United States of America
Against: None

“The members of the Council are convinced that the
carrying out of the execution will only result in a further
worsening of an extremely grave situation.

Abstaining. Ukrainian Soviet Socialist Republic, Union
of Soviet Socialist Republics

“Once again, the members of the Council strongly
urge the South African Government to extend clemency
to Mr. Moloise and to rescind his death sentence.”

i%e drqft resolution was adopted-by 13 votes to none, with
2 abstentions [resolution 575 iZ9@“].

Adoption of the agenda

5. The PRESIDENT:
I shall now call on those members
of the Council who wish to make statements following the
voting.

The agenda was adopted.
1

,

6.

Mr. LIANG

Yufan (China) (interpretation from Chiconsistently holds that the
independence, sovereignty and territorial integrity of Lebanon must be respected. Proceeding from this basic stand,
and in view of the request from the Lebanese Government, China voted in favour of the resolution which the
Council has just adopted, by which the Council authorizes
the extension of the mandate of UNIFIL for another six
months. We hope that in the next six months a fundamental improvement can be achieved in the situation of
UNIFIL, which has been unable to perform its duties.

12. In this connection;-my delegation is in agreement
with the analysis of the -situation submitted- by the
Secretary-General in his report. The situation prevailing in
Lebanon south of the Litani is dangerous, and the events
that took place yesterday provide new testimony, to that.
UNIFIL
is caught between two hostile forces and continues to be prevented, in contravention of Council resolutions, from deploying its personnel up to the international
border, as provided for in its mandate. France again insists
on the need for comprehensive application as soon as possible of Council resolution 425 (1978) and 426 (1978)
through negotiations with the parties concerned.

nese): The Chinese delegation

7. The Council assigned a clear mandate to UNIFIL in
its resolution 425 (1978), namely, to confirm the withdrawal of Israeli forces, restore international peace and
security and assist the Government of Lebanon in ensuring
the return of its effective authority in the area. Regrettably,
however, that mandate has so far not been truly carried
out, despite the‘lapse of seven years.. We must point out
emphatically that such a state of affairs is far from normal
and needs to be changed promptly.

13. Furthermore, we believe that, as is stressed in the
report, the extension of the mandate, however justified it
may be at present, should not be construed as an openended commitment by the contributing countries to maintain UNIFIL,
and consequently to provide it with the
necessary contingents, indefinitely.
14. I share the concern expressed by the SecretaryGeneral at the sizeable financial deficit that has accumulated so far and which is being borne by those States
participating in the United Nations operation. It is therefore advisable that all members of the international community pay their contributions without delay and fulfil
their responsibilities.

.8. We maintain that the Israeli authorities should be held
responsible for this abnormal situation. By its massive
invasion of Lebanon in 1982, Israel defied the relevant
resolutions of the Security Council and completely ignored
UNIFIL, bringing serious damage to the credibility of both
the Interim Force and the United .Nations. The so-called
security zone set up by Israel in southern Lebanon constitutes the basic obstacle to .the functioning of UNIFIL.
Therefore the elimination of the aftermath of the Israeli
invasion of Lebanon, including the dismantling of the
security zone and the total withdrawal of Israeli troops
from Lebanese territory, is a prerequisite for the normal
functioning of UNIFIL,
the recovery of Lebanese sovereignty over southern Lebanon and the restoration of international peace and security in the area. The Council
should take effective measmes to attain these objectives.

15. As members of the Council are aware, my country
has spared no effort to ensure that it is represented by a
significant contingent in the Force. France will therefore
maintain its participation at the same level in terms of
troops.
16. We also wish to reiterate our interest in the humanitarian and security aspects of the action that UNIFIL carries out in the spirit of resolution 523 (1982). It is very
largely thanks to its’presence that southern Lebanon is
enjoying a little peace and security.

9. The Chinese delegation fullv shares the view exuressed
by the Secretary-Ge&rai in paragraph 37 of his -report,
that a decision by the Council on the extension of the
mandate must not be understood to mean that UNIFIL
will be allowed to become an open-ended commitment for
the troop-contributing
countries and for the United
Nations.

17. My delegation also wishes to express its concern at
the continuous attacks that UNIFIL has to face and at the
prospect of renewed violence in that part of Lebanon.
18. I would also inform the members of the Council that
my country and the French public in general are concerned about the situation of tens of thousands of Christian Lebanese besieged in the city of Jazzin. We know that
our concern is shared by many countries. I therefore wish
to reaffirm today that my -country remains ready, if circumstances so demand, and in liaison with the Lebanese
Government, to consider action by UNIFIL to ensure the
protection of Jazzin.

10. In conclusion, the Chinese delegation wishes to take
this opporurnity to express its since&thanks to the troopcontributing
countries and, the officers and men of
UNIFIL.
*5
Il.
Mr. de :KfiMOULARIA
(France) (interpretation
from French): France has just expressed through its vote its
support for the extension of the mandate of UNIFIL and
thus for the activities. and role of the Force. It has thus
.responded to the request made by the Lebanese Govemment in this regard. My Government considers that despite
the many obstacIes .that it has encountered, UNIFIL’s
action has been positive, in particular because it assures an
international presence that is indispensable in a particularly sensitive region.

19. I conclude by associating myself with the SecretaryGeneral in the hope so wisely expressed in the conclusions
to his report, namely, that there is still a good chance of
re-establishing peace in Lebanon, a country that has suffered for so long and with which my country has so many
ties.
20. Mr. TROYANOVSKY
(Union of Soviet Socialist
Republics) (interpretation from Russianj: The Security
2

Israel and who prevents the Council from calling the
aggressor to book and ensuring fulfilment of ‘its de&
sions, including those relating to the implementation of the
UNIFIL
mandate. The United States would do well to
bear in mind the fact that such action seriously undermines
the Council’s prestige and effectiveness.

Council has been convened today to extend once again the
mandate of UNIFIL.
It is worth recalling that this is the
18th extension of the mandate of that Force since it was set
up in March 1978.
21. In paragraph 4 of the last resolution on this item,
resolution 561 (1985), the Council reiterates that *‘the
Force should fully implement its mandate as defined in
resolutions 425 (1978), 426 (1978) and all other relevant
resolutions”. Today, half a year later, we see that that
resolution,
like many other Council decisions on
Lebanon-primarily
the basic resolutions 425 (1978), 508
(1982) and 509 (1982)-has not been fulfilled, and the
Force continues to be prevented from fultilling the mandate conferred on it by the Council.

26. The Soviet Union decisively condemns Israel’s continuing occupation of Lebanese territory and expresses its
solidarity with the struggle of the Lebanese people to bring
about the definitive expulsion of the aggressors from its
ancestral lands.
27. It is important to guarantee fulfilment of the decisions taken by the Security Council and to see to it that
the sovereignty and territorial integrity of Lebanon are
respected and that an end finally be put to the tyranny
being practised against the civilian population,

22. What has changed in the situation in southern Lebanon over the past six months? The answer to that question
is clear from the report of the Secretary-General that is
now before the Council. When Israel redeployed its
troops, it handed over the border regions of southern Lebanon it claimed to be a “security zone” to the control of its
mercenaries, the so-called South Lebanon Army, after
having co-opted to that force its own military personnel in
the guise of instructors and advisers. Of course, no one can
have the slightest doubt that the Lahad gangs are about as
independent in their actions as are puppets in a puppet
theatre, and I do not think even the representative of Israel
would contest that.

28. The withdrawal of Israeli troops to the Israeli side
of the border and the cessation of Israel’s interference in
the affairs of Lebanon would create conditions in which
UNIFIL
would be able freely to carry out the mandate
entrusted it. With this in mind, and taking into consideration the request of the Lebanese Government and the
recommendations
of the Secretary-General, the Soviet
delegation did not.object to the extension of the mandate
of UNIFIL for a,further interim period. We abstained in
the voting for reasons that we have set forth in detail at
prior Council meetings.
’
29. Sir John THOMSON (United Kingdom): There is no
need for me to speak at length in explanation of my delegation’s positive vote. My delegation’s views are well known,
as a result of our statements on previous similar occasions.
.

23. However, things have not stopped there. Israel has
also left its own military units in the border zones, some in
the area where the troops of UNIFIL
are deployed.
According to T&e Washington Post of 1 October, Israeli
tank and mechanized units are stationed to the north of
the Norwegian UNIFIL contingent as well as in the area
under the responsibility of the Finnish UNIFIL batallions.
As a result, as the Secretary-General notes in his report,
the Force is hemmed in among the many positions occupied by the Israeli Army and its mercenaries and is being
systematically subjected to armed attacks and bombardment.

30. It remains our belief that the Council’s objectives
must be to secure a speedy and complete withdrawal of all
Israeli forces, to establish peace and security in the area
and to restore effective Lebanese authority and sovereignty
up to the internationally recognized,border. We accept the
Secretary-General’s view that the balance of advantage lies
in renewing the mandate of UNIFIL
for a further six
months. At the same time we agree with him that continuation of the present.situation in southern Lebanon is both
unsatisfactory and dangerous.

24. The criminal practice of punitive operations continues, as does collective punishment directed against the
civilian population of southern Lebanon. Israel’s continuing occupation of part of Lebanese territory has quite naturally given rise to legitimate resistance by the Lebanese,
who have been waging a valiant struggle to expel the
aggressor from their land once and for all. Thus we cannot
help but agree with the Secretary-General’s conclusion in
paragraph 33 of his report that “the current situation in
Lebanon south of the Litani is not only unsatisfactory but
also dangerous.*’

3 1. It would be a mistake to believe that no harm is being
done by Israel’s policy ‘of maintaining a so-called security
zone on Lebanese soil and preventing UNIFIL from carrying out its mandate. On the contrary, real damage is being
done to the chances of.restoring stable and peaceful conditions in southern Lebanon. Opportunities are wasted,
goodwill squandered and violent extremism encouraged.
We appeal to those involved to face this realistically.

25. This situation cannot fail to give rise to the most
serious concern. For more than seven and a half years,
Israel has continued, either directly or through its mercenaries, to hold sway in Lebanon, defiantly refusing to implement the many resolutions of the Council that have clearly
called for a complete and unconditional withdrawal of its
troops from Lebanon. It is well known who stands behind

32. We take note with approval of the Secretary-General’s observation that extension of the mandate of UNIFIL
cannot be allowed to become an open-ended commitment
for the troop-contributing
‘countries’ and for the United
Nations if the requisite conditions for the effective operation of the Force continue to be absent.
3

33. The Council cannot ignore the important effect that
UNIFIL has already had on a dangerous situation, a situation which could cause a new threat to international peace
and security, nor can the Council be indifferent to the trust
of the local population, whose safety and -well-being
depend in large measure on the continuing efforts of the
United Nations, and on UNIFIL in particular. This is why
my Government once again joins the Secretary-General in
appealing strongly to all Member States to pay their assessments to the’ UNIFIL Special Account, now in deficit to
the tune of $US 224 million. This is an expense which is
much more important and for a more important cause
than many other projects to which the delegations at present in default contribute mc rey.

41. I should also like to exnress our sincere annreciation
II
to the Secretary-General and his colleagues for their untiring efforts. The Secretary-General can count on my
Government’s full support in his continuing efforts to
establish a firm basis for international peace and security
in the area.
42. Everyone should seriously note his belief that there is
still a good chance of reestablishing international peace
and security in Lebanon south of the Litani if the correct
actions are taken soon by all concerned, but that further
undue delay is likely to produce a new and serious crisis,
possibly with widespread ramifications.
43. The PRESIDENT:
I shall now speak in my capacity
as representative of the UNITED STATES OF AMERICA.

34. We are most grateful to the Secretary-General and
his staff for his report and for his continuing efforts. In
addition, we extend our thanks and congratulations to the
troop<ontributing
countries. This leads me, finally, to join
others in pay,ing a sincere tribute to Lieutenant-General
Callaghan and all the personnel of UNIFIL
and the
United Nations Truce Supervision Organization for their
courageous and devoted work and, in particular, their
humanitarian efforts in most difficult circumstances.

44. Since my country was referred to, I believe it might.
be well that those. who wish to tell others how to support
Council decisions should at least pay their share of the cost
of supporting UNIFIL.
45. I now resume my functions as PRESIDENT
Council.

35. Mr. ULRICH (Denmark): My delegation has closely
studied the latest report of the Secretary-General on
UNIFIL.
We are deeply concerned ‘about the situation in
Lebanon south of the Litani as assessed by the SecretaryGeneral.

46.

I call on the representative of Lebanon.

47.

Mr.

EL-TURK

(Lebanon)

(interpretation

of the

from

Arabic): I should like to begin, Sir, by congratulating

you
on your assumption of the presidency of the Security
Council for this month. I should also like to express our
complete confidence in your skill, experience and wisdom
in directing the work of the Council in the right direction.
Furthermore, I wish to express to your predecessor, Sir
John Thomson, the representative of the United Kingdom,
our appreciation for the constructive role he played in
presiding over the work of the Council in September.

36. The so-called security zone arrangement maintained
north of the Israeli-Lebanese border is contrary to Security
Council resolutions and has meant that UNIFIL
finds
itself in the midst of mutually hostile forces and is preeluded from deploying right up to:the international border
in accordance with its mandate.’

48. Following the vote on the draft resolution on extending the mandate of ‘UNIFIL
for a further six months, I
must convey the thanks and appreciation of the delegation
of Lebanon to the Council for acceding to the request of
the Lebanese Government. I must furthermore pay tribute
to the Secretary-General and his assistants for the excellent
efforts they have made, which have been described in
detail in his report.

37. We have taken note of the Secretary-General’s prediction that if the Israeli presence in the “security zone”
continues for long, violence will inevitably escalate and
spread, making UNIFIL’s
situation even more difftcult.
38. Denmark therefore joins. the Secretary-General in
hoping that the Israeli authorities will conclude that, of
all the options available, the effective implementation
of
UNIFIL’s
mandate would in the ‘long run be the least
hazardous for all concerned.

49. I feel duty bound on this occasion to commend the
work done by the Force, in conditions which are often
difficult and sometimes dangerous because of the numerous obstacles created and acts of harassment carried out
by the Israeli forces as well as by the illegitimate forces
collaborating with them. We express Lebanon’s gratitude
and appreciation to UNIFIL,
its leaders, soldiers and
administrators. We would also express our appreciation to
the States contributing to UNIFIL because they made possible the implementation of the wishes of the international
community represented in the Council, and thus provided
a shining example of what States can undertake within the
appropriate framework to translate expressions of intemational solidarity into practice.

39. My Government once again urges that UNIFIL
should be allowed to carry out the mandate laid down for
it by the Security Council, namely, to assist the Lebanese
Government in controlling the Lebanese border area and
to provide security for both sides of that border.
;
”
40. My delegation should like to pay tribute to
Lieutenant-General
Callaghan, his staff and the officers
and men of. UNIFIL
for the exemplary dedication and
cqurage with which they have carried out their difficult
tasks. ”
4

50. On this occasion, I must recall the Lebanese position,
which is based on firm principies and foundations and has
been expounded by Lebanon on many previous occasions
in the Council. That position is in general based on the
following:

and to increased tension in southern Lebanon as well as to
instability in the region. Moreover, it would also demonstrate a weakening of international will and would be a
victory for the principle of force; it would be a public
admission by the Council of its inability to shoulder the
international tasks entrusted to it.

-First, full implementation
of resolution 425 (1978),
which, in the light of the Lebanese request, included provision for the establishment of an international interim force
for Southern Lebanon to ensure the withdrawal of Israeli
forces from Lebanon, the restoration of international
peace and security and assistance to the Government of
Lebanon in restoring its effective authority in the area.

54. Lebanon continues to believe that the Council is’capl ’
able of assuming its responsibility for the maintenr$e of
international peace and security. We continue to believe
that the Council desires the implementation of the resolutions it adopts, because of its firm belief in the rightfulness
of the claim by any-State to the safeguarding of its sovereignty, independence and territorial integrity.

-Secondly, in conformity with that resolution, Israel
must withdraw completely from Lebanese territories so as
to allow the Force to carry out the task entrusted to it
under resolutions 425 (1978) and 426 (1978). Lebanon
rejects the presence of any armed Israeli forces, regardless
of the number and equipment of this presence and regardless whether it is overt or veiled.

55. More than 10 years have passed since the outbreak of
the Lebanese tragedy and the attendant suffering of the
Lebanese people. The time has come for our nation, which
has participated in the march of history for thousands of,
years and which was the birthplace of many civilizations,
for a people like the peace-loving Lebanese people to be
spared further bloodshed, tears and spiraling violence and
destruction; The time has come for them to regain their
sovereignty and territorial integrity. The time has come for
the Lebanese people to resume a normal life and to take up
aga’in its creative endeavours.

-Thirdly,
we reject the presence of any illegitimate collaborationist forces linked with Israel? and especially the
so-called South Lebanon Army.
-Fourthly,
we reject. the principle of an Israeli security
zone inside Lebanese territory.

56. Let us hope thatthe next time the Council meets to
consider this item, it will be witness to the realization of
those hopes.

-Fifthly, we reject all violation of the sanctity of Lebanese territories, air space and territorial waters:

57. The PRESIDENT:
I should like to inform members
of the Council that I have just received a letter from the
representative of Israel in which he requests to be invited
to participate in the discussion of the item on the Council’s
agenda, In conformity with the usual practice, I propose,
with the consent of the Council, to invite that representative to participate in the discussion, without the right to
vote, in accordance with the relevant provisions of the
Charter and rule 37 of the provisional rules of procedure.

-Sixthly, we condemn all forms of Israeli practices and
inhuman acts in southern Lebanon.
51. The Lebanese delegation, while hoping that efforts
made during the renewed mandate of UNIFIL
will bear
fruit and induce Israel to implement Council resolutions
by withdrawing completely from Lebanese territories, at
the same time welcomes any other initiatives that might
produce the desired result. The Lebanese delegation
appeals for support of the efforts of the Secretary-General
and his assistants aimed at achieving this end.

It was so decided.

’
,‘)’

58. The PRESIDENT:
I invite the representative of
Israel to take a place at the Council table and to.-make his. . .
statement.
,’ ’
.,, ..
59. Mr. NETANYAHU
(Israel): My participation in this
discussion is prompted by two sets of remarks. The first
was from the Soviet representative,,and I shall deal with
that quickly and then proceed to the second point.
,”
60. The Soviet representative spoke about the ills of
occupation and the ills of puppet regimes. He is right to
speak about this; he could start directing those words to
his own Government for its actions in Afghanistan, which
are known to everybody here. But since he wants to
address them to the Middle East, and specifically.since he
wants to address them to Lebanon, he has a ready address
of occupation and of puppet regimes, and members .of the
Council know where that address lies-and it is not Israel.

52. Pending this outcome, we believe that the Force is
carrying out its task in southern Lebanon with great courage and effectiveness. We believe.that the presence of the
Interim Force, despite the problems and difficulties it faces
from time to time, is an important expression of the Security Council’s commitment to assisting Lebanon to cope
with continuing violations of the sanctity of its sovereignty
and helping the Lebanese Government to restore its
authority over all its territory within internationally recognized borders.
53. In addition, we appreciate the efforts made by
UNIFIL
to provide protection and humanitarian assistance for the local inhabitants in the areas where it is
deployed. At the same time, we believe that the absence of
international forces or the failure of those forces fully to
carry out their mission will lead to further acts of violence
5

.

We have absolutely no interest, no claim, no desire whatsoever regarding the question of territorial claims on Lebanon, or any other desires regarding Lebanon.
61. Lebanon, frankly, is not our interest. Our interest is
one: security; security for people in the north of Israel, to
prevent them from suffering the kind of calamities and
attacks they have experienced over the last decadeactually, since the early 197Os,with the collapse of Lebanon’s effective sovereignty and its domination first by the
PLO (Palestine Liberation Organization) and then by
Syria.
62. The problem of preventing cross-border attacks is the
true domain of this discussion, because, in fact, that is the
purpose of UNIFIL.
The purpose of UNIFIL
is not, as
members know, to deal with the question of domestic tranquillity inside Lebanon or the terrible tragedies that have
beset that country and still beset it every day. The purpose
of UNIFIL
is to ensure that there is no cross-border violence, that there is no continuous problem’that involves
international-and
I stress the word “intemational”peace and security.

are there all the time-but
the successful attacks have, in
fact, been very, very few. In fact, in the year since Israel
withdrew from Lebanon we have had 12 car-bomb
attacks-none of them has been successful-but the curve
of attacks, even of attempts, rather than increasing, has
been sharply declining. That reality-the
fact that the
south of Lebanon is its most traquil part and that there is
relative calm there-is indeed reflected in the relevant passage in the Secretary-General’s report.
.
65. Thus, the root question that faces us is the structural
problem of Lebanon, and its domination, and the absence
of a strong central Government which could police that
area. UNIFIL cannot police that area, just as it cannot do
what at least one representative here has called for, that is
police the domestic strife in Jazzin and elsewhere. Great
tragedies are occurring there and might occur there. But if
UNIFIL
wants to direct itself simply to the question of
bloodshed, then it has many, many other areas to deal
with in Lebanon where the needs are far greater and more
pressing.
66. In short. the oroblem is not sovereignty; the problem
is security. The problem is not even bloodshed; it-belongs
elsewhere. As far as UNIFIL is concerned, because it is not
able structurally to stop terrorism, because it can only
serve as a buffer between two Governments and because
there is no sufficiently strong Government on one side, it is
structurally unable to fulfil the mandate-or
at least it is
very, very difficult for it to fulfil the mandate as long as
that reality prevails.
,

63. I move on now to the second issue, and that is the
question of international security. In the Council six
months ago I heard the same predictions and prognoses as
today: that the problem would deteriorate, that we would
find ourselves in a difficult situation as far as the border
between Israel and Lebanon and attacks on Israel are concerned. This was said not by countries that obviously want
to attack Israel at every opportunity, but by people, I
think, of good will and by representatives of countries of
good will, who had that assessment as a fair difference of
opinion with us. We argued at the time that we thought
that this problem, the problem of international peace and
security-that is, the problem of preventing attacks against
Israel-is a problem of how to prevent terrorist attacks,
which are continuously launched, from penetrating the
southern cordon, given that there is no strong central
Government in Lebanon.

67. Therefore, our position on UNIFIL is that we do not
think it has a useful role. We are not going to raise any
objection, and I do not raise one here, with respect to the
Council’s decision, but we think that the reality is such that
the only possibility for maintaining security in that area is
the present situation as it exists.
68. The PRESIDENT:
The Security Council has thus
concluded the present stage of its consideration of the item
on its agenda.

64. The arrangements that we discussed proved to be
successful, contrary to the expectations of many in this
chamber. The attacks and the attempts were there-they

Litho

in United

Nations,

New York

1

lXe meeting rose at I p.m.

00300

90-61439-March

1995-1.92.5
