S/PV.8252

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-third year

8252

nd meeting
Thursday, 10 May 2018, 9.30 a.m.
New York

President:

Ms. Wronecka . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Poland)

Members:

Bolivia (Plurinational State of). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Côte d’Ivoire . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Equatorial Guinea. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ethiopia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kazakhstan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kuwait. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Netherlands. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Peru. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Sweden . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Inchauste Jordán
Mr. Zhang Dianbin
Mr. Djédjé
Mr. Ndong Mba
Mr. Alemu
Mrs. Gueguen
Mr. Temenov
Mr. Alotaibi
Mr. Van Oosterom
Mr. Meza-Cuadra
Mr. Polyanskiy
Mr. Orrenius Skau
Mr. Allen
Ms. French

Agenda
Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan
Report of the Secretary-General on the African Union-United Nations Hybrid
Operation in Darfur (S/2018/389)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

18-14267 (E)
*1814267*

S/PV.8252

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

The meeting was called to order at 9.40 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and
South Sudan
Report of the Secretary-General on the African
Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in
Darfur (S/2018/389)
The President: In accordance with rule 37 of
the Council’s provisional rules of procedure, I invite
the representative of the Sudan to participate in this
meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite Mr. Jeremiah
Kingsley Mamabolo, Joint Special Representative for
Darfur and Head of the African Union-United Nations
Hybrid Operation in Darfur, to participate in this
meeting.
Mr. Mamabolo is joining today’s meeting via
video-teleconference from El Fasher.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I wish to draw the attention of Council members
to document S/2018/389, which contains the report of
the Secretary-General on the African Union-United
Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur.
I now give the floor to Mr. Mamabolo.
Mr. Mamabolo: It is an honour and privilege for
me to update the Security Council on the situation
in Darfur and the work of the African Union-United
Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur (UNAMID).
Detailed information on these issues is contained
in the report of the Secretary-General on UNAMID
(S/2018/389) published on 25 April, which covers the
period from 16 February until 15 April.
So far, the implementation of the second phase
of the reconfiguration of UNAMID is proceeding
very well. Significant progress has been made since
February, when the Chinese engineering company
began construction of the temporary operating base
in Golo, while the Pakistani engineering company
is improving the road infrastructure in the area,
specifically the road connecting Nertiti and Golo. The
2/10

10/05/2018

military and police are engaged in the alignment and
establishment of their operational and administrative
structures pursuant to resolution 2363 (2017), and to
reflect the new UNAMID operational configuration.
To that end, the establishment of the State Security
Assistance Force, which is responsible for areas outside
the jurisdiction of the Jebel Marra Task Force, is on
track. The police have deployed to nine of the 10 team
sites of the Jebel Marra Task Force, and the deployment
of formed police units to the areas from which the
military has withdrawn commenced on 1 March.
While it is still early to fully assess the impact on
the security and protection-of-civilians situation in
areas from which UNAMID has withdrawn, I can say
that, so far, based on our assessment following visits to
most of the teams sites that the mission has withdrawn
from, we have not witnessed nor heard of any adverse
impact. We continue to monitor the situation within the
framework of our protection-of-civilians mandate. It is
also our expectation that the Government of the Sudan
will, where it has not already done so, soon establish its
authority in the areas concerned, especially the rule of
law and justice institutions.
Although the peace process continues to be stalled,
one encouraging development is that, at a meeting with
the Government of the Sudan in Berlin convened by
the German Berghof Foundation on 16 and 17 April,
the Sudan Liberation Army-Minni Minawi faction
and the Justice and Equality Movement in principle
accepted the Doha Document for Peace in Darfur as
the basis for negotiation. The parties at the meeting,
however, could not reach consensus on the timing for
the creation of the implementation mechanism of the
subsequent agreement, but demonstrated a desire to
continue to engage with me in pursuit of a way forward.
I am therefore in contact with all the parties to bridge
their differences so that they can agree on and sign a
pre-negotiation framework as soon as possible. That
should pave way for a cessation of hostilities agreement
and direct negotiations.
Since my previous briefing to the Council, in March
(see S/PV.8202), the general security situation in Darfur
has remained calm, except for sporadic clashes between
the Sudan Liberation Army/Abdul Wahid faction and
Government forces and nomads in the Jebel Marra area.
As has occurred in previous years, clashes during the
dry season became more recurrent between 10 March
and 1 April, and again from 20 to 21 April, with the
Sudan Liberation Army/Abdul Wahid staging several
18-14267

10/05/2018

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

ambushes on Government forces as they deployed in
the Jebel Marra area. Due to access restrictions, the
mission could not verify the number of casualties
reported on both sides or on the number of civilians
affected. There have also been reports of the burning of
villages by the warring parties. A significant number
of civilians have been displaced to different parts of
Darfur, including to the Sortony internally displaced
persons (IDPs) gathering site in North Darfur.
The nature of those incidents and the low casualty
figures reported suggest low-scale skirmishes rather
than a large-scale operation. Nevertheless, they
demonstrate the continued desire of the Sudan Liberation
Army/Abdul Wahid to challenge the Government of the
Sudan and sustain the conflict. Although there were
reports of possible incursions by the Sudan Liberation
Army-Mini Minawi and by the Justice and Equality
Movement in East and South Darfur, that could not
be confirmed. Those two movements remain largely
inactive in Darfur and seem to have observed their
unilateral declaration of ceasefire, recently extended
until 6 August.
According to the revised figures of humanitarian
actors in Darfur, some 1.76 million displaced people
are registered as living in approximately 66 camps.
For unregistered IDPs — that is, displaced people
living in rural settlements and urban areas — estimates
vary considerably, especially as there is no systematic
registration of displacement outside of camps.
Nevertheless, the United Nations humanitarian
agencies and partners estimate that an additional
500,000 displaced people live in host communities and
settlements in Darfur. From our interactions with those
people, they have indicated their desire to return to their
places of origin, as long as the provision of security and
basic public services is guaranteed. Others are willing to
settle where they are only if assured of their traditional
land rights and in their original homes. For Darfur to
be guaranteed lasting peace and development, durable
solutions will have to be found for the plight of IDPs.
As UNAMID continues its reconfiguration and
drawdown, the transition phase will be critical in creating
the foundation for durable peace. To that end, together
with the United Nations country team, UNAMID has
finalized a financing approach for sustaining peace in
Darfur. We will count on the support of the international
community, including Member States of the Council,
for its success. It is imperative that concerted efforts be
exerted towards the mobilization of financial resources

S/PV. 8252

to consolidate and sustain the prevailing peace and
stability in the region.
The President: I thank Mr. Mamabolo for his
briefing.
I shall now give the floor to those Council members
who wish to make statements.
Mr. Ndong Mba (Equatorial Guinea) (spoke
in Spanish): Allow me, at the outset, to extend my
appreciation to Mr. Jeremiah Kingsley Mamabolo,
Joint Special Representative for Darfur and Head of
the United Nations-African Union Mission in Darfur
(UNAMID), for the comprehensive and most relevant
briefing he has just delivered.
We note with satisfaction the favourable results
of the joint work between the Government of the
Sudan, the African Union and the United Nations,
as evidenced by the fact that clashes between the
Sudanese Government and rebel groups in Darfur
have diminished significantly. Generally speaking, the
security situation appears more stable.
The successful impact of the Government-led
weapons-collection campaign is commendable, as
it has contributed substantially to the reduction of
intercommunal clashes. Moreover, as the report
indicates (S/2018/389), there has been a significant
improvement in the freedom of movement for civilians.
The Republic of Equatorial Guinea calls for
due observance of human rights and not neglecting
their violations, especially those perpetrated against
children and women. While it is true that statistically, as
compared to last year, cases of rape have decreased, the
situation remains precarious. We expect an immediate
end to such atrocities.
The Government of the Republic of Equatorial
Guinea is concerned about the slow progress in the
search for a comprehensive political solution to the
conflict in Darfur. The Doha Document for Peace in
Darfur is a viable framework for the peace process in
Darfur because it is important that all parties show
leadership and commit to the implementation and
enforcement of the Document. Equatorial Guinea, as
always, understands that the conflict in Darfur must
be resolved through a political process that allows the
most controversial and topical issues to be addressed,
improved and resolved. That is why we would like
to call on all parties to make efforts to reach peace

18-142673/10

S/PV.8252

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

with the Government through a frank and inclusive
negotiation process.
For those considerations, the Republic of Equatorial
Guinea believes it is essential that current efforts
be redoubled, particularly support for the Sudanese
Government in seeking solutions to the root causes of
the conflict. In that regard, we believe it is necessary for
negotiations to take place between the Government and
the rebel groups in Darfur, and for the Doha Document,
adopted in 2011, to be implemented. It is with a view
to securing that support that we already endorse the
renewal of the mandate of the African Union-United
Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur (UNAMID) in
June, as well as the desirability of inviting Mr. Thabo
Mbeki, Chair of the High-level Independent Panel of
the African Union, to inform the Council of efforts
under way, as he did 18 months ago. We also call for
the adoption of measures and targeted sanctions against
recalcitrant groups or individuals who are reluctant to
participate in negotiations between the Government
and the rebel groups.
I conclude by once again congratulating UNAMID,
the United Nations, the African Union and the Sudanese
Government on their hard work and we urge them to
continue their efforts.
Mr. Djédjé (Côte d’Ivoire) (spoke in French): I thank
Mr. Jeremiah Mamabolo, Joint Special Representative
for Darfur and Head of the African Union-United
Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur (UNAMID),
for presenting the report of the Secretary-General
on the implementation of the UNAMID mandate
(S/2018/389). The report informs us of the UNAMID
operational environment and of developments in the
overall situation in Darfur. My intervention will focus
on the security and political situations in Darfur, the
operational environment for UNAMID and the different
phases of the reconfiguration of the mission.
With regard to the first point, Côte d’Ivoire notes
with satisfaction that the overall security situation
in Darfur remains stable, in view of the Sudanese
Government’s continuing efforts to create a secure
environment in the country.
My country also welcomes the launch of the
Government’s arms control plan, launched so that only
regular forces are equipped with them, and welcomes the
positive impact that the weapons-collection campaign
continues to have on reducing intercommunal conflicts
and crime.
4/10

10/05/2018

Côte d’Ivoire welcomes the extension of the
unilateral ceasefire by the Government. However, it
urges the parties involved to engage in frank discussions
in order to achieve the signing of a permanent ceasefire.
On the political front, my delegation shares the
concerns expressed by the Secretary-General regarding
the impasse in the Darfur peace process. Despite
ongoing efforts by the African Union High-level
Independent Panel and the Joint Special Representative
to find a political solution to the crisis in Darfur, little
progress has been made in the political process and in
the implementation of the Doha Document for Peace
in Darfur.
My country therefore notes with regret the
persistence of land ownership disputes, which continue
to affect the people of Darfur. In view of the situation,
Côte d’Ivoire believes that the full implementation of
the Doha Document would provide lasting solutions to
the root causes of the conflict, including those relating
to land management, in the interests of the people.
To that end, my delegation shares Mr. Mamabolo’s
view that the Security Council should do everything
in its power to encourage the various parties to adhere
to the Document and embrace the imperative need
for a political settlement of the crisis and to redouble
their efforts to negotiate an inclusive peace agreement
focused on the implementation of the measures
stipulated in the Doha Document.
With regard to the UNAMID operational
environment, my country condemns the attack on
a UNAMID national staff member on 24 February,
as well as all unjustifiable acts of violence against
UNAMID staff in general, which are violations of the
status of forces agreement.
Nevertheless, Côte d’Ivoire notes with satisfaction
the improved collaboration between the Government
of the Sudan and UNAMID in the implementation of
the mission’s mandate. Therefore, while welcoming the
progress made in that regard, my delegation reiterates
its call to the Government of the Sudan to ensure
strict compliance with the status of forces agreement
with a view to facilitating the fulfilment of the
mission’s mandate.
With regard to the reconfiguration of UNAMID,
Côte d’Ivoire welcomes the fact that no negative impact
has been recorded following the withdrawal of UNAMID
from the various areas in which the team sites were
18-14267

10/05/2018

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

closed during the first phase of the reconfiguration. As
for the second phase of the mission’s reconfiguration,
my country welcomes the significant progress made in
its implementation, including the establishment of the
Jebel Marra Task Force.
My delegation hopes that the recommendations
of the UNAMID strategic review, as mandated by the
Security Council through its presidential statement
of 31 January (S/PRST/2018/4), will enable Council
members to better define the mission’s priorities in the
context of the renewal of its mandate.
In conclusion, my delegation commends UNAMID
for its ceaseless efforts to re-establish peace and
stability in Darfur.
Mr. Inchauste Jordán (Plurinational State of
Bolivia) (spoke in Spanish): We would like to thank
the Joint Special Representative for Darfur and Head
of the African Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation
in Darfur (UNAMID), Mr. Jeremiah Mamabolo, for his
comprehensive briefing on the report of the SecretaryGeneral on the situation in the Sudan (S/2018/389). We
take this opportunity, through him, to commend the
work that UNAMID is conducting on the ground.
At the outset, we underscore the positive aspects
highlighted in the Secretary-General’s report, in
particular with regard to security, which has remained
stable, as in previous reporting periods. We also welcome
the Government’s decision to extend the unilateral
ceasefire to all areas of operations until 30 June.
We would also like to underscore the positive results
of the first arms-collection campaign promoted by the
Government. It is clear that this process has contributed
to improving the security situation in Darfur. It
is important to continue to encourage the civilian
population and militias to maintain and increase their
commitment to that governmental campaign, which is
in line with the peacebuilding process.
With regard to the humanitarian situation, we regret
that the clashes between the Sudanese armed forces and
the Sudan Liberation Army/Abdul Wahid faction have
complicated the delivery of humanitarian assistance in
some areas of Jebel Marra. Despite that, we underscore
the improved access of humanitarian assistance to
that area, which was previously inaccessible. In the
same vein, we welcome the return of the almost 2,000
internally displaced persons to Yasin. However, despite
that positive development, many challenges remain.
We therefore encourage the international community

S/PV. 8252

to continue to support projects that enable internally
displaced persons to have to access basic services and
improve their quality of life.
Bolivia believes that the political situation continues
to be one of the main challenges for the Sudan. We
appreciate the Government’s efforts to promote the
implementation of the Doha Document for Peace in
Darfur. Again, we stress that the only way a solution
to this situation can be achieved is through a political
process that addresses the root causes of the conflict,
which are primarily disputes over land ownership.
We also underscore that further efforts are needed
to help resolve the differences that exist with regard
to the Doha Document. We call on the movements that
have not signed the Document to engage constructively
in dialogue with the Government and to achieve a
permanent cessation of hostilities. We highlight the
communiqué of the Peace and Security Council of
the African Union of 20 February, which called on
the African Union Commission to develop possible
measures, including possible sanctions, that could be
applied against all those who continue to impede efforts
to achieve peace and security in Darfur.
With regard to the reconfiguration of UNAMID,
we commend the progress made with the successful
completion of the first phase and the initiation of the
second phase. We are pleased to learn that UNAMID
started withdrawing in the first phase from the
areas envisioned and that did not have any negative
consequences. We must continue to work to strengthen
the country team’s capacities to ensure that the
withdrawal of the Hybrid Operation is successful. We
also highlight the fundraising strategy for sustaining
peace in Darfur that was developed by UNAMID and
the country team. We must support that strategy to
ensure a successful transition from peacekeeping to
peacebuilding in Darfur.
Finally, we appreciate this opportunity to
acknowledge the great work being done by Joint Special
Representative Mamabolo, UNAMID, the United
Nations country team and the members of the African
Union High-level Implementation Panel to achieve
peace and sustainable development in Darfur.
Mr. Meza-Cuadra (Peru) (spoke in Spanish):
We would like to thank you, Madam President, for
convening this meeting, and Mr. Jeremiah Kingsley
Mamabolo, Joint Special Representative for Darfur
and Head of the African Union-United Nations Hybrid

18-142675/10

S/PV.8252

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

10/05/2018

Operation in Darfur (UNAMID), for his briefing, as
well as the valuable work he is doing with his team.

aims to facilitate the transition from peacekeeping
to peacebuilding.

We note that the security situation in Darfur remains
relatively stable and that intercommunal violence has
significantly decreased. Nevertheless, we must regret
that the peace process remains stalled. There is still a
need to address the root causes of the conflict and to
build sustainable peace.

We also welcome the efforts of the Joint Special
Representative, the Special Envoy for the Sudan
and South Sudan and the African Union High-level
Implementation Panel to revive the peace process.

The human rights situation remains precarious.
We note the decrease in human rights violations and
abuses as compared to the previous year, but the figures
remain high. We are particularly concerned about the
vulnerability of women and children and the absence
of an institutional framework capable of effectively
protecting them.
Peru supports the important work being done
by UNAMID in escorting and protecting civilians,
which allows women and children to carry out their
daily activities outside the camps for displaced
persons. That enables humanitarian actors to obtain
relevant information about the needs of internally
displaced persons.
However, we must condemn the persistence of
sexual violence. According to the latest report of
the Secretary-General on the issue (S/2018/389), the
rate in Darfur is particularly high around the camps
for internally displaced persons. We regret that
sexual violence is not reported because of the lack of
protection for victims and witnesses and inaction on
the part of authorities in punishing those responsible.
There is a need for women to occupy the posts of
judges, prosecutors and police officers. We would like
to underscore the work of UNAMID to promote the
participation of the population in the child-protection
programme, including the establishment of four
committees in camps for internally displaced persons,
which aim to promote the exchange of information and
good practices to respond to reports.
We also wish to underscore the improvements in
access to humanitarian assistance in Darfur. However,
we are concerned that those improvements have not
reached all areas of Jebel Marra, where it is estimated
that food insecurity seriously affects the inhabitants of
that area, as well as those in North Darfur, who could
face a level 4 situation of emergency food insecurity.
In that regard, we welcome the joint fundraising
strategy for sustaining peace in Darfur, which
6/10

We conclude by stressing the urgent need for all
parties to the conflict to participate constructively, in
a spirit of compromise, in the peace and reconciliation
process in Darfur, and to make progress in the
implementation of the Doha Document and in the
establishment of a permanent ceasefire.
Mr. Temenov (Kazakhstan): We join others in
expressing our deep appreciation to the Joint Special
Represenative for Darfur, Mr. Jeremiah Mamabolo, for
his comprehensive update on the situation in Darfur.
My delegation supports the conclusions of the report of
the Secretary-General (S/2018/389) and would like to
make the following observations.
We are encouraged by the continuing improvement
in the security and humanitarian situation in Darfur, as
well as the overall reduction in intercommunal clashes,
criminal activities and human rights violations. That
was achieved owing to the strengthened cooperation
among the Sudanese Government, the United
Nations, the African Union and the successful armscollection campaign.
At the same time, we note that the progress in
the implementation of the Doha Document for Peace
in Darfur has been slow. Kazakhstan welcomes
the extension of a unilateral ceasefire by President
Al-Bashir until July 2018, which aims to create a
conducive environment for peace talks. We hope that
all parties in Darfur will undertake the necessary
efforts to invigorate an inclusive political process
led by the African Union High-level Implementation
Panel and supported by Joint Special Representative
Mamabolo. Furthermore, the Council should consider
all the necessary measures to put pressure on those who
undermine the peace process.
Like the Joint Special Representative, we are also
pleased with the significant progress achieved in the
reconfiguration of UNAMID and the absence of a
reported adverse impact of the drawdown. We expect
that the second phase of the reconfiguration will be
successfully implemented and completed within the
established timeline.
18-14267

10/05/2018

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

Given those positive developments, we believe
that it is essential to reconsider UNAMID’s mandates
to reflect the realities on the ground. In particular,
we need to give priority to UNAMID’s peacebuilding
mandate, including support for capacity-building and
quick-impact and community-stabilization measures,
through the implementation of the UNAMID integrated
strategic framework for Darfur and the United Nations
country team. Obviously, there will have to be a
substantial investment by the United Nations system
and donors, delivering as One United Nations, to
streamline operations to meet greater demands within
personnel and resource constraints.
Finally, we call on the international community to
provide the necessary financial and technical support
to the Government of the Sudan to address the root
causes of the conflict, including poverty, the lack of
basic services, drought and massive harvest failures,
as well as to ultimately find a durable solution for the
internally displaced persons.
Mr. Alotaibi (Kuwait) (spoke in Arabic): I would
like to thank the Joint Special Representative for
Darfur and Head of the African Union-United Nations
Hybrid Operation in Darfur (UNAMID), Mr. Jeremiah
Mamabolo, for his briefing.
I shall focus my comments on the security,
humanitarian and political aspects in Darfur and the
reconfiguration of UNAMID.
First of all, with regard to the security situation,
we welcome the positive developments mentioned in
the report of the Secretary-General (S/2018/389), in
particular the return to stability in Darfur, the notable
decrease in intercommunal clashes, the ongoing
ceasefire, the weapons-collection campaign and
the drop in crime. We took part in the field visit last
April, which the President organized in her capacity as
Chair of the Security Council Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1591 (2005). We were able to
see for ourselves what is described in the report of the
Secretary-General, namely, the security situation and
the positive impact of the weapons-collection campaign.
The improvements in the security situation and the
weapons-collection campaign have also contributed to
improving the humanitarian situation. The SecretaryGeneral mentions that development in his report,
particularly with respect to an improvement in the
freedom of movement for civilians, a reduction in
the number of attacks against civilians, a decrease in

S/PV. 8252

incidents of human rights violations and an improvement
in the delivery of humanitarian aid, as well as increased
voluntary returns of internally displaced persons and
a reduction in the number of attacks against civilians.
Last Monday, the Security Council, in an Arria
Formula meeting, was briefed on the successes in
Darfur regarding the action plan for the protection
of children from violations in armed conflict in
Darfur. We welcome the positive role of UNAMID
in strengthening local capacities in the stabilization
of Darfur, in particular strengthening local judicial
institutions as well as training local civilian partners
and security forces in the area of protecting children
and fighting sexual abuse and exploitation. We welcome
the role of the joint mechanism between the Sudan and
the League of Arab States to implement development
projects in Darfur. We also welcome the briefing by
Lieutenant General Leonard Ngondi, Force Commander
of UNAMID, yesterday (see S/PV.8251).
With respect to political developments, we would
like to reaffirm the primacy of a political solution in
Darfur. We would also like to reaffirm the key role of
the Doha Document for Peace in Darfur. We welcome
the return of certain factions to the peace process, as
we were able to see in Berlin last month. However, we
regret that they have tried to negotiate outside of the
framework of the Doha Document.
With regard to the reconfiguration of UNAMID
and the future, we welcome the cooperation between
the Government of the Sudan and UNAMID. A joint
United Nations-African Union mission to the Sudan,
which is mentioned in the report, was carried out to visit
the eight areas from which UNAMID has withdrawn,
as a result of which no negative impact has been noted,
During our visit, we were able to observe one of the
camps — the Abu Shuk camp, in North Darfur. We
hope to see more cooperation between the Sudan, the
authorities of Darfur and UNAMID.
With regard to UNAMID’s exit strategy, I support
the request General Ngondi made yesterday that there
should be a clear transition plan that facilitates a
withdrawal of the operation.
In conclusion, we await the report of the Department
of Peacekeeping Operations on the second phase and
a discussion of the Council on the extension of the
mandate in the light of the facts on the ground and in
manner that maintains peace.

18-142677/10

S/PV.8252

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

The President (spoke in Arabic): I now give the
floor to the representative of the Sudan.
Mr. Mohamed (Sudan) (spoke in Arabic): I
would like to congratulate you, Madam President,
on your country’s accession to the presidency of the
Security Council during the month of May. I would
also like to commend your predecessor, the Permanent
Representative of Peru, for his effective management
of the Council’s business during the month of April.
And I would like to thank the Secretary-General for
his report (S/2018/389), and Mr. Jeremiah Mamabolo
for his briefing.
As Council members are aware from the SecretaryGeneral’s report on the situation in Darfur, and from the
various visits conducted by many members to the Sudan
over the past period, it is with great pleasure for me
to confirm the conclusions reached by those different
delegations and missions to the Sudan. The situation
in the country has seen huge progress and notable
normalization in all aspects, day after day. There is a
return to stability, a move towards reconstruction and
compensation for years of conflict, irrevocably gone
thanks to the efforts of the Sudanese Government with
the support of the international community, the African
Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur
(UNAMID), United Nations agencies and friendly and
brotherly countries, but above all thanks to the will
and the desire of our people in Darfur to reach peace
and stability.
What I said in the Council last March during its
discussion of the Secretary-General’s previous report
on UNAMID (S/2018/154), is applicable to the current
state of affairs in Darfur (see S/PV.8202). I understand
that Council members are aware of the great progress
achieved in the security and humanitarian fields, the
return of internally displaced persons, the weaponscollection campaign, the intercommunal conflict and
addressing the root causes of the conflict.
The current situation in Darfur speaks for itself. It
proves that the fact of peace has become tangible in all
respects, even in the small pockets under the control
of the Sudan Liberation Army-Abdul Wahid rebel
faction. There is a popular sentiment that encourages
full reconciliation and sustained peace.
The Government of the Sudan is aware of the needs
in the upcoming period, including the various social
cohesion and development programmes, as well as
addressing the root causes of the conflict. In that regard,
8/10

10/05/2018

it is important to underscore that the international
community must provide the necessary assistance
to implement such programmes by means of direct
support or through the various United Nations agencies
or its country team in the Sudan. We call on donor
countries to fulfil their pledges. We would like to thank
the Secretary-General for having agreed to provide the
necessary support through the Peacebuilding Fund.
We also thank friendly and brotherly countries, in
particular the State of Qatar, Japan and Turkey, as well
as the African Union (AU) and the League of Arab
States, among others, for their ongoing support to the
people of Darfur.
Turning to the implementation of resolution
2363 (2017), which provides for the beginning of the
drawdown and the reconfiguration of UNAMID, that
decision has proved to be appropriate given the phase of
peacebuilding and strengthening security and stability
throughout the states of Darfur. We look forward to
the outcome of the strategic review conducted by the
African Union Commission and the Department of
Peacekeeping Operations with regard to implementing
an exit strategy for UNAMID from Darfur in the
near future. That would allow for the necessary
peacebuilding and strengthening of stability. It is high
time for such steps.
The Government of the Sudan has already started to
implement such projects, such as launching a campaign
to collect weapons from civilians. Reports indicate
that, to date, the campaign has been successful despite
limited resources. We are determined to continue
the campaign. As we have affirmed previously, it is
necessary to collect weapons in order to achieve peace
and stability. Everyone, in particular the SecretaryGeneral and the international officials who recently
visited Darfur, have seen the positive impact of the
weapons-collection campaign on the security situation
in Darfur. The Government of the Sudan will therefore
spare no effort to implement the campaign. In that
regard, we emphasize the importance of our partnership
with UNAMID and the ongoing consultations and
meetings with the Joint Special Representative for
Darfur and Head of the AU-United Nations Hybrid
Operation in Darfur.
The political settlement of the situation in Darfur
is the main objective of the Government of the Sudan.
We are striving to achieve that goal in accordance
with the provisions of the Doha Document for Peace
in Darfur, which is the main reference document for
18-14267

10/05/2018

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

S/PV. 8252

peace in Darfur. That was affirmed by the international
committee for the Doha Document.

and political proxies in some camps for internally
displaced persons.

I would like to respond to some questions raised
by representatives. By the end of last year, 85 per cent
of the Doha agreement had been implemented. As
the Security Council knows, the Doha agreement is
recognized by the United Nations and the international
community. It remains to compel the parties that refuse
to be party to the agreement to sign the Document.
In view of the broad recognition it has received and
the pace of its implementation, we cannot abandon
the agreement owing to the leverage of a few people
who know that peace, the subsequent elections and
democratic representation will exclude them from
the arrangement. We must not forget what the former
Nigerian President, Mr. Obasanjo, said in 2004 when
he launched the Abuja negotiations, namely, that what
was of real concern to the armed groups was that they
would be dissolved, like salt in water, at the final
stage of the negotiations. It is therefore normal that
those groups would spare no effort to undermine the
peace process and the UNAMID exit strategy, as the
Force Commander said yesterday (see S/PV.8251). We
therefore call on all countries with influence on the
armed groups to pressure them to engage in negotiations
without preconditions and to seriously participate
without delay so that we can reach a political agreement
that would improve the situation and, inter alia, help to
achieve a stable and secure Sudan.

(spoke in English)

In that regard, it would be remiss of me not to
mention the significant efforts of the African Union
High-level Implementation Panel to narrow the
differences and to conduct a series of talks. However,
the intransigence of some armed groups that are not part
of the military in Darfur and thrive on conflict in the
neighbouring countries, in particular Libya and South
Sudan, has thwarted efforts to reach a political solution
with them or to engage them in the political process
on the basis of the Doha agreement. That includes the
meetings held recently in Berlin to persuade the leaders
of those movements to resume negotiations. That only
proves what we have said before, namely, that the Sudan
Liberation Army/Minni Minawi faction and the Justice
and Equality Movement (Jebril) are not part of the
solution in Darfur. We reaffirm that those movements
represent a threat to international and regional peace
and security. The Sudan Liberation Army/Abdul Wahid
faction is empowered only by its media spokespersons

On the issue of access, I would like to mention that
as long ago as 2017, we circulated an aide-memoire
on access to the areas targeted in Darfur. Principally,
mutatis mutandis, the contents are valid as far as our
commitment to access is concerned. We therefore
thought the circulation could be useful. We will send
copies of it to all Security Council members.
(spoke in Arabic)
We call once again for unity on the mechanisms
set up by the Council to help the Sudan to bring
about lasting peace in Darfur. The follow-up on the
implementation of resolution 1591 (2005) on imposing
targeted sanctions must be consistent with the Security
Council resolve to bring about normality, as provided
for in resolution 2363 (2017). In that regard, we propose
a reduction in the number of experts and lifting the
military ban in Darfur. There are two options with
regard to the listed individuals, namely, either to delist
them from the sanctions list or to list Abdul Wahid
Mohamed al-Nour in implementation of the resolution
1591 (2005), which warned about his designation on the
sanctions list.
(spoke in English)
I beg the Council’s kind indulgence to carefully
consider the fact that Abdul Wahid Mohamed al-Nour,
known as Mr. No, and his small number of followers
are obstructing the peace process in Jebel Marra — the
only place the Security Council agreed to exclude
from the greater Darfur area and in which it maintains
a peacekeeping force. Jebel Marra accounts for less
than 5 per cent of Darfur’s total surface area. I believe
there is no other option but to demonstrate the resolve
of the international community here in the Security
Council by declaring that the ongoing normalization
of the situation in Darfur shall not be held hostage to
the misjudgments, bad faith and whims of Mr. Abdul
Wahid. All that is required for peace to prevail at last
in that part of my country is to strip him of all political
support and send him a stern and unequivocal message
of zero tolerance, as he is the obstacle to peace.
(spoke in Arabic)
In conclusion, we commend the comprehensive and
concerted efforts made to conclude the peace process.

18-142679/10

S/PV.8252

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

Once again we welcome peacebuilding, which will
bring about development and, therefore, an end to the
conflict. My delegation would like to thank UNAMID
for its efforts in all areas, and peacekeepers for their
sacrifices throughout the years. We would also like
to thank troop- and police-contributing countries. We
reiterate our Government’s readiness to cooperate with
all regional and international partners on UNAMID-

10/10

10/05/2018

related matters until the very last of its components
leave the country.
The President: There are no more names inscribed
on the list of speakers.
I now invite Council members to informal
consultations to continue our discussion on the subject.
The meeting rose at 10.30 a.m.

18-14267
