S/PV.7820

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-first year

7820th meeting

Wednesday, 23 November 2016, 10.25 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Seck . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Senegal)

Members:

Angola. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Egypt. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Japan. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Malaysia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
New Zealand. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Spain. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ukraine. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Uruguay. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Gaspar Martins
Mr. Shen Bo
Mr. Aboulatta
Mr. Delattre
Mr. Bessho
Mrs. Adnin
Mr. Van Bohemen
Mr. Safronkov
Mr. González de Linares Palou
Mr. Yelchenko
Mr. Rycroft
Ms. Sison
Mr. Rosselli
Mr. Ramírez Carreño

Agenda
The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

16-39999 (E)
*1639999*

S/PV.7820

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

The meeting was called to order at 10.25 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in the Middle East, including the
Palestinian question
The President (spoke in French): In accordance
with article 39 of the Council’s provisional rules
of procedure, I invite the following briefers to
participate in this meeting: Mr. Nickolay Mladenov,
Special Coordinator for the Middle East Peace
Process and Personal Representative of the SecretaryGeneral; and Mr. Stephen O’Brien, Under-SecretaryGeneral for Humanitarian Affairs and Emergency
Relief Coordinator.
The Security Council will now begin its consideration
of the item on its agenda.
I now give the floor to Mr. Mladenov.
Mr. Mladenov: As we sit here today, the continuing
status quo in the occupied Palestinian territory reduces
the prospect for sustainable and just peace between
Israelis and Palestinians. Rarely have the risks to the
two-State solution been greater than today. How many
times have we said in this Chamber that we must move
past the blatant obstructionism, the false starts and the
perpetual claims that the time is simply not right for
action? Inaction has a cost, one measured in human
lives and suffering. The situation on the ground is
changing steadily — dangerously — as proponents of
Israeli settlement expansion feel emboldened, internal
divisions among Palestinians flare up and the prospect
of a future Palestinian State comes under threats like
never before.
The proponents of the status quo, the critics of
the two-State solution, offer no viable alternative that
meets the legitimate national and historic aspirations
of both Israelis and Palestinians. The alternative is
an open-ended occupation, a perpetual conflict that
breeds anger among the people of Palestine and Israel
and fuels radicals across a Middle East already torn by
ethnic and religious strife.
Socioeconomic despair, underpinned by the
persistent hardships of the occupation and fragile
democratic institutions, is affecting stability in the
West Bank and threatening to erode the achievements
of the Palestinian State-building agenda. The stark
2/8

23/11/2016

reality is most visible in the Palestine refugee camps,
which remain a symbol of the failure to produce a
sustainable political solution to end the conflict and
Palestinian suffering.
I visited the West Bank city of Nablus twice this
month to meet with the Governor, as well as with
residents and representatives of the Balata refugee
camp. Established in 1950 to serve approximately
5,000 refugees, Balata today is the home of almost
30,000 people, living on just 0.25 square kilometres of
land. Some 50 per cent of its residents are reportedly
unemployed, the majority of them youths. Poverty and
food insecurity rates are the highest in the West Bank.
The harsh conditions, combined with regular Israeli
incursions and the lack of a permanent home, create the
potential for violence.
With growing political tension in the West Bank over
the past months, we have witnessed a series of clashes
between Palestinian security forces and residents of
the camp and the nearby old city. Regrettably, during
recent operations, one woman caught in the crossfire
was killed and 15 people were injured, including four
security personnel.
The Palestinian Authority has an obligation to
maintain law and order, including in the refugee camps,
which they continue to do effectively and professionally
under very challenging circumstances. It is critical
that, should force be used, it be used judiciously. Those
charged or arrested must be afforded due judicial
process and treated equally under Palestinian law.
The problems in the camps are a reflection of the
deep social economic and political challenges, the
resolution of which is not in the hands of the vulnerable
Palestine refugees; rather, it is foremost in the hands
of Palestinian and Israeli political leaders. Left
without hope and mired in poverty, Palestine’s most
traumatized — its refugees — have seen their needs
outpace the resources available to the United Nations
Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the
Near East (UNRWA).
Generations of residents have been educated by
UNRWA and thousands have gained employment
and a sense of security through its various activities.
The most destitute have benefitted from its relief
programme. I appeal to the international community to
support UNRWA so that it can carry out its activities
effectively and predictably. I welcome the generous
commitments made by the United Arab Emirates
16-39999

23/11/2016

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

and Kuwait, in addition to Canada’s resumption of
support for UNRWA. That support is indispensable to
maintaining the lives of Palestine refugees and to the
stability of the region.
The situation in the camps, however, is only part of
the story. If current socioeconomic trends continue, the
potential for serious deterioration of the situation in the
West Bank will grow. The Palestinian Authority faces
fiscal difficulties, as international assistance this year
is down by some 30 per cent. The Palestinian Authority
is dependent upon Israel for clearance revenues, and
on the international community for financial support.
Economic development in the West Bank remains
constrained by Israeli restrictions on access to the most
fertile lands, water and mineral resources in Area C,
which constitutes approximately 60 per cent of the
West Bank.
While Israel has made important positive gestures,
including retroactively legalizing two Palestinian
schools and advancing a community outline plan for
a Palestinian village in Area C near Jenin, such steps
are only the beginning. They need to be expanded and
encouraged. I welcome the important discussions being
held between the parties on critical issues, such as
water and electricity, that build on agreements from the
Ad Hoc Liaison Committee meeting in September here
in New York.
While progress is being made, it remains slow. It
is critical that these discussions become operational
realities in order to meet the dire needs of the West
Bank and Gaza. It is in no one’s interest to allow the
Palestinian economy and stability to crumble. Only
significant policy shifts by Israel and actions by the
Palestinians to strengthen their institutions and the rule
of law can sustainably reverse this cause.
In its July report (see S/2016/595), the Middle East
Quartet underscored the need for Palestinian unity: a
single, democratic and legitimate Government that
unites Gaza and the West Bank. That remains critical
for the fulfilment of Palestinian national aspirations.
Sadly, that unity continues to remain an elusive goal.
On 29 November, Fatah is scheduled to hold its
seventh party conference. That should be used as an
opportunity for promoting unity, for strengthening
the mainstream centre of Palestinian politics and
paving the way for elections. I urge all to conduct the
proceedings in a fully transparent and representational

S/PV.7820

manner that encourages moderate voices and respects
opposing views.
Recent developments in Israel are increasingly
worrying. Last week, despite strong opposition, the
so-called legalization bill passed a preliminary vote
in the Knesset. If adopted, the bill would enable the
expansion of illegal settlements and outposts on private
Palestinian land. If ratified, it would constitute a breach
of international law and, according to Israel’s own
Attorney General, would also be unconstitutional.
Today, the local planning committee in Jerusalem
decided to advance plans for 500 new housing units
in the existing settlement of Ramat Shlomo, further
encroaching into the East Jerusalem neighbourhood of
Beit Hanina. I once again urge Israel to adhere to the
repeated calls to cease illegal settlement construction
in the occupied West Bank, including East Jerusalem.
In recent weeks, Israel has also conducted over
80 demolitions of Palestinian structures in Area C and
East Jerusalem, for a lack of building permits that are
next to impossible to obtain. In this latest round 122
people have been displaced. This year to date, over
1,020 structures have been demolished, which is nearly
twice last year’s total.
Let me now turn to Gaza, where I continue to
be deeply concerned by the continuing militant
buildup, smuggling and increased restrictions on
the movement of people and goods in and out of the
Strip. As I briefed the Security Council last month
(see S/PV.7792), the amount of construction materials
entering Gaza is woefully inadequate to meet the vast
reconstruction needs.
Due to limitations by Israel on imports of materials
and approvals of construction projects, the volume of
such building materials — primarily cement — has now
fallen well behind demand. This creates tensions among
approved beneficiaries over the limited availability
in the market. At today’s import rates, it would take
at least seven months to clear the current backlog of
33,000 households in Gaza that have been approved to
purchase cement to repair or reconstruct their housees.
Thousands of households have been waiting for months
to access the material they need, and economic activity
in the Gaza strip is slowing ominously.
In October, at least 50 per cent of permit
applications to exit Gaza were denied for national staff
of international aid agencies alone, in sharp contrast to

16-399993/8

S/PV.7820

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

the average of less than 5 per cent of denials in 2015.
That has significant impacts on the ability of the United
Nations and the humanitarian community to deliver and
monitor ongoing programmes. While acknowledging
Israel’s security concerns, I urge it to address this
pressing issue without delay.
I also welcome recent Egyptian efforts to relieve
the suffering of the people in Gaza. The opening of the
Rafah Border Crossing for 10cdays this month enabled
thousands of people, including students and those
seeking urgent medical attention, to cross into Egypt,
and over 2,000 Palestinians to return back home to the
Gaza strip.
I now turn briefly to Lebanon. Since the Council
was last briefed, on 10 November, there have been
further signs of the country overcoming its political
crisis. Following the election of President Aoun,
progress has been made towards the formation of a
Government under the leadership of Prime Minister
Saad Hariri. It is hoped that this positive momentum
will translate into a full reactivation of institutions,
including parliamentary elections by May 2017.
The situation in the United Nations Interim Force
in Lebanon (UNIFIL) area of operations remains
unchanged, mostly quiet with some violations by both
sides. The UNIFIL investigation into a firing incident
across the Blue Line on 26 October near Kafer Kela
is ongoing. In a tripartite meeting, Israel and Lebanon
reaffirmed their commitments to calm and stability
along the Blue Line.
On the Golan, I remain concerned by the current
precarious situation, which undermines the 1974
Disengagement of Forces Agreement and clearly
jeopardizes the ceasefire between Israel and the Syrian
Arab Republic. I urge both parties to maintain liaison
with the United Nations Disengagement Observer
Force and to refrain from any action that could escalate
the situation across the ceasefire line and the already
volatile regional environment.
As the situation in the West Bank continues to
deteriorate, as Gaza’s chronic challenges show little
sustainable progress, and as the voices of extremism on
all sides intensify their efforts to destroy any remaining
hope for the two-State solution, I would like to conclude
with a call to both parties and all stakeholders to stand up
to those promoting a hate-driven agenda that threatens
to prolong this conflict. A carefully worded statement
or a well-crafted speech will not reverse the current
4/8

23/11/2016

trajectory. What people long for is concrete action.
They need to see a plan to rebuild trust and create the
conditions for a return to meaningful negotiations by
focusing on positive changes on the ground and an
engagement with the region. They need the international
community to restate its consensus that the two-State
solution is the only outcome that legitimately meets
the national aspirations of both peoples, and to speak
clearly against the obstacles to peace: settlements, the
taking of land, violence and incitement. They need to
hear from us that development cannot be a substitute
for statehood and that democracy, human rights and the
rule of law must be respected. They need courageous
Israeli and Palestinian leaders who together can chart a
clear strategy to peace and security.
I urge all those who are committed to ending the
conflict, including the Council, to consider carefully
what it will take to advance the prospects for peace, and
to begin, in consultation with the parties, to develop an
agreed path forward. Time is running out. Palestinians
and Israelis deserve to live in peace; we must spare
no effort in helping them reach that goal. As ever,
the United Nations remains committed to advancing
that objective.
The President (spoke in French): I thank
Mr. Mladenov for his briefing.
I now give the floor to Mr. O’Brien.
Mr. O’Brien: I thank my colleague Mr. Nickolay
Mladenov for his authoritative and comprehensive
briefing, and I shall complement his remarks on the
humanitarian situation in the occupied Palestinian
territory. Last month, I also provided an overview of
the humanitarian situation in the occupied Palestinian
territory (see S/PV.7792). Today, I will focus my
remarks on the increasing challenges humanitarian
actors are facing in responding to the needs of those
vulnerable Palestinians, and for which we need greater
support from the Council.
In the occupied Gaza Strip, 70 per cent of the
population currently receives some form of international
assistance, mostly food aid. Yet our ability to deliver
that assistance has become increasingly restricted.
Israel bans or restricts the import of certain goods into
Gaza, on the grounds that they have a dual military
and civilian purpose. Affected items range from
communications equipment to cement, wood and even
water pumps, fire trucks and medical X-ray machines.
Mr. Mladenov has already spoken about the growing
16-39999

23/11/2016

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

and dramatic gap between how much material Israel is
permitting to be imported to Gaza through the Gaza
Reconstruction Mechanism, and the growing waiting
lists of beneficiaries. That translates very directly into
the humanitarian realm, with 60,000 highly vulnerable,
displaced persons in Gaza still waiting for their home
sto be rebuilt, who need rental assistance and much
more in the interim.
It is not just about concrete. Urgent projects, which
aim to reduce the risk of flooding that threatens nearly
500,000 people as winter approaches, have been on hold
for 10 months as they await clearance of equipment.
Projects to rehabilitate water wells and the construction
of a neonatal intensive care unit are other examples of
urgent needs suffering unnecessary long delays.
Aid workers have also been caught up in the
increased restrictions. United Nations staff in Gaza
require a permit to leave Gaza in order to meet with
their managers in Jerusalem or Ramallah, or to attend
training programmes elsewhere. While those permits
were relatively easy to receive in previous years, when
never more than 10 per cent were typically rejected, last
month more than half of our United Nations applicants
were turned away, with some advised not to apply again
for 12 months. No explanation other than “security”
is cited, leaving us at a loss as to how to respond and
with a growing morale problem. Non-governmental
organizations (NGOs), embassies and others are
experiencing similar trends.
Those new access restrictions are hitting other Gaza
residents hard as well, of course; over half of the 2,000
permit applications by patients seeking urgent medical
treatment outside Gaza in October, most typically for
cancer treatment, were not approved by Israel. Inside
Gaza, the operating space for NGOs is also difficult.
The de facto authorities, Hamas, regularly seek to do
audits, review staff or beneficiary lists or introduce new
permit requirements and restrictions on work in certain
areas of the Strip. NGOs need to resist those pressures
and navigate anti-terrorist legislation set up by many
Member States, which generate their own restrictions
on the type of programming that is allowed and with
whom one can and cannot engage.
The ongoing internal divisions between the
Palestinian authorities in the West Bank and those in
Gaza also inevitably transfer an increasing burden
onto humanitarian actors and humanitarian budgets,
as unstaffed operating theatres, dilapidated equipment

S/PV.7820

and breaks in fuel supplies take their toll on people
and services.
Ultimately, real progress in Gaza requires a
full lifting of the blockade by Israel, in line with the
resolutions of the Council and the General Assembly.
Until that happens, Israel must ensure that items needed
for reconstruction, relief and emergency preparedness
are allowed entry, and that aid workers are able to move
about to do their vital work.
While it is not a substitute for the opening of
access to Israel, we also look to Egypt, in line with its
own security considerations, to maintain the welcome
increase in openings at the Rafah Border Crossing, which
remains, literally, a life line for some. We must also see
greater action from Palestinian leaders in Ramallah and
Gaza; internal differences must be resolved for the sake
of Palestine’s most vulnerable constituents.
In the occupied West Bank, as the pressures
increase on communities in Area C, so too do the
obstacles to our operations there as well. As I have
reported to the Council before, the pace of demolitions
and confiscations of Palestinian property by the Israeli
authorities has far exceeded any previous years on
record — more than double this year as compared to
2015. Those have occurred mainly within herding
communities in Area C, which count among Palestine’s
most vulnerable households. Obstruction to our
operations in those areas is occurring in the most
egregious way, with our relief items themselves
frequently demolished or confiscated by Israeli forces.
The rate of demolition or seizure of such donor-funded
relief is on a trajectory to potentially triple as compared
to 2015. Affected relief items include shelters and tents,
water cisterns, animal pens and other basic structures
for survival and livelihoods.
More fundamentally, Palestinians in Area C
are living in an increasingly coercive environment
that is created by discriminatory planning policies,
demolitions, the active promotion of plans to relocate
Bedouin to new townships and other practices that
generate miserable living conditions and create
pressure on people to move elsewhere. Much of that
occurs in the line of sight of new or expanding Israeli
settlements, which are illegal under international law,
as reiterated by successive resolutions by the Council.
About a quarter of the structures targeted this year were
in Palestinian Bedouin communities located within or

16-399995/8

S/PV.7820

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

near the area allocated to the E-1 settlement expansion
project on the outskirts of occupied East Jerusalem.
It is critical that the interests of those vulnerable
Bedouin communities be placed first. They need
and deserve our unequivocal support to resist those
coercive pressures by the occupying Power, and
must not be burdened by still more pressures from
Palestinian leaders, some of whom appear to view those
communities as a key battleground in Palestine’s long
struggle. Those vulnerable civilians have no place as
instruments in a political strategy.
I reiterate the Secretary-General’s call to Israel to end
the policies and practices that place those Palestinians
at risk of forcible transfer. I also remind the Palestinian
authorities of the need to respect the principles of
independence, impartiality, neutrality and humanity,
which are the bedrock of the humanitarian imperative.
The continued lack of a resolution to the core
drivers of the ongoing humanitarian crisis has left
Palestinians stuck in a perpetual cycle of humanitarian
relief, increasingly dependent on assistance and
facing an ongoing lack of respect for their rights
and heightened instability. We need a coherent
international response that will enhance the protection
of civilians and deliver accountability for violations
of international humanitarian law and international
human rights law. That is especially important in the
absence of an active political process between Israeli
and Palestinian leaders.
Israel, the main duty-bearer, is a signatory to the
Fourth Geneva Convention and has clear obligations
as an occupying Power, and both Israel and Palestine
have ratified the major human rights treaties. They are
bound by customary international law as well, as are all
countries. The members of the Security Council have
a vital role to play in motivating the parties to respect
their obligations, Similarly, all parties to the Geneva
Conventions have an obligation not only to respect
them but also to ensure that others respect them.
The challenges facing Palestinians in the
occupied Palestinian territory, and the challenges that
humanitarian personnel face in trying to assist them,
require action not only by the Israeli and Palestinian
authorities but by every member of the Council. If we
want to prevent further deterioration in a region already
overwhelmed with humanitarian emergencies, the
Council’s decisive collective action is vital. If it would
help the members of the Council to have a specific
6/8

23/11/2016

list of humanitarian relief actions that should be taken
or avoided, I and my colleagues will be pleased to
provide it.
However, those actions notwithstanding, the
principles of international humanitarian law do and
must must apply. That includes all members of the
Council, all those in the occupied Palestinian territory,
both Israelis and Palestinians, and all who have
signed international legal obligations to which they
are, and must be held, accountable. We look to the
Council to ensure greater respect for obligations under
international humanitarian law and international human
rights law and to enhance the protection of civilians.
We look to the Council to safeguard the operational
space that aid workers require to provide assistance
to those most in need. And we look to the Council to
address the underlying driver of Palestine’s protection
crisis through a political resolve to end the occupation,
which is now approaching its fiftieth anniversary.
The President (spoke in French): I thank
Mr. O’Brien for his briefing.
I shall now give the floor to the members of the
Security Council who wish to make statements.
Mr. Rosselli (Uruguay) (spoke in Spanish): We
would like to thank Mr. Mladenov and Mr. O’Brien
for their testimony, which is considerably more than
briefings, being testament to something that we cannot
even describe as déjà vu, since déjà vu implies a
static situation. The current situation is not static; it is
simply deteriorating.
We listened very carefully to Mr. O’Brien’s most
recent testimony. There was a moment during it when
I was not sure whether I was listening to him talk
about Israel, Gaza and Palestine, or about Syria, the
Sudan, South Sudan or Yemen, because the obstacles
to development and the tasks being carried out by
United Nations entities in the field and to humanitarian
assistance are things that we have so many times
denounced in the Council with regard to the Sudan,
South Sudan and Yemen. They are the same. A
Government is blocking the work that the Council has
been trying to do through numerous missions and for
many years.
Therefore, in the same way, and with the same
passion with which my delegation has asked other
Governments to stop interrupting and interfering with
the provision of assistnance by the United Nations, we
16-39999

23/11/2016

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

urge the same thing of the Government of Israel and,
in appropriate cases, the Palestinian Authority. The
Security Council cannot treat people differently. We
have heard other impassioned statements denouncing
the desperate situations that result from the decreased
access for humanitarian aid, to various areas of Syria,
for example. Mr. Mladenov and Mr. O’Brien are using
the same narrative with regard to the Palestinian people.
We therefore appeal to the authorities in this particular
conflict that they stop such activities.
Uruguay is concerned about the total lack of
progress in the Palestinian-Israeli conflict, with its
humanitarian, political and security implications for
both countries and the region as a whole. We once again
affirm our support for the right of Israel and Palestine
to live in peace, within secure and recognized borders,
in an atmosphere of renewed cooperation, free of any
threat or act that could threaten peace. We also support
a solution based on two independent States, convinced
that that is the only option that can enable Israel and
Palestine to peacefully coexist. It is up to the parties
to create the conditions necessary for a resumption of
negotiations and to take action and adopt policies that
demonstrate their commitment to a two-State solution.
They should also refrain from taking unilateral
decisions that hinder dialogue and that they comply
with their obligations under international law.
Uruguay remains concerned about the Israeli
authorities’ continuing decisions to build settlements
in the occupied Palestinian territory in the West Bank,
as well as their policy of demolishing Palestinian
homes and buildings. We have to point out once again
that the settlements are illegal under international
law, and we urge Israel to stop this practice. We also
reiterate our firm condemnation of acts of terrorism
and their glorification, as well as the incidents in which
unarmed Palestinians have died at the hands of Israeli
security forces.
We reiterate that the only formula in the search
for peace is direct bilateral negotiations between the
Israelis and Palestinians, which would finallhy allow
an end to this conflict, still unresolved almost seven
decades after it began.
Mr. Ramírez Carreño (Bolivarian Republic of
Venezuela) (spoke in Spanish): I would like to thank
you, Mr. President, for convening today’s meeting.
Following Uruguay’s example, I wish to briefly express
some views before the discussion on this item in closed

S/PV.7820

consultations. I thank Mr. Mladenov and Mr. O’Brien
for their briefings.
We stress once again — as we do every month when
we hear yet another report on what is happening — that
the tragedy in Palestine is the longest-lasting case with
no resolution by the Security Council. We have beaten
the Council’s sad record of lack of ability or political
will to reach a positive response to the tragedy that the
Palestinian people are suffering.
We would like to voice our deepest rejection of and
indignation at the State of Israel’s permanent policy
of aggression towards the Palestinian people and its
occupation of their territory. It is surprising that Israel is
one of probably only two or three countries in the world
that disregard Security Council resolutions, and that in
violation of all United Nations resolutions, including
the Council’s, it has continued to move forward, in as
flagrant and illegal manner, with a policy of colonizing
Palestinian territory. The status quo is unsustainable,
as every delegation in the Security Council has said,
but it continues to dig itself in deeper and weaken the
possibility of a two-State solution.
We reiterate that the occupation of Palestine requires
re-establishing the full rights of the Palestinian people
to their self-determination and independence, as well as
Israel’s withdrawal from all occupied territories to the
pre-1967 borders. We once again reject the settlement
policy of the occupying Power. Israeli settlements are
not only illegal and run counter to all international
law and resolutions but — worse yet — are also part
of an ongoing strategy by the occupying Power aimed
at colonizing Palestinian territory and expelling
Palestinians from their land. We think that the recent
decisions by the Israeli Government to attempt to
use legal subterfuge to justify settlement expansions
requires a resounding response by the Security Council.
We do not know for how long we will be able to
ask Palestine to continue to be patient or how long we
can ask the Palestinian Authority and the Palestinian
people to continue to wait until the Security Council
agrees upon a strategy. This is a situation in which
the Security Council is shirking its responsibility.
As an elected member of the Security Council until
31 December, and given that many States here are
involved in dealing with the question of Palestine,
including, in particular, Senegal, which co-chairs the
Committee on the Exercise of the Inalienable Rights of
the Palestinian People and is the African representative

16-399997/8

S/PV.7820

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

of the Arab people, we believe that time is right for
the Council to at least adopt a draft resolution that
denounces the settlements as illegal and insists that
Israel comply with international law.
I want to underscore that at the latest informal
consultations we held with representatives of Israeli
civil society, one of the participants said that part of the
problem and the reason for which Israeli Governments
acts with impunity is that there is no international
response to the violations of the provisions of the
Security Council and the United Nations. There is no
response, and the Israeli authorities therefore are acting
as though they have the support or, at least, the green
light of some of the members of the Security Council.
We would like to make a particular appeal to the United
States delegation. Although we are in a transition
period between Administrations, President Obama is
still in power and perhaps has a last opportunity to say
something in favour of the Palestinian people, legality
and the rule of law.
Lastly, we would be remiss if we failed to mention
the humanitarian situation in the occupied territories
and the situation marked by extraordinary violence
that the occupying Power exerts upon the Palestinian

8/8

23/11/2016

people. More than 7,000 Palestinians are held in Israeli
prisons. More than 700 men, women and children are
subject to administrative detention. We want to speak
out in particular on behalf of the Palestinian children
who are subject to military tribunal simply because
they are voicing their ire and opposition to the Israeli
occupation and ongoing Israeli violence against
their people. We would also like to say that, through
the settlements policy and their expansion, great
prominence is being given to a very aggressive group,
that is, extremist settlers, who carry out daily acts
oppression and violence against the Palestinian people.
Finally, we once again call on all members of
the Security Council to have the courage to take the
historic step to reject clearly what Israel is doing in the
occupied territories and to give a glimmer of hope for
all the diplomatic efforts, including those supported by
the Quartet, Russia and France, and all initiatives that
deserve the unqualified support of the Security Council.
The President (spoke in French): I now invite
Council members to informal consultations to continue
our discussion on the subject.
The meeting rose at 11.05 a.m.

16-39999
