A

UNITED
NATIONS

General Assembly
Distr.
GENERAL
A/RES/49/116
22 February 1995

Forty-ninth session
Agenda item 89
RESOLUTION ADOPTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY
[on the report of the Second Committee (A/49/729/Add.6)]
49/116.

Unauthorized fishing in zones of national
jurisdiction and its impact on the living
marine resources of the world’s oceans and
seas

The General Assembly,
Inviting all members of the international community, particularly those
with fishing interests, to strengthen their cooperation in the conservation
and management of living marine resources in accordance with international law
as reflected in the United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea, 1/
Recalling Agenda 21, 2/ adopted by the United Nations Conference on
Environment and Development, in particular its chapter 17, concerning the
sustainable development and conservation of the marine living resources of
areas under national jurisdiction,

1/
Official Records of the Third United Nations Conference on the Law of
the Sea, vol. XVII (United Nations publication, Sales No. E.84.V.3),
document A/CONF.62/122.
2/
Report of the United Nations Conference on Environment and
Development, Rio de Janeiro, 3-14 June 1992 (A/CONF.151/26/Rev.1 (Vol. I and
Vol. I/Corr.1, Vol. II, Vol. III and Vol. III/Corr.1)) (United Nations
publication, Sales No. E.93.I.8 and corrigenda), vol. I: Resolutions Adopted by
the Conference, resolution 1, annex II.

95-76855

/...

A/RES/49/116
Page 2

Recalling also the Programme of Action for the Sustainable Development
of Small Island Developing States, 3/ adopted by the Global Conference on
the Sustainable Development of Small Island Developing States, in particular
chapter IV, concerning the sustainable development and conservation of the
coastal and marine resources of areas under national jurisdiction,
Noting that, in the Rio Declaration on Environment and Development 4/
the international community recognized that the special situation and needs of
developing countries, particularly the least developed and those most
environmentally vulnerable, should be given special priority,
Expressing deep concern at the detrimental impact of unauthorized
fishing in zones under national jurisdiction, where the overwhelming
proportion of the global fish catch is harvested, on the sustainable
development of the world’s fishery resources and on the food security and
economies of many States, particularly the developing countries,
Reaffirming the rights and duties of coastal States to ensure proper
conservation and management measures with respect to the living resources in
zones under their national jurisdiction, in accordance with international law,
as reflected in the United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea,
Taking note of recent discussions, at the international, regional and
subregional levels, on fishery conservation and management measures, and on
compliance with and enforcement thereof,
1.
Calls upon States to take the responsibility, consistent with
their obligations under international law as reflected in the United Nations
Convention on the Law of the Sea, 1/ to take measures to ensure that no
fishing vessels entitled to fly their national flag fish in zones under the
national jurisdiction of other States unless duly authorized by the competent
authorities of the coastal State or States concerned; such authorized fishing
operations should be carried out in accordance with the conditions set out in
the authorization;
2.
Calls upon development assistance organizations to make it a high
priority to support efforts, including through financial and/or technical
assistance by the developing coastal States, in particular the least developed
countries and the small island developing States, to improve the monitoring
and control of fishing activities, and the enforcement of fishing regulations;
3.
Requests the Secretary-General to bring the present resolution to
the attention of all members of the international community, relevant
intergovernmental organizations, the organizations and bodies of the United
Nations system, regional and subregional fisheries bodies, and relevant
non-governmental organizations;
4.
Also requests the Secretary-General to submit to the General
Assembly, at its fiftieth session, a report on the steps taken and on problems

3/
Report of the Global Conference on the Sustainable Development of
Small Island Developing States, Bridgetown, 26 April-6 May 1994 (A/CONF.167/9
and Corr.1 and 2) (United Nations publication, Sales No. E.94.I.18 and
corrigenda), chap. I, resolution 1, annex II.
4/
Report of the United Nations Conference on Environment and
Development, Rio do Janeiro, 3-14 June 1992 (A/CONF.151/26/Rev.1 (Vol. I and
Vol. I/Corr.1, Vol. II, Vol. III and Vol. III/Corr.1)) (United Nations
publication, Sales No. E.93.I.8 and corrigenda), vol. I: Resolutions Adopted by
the Conference, resolution 1, annex I.
/...

A/RES/49/116
Page 3

encountered in the implementation of the present resolution, and thereafter as
may be determined by the Assembly.
92nd plenary meeting
19 December 1994
