A/63/PV.70

United Nations

General Assembly

Official Records

Sixty-third session

70

th plenary meeting
Thursday, 18 December 2008, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. D’Escoto Brockmann . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (Nicaragua)

In the absence of the President, Mr. Tanin
(Afghanistan), Vice-President, took the Chair.
The meeting was called to order at 10.30 a.m.
Agenda item 104
Elections to fill vacancies in subsidiary organs and
other elections
(b) Election of seven members of the
Organizational Committee of the
Peacebuilding Commission
Draft resolution A/63/L.58
The Acting President: The Assembly will now
take a decision on draft resolution A/63/L.58, entitled
“Election by the General Assembly of seven members
of the Organizational Committee of the Peacebuilding
Commission: term of office”. May I take it that the
Assembly wishes to adopt draft resolution A/63/L.58?
The draft resolution was adopted (resolution
63/145).
The Acting President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Japan to make a statement on the
resolution just adopted.
Mr. Takasu (Japan): First of all, I should like to
welcome the adoption of resolution 63/145. I should
like to express my sincere appreciation to all those
delegations that participated in the consultations on the
resolution for their support and understanding. I thank
in particular those delegations which expressed and

demonstrated maximum flexibility to reach an
agreement on the allocation of a seat for members of
the Peacebuilding Commission. This arrangement will
enable the Peacebuilding Commission to continue its
effective work.
I would like to take this opportunity to record the
two understandings. The first understanding is that this
arrangement is of a provisional nature, applicable for
the next two years, 2009 and 2010. Any arrangement
beyond 2011 will be reviewed in conjunction with the
general review of the Peacebuilding Commission to
take place in 2010. The other understanding is that the
chairmanship of the country-specific configuration of
the Peacebuilding Commission will be determined by
the first meeting of the Organizational Committee of
the Peacebuilding Commission next year. The
provisional rules of procedure of the Peacebuilding
Commission state that the Organizational Committee
decides on the presiding officer of country-specific
meetings. Therefore, the Organizational Committee is
in a position to decide continuity of chairmanship. If it
so decides, Belgium will continue to chair the Central
African Republic configuration and Brazil that of
Guinea-Bissau.
The Acting President: The Assembly has thus
concluded this stage of its consideration of sub-item
(b) of agenda item 104.
Reports of the Third Committee
The Acting President: The General Assembly
will consider the reports of the Third Committee on

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. Corrections should be submitted to the original
languages only. They should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature
of a member of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room
C-154A. Corrections will be issued after the end of the session in a consolidated corrigendum.

08-66058 (E)

*0866058*

A/63/PV.70

agenda items 39, 55, 56, 58, 60 to 64, 97, 98, 110 and
119. I request the Rapporteur of the Third Committee,
Mr. Khalid Alwafi of Saudi Arabia, to introduce the
reports of the Third Committee in one intervention.
Mr. Alwafi (Saudi Arabia), Rapporteur of the
Third Committee (spoke in Arabic): I have the honour
to present for the consideration of the General
Assembly the following reports of the Third
Committee on the agenda items allocated to them by
this Assembly.

one draft resolution and, in paragraph 11, the adoption
of one draft decision.
Under agenda item 62, entitled “Elimination of
racism and racial discrimination”, the Third Committee
recommends, in paragraph 31 of document A/63/428,
the adoption of three draft resolutions.

Under agenda item 39, entitled “Report of the
United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees,
questions relating to refugees, returnees and displaced
persons and humanitarian questions”, the Third
Committee recommends, in paragraph 22 of document
A/63/423, the adoption of four draft resolutions.

I understand that the Assembly will defer its
consideration of draft resolution II, “Global efforts for
the total elimination of racism, racial discrimination,
xenophobia and related intolerance and the
comprehensive implementation of and follow-up to the
Durban Declaration and Programme of Action”, and
draft resolution III, “International Convention on the
Elimination of All Forms of Racial Discrimination”, to
such a time when it has before it the pertinent Fifth
Committee report.

Under agenda item 55, entitled “Social
development”, the Third Committee recommends, in
paragraph 39 of document A/63/424, the adoption of
five draft resolutions.

Under agenda item 63, entitled “Right of peoples
to
self-determination”,
the
Third
Committee
recommends, in paragraph 19 of document A/63/429,
the adoption of three draft resolutions.

Under agenda item 56, entitled “Advancement of
women”, the Third Committee recommends, in
paragraph 27 of document A/63/425, the adoption of
five draft resolutions.

Under agenda item 64, entitled “Promotion and
protection of human rights”, the Third Committee
recommends, in paragraph 5 of document A/63/430,
the adoption of one draft decision.

Under agenda item 58, entitled “Report of the
Human Rights Council”, the Third Committee
recommends, in paragraph 13 of document
A/63/435/Add.1, the adoption of one draft resolution.
It may be recalled that, at its sixty-sixth plenary
meeting on 10 December, the General Assembly
adopted the draft resolution which was recommended
by the Third Committee in document A/63/435,
entitled “Optional Protocol to the International
Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights”.

Under agenda item 64 (a), entitled “Promotion
and protection of human rights: implementation of
human rights instruments”, the Third Committee
recommends, in paragraph 17 of document
A/63/430/Add.1, the adoption of two draft resolutions.

Under agenda item 60, entitled “Promotion and
protection of the rights of children”, the Third
Committee recommends, in paragraph 18 of document
A/63/426, the adoption of one draft resolution and, in
paragraph 19, the adoption of one draft decision. I
understand, however, that the Assembly will defer its
consideration of the draft resolution, entitled “Rights
of the child”, to such a time when it has before it the
pertinent Fifth Committee report.
Under agenda item 61, entitled “Indigenous
issues”, the Third Committee recommends, in
paragraph 10 of document A/63/427, the adoption of

2

Under agenda item 64 (b), entitled “Promotion
and protection of human rights: human rights
questions, including alternative approaches for
improving the effective enjoyment of human rights and
fundamental freedoms”, the Third Committee
recommends, in paragraph 182 of document
A/63/430/Add.2, the adoption of 23 draft resolutions. I
understand, however, that the Assembly will postpone
its consideration of draft resolution XXIII, entitled
“Committee on the Rights of the Child”, until such
time as it has before it the relevant report of the Fifth
Committee. In addition, I wish to correct the following
error in the English version of document
A/63/430/Add.2. In paragraph 91 of the report, on page
27, “43rd meeting” should read “38th meeting”.
Under agenda item 64 (c), entitled “Promotion
and protection of human rights: human rights situations
and reports of special rapporteurs and representatives”,

08-66058

A/63/PV.70

the Third Committee recommends, in paragraph 29 of
document A/63/430/Add.3, the adoption of three draft
resolutions. I understand, however, that the Assembly
will postpone its consideration of draft resolution II,
“Situation of human rights in Myanmar”, until such
time as it has before it the relevant report of the Fifth
Committee.
Under agenda item 64 (d), entitled “Promotion
and protection of human rights: comprehensive
implementation of and follow-up to the Vienna
Declaration and Programme of Action”, the Third
Committee advises, in document A/63/430/Add.4, that
no action was taken under that sub-item.
Under agenda item 64 (e), entitled “Promotion
and protection of human rights: Convention on the
Rights of Persons with Disabilities”, the Third
Committee recommends, in paragraph 8 of document
A/63/430/Add.5, the adoption of one draft resolution.
Through you, Mr. President, I wish to recommend to
the Assembly that paragraph 2 of the draft resolution,
which provides the status of signatures and
ratifications of the Convention and of the Optional
Protocol thereto, be updated, as a number of States
have signed or ratified those instruments since the
Third Committee adopted the draft resolution on
11 November. I am advised by the Secretariat that, as
of yesterday, there are 137 States signatories and 45
States parties to the Convention and 80 States
signatories and 27 States parties to the Optional
Protocol. The number of regional integration
organizations that have signed the Convention remains
unchanged.
Under agenda item 97, entitled “Crime
prevention and criminal justice”, the Third Committee
recommends, in paragraph 26 of document A/63/431,
the adoption of four draft resolutions and, in paragraph
27, the adoption of one draft decision.
Under agenda item 98, entitled “International
drug control”, the Third Committee recommends, in
paragraph 13 of document A/63/432, the adoption of
one draft resolution.
Under agenda item 110, entitled “Revitalization
of the work of the General Assembly”, the Third
Committee recommends, in paragraph 7 of document
A/63/433, the adoption of one draft decision.
Finally,
“Programme

08-66058

under agenda item 119, entitled
planning”, the Third Committee

recommends, in paragraph 23 of document A/63/434,
the adoption of one draft decision.
(spoke in English)
Before concluding, I should like to thank the
Chairman and the other members of the Bureau of the
Third Committee for their support and help in ensuring
the successful completion of the work of the
Committee. I also take this opportunity to thank the
secretariat of the Committee for its support. I
respectfully commend the reports of the Third
Committee to the plenary of the General Assembly for
its consideration.
The Acting President: If there is no proposal
under rule 66 of the rules of procedure, I shall take it
that the General Assembly decides not to discuss the
reports of the Third Committee that are before the
Assembly today.
It was so decided.
The Acting President: Statements will therefore
be limited to explanations of vote.
Members will also recall that, at its sixty-sixth
plenary meeting on 10 December 2008, the General
Assembly considered the report of the Third Committee
on agenda item 58, “Report of the Human Rights
Council”, contained in document A/63/435. At that
meeting, it was decided that explanations of vote on the
resolution contained in that report would be made during
the consideration of the other reports of the Third
Committee. Members are therefore invited to
immediately indicate to the Secretariat their intention to
speak in explanation of vote on the recommendation
contained in document A/63/435 when the Assembly
resumes its consideration of agenda item 58 to consider
document A/63/435/Add.1.
The positions of delegations regarding the
recommendations of the Third Committee have been
made clear in the Committee and are reflected in the
relevant official records.
May I remind members that, under paragraph 7 of
decision 34/401, the General Assembly agreed that
“When the same draft resolution is
considered in a Main Committee and in plenary
meeting, a delegation should, as far as possible,
explain its vote only once, that is, either in the
Committee or in plenary meeting, unless that

3

A/63/PV.70

Draft resolution
63/146).

delegation’s vote in plenary meeting is different
from its vote in the Committee.”
May I also remind delegations that, in accordance
with General Assembly decision 34/401, explanations
of vote are limited to 10 minutes and should be made
by delegations from their seats.
Before we begin to take action on the
recommendations contained in the reports of the Third
Committee, I should like to advise representatives that
we are going to proceed to take decisions in the same
manner as was done in the Third Committee, unless the
Secretariat is notified otherwise in advance. That
means that, where separate votes or recorded votes
were taken, we will do the same. I should also hope
that we may proceed to adopt without a vote those
recommendations that were adopted without a vote in
the Third Committee.
Before proceeding further, I would like to draw
the attention of members to a note by the Secretariat,
entitled “List of draft proposals contained in the
reports of the Third Committee”, which has been
circulated as document A/C.3/63/INF/1. This note has
been distributed desk to desk in the General Assembly
Hall as a reference guide for action on draft resolutions
and decisions recommended by the Third Committee in
its reports.
In this connection, members will find in column
three of the note the numbers of the draft resolutions or
decisions for action in the plenary, with the
corresponding numbers of draft resolutions or
decisions in the Third Committee in column four of the
same note.

Report of the Third Committee (A/63/423)
The Acting President: The Assembly has before
it four draft resolutions recommended by the Third
Committee in paragraph 22 of its report. We will now
take a decision on draft resolutions I to IV.
Draft resolution I is entitled “Enlargement of the
Executive Committee of the Programme of the United
Nations High Commissioner for Refugees”. The Third
Committee adopted draft resolution I without a vote.
May I take it that the Assembly wishes to do likewise?
4

was

adopted

(resolution

The Acting President: Draft resolution II is
entitled “New international humanitarian order”. The
Third Committee adopted draft resolution II without a
vote. May I take it that the Assembly wishes to do the
same?
Draft resolution II was adopted (resolution
63/147).
The Acting President: Draft resolution III is
entitled “Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees”. The Third Committee
adopted draft resolution III without a vote. May I take
it that the Assembly wishes to do likewise?
Draft resolution III was adopted (resolution
63/148).
The Acting President: Draft resolution IV is
entitled “Assistance to refugees, returnees and
displaced persons in Africa”. The Third Committee
adopted draft resolution IV without a vote. May I take
it that the Assembly wishes to do the same?
Draft resolution IV was adopted (resolution
63/149).
The Acting President: May I take it that it is the
wish of the General Assembly to conclude its
consideration of agenda item 39?
It was so decided.
Agenda item 55
Social development
Report of the Third Committee (A/63/424)

Agenda item 39
Report of the United Nations High Commissioner for
Refugees, questions relating to refugees, returnees
and displaced persons and humanitarian questions

I

The Acting President: The Assembly has before
it five draft resolutions recommended by the Third
Committee in paragraph 39 of its report (A/63/424).
We will now take a decision on draft resolutions I to V,
one by one.
Draft resolution I is entitled “Realizing the
Millennium Development Goals for persons with
disabilities through the implementation of the World
Programme of Action concerning Disabled Persons and
the Convention on the Rights of Persons with
Disabilities”.
to

Before taking action on draft resolution I, I wish
inform members that I have received a

08-66058

A/63/PV.70

communication from the Secretariat that, despite the
recorded vote in the Third Committee, there is no need
to proceed with a vote in the General Assembly on
draft resolution I. May I therefore take it that the
Assembly wishes to adopt draft resolution I without a
vote?
Draft resolution
63/150).

I

was

adopted

(resolution

The Acting President: Draft resolution II is
entitled “Follow-up to the Second World Assembly on
Ageing”. The Third Committee adopted draft
resolution II without a vote. May I take it that the
Assembly wishes to do likewise?
Draft resolution II was adopted (resolution
63/151).
The Acting President: Draft resolution III is
entitled “Implementation of the outcome of the World
Summit for Social Development and of the twentyfourth special session of the General Assembly”. The
Third Committee adopted draft resolution III without a
vote. May I take it that the Assembly wishes to do the
same?
Draft resolution III was adopted (resolution
63/152).
The Acting President: Draft resolution IV is
entitled “Follow-up to the implementation of the
International Year of Volunteers”. The Third
Committee adopted draft resolution IV without a vote.
May I take it that the Assembly wishes to do likewise?
Draft resolution IV was adopted (resolution
63/153).
The Acting President: Draft resolution V is
entitled “United Nations Literacy Decade: education
for all”. The Third Committee adopted draft resolution
V without a vote. May I take it that the Assembly
wishes to do the same?
Draft resolution V was adopted (resolution
63/154).
The Acting President: I call on those delegations
wishing to speak in explanation of position on the
resolutions just adopted.
Mr. McMahan (United States of America): With
respect to resolution 63/150, I would like to draw
attention to the explanation made by the United States
on 25 November regarding what is now the fifth

08-66058

preambular paragraph. I would also like to note that 93
members of the Third Committee either voted against
or abstained on a proposed amendment to include that
paragraph in this resolution.
Mrs. Eilon Shahar (Israel): I would like to refer
to resolution 63/150, just adopted by consensus, and
give a brief explanation of position. Israel is committed
to the advancement of the rights of persons with
disabilities and several steps have already been
initiated in Israel with a view to promoting the
implementation of the Convention.
With regard to the resolution, we would like to
thank the delegation of the Philippines for the
constructive way it led the negotiations and express our
regret that certain elements of politicization were
included in the text, in particular the fifth preambular
paragraph. The attempt to draw artificial parallels
between two different legal regimes under international
law — those of human rights law and the law of armed
conflict — only undermines the effectiveness of each
regime. Israel would therefore like to place on record
our concern regarding the reference in this resolution
to elements taken from the law of armed conflict.
The Acting President: May I take it that it is the
wish of the General Assembly to conclude its
consideration of agenda item 55?
It was so decided.
Agenda item 56
Advancement of women
Report of the Third Committee (A/63/425)
The Acting President: The Assembly has before
it five draft resolutions recommended by the Third
Committee in paragraph 27 of its report (A/63/425).
I now give the floor to the representative of
Senegal.
Mr. Badji (Senegal) (spoke in French): The
delegation of Senegal is pleased to take the floor to
address the issue of the important draft resolution IV,
entitled “Supporting efforts to end obstetric fistula”.
The draft resolution seeks to find solutions to one of
the most devastating maternal injuries and thus to save
the lives of thousands of women throughout the world.
This explains, of course, the strong support expressed
by delegations for the draft resolution.

5

A/63/PV.70

Unfortunately, when this draft resolution was
adopted in the Third Committee on 30 October 2008,
the fifth and twelfth preambular paragraphs were
inadvertently omitted from the text. It was only after
the draft resolution was adopted that it was brought to
our attention that the text did not contain the two
aforementioned paragraphs. Unfortunately, once again,
it was not possible to reinsert them in the text before
the Third Committee. Therefore, allow me to read out,
in English, the two paragraphs that should be inserted
into the text before it is adopted in plenary.
The fifth preambular paragraph reads as follows:
(spoke in English)
“Taking note with appreciation of the report
of the Secretary-General on supporting efforts to
end obstetric fistula, and welcoming the
conclusions of recommendations therein.”
(spoke in French)
The twelfth preambular paragraph reads as
follows:
(spoke in English)
“Welcoming ongoing partnerships between
stakeholders at all levels to address the
multifaceted determinants of maternal mortality
and the commitments announced at the 2008
high-level event on the Millennium Development
Goals to accelerate progress on Millennium
Development Goal 5.”
(spoke in French)
Bearing in mind that those two paragraphs
enjoyed the full support of Member States during the
negotiations in the Third Committee, as I mentioned,
my delegation would like to propose that they be
reinserted in the text of the draft resolution prior to its
adoption, in accordance with the consensus it enjoyed
within the Third Committee.
The Acting President: We will now take a
decision on draft resolutions I to V, one by one.
We turn first to draft resolution I, entitled
“Intensification of efforts to eliminate all forms of
violence against women”. The Third Committee
adopted draft resolution I without a vote. May I take it
that the Assembly wishes to do the same?

6

Draft resolution I was adopted (resolution
63/155).
The Acting President: Draft resolution II is
entitled “Trafficking in women and girls”. The Third
Committee adopted draft resolution II without a vote.
May I take it that the Assembly wishes to do likewise?
Draft resolution II was adopted (resolution
63/156).
The Acting President: Draft resolution III is
entitled “Future operation of the International Research
and Training Institute for the Advancement of
Women”. The Third Committee adopted draft
resolution III without a vote. May I take it that the
Assembly wishes to do the same?
Draft resolution III was adopted (resolution
63/157).
The Acting President: Draft resolution IV is
entitled “Supporting efforts to end obstetric fistula”.
This resolution was orally corrected by Senegal. The
Third Committee adopted draft resolution IV without a
vote. May I take it that the Assembly wishes to adopt
draft resolution IV, as orally corrected?
Draft resolution IV, as orally corrected, was
adopted (resolution 63/158).
The Acting President: Draft resolution V is
entitled “Follow-up to the Fourth World Conference on
Women and full implementation of the Beijing
Declaration and Platform for Action and the outcome
of the twenty-third special session of the General
Assembly”. The Third Committee adopted draft
resolution V without a vote. May I take it that the
Assembly wishes to do the same?
Draft resolution V was adopted (resolution
63/159).
The Acting President: I give the floor to the
representative of the United States of America in
explanation of position on the resolutions just adopted.
Mr. McMahan (United States of America): The
United States disassociates itself from the consensus on
resolution 63/159 just adopted on the follow-up to the
Fourth World Conference on Women and full
implementation of the Beijing Declaration and
Platform for Action and the outcome of the twentythird special session of the General Assembly. At this
time I would like to draw members’ attention to the

08-66058

A/63/PV.70

explanation of position made by the United States on
24 November 2008 upon the adoption, in the Third
Committee, of draft resolution A/C.3/63/L.73.

Human Rights Committee in declining to consider
communications relating to common article 1 of the
two Covenants.

The Acting President: May I take it that it is the
wish of the General Assembly to conclude its
consideration of agenda item 56?

The right of peoples to self-determination set out
in Part I of the International Covenant on Economic,
Social and Cultural Rights remains subject to the State
reporting process set out by the Covenant. Canada
continues to strongly support this reporting process.

It was so decided.
Agenda item 58 (continued)
Report of the Human Rights Council
Reports of the Third Committee (A/63/435
and Add.1)
The Acting President: We first turn to document
A/63/435. As announced earlier, the General Assembly
considered this document at its 66th plenary meeting,
on 10 December 2008, and adopted the
recommendation contained therein as General
Assembly resolution 63/117. At that meeting, it was
agreed
that
explanations
of
vote
on
the
recommendation contained in that report would be
made at this meeting.
I now call on those representatives who wish to
speak in explanation of vote.
Ms. Janson (Canada): As a State party since
1976 to the two International Covenants on Human
Rights, Canada is fully committed to the progressive
realization of economic, social and cultural rights and
the protection of civil and political rights. Canada
recognizes that all human rights are universal,
indivisible, interdependent and interrelated.
Canada has consistently raised concerns with
respect to the communications procedure for economic,
social and cultural rights. One of our main concerns is
that the Optional Protocol does not sufficiently take
into account the deference that must be accorded to
States when assessing their policy choices and resource
allocations. We also believe that some of the rights in
the Covenant are set out in such broad terms that they
cannot easily be subjected to quasi-judicial assessment.
We would like to reiterate our understanding that
Part I of the International Covenant on Economic,
Social and Cultural Rights is not included within the
scope of the Optional Protocol, including the
individual communications and inquiry procedures
established by it. The Committee on Economic, Social
and Cultural Rights should follow the views of the

08-66058

Canada recognizes the importance of the Optional
Protocol to many States. Canada has therefore joined
the consensus in adopting this instrument in order to
permit those States that wish to submit themselves to
its provisions to do so.
Mr. Lundberg (Finland): Finland attaches great
importance to the Optional Protocol to the International
Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights.
The Optional Protocol constitutes a significant step
towards the full realization of all human rights and
enjoys the full support of the Government of Finland.
We regard this carefully drafted text to be well
balanced and to successfully reflect the compromises
achieved during the hard negotiations conducted over
several years.
Finland considers all human rights as universal
and indivisible. We believe that civil and political
rights, on the one hand, and economic, social and
cultural rights, on the other, cannot be separated from
each other, as they are interconnected and mutually
reinforcing in many ways. This Optional Protocol
represents an important contribution to the human
rights of individuals, as it takes into account the
indivisible
and
interrelated
nature
of
the
aforementioned rights.
We thank all Member States for their constructive
approach towards adopting the Protocol by consensus,
and we hope that signatures and ratifications of this
instrument will soon follow. Finland intends to sign the
Optional Protocol at the earliest possible occasion.
Ms. Jeurlink (United Kingdom): The United
Kingdom would like to take this opportunity to
summarize its concerns with the Optional Protocol that
was adopted by the General Assembly on
10 December. The United Kingdom has already put on
record its position on certain aspects of the Optional
Protocol in a number of forums, most recently during
the adoption of the report in the Third Committee of

7

A/63/PV.70

the General Assembly. That continues to be the
position of the United Kingdom.

cultural rights for its States parties, and we hope that it
will be widely and effectively implemented.

The United Kingdom is of the firm belief that all
human rights are universal, indivisible and mutually
reinforcing, be they economic, social, cultural, civil or
political. However, the United Kingdom does not
consider that economic, social and cultural rights,
particularly because of their progressively realizable
nature, lend themselves to third-party adjudication in
the same way as civil and political rights. The United
Kingdom is therefore sceptical of the practical benefits
of an individual complaints mechanism in respect of
economic, social and cultural rights. In view of the
varying degrees of specificity with which the rights in
the Covenant are drawn, we have favoured an à la carte
approach to allow States parties to the Protocol to
declare the rights in the Covenant to which individual
complaints could apply. The adoption of the
comprehensive approach in the Protocol will make it
even more difficult for the United Kingdom to become
a State party in the future.

Before concluding, we again commend all those
who worked very hard to make this necessary new
instrument a reality.

The United Kingdom has previously stated on
record its understanding of certain aspects of the text,
including views on article 8, article 4 and amendments
to articles 2 and 11. The United Kingdom continues to
hold this understanding and refers Member States to its
previous statements in relation to these portions of the
text.
Ms. Klopčič (Slovenia): Slovenia welcomes the
adoption of the Optional Protocol to the International
Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights by
the General Assembly last week. That adoption, in the
year when we are celebrating the sixtieth anniversary
of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights, is an
important step forward. The Universal Declaration of
Human Rights itself is an impressive and far-sighted
vision of the whole spectrum of human rights,
encompassing basic civil and political rights, as well as
social, economic and cultural rights. However, it has
taken history 60 years to catch up fully with this
vision.
While two optional human rights protocols were
adopted in 1966, a complaints procedure for violations
of economic, social and cultural rights was left out. We
commend the comprehensive scope of the Optional
Protocol, thus guaranteeing the universality of all
human rights. The Optional Protocol will build upon
the progressive realization of economic, social and

8

Mr. Heissel (Austria): Austria welcomes the
creation of an individual complaints mechanism related
to the International Covenant on Economic, Social and
Cultural Rights as an important step to further enhance
and strengthen the international human rights
protection system. Given the importance it attaches to
the issue, Austria has been engaging constructively in
the drafting process with a view to arriving at a result
that enjoys the largest possible support.
The new mechanism can be viable only with
broad membership and effective implementation by all
States parties. Therefore, the text of the Optional
Protocol needs to ensure that national specificities in
the implementation of human rights obligations under
the Covenant are taken into account. Recognizing the
efforts made by the Working Group — and thanking its
Chair in particular — to accommodate the concerns of
all States in the proposed text, Austria understands that
the Optional Protocol, in its version before us,
recognizes the variety of means and choices available
to States when implementing their obligations under
the Covenant.
Ms. Ernst (Australia): We wish to take this
opportunity to highlight the way in which Australia
interprets a number of key issues in the Optional
Protocol.
The purpose of the Optional Protocol is to
establish an avenue for redress for individuals whose
rights under the Covenant have been violated. We
recall that the Human Rights Committee has
determined, with reference to the Optional Protocol to
the International Covenant on Civil and Political
Rights, that its jurisdiction cannot be invoked by an
individual when the alleged violation concerns a
collective right. Some of the rights recognized and
protected by the Covenant, including the right to selfdetermination, are not individual human rights, but
collective rights of all peoples. Consistent with the
Human Rights Committee’s previous determinations,
Australia believes that these rights should not be
justiciable by the Committee on Economic, Social and
Cultural Rights under this Optional Protocol.

08-66058

A/63/PV.70

Secondly, we note that article 4 gives the
Committee the discretion to decline jurisdiction if the
complainant has not suffered any clear disadvantage.
Australia understands that this discretion is designed to
ensure that the Committee’s time is not devoted to
spurious complaints but only to those cases where the
complainant establishes a clear personal disadvantage.
We also understand that the Optional Protocol
establishes a complaints mechanism for aggrieved
individuals, although article 4 acknowledges that an
individual complaint may reveal a serious issue of
general importance. Serious issues of general
importance can be better addressed through the regular
monitoring and reporting obligations in articles 16 and
17 of the Covenant itself and the inquiry procedure
under articles 11 and 12 of the Protocol, which are
specifically designed to implement strategies to resolve
those serious issues.
Finally, Australia wishes to highlight the
reasonableness test in article 8, paragraph 4, of the
Optional Protocol. This article recognizes that States
parties may choose from a range of possible policy
measures to implement Covenant rights in accordance
with the progressive realization requirement in article 2
of the Covenant.

support the elaboration of an Optional Protocol to the
Covenant, and therefore we did not block consensus on
the resolution adopting the Protocol, despite our
concerns with the final text.
The proponents of an Optional Protocol have
long argued that the absence of a complaints procedure
for economic, social and cultural rights relegates those
rights to a kind of second-class status. These
arguments, however, are premised on the view that
economic, social and cultural rights are substantially
identical to civil and political rights and therefore must
be justiciable in the same manner as those rights.
While civil and political rights and economic, social
and cultural rights are equally important, the nature of
these rights in a legal sense is fundamentally different.
The Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural
Rights states that those rights are to be progressively
realized, in accordance with available resources —
significant qualifications that are not contained in the
International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights.
The Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights
also sets forth rights that are, on their face, difficult to
adjudicate. It speaks, for instance, of an adequate
standard of living and the highest attainable standard of
health. It is not apparent at what point these rights have
been violated or simply not yet satisfactorily achieved.

The implementation of economic, social and
cultural rights, by their nature, involves balancing
competing resource priorities, and the Covenant
requires a State party to take steps towards the
realization of Covenant rights to the maximum of its
available resources. Article 8, paragraph 4, directs the
Committee to bear in mind that a State party may adopt
a range of possible policy measures for the
implementation of Covenant rights. In other words, the
Committee, in carrying out its responsibilities under
the Optional Protocol, acknowledges the discretion of
the State party to make legitimate decisions about
resource allocation when pursuing Covenant rights.

This fundamental fact, to clarify again, is not to
say that the rights set out in the Covenant on
Economic, Social and Cultural Rights are not
important; millions or even billions suffer daily from
inadequate food, housing, water, sanitation and other
basic needs. Rather, in our view, it seems apparent that
that Covenant takes a different approach to rights. That
approach is confirmed in the text of the respective
Covenants. For instance, the International Covenant on
Civil and Political Rights contains provisions on
remedies and enforcements. The Covenant on
Economic, Social and Cultural Rights does not.

Mr. McMahan (United States of America): My
Government extends its congratulations to the Chair of
the Working Group on the Optional Protocol. The
United States appreciated the opportunity to participate
in the Working Group. While we were sceptical of the
need for a protocol, we sought to engage constructively
with the hope of helping to produce an outcome
coherent with the Covenant on Economic, Social and
Cultural Rights and with relevant precedents. We
recognize and understand that a majority of countries

With these observations in mind, my delegation
would not stand in the way of those States parties to
the Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights
who may choose to avail themselves of the
non-binding communication procedure set out in the
Optional Protocol. That having been said, my
delegation continues to believe that an international
committee of experts, no matter how qualified, would
struggle to adjudicate individual complaints in a
manner that is consistent with the provisions of the

08-66058

9

A/63/PV.70

Covenant itself and respectful of the sovereign right of
Governments to make difficult decisions with respect
to the allocation of scarce resources in order to bring
basic services to their populations.

Optional Protocol, Denmark is very sceptical about the
creation of an individual complaints mechanism for the
International Covenant on Economic, Social and
Cultural Rights.

Mr. Bennwik (Sweden): Sweden joined
consensus in the Third Committee regarding this
resolution. For the record, I would like to recall our
explanation of position given at the time of the
adoption in the Third Committee.

We still find that the majority of the rights in the
Covenant do not carry immediate legal effect.
Considering the vague nature of the rights and the
principle of progressive realization, Denmark firmly
believes that the majority of the rights in the Covenant
are insufficiently justiciable and therefore less suited to
form the basis of an individual complaints mechanism.
Moreover, due to the vague and broad nature of the
rights in the Covenant, Denmark fears that there is a
genuine risk that the Committee will end up both
functioning as a legislator in the area of economic,
social and cultural rights and determining the
allocation of States parties’ resources within this
sphere. Denmark finds both scenarios unacceptable, as
we place great importance on the fact that allocation of
resources within the economic, social and cultural
sphere is a national matter, which is the responsibility
and prerogative for national democratic institutions
with direct popular legitimacy.

Mr. Şen (Turkey): Our delegation would like to
make a statement on resolution 63/117, entitled
“Optional Protocol to the International Covenant on
Economic, Social and Cultural Rights”. As a party to
the Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights,
Turkey is fully committed to the progressive
realization of the rights set forth in it. Turkey has been
constructively engaged in the negotiations on the draft
Optional Protocol.
Like many other delegations, we did not object to
the compromise text in Geneva. However, we would
like to place on record once again our concern with
regard to the amended article 2. We would have
preferred that the opt-out approach be retained in
article 2. That option would have facilitated the
expansion by States of the range of rights covered by
the complaints procedure over time as they
progressively work with greater clarity in domestic
systems. This would render the procedure more
manageable and acceptable to a broad range of States.
We would also have preferred to maintain the
compromise reached in the Working Group on the
limited approach in articles 2 and 11. It is the
understanding of Turkey that the right set forth in
Part I of the Covenant is conferred upon peoples. In
this regard, it cannot be invoked through an individual
complaints mechanism.
Mr. Michelsen (Norway): Norway would like to
take this opportunity to put on record its concerns
regarding the Optional Protocol by referring to the
statement we made on 18 November when the Third
Committee adopted the Protocol.
Ms. Raabymagle (Denmark): Denmark is
strongly committed to the full realization of economic,
social and cultural rights. We firmly adhere to the
universality, indivisibility, interdependence and
interrelatedness of all human rights. However, as we
also expressed throughout the negotiations on the draft

10

Mr. Argüello (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish):
Argentina reiterates all the terms of its explanation of
position delivered at the time of the adoption of this
draft resolution by the Third Committee on
18 November.
Miss Abdelhak (Algeria) (spoke in French): My
delegation welcomes the adoption by the Human
Rights Council and the General Assembly of the
Optional Protocol to the International Covenant on
Economic, Social and Cultural Rights. On this
occasion, Algeria commends Ms. Catarina de
Albuquerque for the professionalism and diligence she
demonstrated in working to reach the consensus on the
text of the Protocol in question.
The adoption of this Protocol by the General
Assembly is of such significance that it took place on
10 December 2008, the day of the commemoration of
the sixtieth anniversary of the Universal Declaration of
Human Rights. This new asset will finally make it
possible for economic, social and cultural rights to
benefit from the same treatment that is given to civil
and political rights, by granting individuals the
opportunity to bring before the Committee on
Economic, Social and Cultural Rights violations of the
economic, social and cultural rights included in the

08-66058

A/63/PV.70

Covenant in its entirety. This achievement shows the
will of the international community to promote and
protect all human rights for all.
The Acting President: The Assembly will now
turn to document A/63/435/Add.1. The Assembly has
before it a draft resolution recommended by the Third
Committee in paragraph 13 of its report in that
document. We will now take a decision on the draft
resolution. A recorded vote has been requested.
A recorded vote was taken.
In favour:
Afghanistan, Algeria, Angola, Antigua and
Barbuda,
Armenia,
Azerbaijan,
Bahamas,
Bahrain, Bangladesh, Barbados, Belarus, Belize,
Benin, Bhutan, Botswana, Brunei Darussalam,
Burkina Faso, Burundi, Cambodia, Cameroon,
Cape Verde, Central African Republic, Chile,
China, Colombia, Comoros, Congo, Côte
d’Ivoire, Cuba, Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea, Djibouti, Dominica, Dominican Republic,
Ecuador, Egypt, Eritrea, Ethiopia, Gabon,
Gambia, Ghana, Grenada, Guatemala, Guinea,
Guinea-Bissau, Guyana, Haiti, Honduras, India,
Indonesia, Iran (Islamic Republic of), Iraq,
Jamaica, Jordan, Kazakhstan, Kenya, Kuwait,
Kyrgyzstan, Lao People’s Democratic Republic,
Lebanon, Lesotho, Liberia, Libyan Arab
Jamahiriya, Madagascar, Malawi, Malaysia,
Maldives, Mali, Mauritania, Mauritius, Mongolia,
Morocco, Mozambique, Myanmar, Namibia,
Nepal, Nicaragua, Niger, Nigeria, Oman,
Pakistan, Panama, Papua New Guinea, Paraguay,
Peru, Philippines, Qatar, Russian Federation,
Rwanda, Saint Kitts and Nevis, Saint Lucia, Saint
Vincent and the Grenadines, Sao Tome and
Principe, Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Sierra Leone,
Singapore, Solomon Islands, Somalia, South
Africa, Sri Lanka, Sudan, Suriname, Swaziland,
Syrian Arab Republic, Tajikistan, Thailand,
Timor-Leste, Togo, Trinidad and Tobago, Tunisia,
Turkey, Turkmenistan, Uganda, United Arab
Emirates, United Republic of Tanzania,
Uzbekistan, Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of),
Viet Nam, Yemen, Zambia, Zimbabwe
Against:
Australia, Canada, Israel, Marshall Islands,
Micronesia (Federated States of), Palau, United
States of America

08-66058

Abstaining:
Albania, Andorra, Argentina, Austria, Belgium,
Bolivia, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Brazil,
Bulgaria, Costa Rica, Croatia, Cyprus, Czech
Republic, Denmark, El Salvador, Estonia, Fiji,
Finland, France, Georgia, Germany, Greece,
Hungary, Iceland, Ireland, Italy, Japan, Latvia,
Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Malta,
Mexico,
Monaco,
Montenegro,
Nauru,
Netherlands, New Zealand, Norway, Poland,
Portugal, Republic of Korea, Republic of
Moldova, Romania, Samoa, San Marino, Serbia,
Slovakia, Slovenia, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland,
the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia,
Tonga, Ukraine, United Kingdom of Great Britain
and Northern Ireland, Uruguay, Vanuatu
The draft resolution was adopted by 121 votes to
7, with 58 abstentions (resolution 63/160).
The Acting President: May I take it that it is the
wish of the General Assembly to conclude its
consideration of agenda item 58?
It was so decided.
Agenda item 60
Promotion and protection of the rights of children
Report of the Third Committee (A/63/426)
The Acting President: The Assembly has before
it a draft resolution recommended by the Third
Committee in paragraph 18 of its report and a draft
decision recommended by the Committee in paragraph
19 of the same report.
Before proceeding further, I should like to inform
members that action on the draft resolution, entitled
“Rights of the child” is postponed to a later date to
allow time for the review of its programme budget
implications by the Fifth Committee. The Assembly
will take action on the draft resolution as soon as the
report of the Fifth Committee on its programme budget
implications is available.
We shall now take action on the draft decision,
entitled “Documents considered by the General
Assembly in connection with the promotion and
protection of the rights of children”. May I take it that
the General Assembly wishes to adopt the draft
decision recommended by the Third Committee?
The draft decision was adopted.

11

A/63/PV.70

The Acting President: The Assembly has thus
concluded this stage of its consideration of agenda item
60.
Agenda item 61
Indigenous issues
Report of the Third Committee (A/63/427)
The Acting President: The Assembly has before
it a draft resolution recommended by the Third
Committee in paragraph 10 of its report and a draft
decision recommended in paragraph 11 of the same
report. We will now take action on the draft resolution
and the draft decision.
The draft resolution is entitled “Indigenous
issues”. The Third Committee adopted the draft
resolution without a vote. May I take it that the
General Assembly wishes to do likewise?
The draft resolution was adopted (resolution
63/161).
The draft decision is entitled “The status of the
United Nations Voluntary Fund for Indigenous
Populations”. May I take it that the Assembly wishes to
adopt the draft decision recommended by the Third
Committee?
The draft decision was adopted.
The Acting President: May I take it that it is the
wish of the General Assembly to conclude its
consideration of agenda item 61?
It was so decided.
Agenda item 62
Elimination of racism and racial discrimination
Report of the Third Committee (A/63/428)
The Acting President: The Assembly has before
it three draft resolutions recommended by the Third
Committee in paragraph 31 of its report.
Before proceeding further, I should like to inform
members that action on draft resolution II, entitled
“Global efforts for the total elimination of racism,
racial discrimination, xenophobia and related
intolerance and the comprehensive implementation of
and follow-up to the Durban Declaration and
Programme of Action”, and draft resolution III, entitled
“International Convention on the Elimination of All

12

Forms of Racial Discrimination”, is postponed to a
later date to allow time for the review of their
programme budget implications by the Fifth
Committee. The Assembly will take action on draft
resolutions II and III as soon as the reports of the Fifth
Committee on their programme budget implications are
available.
We will now take a decision on draft resolution I.
Draft resolution I is entitled “Inadmissibility of certain
practices that contribute to fuelling contemporary
forms of racism, racial discrimination, xenophobia and
related intolerance”. A recorded vote has been
requested.
A recorded vote was taken.
In favour:
Afghanistan, Algeria, Angola, Antigua and
Barbuda, Argentina, Armenia, Azerbaijan,
Bahamas, Bahrain, Bangladesh, Barbados,
Belarus, Belize, Benin, Bhutan, Bolivia,
Botswana, Brazil, Brunei Darussalam, Burkina
Faso, Burundi, Cambodia, Cameroon, Cape
Verde, Central African Republic, Chile, China,
Colombia, Comoros, Congo, Costa Rica, Côte
d’Ivoire, Cuba, Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea, Djibouti, Dominica, Dominican Republic,
Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador, Eritrea, Ethiopia,
Gabon, Gambia, Ghana, Grenada, Guatemala,
Guinea, Guyana, Haiti, Honduras, India,
Indonesia, Iran (Islamic Republic of), Iraq, Israel,
Jamaica, Jordan, Kazakhstan, Kenya, Kuwait,
Kyrgyzstan, Lao People’s Democratic Republic,
Lebanon, Lesotho, Liberia, Libyan Arab
Jamahiriya, Madagascar, Malawi, Malaysia,
Maldives, Mali, Mauritania, Mauritius, Mexico,
Mongolia, Morocco, Mozambique, Myanmar,
Namibia, Nepal, Nicaragua, Niger, Nigeria,
Oman, Pakistan, Paraguay, Peru, Philippines,
Qatar, Russian Federation, Rwanda, Saint Kitts
and Nevis, Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent and the
Grenadines, Sao Tome and Principe, Saudi
Arabia, Senegal, Serbia, Sierra Leone, Singapore,
Solomon Islands, Somalia, South Africa, Sri
Lanka, Sudan, Suriname, Swaziland, Syrian Arab
Republic, Tajikistan, Thailand, Timor-Leste,
Togo, Trinidad and Tobago, Tunisia, Turkey,
Turkmenistan, Tuvalu, Uganda, United Arab
Emirates, United Republic of Tanzania, Uruguay,
Uzbekistan, Vanuatu, Venezuela (Bolivarian

08-66058

A/63/PV.70

Republic of),
Zimbabwe

Viet

Nam,

Yemen,

Zambia,

Against:
Marshall Islands, United States of America
Abstaining:
Albania, Andorra, Australia, Austria, Belgium,
Bosnia and Herzegovina, Bulgaria, Canada,
Croatia, Cyprus, Czech Republic, Denmark,
Estonia, Fiji, Finland, France, Georgia, Germany,
Greece, Guinea-Bissau, Hungary, Iceland,
Ireland, Italy, Japan, Latvia, Liechtenstein,
Lithuania,
Luxembourg,
Malta,
Monaco,
Montenegro, Netherlands, New Zealand, Norway,
Palau, Panama, Papua New Guinea, Poland,
Portugal, Republic of Korea, Republic of
Moldova, Romania, Samoa, San Marino,
Slovakia, Slovenia, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland,
the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia,
Tonga, Ukraine, United Kingdom of Great Britain
and Northern Ireland
Draft resolution I was adopted by 129 votes to 2,
with 54 abstentions (resolution 63/162).
The Acting President: The General Assembly
has thus concluded this stage of its consideration of
agenda item 62.
Agenda item 63
Right of peoples to self-determination
Report of the Third Committee (A/63/429)
The Acting President: The Assembly has before
it three draft resolutions recommended by the Third
Committee in paragraph 19 of its report. We will now
take a decision on draft resolutions I, II and III.
Draft resolution I is entitled “Universal
realization of the right of peoples to selfdetermination”. The Third Committee adopted draft
resolution I without a vote. May I take it that the
Assembly wishes to do the same?
Draft resolution
63/163).

I

was

adopted

(resolution

The Acting President: Draft resolution II is
entitled “Use of mercenaries as a means of violating
human rights and impeding the exercise of the right of
peoples to self-determination”. A recorded vote has
been requested.

08-66058

A recorded vote was taken.
In favour:
Afghanistan, Algeria, Angola, Antigua and
Barbuda, Argentina, Armenia, Azerbaijan,
Bahamas, Bahrain, Bangladesh, Barbados,
Belarus, Belize, Benin, Bhutan, Bolivia,
Botswana, Brazil, Brunei Darussalam, Burkina
Faso, Burundi, Cambodia, Cameroon, Cape
Verde, Central African Republic, China,
Colombia, Comoros, Congo, Costa Rica, Côte
d’Ivoire, Cuba, Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea, Djibouti, Dominica, Dominican Republic,
Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador, Eritrea, Ethiopia,
Gabon, Gambia, Ghana, Grenada, Guatemala,
Guinea, Guinea-Bissau, Guyana, Haiti, Honduras,
India, Indonesia, Iran (Islamic Republic of), Iraq,
Jamaica, Jordan, Kazakhstan, Kenya, Kuwait,
Kyrgyzstan, Lao People’s Democratic Republic,
Lebanon, Lesotho, Liberia, Libyan Arab
Jamahiriya, Madagascar, Malawi, Malaysia,
Maldives, Mali, Mauritania, Mauritius, Mexico,
Mongolia, Morocco, Mozambique, Myanmar,
Namibia, Nepal, Nicaragua, Niger, Nigeria,
Oman, Pakistan, Panama, Papua New Guinea,
Paraguay, Philippines, Qatar, Russian Federation,
Rwanda, Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent and the
Grenadines, Samoa, Sao Tome and Principe,
Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Sierra Leone, Singapore,
Solomon Islands, Somalia, South Africa, Sri
Lanka, Sudan, Suriname, Swaziland, Syrian Arab
Republic, Tajikistan, Thailand, Timor-Leste,
Togo, Trinidad and Tobago, Tunisia, Tuvalu,
Uganda, United Arab Emirates, United Republic
of Tanzania, Uruguay, Uzbekistan, Venezuela
(Bolivarian Republic of), Viet Nam, Yemen,
Zambia, Zimbabwe
Against:
Albania, Andorra, Australia, Austria, Belgium,
Bosnia and Herzegovina, Bulgaria, Canada,
Croatia, Cyprus, Czech Republic, Denmark,
Estonia, Finland, France, Georgia, Germany,
Greece, Hungary, Iceland, Ireland, Israel, Italy,
Japan,
Latvia,
Liechtenstein,
Lithuania,
Luxembourg,
Malta,
Marshall
Islands,
Micronesia (Federated States of), Monaco,
Montenegro, Netherlands, Norway, Palau,
Poland, Portugal, Republic of Korea, Republic of
Moldova, Romania, San Marino, Serbia,
Slovakia, Slovenia, Spain, Sweden, the former

13

A/63/PV.70

Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Turkey,
Ukraine, United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland, United States of America
Abstaining:
Chile, Fiji, New Zealand, Switzerland, Tonga
Draft resolution II was adopted by 125 votes to
52, with 5 abstentions (resolution 63/164).
[Subsequently, the delegation of Peru advised the
Secretariat that it had intended to vote in favour.]
The Acting President: Draft resolution III is
entitled “The right of the Palestinian people to selfdetermination”. A recorded vote has been requested.
A recorded vote was taken.
In favour:
Afghanistan, Albania, Algeria, Andorra, Angola,
Antigua and Barbuda, Argentina, Armenia,
Austria,
Azerbaijan,
Bahamas,
Bahrain,
Bangladesh, Barbados, Belarus, Belgium, Belize,
Benin, Bhutan, Bolivia, Bosnia and Herzegovina,
Botswana, Brazil, Brunei Darussalam, Bulgaria,
Burkina Faso, Burundi, Cambodia, Cape Verde,
Central African Republic, Chile, China,
Colombia, Comoros, Congo, Costa Rica, Côte
d’Ivoire, Croatia, Cuba, Cyprus, Czech Republic,
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea,
Denmark, Djibouti, Dominica, Dominican
Republic, Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador, Eritrea,
Estonia, Ethiopia, Finland, France, Gabon,
Gambia, Georgia, Germany, Ghana, Greece,
Grenada, Guatemala, Guinea, Guinea-Bissau,
Guyana, Haiti, Honduras, Hungary, Iceland,
India, Indonesia, Iran (Islamic Republic of), Iraq,
Ireland,
Italy,
Jamaica,
Japan,
Jordan,
Kazakhstan, Kenya, Kuwait, Kyrgyzstan, Lao
People’s Democratic Republic, Latvia, Lebanon,
Lesotho, Liberia, Libyan Arab Jamahiriya,
Liechtenstein,
Lithuania,
Luxembourg,
Madagascar, Malawi, Malaysia, Maldives, Mali,
Malta, Mauritania, Mauritius, Mexico, Monaco,
Mongolia, Montenegro, Morocco, Mozambique,
Myanmar, Namibia, Nepal, Netherlands, New
Zealand, Nicaragua, Niger, Nigeria, Norway,
Oman, Pakistan, Panama, Papua New Guinea,
Paraguay, Philippines, Poland, Portugal, Qatar,
Republic of Korea, Republic of Moldova,
Romania, Russian Federation, Rwanda, Saint
Lucia, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, Samoa,

14

San Marino, Sao Tome and Principe, Saudi
Arabia, Senegal, Serbia, Sierra Leone, Singapore,
Slovakia, Slovenia, Solomon Islands, Somalia,
South Africa, Spain, Sri Lanka, Sudan, Suriname,
Swaziland, Sweden, Switzerland, Syrian Arab
Republic, Tajikistan, Thailand, the former
Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Timor-Leste,
Togo, Trinidad and Tobago, Tunisia, Turkey,
Turkmenistan, Tuvalu, Uganda, Ukraine, United
Arab Emirates, United Kingdom of Great Britain
and Northern Ireland, United Republic of
Tanzania, Uruguay, Uzbekistan, Venezuela
(Bolivarian Republic of), Viet Nam, Yemen,
Zambia, Zimbabwe
Against:
Israel, Marshall Islands, Micronesia (Federated
States of), Palau, United States of America
Abstaining:
Australia, Cameroon, Canada, Fiji, Nauru, Tonga,
Vanuatu
Draft resolution III was adopted by 173 votes to
5, with 7 abstentions (resolution 63/165).
[Subsequently, the delegation of Peru advised the
Secretariat that it had intended to vote in favour.]
The Acting President: May I take it that it is the
wish of the General Assembly to conclude its
consideration of agenda item 63?
It was so decided.
Agenda item 64 (continued)
Promotion and protection of human rights
Report of the Third Committee (A/63/430)
The Acting President: The Assembly has before
it a draft decision recommended by the Third
Committee in paragraph 5 of its report. We shall now
take action on the draft decision.
The draft decision is entitled “Reports considered
by the General Assembly in connection with the
promotion and protection of human rights”. May I take
it that the General Assembly wishes to adopt the draft
decision recommended by the Third Committee?
The draft decision was adopted.

08-66058

A/63/PV.70

The Acting President: The Assembly has thus
concluded this stage of its consideration of agenda item
64.
(a) Implementation of human rights instruments
Report of the Third Committee
(A/63/430/Add.1)
The Acting President: The Assembly has before
it two draft resolutions recommended by the Third
Committee in paragraph 17 of its report. We will now
take a decision on the two draft resolutions.
We first turn to draft resolution I, entitled
“Torture and other cruel, inhuman or degrading
treatment or punishment”. The Third Committee
adopted the draft resolution without a vote. May I take
it that the General Assembly wishes to do likewise?
Draft resolution
63/166).

I

was

adopted

(resolution

The Acting President: Draft resolution II is
entitled “Equitable geographical distribution in the
membership of the human rights treaty bodies”. A
recorded vote has been requested.
A recorded vote was taken.
In favour:
Afghanistan, Algeria, Angola, Antigua and
Barbuda, Argentina, Azerbaijan, Bahamas,
Bahrain, Bangladesh, Barbados, Belarus, Belize,
Benin, Bhutan, Bolivia, Botswana, Brunei
Darussalam, Burkina Faso, Burundi, Cambodia,
Cameroon, Central African Republic, China,
Colombia, Comoros, Congo, Costa Rica, Côte
d’Ivoire, Cuba, Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea, Djibouti, Dominica, Dominican Republic,
Ecuador, Egypt, Eritrea, Ethiopia, Fiji, Gabon,
Gambia, Ghana, Grenada, Guatemala, Guinea,
Guinea-Bissau, Guyana, Haiti, Honduras, India,
Indonesia, Iran (Islamic Republic of), Iraq,
Jamaica, Jordan, Kazakhstan, Kenya, Kuwait,
Kyrgyzstan, Lao People’s Democratic Republic,
Lebanon, Lesotho, Liberia, Libyan Arab
Jamahiriya, Madagascar, Malawi, Malaysia,
Maldives, Mali, Marshall Islands, Mauritania,
Mauritius,
Mexico,
Mongolia,
Morocco,
Mozambique, Myanmar, Namibia, Nauru, Nepal,
Nicaragua, Niger, Nigeria, Oman, Pakistan,
Papua New Guinea, Paraguay, Peru, Philippines,
Qatar, Russian Federation, Rwanda, Saint Kitts

08-66058

and Nevis, Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent and the
Grenadines, Samoa, Sao Tome and Principe,
Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Sierra Leone, Singapore,
Solomon Islands, Somalia, South Africa,
Sri Lanka, Sudan, Suriname, Swaziland, Syrian
Arab Republic, Tajikistan, Thailand, Timor-Leste,
Togo, Tonga, Trinidad and Tobago, Tunisia,
Turkmenistan, Tuvalu, Uganda, United Arab
Emirates, United Republic of Tanzania, Uruguay,
Uzbekistan, Vanuatu, Venezuela (Bolivarian
Republic of), Viet Nam, Yemen, Zambia,
Zimbabwe
Against:
Albania, Andorra, Armenia, Australia, Austria,
Belgium, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Bulgaria,
Canada, Chile, Croatia, Cyprus, Czech Republic,
Denmark, Estonia, Finland, France, Georgia,
Germany, Greece, Hungary, Iceland, Ireland,
Israel, Italy, Japan, Latvia, Liechtenstein,
Lithuania,
Luxembourg,
Malta,
Monaco,
Montenegro, Netherlands, New Zealand, Norway,
Palau, Panama, Poland, Portugal, Republic of
Korea, Republic of Moldova, Romania, San
Marino, Serbia, Slovakia, Slovenia, Spain,
Sweden, Switzerland, the former Yugoslav
Republic of Macedonia, Turkey, Ukraine, United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland,
United States of America
Abstaining:
Brazil, Cape Verde
Draft resolution II was adopted by 128 votes to
55, with 2 abstentions (resolution 63/167).
The Acting President: I call on the
representative of the United Kingdom to speak in
explanation of position.
Ms. Jeurlink (United Kingdom): The United
Kingdom would like to draw the General Assembly’s
attention to the explanation of position we gave in the
Third Committee on draft resolution A/C.3/63/L.18/
Rev.1, entitled “Torture and other cruel, inhuman or
degrading treatment or punishment”, now resolution
63/166. That explanation outlined our understanding of
the legal position on some of the issues raised in the
resolution. That remains our position.
The Acting President: May I take it that it is the
wish of the General Assembly to conclude its
consideration of sub-item (a) of agenda item 64?

15

A/63/PV.70

It was so decided.
(b) Human rights questions, including
alternative approaches for improving the
effective enjoyment of human rights and
fundamental freedoms
Report of the Third Committee
(A/63/430/Аdd.2)
The Acting President: The Assembly has before
it 23 draft resolutions recommended by the Third
Committee in paragraph 182 of its report.
Before proceeding further, I should like to inform
members that action on draft resolution XXIII, entitled
“Committee on the Rights of the Child”, is postponed
to a later date to allow time for the review of its
programme budget implications by the Fifth
Committee. The Assembly will take action on draft
resolution XXIII as soon as the report of the Fifth
Committee on its programme budget implications is
available.
I shall first give the floor to the representative of
the Syrian Arab Republic who wishes to speak in
explanation of their vote.
Ms. Halabi (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in
Arabic): My delegation would like to explain its vote
on draft resolution I, entitled “Moratorium on the use
of the death penalty”.
It is self-evident that Member States of this
Organization enjoy the right to equal sovereignty
according to the Charter of the United Nations. The
exercise of this sovereignty is based on mutual respect
and non-interference in the internal affairs of States.
My delegation is of the view that the draft resolution
on the moratorium on the use of the death penalty is a
clear intervention in the internal affairs and the
political independence of States, in contravention of
the Charter.
The draft resolution has nothing to do with the
implementation or non-implementation of the death
penalty but relates in the first place to the sovereignty
of each State in choosing its political, juridical, social
and cultural systems. Asking countries to stop the
implementation of this penalty is specifically a request
for States to change their juridical systems, which are
the end result of the historical, cultural, religious and
political peculiarities of each State.

16

The discussion on the need to implement this
penalty affects the human dignity of the defendant and
it completely ignores the human dignity of the victim
or victims, and this disregards the rights that values
and human ideals require be restored to them. In many
countries, including mine, the implementation of the
death penalty is determined by legislatures. The
Government of the Syrian Arab Republic implements
that penalty in accordance with legislative decisions,
which are primarily based on protecting the rights of
victims and on a number of judicial, social, religious
and cultural factors.
This penalty is a legal penal action that pertains
to criminal justice. It has nothing to do with human
rights. Its abolition would sanctify human rights
violations and would reward perpetrators of crimes,
who may destroy not just one life but many.
Safeguarding human rights first and foremost requires
thinking of the rights of victims before thinking of the
penalty itself.
We would like to remind the Assembly that in
joining the Organization, countries are admitted on the
basis of the equal sovereignty of all States, as well as
the principle of non-interference in their domestic
affairs. We hope that those principles will serve as
guidelines when some countries impose their own
systems on others. Were that not the case, the Charter
and the entire world order would be violated.
My country will therefore vote against draft
resolution I in document A/63/430/Add.2. We
encourage other countries to do likewise out of respect
for the Charter.
The Acting President: We will now take a
decision on draft resolutions I to XXII, one by one.
After all the decisions have been taken, representatives
will again have the opportunity to explain their votes
or positions.
We first turn to draft resolution I, entitled
“Moratorium on the use of the death penalty”. A
recorded vote has been requested.
A recorded vote was taken.
In favour:
Albania, Algeria, Andorra, Angola, Argentina,
Armenia, Australia, Austria, Azerbaijan, Belgium,
Benin, Bolivia, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Brazil,
Bulgaria, Burkina Faso, Burundi, Cambodia,
Canada, Cape Verde, Chile, Colombia, Congo,

08-66058

A/63/PV.70

Costa Rica, Côte d’Ivoire, Croatia, Cyprus, Czech
Republic, Denmark, Dominican Republic,
Ecuador, El Salvador, Estonia, Ethiopia, Finland,
France, Gabon, Georgia, Germany, Greece,
Guinea-Bissau, Haiti, Honduras, Hungary,
Iceland, Ireland, Israel, Italy, Kazakhstan,
Kyrgyzstan, Latvia, Liechtenstein, Lithuania,
Luxembourg, Madagascar, Mali, Malta, Marshall
Islands,
Mauritius,
Mexico,
Micronesia
(Federated States of), Monaco, Montenegro,
Mozambique,
Namibia,
Nauru,
Nepal,
Netherlands, New Zealand, Nicaragua, Norway,
Palau, Panama, Paraguay, Peru, Philippines,
Poland, Portugal, Republic of Moldova, Romania,
Russian Federation, Rwanda, Samoa, San
Marino, Sao Tome and Principe, Serbia, Slovakia,
Slovenia, Somalia, South Africa, Spain, Sri
Lanka, Sweden, Switzerland, Tajikistan, the
former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, TimorLeste, Turkey, Turkmenistan, Tuvalu, Ukraine,
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern
Ireland, Uruguay, Uzbekistan, Vanuatu, Venezuela
(Bolivarian Republic of)
Against:
Afghanistan, Antigua and Barbuda, Bahamas,
Bangladesh, Barbados, Belize, Botswana, Brunei
Darussalam, China, Comoros, Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea, Dominica, Egypt,
Grenada, Guyana, India, Indonesia, Iran (Islamic
Republic of), Iraq, Jamaica, Japan, Kuwait,
Libyan Arab Jamahiriya, Malaysia, Maldives,
Mongolia, Myanmar, Nigeria, Pakistan, Qatar,
Saint Kitts and Nevis, Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent
and the Grenadines, Saudi Arabia, Singapore,
Solomon Islands, Sudan, Swaziland, Syrian Arab
Republic, Thailand, Tonga, Trinidad and Tobago,
Uganda, United States of America, Yemen,
Zimbabwe
Abstaining:
Bahrain, Belarus, Bhutan, Cameroon, Central
African Republic, Cuba, Djibouti, Eritrea, Fiji,
Gambia, Ghana, Guatemala, Guinea, Jordan,
Kenya, Lao People’s Democratic Republic,
Lebanon, Lesotho, Liberia, Malawi, Mauritania,
Morocco, Niger, Oman, Papua New Guinea,
Republic of Korea, Senegal, Sierra Leone,
Suriname, Togo, United Arab Emirates, United
Republic of Tanzania, Viet Nam, Zambia

08-66058

Draft resolution I was adopted by 106 votes to
46, with 34 abstentions (resolution 63/168).
[Subsequently, the delegation of Guatemala
advised the Secretariat that it had intended to vote
in favour; the delegation of Ethiopia advised the
Secretariat that it had intended to vote against;]
The Acting President: Draft resolution II is
entitled “The role of the Ombudsman, mediator and
other national human rights institutions in the
promotion and protection of human rights”. The Third
Committee adopted the draft resolution without a vote.
May I take it that the Assembly wishes to do the same?
Draft resolution II was adopted (resolution
63/169).
The Acting President: Draft resolution III is
entitled “Regional arrangements for the promotion and
protection of human rights”. The Third Committee
adopted it without a vote. May I take it that the
Assembly wishes to do the same?
Draft resolution III was adopted (resolution
63/170).
The Acting President: Draft resolution IV is
entitled “Combating defamation of religions”. A
recorded vote has been requested.
A recorded vote was taken.
In favour:
Afghanistan, Algeria, Angola, Antigua and
Barbuda,
Azerbaijan,
Bahamas,
Bahrain,
Bangladesh, Barbados, Belarus, Bhutan, Bolivia,
Brunei Darussalam, Cambodia, China, Comoros,
Côte d’Ivoire, Cuba, Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea, Djibouti, Dominica, Egypt, El
Salvador, Eritrea, Ethiopia, Fiji, Gabon, Gambia,
Guinea, Guinea-Bissau, Guyana, Honduras,
Indonesia, Iran (Islamic Republic of), Iraq,
Jamaica,
Jordan,
Kazakhstan,
Kuwait,
Kyrgyzstan, Lao People’s Democratic Republic,
Lebanon, Lesotho, Libyan Arab Jamahiriya,
Malaysia, Maldives, Mali, Mauritania, Morocco,
Mozambique, Myanmar, Namibia, Nicaragua,
Niger, Nigeria, Oman, Pakistan, Philippines,
Qatar, Russian Federation, Saint Vincent and the
Grenadines, Sao Tome and Principe, Saudi
Arabia, Senegal, Sierra Leone, Singapore,
Somalia, South Africa, Sri Lanka, Sudan,
Suriname, Swaziland, Syrian Arab Republic,

17

A/63/PV.70

Tajikistan, Thailand, Togo, Tunisia, Turkey,
Turkmenistan, Uganda, United Arab Emirates,
Uzbekistan, Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of),
Viet Nam, Yemen, Zimbabwe
Against:
Andorra, Australia, Austria, Belgium, Belize,
Bulgaria, Canada, Cape Verde, Croatia, Cyprus,
Czech Republic, Denmark, Estonia, Finland,
France, Georgia, Germany, Greece, Hungary,
Iceland, Ireland, Israel, Italy, Latvia, Liberia,
Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Malta,
Marshall Islands, Micronesia (Federated States
of), Monaco, Montenegro, Netherlands, Norway,
Palau, Poland, Portugal, Republic of Korea,
Republic of Moldova, Romania, Samoa, San
Marino, Serbia, Slovakia, Slovenia, Spain,
Sweden, Switzerland, the former Yugoslav
Republic of Macedonia, Ukraine, United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland,
United States of America
Abstaining:
Argentina, Armenia, Benin, Botswana, Brazil,
Burkina Faso, Burundi, Central African Republic,
Chile, Colombia, Congo, Costa Rica, Dominican
Republic, Ecuador, Ghana, Grenada, Guatemala,
Haiti, India, Japan, Kenya, Madagascar, Malawi,
Mauritius, Mexico, Mongolia, Nauru, Nepal,
Panama, Papua New Guinea, Paraguay, Peru,
Rwanda, Saint Lucia, Timor-Leste, Tonga,
Trinidad and Tobago, Tuvalu, United Republic of
Tanzania, Uruguay, Vanuatu, Zambia
Draft resolution IV was adopted by 86 votes to
53, with 42 abstentions (resolution 63/171).
The Acting President: Draft resolution V is
entitled “National institutions for the promotion and
protection of human rights”. The Third Committee
adopted the draft resolution without a vote. May I take
it that the Assembly wishes to do likewise?
Draft resolution V was adopted (resolution
63/172).
The Acting President: Draft resolution VI is
entitled “International Year of Human Rights
Learning”. The Third Committee adopted it without a
vote. May I take it that the Assembly wishes to do the
same?
Draft resolution VI was adopted (resolution
63/173).

18

The Acting President: Draft resolution VII is
entitled “Effective promotion of the Declaration on the
Rights of Persons Belonging to National or Ethnic,
Religious and Linguistic Minorities”. The Third
Committee adopted draft resolution VII without a vote.
May I take it that the Assembly wishes to do likewise?
Draft resolution VII was adopted (resolution
63/174).
The Acting President: Draft resolution VIII is
entitled “Human rights and extreme poverty”. The
Third Committee adopted it without a vote. May I take
it that the Assembly wishes to do the same?
Draft resolution VIII was adopted (resolution
63/175).
The Acting President: Draft resolution IX is
entitled “Globalization and its impact on the full
enjoyment of all human rights”. A recorded vote has
been requested.
A recorded vote was taken.
In favour:
Afghanistan, Algeria, Angola, Antigua and
Barbuda, Argentina, Armenia, Azerbaijan,
Bahamas, Bahrain, Bangladesh, Barbados,
Belarus, Belize, Benin, Bhutan, Bolivia,
Botswana, Brunei Darussalam, Burkina Faso,
Burundi, Cambodia, Cameroon, Cape Verde,
Central African Republic, Chad, China,
Colombia, Comoros, Congo, Costa Rica, Côte
d’Ivoire, Cuba, Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea, Djibouti, Dominica, Dominican Republic,
Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador, Eritrea, Ethiopia,
Fiji,
Gabon,
Gambia,
Ghana,
Grenada,
Guatemala, Guinea, Guinea-Bissau, Guyana,
Haiti, Honduras, India, Indonesia, Iran (Islamic
Republic of), Iraq, Jamaica, Jordan, Kazakhstan,
Kenya, Kuwait, Kyrgyzstan, Lao People’s
Democratic Republic, Lebanon, Lesotho, Liberia,
Libyan Arab Jamahiriya, Madagascar, Malawi,
Malaysia, Maldives, Mali, Mauritania, Mauritius,
Mexico, Mongolia, Morocco, Mozambique,
Myanmar, Namibia, Nepal, Nicaragua, Niger,
Nigeria, Oman, Pakistan, Panama, Papua New
Guinea, Paraguay, Peru, Philippines, Qatar,
Russian Federation, Rwanda, Saint Kitts and
Nevis, Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent and the
Grenadines, Samoa, Sao Tome and Principe,
Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Sierra Leone, Solomon

08-66058

A/63/PV.70

Islands, Somalia, South Africa, Sri Lanka, Sudan,
Suriname, Swaziland, Syrian Arab Republic,
Tajikistan, Thailand, Togo, Tonga, Trinidad and
Tobago, Tunisia, Turkmenistan, Tuvalu, Uganda,
United Arab Emirates, United Republic of
Tanzania,
Uruguay,
Uzbekistan,
Vanuatu,
Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of), Viet Nam,
Yemen, Zambia, Zimbabwe
Against:
Albania, Andorra, Australia, Austria, Belgium,
Bosnia and Herzegovina, Bulgaria, Canada,
Croatia, Cyprus, Czech Republic, Denmark,
Estonia, Finland, France, Georgia, Germany,
Greece, Hungary, Iceland, Ireland, Israel, Italy,
Japan,
Latvia,
Liechtenstein,
Lithuania,
Luxembourg,
Malta,
Marshall
Islands,
Micronesia (Federated States of), Monaco,
Montenegro, Netherlands, New Zealand, Norway,
Palau, Poland, Portugal, Republic of Korea,
Republic of Moldova, Romania, San Marino,
Serbia, Slovakia, Slovenia, Spain, Sweden,
Switzerland, the former Yugoslav Republic of
Macedonia, Turkey, Ukraine, United Kingdom of
Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United States
of America
Abstaining:
Brazil, Chile, Singapore, Timor-Leste
Draft resolution IX was adopted by 129 votes to
54, with 4 abstentions (resolution 63/176).
The Acting President: Draft resolution X is
entitled “Subregional Centre for Human Rights and
Democracy in Central Africa”. The Third Committee
adopted the draft resolution without a vote. May I take
it that the Assembly wishes to do likewise?
Draft resolution X was adopted (resolution
63/177).
The Acting President: Draft resolution XI is
entitled “The right to development”. A recorded vote
has been requested.
A recorded vote was taken.
In favour:
Afghanistan, Albania, Algeria, Andorra, Angola,
Antigua and Barbuda, Argentina, Armenia,
Australia, Austria, Azerbaijan, Bahamas, Bahrain,
Bangladesh, Barbados, Belarus, Belgium, Belize,
Benin, Bhutan, Bolivia, Bosnia and Herzegovina,

08-66058

Botswana, Brazil, Brunei Darussalam, Bulgaria,
Burkina Faso, Burundi, Cambodia, Cameroon,
Cape Verde, Central African Republic, Chad,
Chile, China, Colombia, Comoros, Congo, Costa
Rica, Côte d’Ivoire, Croatia, Cuba, Cyprus,
Czech Republic, Democratic People’s Republic
of Korea, Denmark, Djibouti, Dominica,
Dominican Republic, Ecuador, Egypt, El
Salvador, Eritrea, Estonia, Ethiopia, Fiji, Finland,
France, Gabon, Gambia, Georgia, Germany,
Ghana, Greece, Grenada, Guatemala, Guinea,
Guinea-Bissau,
Guyana,
Haiti,
Honduras,
Hungary, Iceland, India, Indonesia, Iran (Islamic
Republic of), Iraq, Ireland, Italy, Jamaica, Japan,
Jordan, Kazakhstan, Kenya, Kuwait, Kyrgyzstan,
Lao People’s Democratic Republic, Latvia,
Lebanon, Lesotho, Liberia, Libyan Arab
Jamahiriya,
Liechtenstein,
Lithuania,
Luxembourg, Madagascar, Malawi, Malaysia,
Maldives, Mali, Malta, Mauritania, Mauritius,
Mexico, Micronesia (Federated States of),
Monaco, Mongolia, Montenegro, Morocco,
Mozambique, Myanmar, Namibia, Nauru, Nepal,
Netherlands, New Zealand, Nicaragua, Niger,
Nigeria, Norway, Oman, Pakistan, Panama, Papua
New Guinea, Paraguay, Peru, Philippines, Poland,
Portugal, Qatar, Republic of Korea, Republic of
Moldova, Romania, Russian Federation, Rwanda,
Saint Kitts and Nevis, Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent
and the Grenadines, Samoa, San Marino, Sao
Tome and Principe, Saudi Arabia, Senegal,
Serbia, Sierra Leone, Singapore, Slovakia,
Slovenia, Solomon Islands, Somalia, South
Africa, Spain, Sri Lanka, Sudan, Suriname,
Swaziland, Sweden, Switzerland, Syrian Arab
Republic, Tajikistan, Thailand, the former
Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Timor-Leste,
Togo, Tonga, Trinidad and Tobago, Tunisia,
Turkey, Turkmenistan, Tuvalu, Uganda, United
Arab Emirates, United Kingdom of Great Britain
and Northern Ireland, United Republic of
Tanzania,
Uruguay,
Uzbekistan,
Vanuatu,
Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of), Viet Nam,
Yemen, Zambia, Zimbabwe
Against:
Marshall Islands, Palau, Ukraine, United States of
America
Abstaining:
Canada, Israel

19

A/63/PV.70

Draft resolution XI was adopted by 182 votes to
4, with 2 abstentions (resolution 63/178).
[Subsequently, the delegation of Ukraine advised
the Secretariat that it had intended to vote in
favour.]
The Acting President: Draft resolution XII is
entitled “Human rights and unilateral coercive
measures”. A recorded vote has been requested.
A recorded vote was taken.
In favour:
Afghanistan, Algeria, Angola, Antigua and
Barbuda, Argentina, Armenia, Azerbaijan,
Bahamas, Bahrain, Bangladesh, Barbados,
Belarus, Belize, Benin, Bhutan, Bolivia,
Botswana, Brazil, Brunei Darussalam, Burkina
Faso, Burundi, Cambodia, Cameroon, Cape
Verde, Central African Republic, Chad, Chile,
China, Colombia, Comoros, Congo, Costa Rica,
Côte d’Ivoire, Cuba, Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea, Djibouti, Dominica,
Dominican Republic, Ecuador, Egypt, El
Salvador, Eritrea, Ethiopia, Fiji, Gabon, Gambia,
Ghana, Grenada, Guatemala, Guinea, GuineaBissau, Guyana, Haiti, Honduras, India,
Indonesia, Iran (Islamic Republic of), Iraq,
Jamaica, Jordan, Kazakhstan, Kenya, Kuwait,
Kyrgyzstan, Lao People’s Democratic Republic,
Lebanon, Lesotho, Liberia, Libyan Arab
Jamahiriya, Madagascar, Malawi, Malaysia,
Maldives, Mali, Mauritania, Mauritius, Mexico,
Mongolia, Morocco, Mozambique, Myanmar,
Namibia, Nepal, Nicaragua, Niger, Nigeria,
Oman, Pakistan, Panama, Papua New Guinea,
Paraguay, Peru, Philippines, Qatar, Russian
Federation, Rwanda, Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent
and the Grenadines, Samoa, Sao Tome and
Principe, Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Sierra Leone,
Singapore, Solomon Islands, Somalia, South
Africa, Sri Lanka, Sudan, Suriname, Swaziland,
Syrian Arab Republic, Tajikistan, Thailand,
Timor-Leste, Togo, Tonga, Trinidad and Tobago,
Tunisia, Turkmenistan, Tuvalu, Uganda, United
Arab Emirates, United Republic of Tanzania,
Uruguay, Uzbekistan, Vanuatu, Venezuela
(Bolivarian Republic of), Viet Nam, Yemen,
Zambia, Zimbabwe

20

Against:
Albania, Andorra, Australia, Austria, Belgium,
Bosnia and Herzegovina, Bulgaria, Canada,
Croatia, Cyprus, Czech Republic, Denmark,
Estonia, Finland, France, Georgia, Germany,
Greece, Hungary, Iceland, Ireland, Israel, Italy,
Japan,
Latvia,
Liechtenstein,
Lithuania,
Luxembourg,
Malta,
Marshall
Islands,
Micronesia (Federated States of), Monaco,
Montenegro, Netherlands, New Zealand, Norway,
Palau, Poland, Portugal, Republic of Korea,
Republic of Moldova, Romania, San Marino,
Serbia, Slovakia, Slovenia, Spain, Sweden,
Switzerland, the former Yugoslav Republic of
Macedonia, Turkey, Ukraine, United Kingdom of
Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United States
of America
Draft resolution XII was adopted by 132 votes to
54 (resolution 63/179).
The Acting President: Draft resolution XIII is
entitled “Enhancement of international cooperation in
the field of human rights”. The Third Committee
adopted draft resolution XIII without a vote. May I
take it that the Assembly wishes to do likewise?
Draft resolution XIII was adopted (resolution
63/180).
The Acting President: Draft resolution XIV is
entitled “Elimination of all forms of intolerance and of
discrimination based on religion or belief”. The Third
Committee adopted the draft resolution without a vote.
May I take it that the Assembly wishes to do the same?
Draft resolution XIV was adopted (resolution
63/181).
The Acting President: Draft resolution XV is
entitled “Extrajudicial, summary or arbitrary
executions”. I call on the representative of Uganda.
Ms. Awino Kafeero (Uganda): Uganda is taking
the floor on behalf of the member States of the
Organization of the Islamic Conference to introduce
oral amendments to operative subparagraph 6 (b) of
draft resolution XV. We would like to propose inserting
the phrase “peoples under foreign occupation”, before
the word “refugees”. We would also like to propose a
second amendment to the same subparagraph by
deleting the phrase “, including sexual orientation” and
replacing it with “whatsoever”. Thus the phrase that

08-66058

A/63/PV.70

now includes it would read “all killings committed for
any discriminatory reason whatsoever”.

sexual orientation,” with the word “whatsoever”. We
have no objection to holding two separate votes.

I would like to clarify that I did not mean to call
for deletions to subparagraph 6 (b). I simply meant
inserting the phrase “peoples under foreign
occupation,” before the word “refugees” and replacing
the phrase “, including sexual orientation” with
“whatsoever”.

Ms. Schlyter (Sweden): Given the fact that this
situation has been brought up rather suddenly,
delegations did not expect to have a vote today, so I
would also like to explain very briefly the serious
concerns that my delegation and all the other sponsors
have with these amendments. Of course, this was also
explained extensively at the time of the vote in the
Committee, where these amendments were defeated.

Ms. Schlyter (Sweden): I take the floor with
some regret with regard to the fact that amendments
have been proposed to the draft resolution. The Third
Committee already voted on these amendments, and
both were defeated.
Since we voted separately on both these points in
the Committee, and in order to make it easier for all
delegations present here today to state their positions, I
would propose that we also vote on both amendments
separately at this time.
I would also like to take this opportunity to say
that Sweden, along with all the other sponsors of this
resolution, will vote against both of these amendments
that have been reintroduced and would strongly appeal
to other delegations to do likewise. We will be voting
against these amendments.
Mr. Attiya (Egypt): My delegation is taking the
floor as a member of the Organization of the Islamic
Conference (OIC) and to align itself with the statement
made by Uganda and the amendments presented by the
OIC. My delegation only wishes to draw the attention
of members of the General Assembly to the fact that the
amendments just read out and presented orally by the
representative of Uganda are reflected in document
A/63/430/Add.2, in paragraph 131, subparagraphs (b)
and (c). These two subparagraphs are the amendments
that were just orally presented by Uganda. The
representative of Sweden was correct when she
mentioned that in the Committee we voted separately
on these two amendments.
The Acting President: I ask the representative of
Uganda to kindly repeat both amendments.
Ms. Awino Kafeero (Uganda): The proposed
amendments would read as follows. In paragraph 6 (b),
before the word “refugees”, we request the insertion of
the phrase “peoples under foreign occupation,”. The
second amendment we are requesting in the same
paragraph would be to replace the phrase “, including

08-66058

Briefly, the reasons why we are not in favour of
the addition of the words “foreign occupation” is that
we already added “foreign occupation” in this very
paragraph at the time of the consideration of the matter
by the Third Committee. The reference to foreign
occupation that is sought is already in the text. If
delegations have the draft resolution in front of them, it
is in the sixth line of paragraph 6 (b).
Regarding the addition of the word “whatsoever”
instead of “sexual orientation”, of course, the same
very strong objections apply. It is essential for us that a
reference is made to the importance of protecting
persons from killings based on their sexual orientation,
given that this is still an extensive problem.
We therefore will strongly appeal once again to
all delegations to vote against both of these
amendments.
The Acting President: The representative of
Uganda has submitted oral amendments to operative
paragraph 6 (b) of draft resolution XV. In accordance
with rule 90 of the rules of procedure, the Assembly
will first take a decision on the first amendment
submitted by the representative of Uganda. A recorded
vote has been requested.
A recorded vote was taken.
In favour:
Afghanistan, Algeria, Angola, Antigua and
Barbuda,
Azerbaijan,
Bahamas,
Bahrain,
Bangladesh, Barbados, Belarus, Belize, Bolivia,
Brunei Darussalam, Burkina Faso, China,
Comoros, Côte d’Ivoire, Cuba, Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea, Djibouti, Dominica,
Ecuador, Egypt, Eritrea, Gambia, Guinea,
Guyana, Indonesia, Iran (Islamic Republic of),
Iraq, Jordan, Kuwait, Lebanon, Libyan Arab
Jamahiriya,
Malaysia,
Maldives,
Mali,
Mauritania, Morocco, Namibia, Nicaragua, Niger,

21

A/63/PV.70

Nigeria, Oman, Pakistan, Qatar, Russian
Federation, Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent and the
Grenadines, Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Sierra Leone,
Singapore, Solomon Islands, Somalia, South
Africa, Sri Lanka, Sudan, Suriname, Swaziland,
Syrian Arab Republic, Thailand, Tunisia, Turkey,
Uganda, United Arab Emirates, Venezuela
(Bolivarian Republic of), Viet Nam, Yemen,
Zambia, Zimbabwe
Against:
Albania, Andorra, Argentina, Armenia, Australia,
Austria,
Belgium,
Bhutan,
Bosnia
and
Herzegovina, Brazil, Bulgaria, Canada, Cape
Verde, Chile, Colombia, Croatia, Cyprus, Czech
Republic, Denmark, Dominican Republic,
El Salvador, Estonia, Fiji, Finland, France,
Georgia,
Germany,
Greece,
Guatemala,
Honduras, Hungary, Iceland, India, Ireland,
Israel, Italy, Japan, Latvia, Liechtenstein,
Lithuania, Luxembourg, Malta, Marshall Islands,
Mauritius, Mexico, Micronesia (Federated States
of), Monaco, Montenegro, Nepal, Netherlands,
New Zealand, Norway, Palau, Panama, Paraguay,
Peru, Philippines, Poland, Portugal, Republic of
Korea, Republic of Moldova, Romania, Samoa,
San Marino, Serbia, Slovakia, Slovenia, Spain,
Sweden, Switzerland, the former Yugoslav
Republic of Macedonia, Ukraine, United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland,
United States of America, Uruguay
Abstaining:
Botswana, Burundi, Cambodia, Chad, Congo,
Costa Rica, Ethiopia, Grenada, Guinea-Bissau,
Haiti, Jamaica, Kenya, Lao People’s Democratic
Republic, Lesotho, Liberia, Madagascar, Malawi,
Mongolia, Rwanda, Timor-Leste, Tonga, United
Republic of Tanzania
The first oral amendment was rejected by
75 votes to 71, with 22 abstentions.
The Acting President: The Assembly will now
take a decision on the second amendment submitted by
the representative of Uganda. A recorded vote has been
requested.
A recorded vote was taken.
In favour:
Afghanistan, Algeria, Angola, Azerbaijan,
Bahrain, Bangladesh, Belarus, Belize, Benin,

22

Brunei Darussalam, Burkina Faso, Cameroon,
China, Comoros, Democratic People’s Republic
of Korea, Djibouti, Dominica, Egypt, Ethiopia,
Gambia, Guinea, Indonesia, Iran (Islamic
Republic of), Iraq, Jordan, Kuwait, Lebanon,
Libyan Arab Jamahiriya, Malawi, Malaysia,
Maldives, Mali, Mauritania, Morocco, Namibia,
Niger, Nigeria, Oman, Pakistan, Qatar, Russian
Federation, Saint Lucia, Saudi Arabia, Senegal,
Sierra Leone, Solomon Islands, Somalia, South
Africa, Sudan, Swaziland, Syrian Arab Republic,
Thailand, Timor-Leste, Trinidad and Tobago,
Uganda, United Arab Emirates, Viet Nam,
Yemen, Zambia, Zimbabwe
Against:
Albania, Andorra, Argentina, Armenia, Australia,
Austria,
Belgium,
Bhutan,
Bosnia
and
Herzegovina, Brazil, Bulgaria, Canada, Cape
Verde, Chile, Colombia, Costa Rica, Croatia,
Cyprus, Czech Republic, Denmark, Dominican
Republic, Ecuador, El Salvador, Estonia, Fiji,
Finland, France, Gabon, Georgia, Germany,
Greece, Guatemala, Honduras, Hungary, Iceland,
India, Ireland, Israel, Italy, Japan, Latvia,
Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Malta,
Mauritius, Mexico, Micronesia (Federated States
of), Montenegro, Nepal, Netherlands, New
Zealand, Nicaragua, Norway, Panama, Paraguay,
Peru, Philippines, Poland, Portugal, Republic of
Korea, Republic of Moldova, Romania, Samoa,
San Marino, Serbia, Slovakia, Slovenia, Spain,
Sweden, Switzerland, the former Yugoslav
Republic of Macedonia, Turkey, Ukraine, United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland,
United States of America, Uruguay, Venezuela
(Bolivarian Republic of)
Abstaining:
Antigua and Barbuda, Bahamas, Barbados,
Bolivia, Botswana, Burundi, Cambodia, Chad,
Congo, Côte d’Ivoire, Grenada, Guinea-Bissau,
Guyana, Haiti, Jamaica, Kenya, Lao People’s
Democratic
Republic,
Lesotho,
Liberia,
Madagascar, Mongolia, Rwanda, Saint Vincent
and the Grenadines, Singapore, Sri Lanka, Togo,
Tonga, United Republic of Tanzania
The second oral amendment was rejected by
78 votes to 60, with 28 abstentions.

08-66058

A/63/PV.70

[Subsequently, the delegation of Tunisia advised
the Secretariat that it had intended to vote in
favour.]
The Acting President: The Assembly will now
vote on draft resolution XV as a whole. The draft
resolution is entitled “Extrajudicial, summary or
arbitrary executions”. A recorded vote has been
requested.
A recorded vote was taken.
In favour:
Afghanistan, Albania, Algeria, Andorra, Angola,
Antigua and Barbuda, Argentina, Armenia,
Australia, Austria, Azerbaijan, Barbados, Belarus,
Belgium, Belize, Bhutan, Bolivia, Bosnia and
Herzegovina,
Botswana,
Brazil,
Bulgaria,
Burundi, Cambodia, Cameroon, Canada, Cape
Verde, Chad, Chile, Colombia, Comoros, Congo,
Costa Rica, Croatia, Cuba, Cyprus, Czech
Republic, Denmark, Dominica, Dominican
Republic, Ecuador, El Salvador, Eritrea, Estonia,
Ethiopia, Fiji, Finland, France, Gabon, Georgia,
Germany, Ghana, Greece, Grenada, Guatemala,
Guinea, Guinea-Bissau, Guyana, Haiti, Honduras,
Hungary, Iceland, India, Ireland, Italy, Jamaica,
Japan, Jordan, Kazakhstan, Kyrgyzstan, Latvia,
Lesotho, Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg,
Maldives, Mali, Malta, Mauritania, Mauritius,
Mexico, Micronesia (Federated States of),
Monaco, Mongolia, Montenegro, Morocco,
Mozambique, Nepal, Netherlands, New Zealand,
Nicaragua, Norway, Panama, Papua New Guinea,
Paraguay, Peru, Philippines, Poland, Portugal,
Republic of Korea, Republic of Moldova,
Romania, Samoa, San Marino, Sao Tome and
Principe, Serbia, Singapore, Slovakia, Slovenia,
Somalia, South Africa, Spain, Suriname, Sweden,
Switzerland, Tajikistan, Thailand, the former
Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Timor-Leste,
Togo, Tonga, Tunisia, Ukraine, United Kingdom
of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, Uruguay,
Uzbekistan, Vanuatu, Venezuela (Bolivarian
Republic of)
Against:
None
Abstaining:
Bahamas, Bahrain, Bangladesh, Benin, Brunei
Darussalam, Burkina Faso, Central African
Republic, China, Côte d’Ivoire, Democratic

08-66058

People’s Republic of Korea, Djibouti, Egypt,
Gambia, Indonesia, Iran (Islamic Republic of),
Iraq, Israel, Kenya, Kuwait, Lao People’s
Democratic Republic, Lebanon, Liberia, Libyan
Arab Jamahiriya, Madagascar, Malawi, Malaysia,
Marshall Islands, Myanmar, Namibia, Niger,
Nigeria, Oman, Pakistan, Palau, Qatar, Russian
Federation, Rwanda, Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent
and the Grenadines, Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Sierra
Leone, Solomon Islands, Sri Lanka, Sudan,
Swaziland, Syrian Arab Republic, Trinidad and
Tobago, Turkey, Tuvalu, Uganda, United Arab
Emirates, United Republic of Tanzania, United
States of America, Viet Nam, Yemen, Zambia,
Zimbabwe
Draft resolution XV as a whole was adopted by
127 votes to none, with 58 abstentions (resolution
63/182).
The Acting President: Draft resolution XVI is
entitled “Missing persons”. The Third Committee
adopted it without a vote. May I take it the Assembly
wishes to do likewise?
Draft resolution XVI was adopted (resolution
63/183).
The Acting President: Draft resolution XVII is
entitled “Protection of migrants”. The Third Committee
adopted the draft resolution without a vote. May I take
it the Assembly wishes to do the same?
Draft resolution XVII was adopted (resolution
63/184).
The Acting President: Draft resolution XVIII is
entitled “Protection of human rights and fundamental
freedoms while countering terrorism”.
Mr. de Léon Huerta (Mexico) (spoke in
Spanish): My delegation has detected an error in
document A/63/430/Add.2 with regard to the oral
revisions in the Third Committee of draft resolution
A/C.3/63/L.39/Rev.1, entitled “Protection of human
rights and fundamental freedoms while combating
terrorism”. In paragraph 150 of the report it should be
made clear that the oral revisions to draft resolution
L.39/Rev.1 revised its operative paragraph 27 and
divided it into two parts, one part becoming new
operative paragraph 3 and the second part becoming
new operative paragraph 28. Therefore operative
paragraph 29 in draft resolution XVIII, which is

23

A/63/PV.70

paragraph 27 of L.39/Rev.1, should not have been
included in resolution XVIII and should be deleted.
The Acting President: The Third Committee
adopted draft resolution XVIII without a vote. May I
take it the Assembly wishes to adopt draft resolution
XVIII, as orally revised?
Draft resolution XVIII, as orally revised, was
adopted (resolution 63/185).
The Acting President: Draft resolution XIX is
entitled “International Convention for the Protection of
All Persons from Enforced Disappearance”. The Third
Committee adopted the draft resolution without a vote.
May I take it the Assembly wishes to do likewise?
Draft resolution XIX was adopted (resolution
63/186).
The Acting President: Draft resolution XX is
entitled “The right to food”. A recorded vote has been
requested.
A recorded vote was taken.
In favour:
Afghanistan, Albania, Algeria, Andorra, Angola,
Antigua and Barbuda, Argentina, Armenia,
Australia, Austria, Azerbaijan, Bahamas, Bahrain,
Bangladesh, Barbados, Belarus, Belgium, Belize,
Benin, Bhutan, Bolivia, Bosnia and Herzegovina,
Botswana, Brazil, Brunei Darussalam, Bulgaria,
Burkina Faso, Burundi, Cambodia, Cameroon,
Canada, Central African Republic, Chad, Chile,
China, Colombia, Comoros, Congo, Costa Rica,
Côte d’Ivoire, Croatia, Cuba, Cyprus, Czech
Republic, Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea, Denmark, Djibouti, Dominica, Dominican
Republic, Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador, Eritrea,
Estonia, Ethiopia, Fiji, Finland, France, Gabon,
Gambia, Georgia, Germany, Ghana, Greece,
Grenada, Guatemala, Guinea, Guinea-Bissau,
Guyana, Haiti, Honduras, Hungary, Iceland,
India, Indonesia, Iran (Islamic Republic of), Iraq,
Ireland, Israel, Italy, Jamaica, Japan, Jordan,
Kazakhstan, Kenya, Kuwait, Kyrgyzstan, Lao
People’s Democratic Republic, Latvia, Lebanon,
Lesotho, Liberia, Libyan Arab Jamahiriya,
Liechtenstein,
Lithuania,
Luxembourg,
Madagascar, Malawi, Malaysia, Maldives, Mali,
Malta, Marshall Islands, Mauritania, Mauritius,
Mexico, Micronesia (Federated States of),
Monaco, Mongolia, Montenegro, Morocco,

24

Mozambique, Myanmar, Namibia, Nauru, Nepal,
Netherlands, New Zealand, Nicaragua, Niger,
Nigeria, Norway, Oman, Pakistan, Palau,
Panama, Paraguay, Peru, Philippines, Poland,
Portugal, Qatar, Republic of Korea, Republic of
Moldova, Romania, Russian Federation, Rwanda,
Saint Kitts and Nevis, Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent
and the Grenadines, Samoa, San Marino, Sao
Tome and Principe, Saudi Arabia, Senegal,
Serbia, Sierra Leone, Singapore, Slovakia,
Slovenia, Solomon Islands, Somalia, South
Africa, Spain, Sri Lanka, Sudan, Suriname,
Swaziland, Sweden, Switzerland, Syrian Arab
Republic, Tajikistan, Thailand, the former
Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Timor-Leste,
Togo, Tonga, Trinidad and Tobago, Tunisia,
Turkey, Turkmenistan, Tuvalu, Ukraine, United
Arab Emirates, United Kingdom of Great Britain
and Northern Ireland, United Republic of
Tanzania,
Uruguay,
Uzbekistan,
Vanuatu,
Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of), Viet Nam,
Yemen, Zambia, Zimbabwe
Against:
United States of America
Draft resolution XX was adopted by 184 votes
to 1 (resolution 63/187).
[Subsequently, the delegation of Cape Verde
advised the Secretariat that it had intended to vote
in favour.]
The Acting President: Draft resolution XXI is
entitled “Respect for the right to universal freedom of
travel and the vital importance of family reunification”.
A recorded vote has been requested.
A recorded vote was taken.
In favour:
Afghanistan, Algeria, Angola, Antigua and
Barbuda, Argentina, Azerbaijan, Bahamas,
Bahrain, Bangladesh, Barbados, Belarus, Belize,
Bhutan, Bolivia, Brazil, Burkina Faso, Burundi,
Cambodia, Cameroon, Cape Verde, Central
African Republic, Chad, Chile, China, Colombia,
Comoros, Congo, Costa Rica, Cuba, Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea, Djibouti, Dominica,
Dominican
Republic,
Ecuador,
Egypt,
El Salvador, Eritrea, Ethiopia, Fiji, Gabon,
Gambia, Ghana, Grenada, Guatemala, Guinea,
Guinea-Bissau, Guyana, Haiti, Honduras, India,

08-66058

A/63/PV.70

Indonesia, Iran (Islamic Republic of), Iraq,
Jamaica, Jordan, Kazakhstan, Kenya, Kuwait,
Kyrgyzstan, Lao People’s Democratic Republic,
Lebanon, Lesotho, Liberia, Libyan Arab
Jamahiriya, Madagascar, Malawi, Maldives, Mali,
Mauritania, Mauritius, Mexico, Mongolia,
Morocco, Mozambique, Myanmar, Namibia,
Nauru, Nepal, Nicaragua, Niger, Nigeria, Oman,
Pakistan, Panama, Papua New Guinea, Paraguay,
Peru, Philippines, Qatar, Russian Federation,
Rwanda, Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent and the
Grenadines, Sao Tome and Principe, Saudi
Arabia, Senegal, Sierra Leone, Solomon Islands,
Somalia, South Africa, Sri Lanka, Sudan,
Suriname, Swaziland, Syrian Arab Republic,
Tajikistan,
Timor-Leste,
Togo,
Tunisia,
Turkmenistan, Tuvalu, Uganda, United Arab
Emirates, United Republic of Tanzania, Uruguay,
Uzbekistan, Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of),
Viet Nam, Yemen, Zambia, Zimbabwe
Against:
Israel, Marshall Islands, Palau, United States of
America
Abstaining:
Albania, Andorra, Armenia, Australia, Austria,
Belgium, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Botswana,
Brunei Darussalam, Bulgaria, Canada, Côte
d’Ivoire, Croatia, Cyprus, Czech Republic,
Denmark, Estonia, Finland, France, Georgia,
Germany, Greece, Hungary, Iceland, Ireland,
Italy, Japan, Latvia, Liechtenstein, Lithuania,
Luxembourg, Malaysia, Malta, Micronesia
(Federated States of), Monaco, Montenegro,
Netherlands, New Zealand, Norway, Poland,
Portugal, Republic of Korea, Republic of
Moldova, Romania, Samoa, San Marino, Serbia,
Singapore, Slovakia, Slovenia, Spain, Sweden,
Switzerland, Thailand, the former Yugoslav
Republic of Macedonia, Tonga, Turkey, Ukraine,
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern
Ireland, Vanuatu
Draft resolution XXI was adopted by 121 votes to
4, with 60 abstentions (resolution 63/188).
The Acting President: Draft resolution XXII is
entitled “Promotion of a democratic and equitable
international order”. A recorded vote has been
requested.
A recorded vote was taken.

08-66058

In favour:
Algeria, Angola, Antigua and Barbuda,
Azerbaijan, Bahamas, Bahrain, Bangladesh,
Barbados, Belarus, Belize, Benin, Bhutan,
Bolivia, Botswana, Brazil, Brunei Darussalam,
Burkina Faso, Burundi, Cambodia, Cameroon,
Cape Verde, Central African Republic, Chad,
China, Colombia, Comoros, Congo, Costa Rica,
Côte d’Ivoire, Cuba, Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea, Djibouti, Dominica,
Dominican
Republic,
Ecuador,
Egypt,
El Salvador, Eritrea, Ethiopia, Fiji, Gabon,
Gambia, Ghana, Grenada, Guatemala, Guinea,
Guinea-Bissau, Guyana, Haiti, Honduras, India,
Indonesia, Iran (Islamic Republic of), Iraq,
Jamaica, Jordan, Kazakhstan, Kenya, Kuwait,
Kyrgyzstan, Lao People’s Democratic Republic,
Lebanon, Lesotho, Liberia, Libyan Arab
Jamahiriya, Madagascar, Malawi, Malaysia,
Maldives, Mali, Mauritania, Mauritius, Mongolia,
Morocco, Mozambique, Myanmar, Namibia,
Nepal, Nicaragua, Niger, Nigeria, Oman,
Pakistan, Panama, Papua New Guinea, Paraguay,
Philippines, Qatar, Russian Federation, Rwanda,
Saint Kitts and Nevis, Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent
and the Grenadines, Sao Tome and Principe,
Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Sierra Leone, Singapore,
Solomon Islands, Somalia, South Africa, Sri
Lanka, Sudan, Suriname, Swaziland, Syrian Arab
Republic, Tajikistan, Thailand, Togo, Tonga,
Trinidad and Tobago, Tunisia, Turkmenistan,
Tuvalu, Uganda, United Arab Emirates, United
Republic of Tanzania, Uruguay, Uzbekistan,
Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of), Viet Nam,
Yemen, Zambia, Zimbabwe
Against:
Albania, Andorra, Australia, Austria, Belgium,
Bosnia and Herzegovina, Bulgaria, Canada,
Croatia, Cyprus, Czech Republic, Denmark,
Estonia, Finland, France, Georgia, Germany,
Greece, Hungary, Iceland, Ireland, Israel, Italy,
Japan,
Latvia,
Liechtenstein,
Lithuania,
Luxembourg,
Malta,
Marshall
Islands,
Micronesia (Federated States of), Monaco,
Montenegro, Netherlands, New Zealand, Norway,
Palau, Poland, Portugal, Republic of Korea,
Republic of Moldova, Romania, Samoa, San
Marino, Serbia, Slovakia, Slovenia, Spain,
Sweden, Switzerland, the former Yugoslav
Republic of Macedonia, Turkey, Ukraine, United

25

A/63/PV.70

Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland,
United States of America
Abstaining:
Argentina, Armenia, Chile, Mexico, Peru, TimorLeste, Vanuatu
Draft resolution XXII was adopted by 124 votes
to 55, with 7 abstentions (resolution 63/189).
The Acting President: I shall now call on those
delegations who wish to speak in explanation of
position or vote on the resolutions just adopted.
Ms. Halabi (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in
Arabic): My delegation would like to explain its vote
on draft resolution XVIII, on the protection of human
rights and fundamental freedoms in the context of
counter-terrorism efforts. Because my country is not
party to the 1951 Convention relating to the Status of
Refugees and its 1967 Protocol, we would like to state
that it will continue its cooperation with the
United Nations system in the light of its own national
law. Our explanation covers operative paragraphs
19 and 20, concerning the lists of individuals and
entities issued by the Security Council.
Ms. Cross (United Kingdom): The United
Kingdom would like to draw the attention of members
to the explanation of position it gave in the Third
Committee
in
relation
to
draft
resolution
A/C.3/63/L.30/Rev.1, entitled “Right to development”
(resolution 63/178). That outlined our concerns with
paragraph 33 of the resolution, in particular the
reference to indigenous peoples. It remains our
position that we do not accept that paragraph 33
establishes collective rights.
I would also like to draw the attention of
members to the explanation of vote that the United
Kingdom gave in the Third Committee in relation to
draft resolution A/C.3/63/L.42/Rev.1, entitled “Right to
food” (resolution 63/187). That outlined our concerns
with paragraph 12 of this resolution. It remains our
position, and support for this resolution does not
change our general position on collective rights, which
remains as set out in our interpretive statement on the
adoption of the United Nations Declaration on the
Rights of Indigenous Peoples.
Ms. Chan (Singapore): I have the honour to
speak in explanation of vote after the vote on
resolution 63/168, entitled “Moratorium on the use of
the death penalty”.

26

Singapore and many delegations remain
convinced that there is no international consensus on
the issue of the death penalty. For many countries,
capital punishment is a crucial measure with which to
protect the security and safety of our citizens. Even
though some claim that this is a human rights issue, it
is first and foremost a matter of the criminal justice
system. The death penalty, applied with the necessary
judicial safeguards and due process of law, is clearly
allowed under international law. Article 6 of the
International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights
states that in countries that have not abolished the
death penalty, the sentence of death may be imposed
only for the most serious crimes in accordance with the
law in force at the time of the commission of the crime.
This is a divisive and controversial issue that
should not be taken up by the General Assembly. As
with last year’s resolution, the votes this year have
reaffirmed this fact. More fundamentally, Singapore
believes that each country has a sovereign right to
decide on this matter for itself. It is enshrined in the
United Nations Charter, where Article 2, paragraph 7,
states that nothing in the Charter authorizes the United
Nations to intervene in matters that are essentially
within the domestic jurisdiction of any State.
The corollary to this is that every State has an
inalienable right to choose its political, economic,
social, cultural and legal justice systems, without
interference in any form by another State. Hence, if a
country decides to abolish the death penalty, implement
a moratorium or to retain it, that is the sovereign
choice of that country. In the absence of an
international consensus, countries on either side of an
argument have no right to impose their opinions on
others.
Singapore respects the decisions that other
countries have taken on this issue and the choice of
some to abolish the death penalty or to impose a
moratorium. What we are asking for is the same
respect to be accorded to those of us who feel that we
still need the death penalty in our legislation.
With that, we would like to put on record our
opposition to this resolution and any attempt to impose
one side’s values and beliefs on all other Member
States.
Mr. Lima (Cape Verde) (spoke in French): I
would like to make a statement in explanation of our
vote on draft resolution IV, contained in

08-66058

A/63/PV.70

A/63/430/Add.2 (resolution 63/171). At first glance,
we could easily come to an agreement on this
resolution, particularly since it calls for everything our
individual and collective consciences agree on — the
condemnation and rejection of racism, xenophobia,
discrimination and intolerance.
The unconscionable witch hunts carried out in
various areas due to religious or ethnic motivations, the
places of worship that have been destroyed or burned
and the calls for racially or religiously motivated
murder that we see in the papers are reminders of the
hateful pogroms of the past. These incidents give
substance to this resolution, and the General Assembly
is justified in taking up such issues.
However, while such grave situations do exist
and should be considered, and require concerted action
by all, we are facing substantive differences and fresh
political confrontation. This signals the failure of the
very dialogue that is sought and the development of
opposing camps when the very goal is to come together
and to bring the entire international community to an
agreement on this issue. We must all take the same
position: everyone against extremism and against
religious fanatics, whoever they may be.
We have read and re-read the text we have before
us today. We have scrutinized the smallest nuances and
researched every underlying issue. We have searched
for every glimmer of truth in a confusing and often
troubling context, in which doublespeak is rampant and
hypocrisy is what we share the most. We continue to be
frustrated that such a major drafting effort has led to
such meagre results. We grope around blindly trying to
discern the line of reasoning, which we cannot follow.
The justifications are clunky, and the operative part, in
many places, seems to be tacked on or falls short of
striking the necessary balance. That leads us to have
doubts on certain points that require impartiality in
addressing such a delicate and complex issue.
It must be said that clarity is really not the
primary attribute of a text whose intentions are difficult
to discern and which draws exhaustively from the store
of good resolutions of recent years, apparently to use
them as so many excuses for a badly constructed line
of reasoning.
The important thing here, from our point of view,
should be to guarantee full freedom of religion and
belief for all, without discrimination. It is important to
ensure full freedom of choice and to respect the wishes

08-66058

of those who would like to change religions, if that is
the outcome of their own free choice. What is more, we
believe that the eradication of intolerance is possible
only where comprehensive efforts are made to adopt
measures to prevent the emergence of such intolerance
and stop its growth. Other resolutions, such as the
resolution on the elimination of all forms of intolerance
and of discrimination based on religion or belief,
address this issue more appropriately.
For all these reasons, Cape Verde has voted
against this text.
Mr. Attiya (Egypt): Egypt voted against draft
resolution I, on the moratorium on the use of the death
penalty, in document A/63/430/Add.2 (resolution
63/168), due to the fact that it contradicts a number of
religious as well as legal and practical considerations
upon which there is international agreement to respect.
Islam, like all other religions, highly values
respect for human dignity and the sanctity of life, as
life is a gift from God to all human beings alike.
Therefore, in Islamic jurisprudence the death penalty is
restricted to the most serious crimes. It may be
imposed only within the application of the due process
of law in order to ensure that the punishment is
compatible with legal and religious regulations and that
no one is arbitrarily deprived of the right to life.
That is in keeping with the fact that article 6 of
the International Covenant on Civil and Political
Rights does not prohibit the imposition of the death
penalty; the aim is clearly to make sure that it is
imposed only for the most serious crimes, to be defined
in accordance with the national law in force at the time
of the commission of the crime. At the same time, it
contains provisions granting the right to seek pardon or
appeal for commutation. Therefore, the focus of the
resolution should have been on ensuring due process,
rather than on abolition.
The restriction contained in article 6 regarding
the imposition of the death penalty for crimes
committed by minors reflects international agreement
that the death penalty can be applied only to mature
adults who are fully aware of the consequences of their
serious crime. In addition, the restriction on carrying
out the sentence on pregnant women manifests respect
for the right to life of the unborn child, who in some
cases is arbitrarily deprived of that right without
having committed a crime and without a court ruling or
the right to appeal, particularly in many conflict areas

27

A/63/PV.70

under brutal occupation. Moreover, Islamic sharia law
prohibits abortion except in very rare and necessary
circumstances.
It is our firm belief that the resolution just
adopted, like the resolution adopted during the
sixty-second session, aims not only to reinterpret the
provisions of the International Covenant on Civil and
Political Rights in the light of particular developments
in the national legislation of certain countries, but also
to impose new interpretations and narrow viewpoints
on the general membership.
The argument that this year’s resolution is of a
procedural nature is supported neither by its title nor
by its provisions. It deals with the use of the death
penalty, not with its application, hence implying that
the death penalty is being used by States that retain it
to serve certain political interests, not to maintain
social order and stability. The text claims that there is a
trend towards abolition and substantiates that argument
on the basis of the Secretary-General’s report, which
relies on unauthenticated information and noticeably
lacks a clear methodology.
Regrettably, despite our sincere efforts — in
keeping with the provisions of the Charter of the
United Nations and existing international legal
instruments — to overcome the selectivity that
characterized the draft resolution before its adoption,
our calls were not heeded. The resolution fails to deal
with extrajudicial executions. It stresses the special
needs of specific social settings, while disregarding the
great diversity of legal, social, economic and cultural
conditions throughout the world and the fact that rules
are not suitable for application at the same level in all
societies or at all times.
While some Member States have voluntarily
decided to abolish the death penalty and others have
chosen to impose a moratorium on executions, many
States retain the death penalty in their constitutions and
penal codes, in full compliance with their obligations
under the International Covenant on Civil and Political
Rights. No side is more right than the other; each State
has decided freely, according to its own sovereign
right, established by the Charter of the United Nations,
to choose the path corresponding to its own social,
cultural and legal needs in order to maintain security,
social order and peace. Hence, no side should give
itself the right to impose its viewpoint on the others.

28

It is our honest belief that the diverging legal and
practical arguments and human rights considerations in
this regard can be reconciled, in all their related
aspects, only by the Human Rights Council through a
comprehensive process of debate and negotiations at
the multilateral level. If we are sincere about
respecting cultural diversity and promoting mutual
understanding, we must not allow ourselves to be
sidetracked from the path of dialogue.
Although Egypt voted against the resolution for
the aforementioned reasons, we strongly believe that it
remains the obligation of all States retaining the death
penalty to ensure that it can be imposed for the most
serious crimes only, pursuant to a final judgement
rendered by a competent court of law within the
application of due process, in order to ensure that no
one is arbitrarily deprived of his or her life. Hence, we
remain of the view that the focus of international
efforts should be on strengthening the international
commitment to ensuring that no one is arbitrarily
deprived of his or her life, including by extrajudicial
execution.
Mr. Degia (Barbados): My delegation wishes to
draw attention to its explanation of vote delivered on
20 November in the Third Committee on draft
resolution A/C.3/63/L.19/Rev.1, entitled “Moratorium
on the use of the death penalty” (resolution 63/168).
That explanation also applies to draft resolution I, just
adopted, and outlines the position of the Government
of Barbados on the death penalty, namely, that capital
punishment is lawful under international law and must
be seen as an internal matter, fully in keeping with the
provisions of the United Nations Charter and all of the
human rights treaties to which Barbados is a party.
Mr. Llanos (Chile) (spoke in Spanish): I am
taking the floor on behalf of the 89 sponsors of draft
resolution I, entitled “Moratorium on the use of the
death penalty”.
In the opinion of the sponsors, the adoption of
General Assembly resolution 62/149 was a milestone in
the improvement and progressive development of
human rights. Currently, 137 countries in all regions of
the world have abolished the death penalty either
de jure or de facto, compared with 130 countries last
year. That confirms the firm world trend towards the
abolishment of the death penalty — a trend that is
irreversible.

08-66058

A/63/PV.70

The resolution just adopted by the Assembly is
the result of informal consultations held by the
delegations of all Member States. This year, the
sponsors worked with a new focus regarding this
resolution, promoting constructive dialogue in order to
minimize confrontation. That focus is reflected in a
resolution that is concise and very simple. It is also
reflected in the biennialization of the resolution and in
the fact that the text takes account of proposals made
by other delegations. The resolution’s focus continues
to be on a moratorium on the use of the death penalty.
Finally, I should like, on behalf of the sponsors,
to reaffirm our intention to continue to work
constructively and in good faith to implement the
present resolution.
Ms. Zhang Dan (China) (spoke in Chinese): The
Chinese delegation regrets the adoption by the General
Assembly of the draft resolution on the death penalty.
To impose the views of one side on the other by
submitting a draft resolution to the Assembly will not
help to resolve the differences regarding this issue. On
the contrary, it will only further politicize and
complicate the issue. In light of the above, the Chinese
delegation voted against draft resolution L.19/Rev.1 in
the
Third
Committee
and
again
in
the
General Assembly.
The Chinese delegation wishes to reiterate its
position. First, whether to restrict the application of the
death penalty or abolish it is a matter of domestic
legislation and justice, not a matter of human rights.
Consideration and adoption of a resolution on the death
penalty is counter to the principle of non-interference
in the domestic affairs of Member States that is
enshrined in the Charter of the United Nations, and is
bound to result in serious confrontation in the positions
of Member States.
Secondly, international law does not ban the
death penalty, nor is there international consensus on
that issue. Article 6, paragraph 2, of the International
Covenant on Civil and Political Rights stipulates that
the death penalty may be imposed for the most serious
crimes. Countries have the right to decide the
appropriateness of a penalty or when to suspend or
abolish a specific penalty in the light of their
traditional needs, level of economic development and
historical and cultural background, and other countries
do not have the right to interfere.

08-66058

Thirdly, the death penalty constitutes a powerful
deterrent to the most serious crimes. It enjoys broad
public support in China, and society is psychologically
prepared to accept it.
The Chinese Government, while retaining the
death penalty, pursues a strict policy on its application
and exercises stringent control with regard to
legislation and justice. First, it restricts the crimes
punishable by the death penalty. Under the Penal Code
of China, the death penalty can be applied only to a
limited number of criminals who have committed the
most serious crimes. Secondly, it restricts the type of
crimes punishable by the death penalty under Chinese
law. Minors below the age of 18 at the time of
committing a crime and female criminals who are
pregnant at the time of trial cannot be subjected to the
death penalty.
Thirdly,
the
Government
restricts
the
implementation of the death penalty. Under Chinese
law, the death penalty is subdivided into a death
sentence with immediate execution and a death
sentence with a two-year suspension of execution. The
punishment of those criminals sentenced to the death
penalty with a two-year suspension of execution may
be commuted to a life sentence if they do not commit
another crime during that period. Thus, only a very
limited number of criminals have actually been put to
death.
Fourthly, limitations are imposed by way of
review and approval. In order to ensure fairness and
justice, China’s Supreme People’s Court has taken back
the authority to review and approve the implementation
of the death penalty and to carry it out.
Miss Abdelhak (Algeria) (spoke in French): My
delegation would like to explain its vote with regard to
draft resolution XV (resolution 63/182).
Algeria voted in favour of draft resolution XV to
reiterate its commitment, together with the
international community, against the practice of
extrajudicial, summary or arbitrary executions, just as
it did at the fifty-ninth and sixty-first sessions of the
General Assembly in 2004 and 2006, respectively.
Algeria also voted for the amendments presented
by Uganda on behalf of the Organization of the Islamic
Conference Group in the hope that the sensitive issue
of extrajudicial, summary or arbitrary executions
would garner the broadest possible support. My

29

A/63/PV.70

delegation hopes that the draft resolution be adopted by
consensus in the future.

those practices undermine the integrity and dignity of
those who are subjected to such abuses.

Mr. Argüello (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish):
With regard to agenda item 64 (b), I have the honour to
make this intervention on human rights, sexual
orientation and gender identity in the name of the
following Member States: Albania, Andorra, Argentina,
Armenia, Australia, Austria, Belgium, Bolivia, Bosnia
and Herzegovina, Brazil, Bulgaria, Canada, Cape
Verde, the Central African Republic, Chile, Colombia,
Croatia, Cuba, Cyprus, the Czech Republic, Denmark,
Ecuador, Estonia, Finland, France, Gabon, Georgia,
Germany, Greece, Guinea-Bissau, Hungary, Iceland,
Ireland, Israel, Italy, Japan, Latvia, Liechtenstein,
Lithuania, Luxembourg, Malta, Mauritius, Mexico,
Montenegro, Nepal, the Netherlands, New Zealand,
Nicaragua, Norway, Paraguay, Poland, Portugal,
Romania, San Marino, Sao Tome and Principe, Serbia,
Slovakia, Slovenia, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, the
former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Timor-Leste,
the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern
Ireland, Uruguay and Venezuela.

We condemn human rights violations based on
sexual orientation or gender identity wherever they
may take place, especially the application of the death
penalty on those grounds, extrajudicial, summary or
arbitrary executions, the practice of torture and other
cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment,
arrest or arbitrary detention and the denial of the
economic, social and cultural rights, including the right
to health. We recall the statement made on behalf of
54 countries in 2006 before the Human Rights Council,
asking its President to provide an opportunity in an
appropriate future session of the Council to debate
such violations. We welcome the attention given to
these questions in special proceedings of the Human
Rights Council and treaty bodies, and we encourage
them to continue integrating the consideration of
human rights violations based on sexual identity or
gender identity within their relevant mandates.

We reaffirm the principle of the universality of
human rights, as established by the Universal
Declaration of Human Rights, the sixtieth anniversary
of which is being celebrated this year. In its article 1, it
establishes that “All human beings are born free and
equal in dignity and rights”.
We reaffirm that everyone has the right to enjoy
their human rights without any distinction with regard
to race, colour, sex, language, religion, political or
other opinion, national or social origin, property, birth
or other status, as established by article 2 of the
Universal Declaration of Human Rights, articles 2 and
26 of the International Covenant on Civil and Political
Rights, and article 2 of the International Covenant on
Economic, Social and Cultural Rights.
We reaffirm the principle of non-discrimination,
which requires that human rights be equally applied to
all human beings regardless of their sexual orientation
or gender identity. We are deeply concerned by the
violations of human rights and fundamental freedoms
based on sexual orientation or gender identity.
Similarly, we are alarmed by the violence, harassment,
discrimination, exclusion, stigmatization and prejudice
against individuals of any country in the world owing
to their sexual orientation or gender identity, because

30

We warmly welcome the adoption of
AG/RES.2435 (XXXVIII-0/08) on human rights,
sexual orientation and gender identity by the General
Assembly of the Organization of American States
during its thirty-eighth session, on 3 June 2008. We
call on all States and relevant international human
rights mechanisms to commit themselves to promoting
and protecting the human rights of all persons,
independent of their sexual orientation and gender
identity. We urge States to take all necessary measures,
in particular legislative and administrative measures, to
ensure that sexual orientation or gender identity
cannot, under any circumstances, be reason for
criminal punishment, in particular execution, arrest or
detention. We urge States to ensure that human rights
violations based on sexual orientation or gender
identity are investigated and that those responsible be
held accountable before justice.
Finally, we urge States to ensure adequate
protection for human rights defenders and to eliminate
the obstacles that impede the progress of their work on
human rights, sexual orientation and gender identity.
Mr. Hallak (Syrian Arab Republic): I have the
honour to make the following statement on behalf of
Afghanistan, Algeria, Bahrain, Bangladesh, Benin,
Brunei Darussalam, Cameroon, Chad, Comoros, Côte
d’Ivoire, Democratic People’s Republic of Korea,
Djibouti, Egypt, Eritrea, Ethiopia, Fiji, Gambia,

08-66058

A/63/PV.70

Guinea, Indonesia, Iran, Iraq, Jordan, Kazakhstan,
Kenya, Kuwait, Kyrgyzstan, Lebanon, Libyan Arab
Jamahiriya, Malawi, Malaysia, Maldives, Mali,
Mauritania, Morocco, Niger, Nigeria, Oman, Pakistan,
Qatar, Rwanda, Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Sierra Leone,
Saint Lucia, Solomon Islands, Somalia, Sudan,
Swaziland,
Syria,
Tajikistan,
Togo,
Tunisia,
Turkmenistan, Uganda, United Arab Emirates, United
Republic of Tanzania, Uzbekistan, Yemen and
Zimbabwe, following the statement just delivered by
the representative of Argentina on behalf of a group of
Member States, on human rights and the so-called
notion of sexual orientation and gender identity.
On 10 December 2008, the human rights family
celebrated the sixtieth anniversary of the adoption of
the Universal Declaration of Human Rights and once
again made an unequivocal commitment to the
principles enshrined therein. On that august occasion,
we reiterated that all human rights are universal,
indivisible, interrelated, interdependent and mutually
reinforcing.
There
was
also
a
universal
acknowledgement that in no country or territory can it
be claimed that all human rights have been fully
realized at all times for all persons. Member States
declared that the full realization of all human rights for
all remains a challenge and that they shall not shy
away from its magnitude.
The principles of non-discrimination and equality
are two faces of the same coin. They are indeed crosscutting principles in the vast area related to the full
realization of all human rights and fundamental
freedom for all. Such principles are well-entrenched in
the Charter of the United Nations and internationally
agreed human rights instruments, as they all reaffirm
faith in fundamental human rights, in the dignity and
worth of the human person and in the equal rights of
men and women without distinction.
In this context, we are seriously concerned by the
attempt to introduce into the United Nations some
notions that have no legal foundation in any
international human rights instrument. We are even
more disturbed at the attempt to focus on certain
persons on the grounds of their sexual interests and
behaviour while ignoring that intolerance and
discrimination regrettably exist in various parts of the
world, be it on the basis of colour, race, gender or
religion, to mention only a few.

08-66058

Our alarm does not merely stem from concern
about the lack of legal grounds or that the statement
delves into matters which fall essentially within the
domestic jurisdiction of States, counter to the
commitment in the Charter of the United Nations to
respect the sovereignty of States and the principle of
non-intervention. More important, it depends on the
ominous usage of two notions. The notion of
orientation spans a wide range of personal choices that
expand far beyond the individual sexual interest in a
copulatory behaviour between normal consenting adult
human beings, thereby ushering in the social
normalization and possibly the legitimization of many
deplorable acts, including paedophilia. The second
notion is often suggested to attribute particular sexual
interests or behaviours to genetic factors, a matter that
has repeatedly been scientifically rebuffed.
We affirm that those two notions are not and
should not be linked to existing international human
rights instruments. We believe that people are not
inherently vulnerable but that some individuals are
made vulnerable due to the socio-economic setting in
which they live. It follows that vulnerable individuals
and groups include women, children, older persons,
peoples under foreign occupation, refugees, asylumseekers and internally displaced persons, migrants,
persons deprived of their liberty and persons belonging
to national or ethnic, religious and linguistic minorities
who become vulnerable as a result, inter alia, of
intolerance and discrimination against them.
We strongly deplore all forms of stereotyping,
exclusion, stigmatization, prejudice, intolerance,
discrimination and violence directed against peoples,
communities and individuals on any grounds
whatsoever and wherever they occur. We also reaffirm
article 29 of the Universal Declaration of Human
Rights and the rights of Member States to enact laws
that meet just requirements of morality, public order
and the general welfare of a domestic society.
We recognize that the rights enumerated in the
Universal Declaration of Human Rights were codified
in subsequent international legal instruments. We note
with concern the attempt to create new rights or new
standards by misinterpreting the Universal Declaration
and international treaties to include such notions that
were never articulated nor agreed by the general
membership. Those attempts undermine not only the
intent of the drafters of and the signatories to those

31

A/63/PV.70

human rights instruments, but also seriously jeopardize
the entire international human rights framework.
We call upon all Member States to continue and
to step up their efforts towards the total elimination of
all forms of racism, racial discrimination, xenophobia
and related intolerance. We also call upon all Member
States to refrain from attempting to give priority to the
rights of certain individuals, which could result in
positive discrimination at the expense of others’ rights
and thus contradict the principle of non-discrimination
and equality.
We urge all Member States, the United Nations
system and non-governmental organizations to
continue to devote special attention and resources to

32

protect the family as the natural and fundamental group
unit of society, in accordance with article 16 of the
Universal Declaration of Human Rights.
In conclusion, we also urge all States and relevant
international human rights mechanisms to intensify
their efforts to consolidate the commitment to the
promotion and protection of human rights and of
everyone on an equal footing without exception.
The Acting President: We have heard the last
speaker for this meeting. The Assembly will continue
its consideration of the reports of the Third Committee
this afternoon at 3 p.m.
The meeting rose at 1.15 p.m.

08-66058
