United Nations

S/PV.4750

Security Council

Provisional

Fifty-eighth year

4750

th meeting
Tuesday, 6 May 2003, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Akram . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (Pakistan)

Members:

Angola . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Bulgaria . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Cameroon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Chile . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Germany . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Guinea . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Mexico . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Spain . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Syrian Arab Republic . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . . .
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Mr. Gaspar Martins
Mr. Raytchev
Mr. Banoum
Mr. Valdés
Mr. Zhang Yishan
Mr. De La Sablière
Mr. Pleuger
Mr. Boubacar Diallo
Mr. Aguilar Zinser
Mr. Konuzin
Ms. Menéndez
Mr. Wehbe
Sir Jeremy Greenstock
Mr. Negroponte

Agenda
The situation in Afghanistan

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room C-154A.

03-34657 (E)

*0334657*

S/PV.4750

The meeting was called to order at 10.15 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in Afghanistan
The President: I should like to inform the
Council that I have received a letter from the
representative of Afghanistan in which he requests to
be invited to participate in the discussion of the item on
the Council’s agenda. In conformity with the usual
practice, I propose, with the consent of the Council, to
invite that representative to participate in the
discussion, without the right to vote, in accordance
with the relevant provisions of the Charter and rule 37
of the Council’s provisional rules of procedure.
There being no objection, it is so decided.
At the invitation of the President, Mr. Farhâdi
(Afghanistan) took a seat at the Council table.
The President: In accordance with the
understanding reached in the Council’s prior
consultations, I shall take it that the Security Council
agrees to extend an invitation under rule 39 of its
provisional rules of procedure to Mr. Lakhdar Brahimi,
Special Representative of the Secretary-General for
Afghanistan.
I invite Mr. Brahimi to take a seat at the Council
table.
The Security Council will now begin its
consideration of the item on its agenda. The Council is
meeting in accordance with the understanding reached
in its prior consultations.
At this meeting, the Security Council will hear a
briefing
by
Mr.
Lakhdar
Brahimi,
Special
Representative
of
the
Secretary-General
for
Afghanistan, to whom I give the floor.
Mr. Brahimi: It is a privilege and an honour for
me to brief the Council once again on Afghanistan. It is
a particular pleasure and honour to be speaking under
your presidency, Sir, and I wish you a very successful
month at the head of the Security Council.
Members will recall that when I last had the
privilege of briefing the Council, in January, I noted
that the Bonn process faced a critical test this year and
that, against a backdrop of ongoing and increasing

2

security concerns, the Government, with support from
the international community, would have to register
significant progress in key areas such as national
reconciliation, the building of national security
structures and national reconstruction in order to
safeguard the success of the process. Today, I must
reiterate and amplify the concerns I raised in January
because, although specific aspects of Bonn are
proceeding, the process as a whole is challenged by the
deterioration in the security environment, which stems
from daily harassment and intimidation, inter-ethnic
and interfactional strife, increases in the activity of
elements linked to the Taliban and to Gulbuddin
Hekmatyar, and the drugs economy. The process is also
challenged by the fact that national security institutions
are perceived by many Afghans, perhaps the majority,
as not serving the broad national interests of all the
people of Afghanistan.
Let me outline the areas of some of the main
activities being conducted in Afghanistan these days.
Members will see that the issue of security arises at
every turn.
In an important step forward towards meeting the
time frame set out in Bonn for convening the
Constitutional
Loya
Jirga,
the
Constitutional
Commission was inaugurated by the father of the
nation, former King Zahir Shah, on 26 April.
Composed of 35 members, including seven women, the
Commission represents the full ethnic, regional and
religious diversity of the Afghan people. The
previously established Drafting Committee has
prepared a preliminary draft constitution, which it will
present to the full Commission soon. Next, over the
summer months, the Commission is to consult the
public on their views and aspirations related to the
constitution. This will require the members of the
Commission to break up into subcommittees that will
visit all parts of the country and hold scores of large
and not-so-large meetings with elders, religious and
community leaders, women, intellectuals, traders and
ordinary people. The United Nations will support and
participate in those activities. Obviously, such
activities require a minimum of security on the roads
and in the cities and villages of Afghanistan. On the
basis of its findings, the Commission will finalize a
draft constitution and present it to the Constitutional
Loya Jirga for its consideration and ratification — we
hope, in October. And naturally, selecting the
participants in the Loya Jirga and holding the assembly

S/PV.4750

itself will also require security and the absence of
intimidation and harassment.
The elections called for under Bonn will also be a
major undertaking. We are in the process of
establishing the electoral unit of the United Nations
Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA), and
early planning for national voter registration has begun.
Given the considerable institution-building demands
faced by the Government on all fronts, Afghanistan’s
own electoral capacity is not yet ready. As President
Karzai requested in his letter of 15 February to the
Secretary-General, the UNAMA electoral unit will
have to play a core role throughout the entire electoral
process, while at the same time helping to build the
capacity of the future electoral management body.
The elections will require substantial resources,
since registration and polling must reach every eligible
Afghan across the country and in major refugee areas
in a timely and equitable manner. In order to plan and
effectively fulfil UNAMA’s assistance in all phases of
the electoral process, our electoral unit will require an
element of assured funding through the assessed
budget. Although substantial, it will constitute a
fraction of the overall cost of the electoral exercise,
and a larger, complementary budget for voluntary
funding has also been prepared. I urge donors and
Member States to provide the necessary support for
this fundamental exercise, since effective preparations
cannot commence until funds become available.

for this plan, which includes programmes for
alternative economic incentives for farmers, as well as
the building of Government capacity in the area of
national law enforcement. It goes without saying that
opium production and the drugs economy is a
contributing factor to insecurity and, if unchecked, has
the potential to undermine much of the institutionbuilding effort and the rule of law in Afghanistan.
Though not at the levels recorded during last
year’s massive return of refugees, the rate of assisted
refugee returns to Afghanistan has again increased
significantly during the month of April. The
Government and the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees estimate that 600,000
Afghans will return this year from Pakistan, 500,000
from Iran and 100,000 from other countries.
There has been progress towards the national
census called for under Bonn. The first phase of the
census involves updating maps, locating and listing
each house in Afghanistan and making preliminary
population counts. That first phase will be completed
nationwide by the spring of 2004 and will serve as the
planning basis for phase two — the actual census —
which will collect a wide range of information at the
level of the individual and provide demographic and
socio-economic information necessary for national
planning and development.

Security will be even more vital for the
preparation and organization of the elections. The
registration exercise will require the recruitment and
training of some 3,000 Afghans — men and women —
who will have to spend time in each of the nearly 400
districts and visit thousands of villages. As is the case
with the consultations of the Constitutional
Commission, that exercise can be conducted only if
there is security. Furthermore, elections everywhere
divide people and create tensions. Afghanistan will not
be an exception, and, here again, security will be
essential.

In a moving display of determination and hope,
the opening of schools on 22 March saw a record
4 million to 5 million children return to school, up
from 3 million last year. The Ministry of Education,
with support from UNICEF and the United States
Agency for International Development (USAID), as
well as from Japan and other donors, has provided
school supplies for more than 4 million children and
teaching supplies for 50,000 primary school teachers.
There have been several incidents of arson against
girls’ schools, which may reflect either extremist action
or rivalry among local commanders — probably
both — but which fly in the face of most parents’
desire to see both girls and boys in school.

The Government has taken a step forward in what
will be a long effort to control the poppy cultivation
which makes Afghanistan the world’s leading supplier
of poppy. It is in the final stages of completing a 10year national drug control strategy, with the assistance
of the United Kingdom as lead nation. The President
has requested the support of all Government ministers

In the judicial sector, the Judicial Reform
Commission has completed a survey of the state of the
judiciary in 10 provinces and major urban centres in
the country. The Commission’s survey team
is
focusing on the infrastructure and the functioning of
the formal justice system, including staffing,
procedures, correction and detention centres, as well as

3

S/PV.4750

on the informal justice system. It is expected that the
final report of the survey will be available by the end
of June and will provide a basis for projects in the
judicial reform effort, which
Italy assists as a lead
nation.
With respect to administrative reform, progress
towards reform of the public administration, although
slow to date, is now picking up, owing in large part to
the growing role of the Civil Service Commission. A
review of the existing administrative laws is under way.
This review will provide the basis for a definition of
the legal framework and for the system of governance,
which will be developed both centrally and subnationally.
The United Nations system is currently seconding
140 staff to various Government structures. To a large
degree, the focus of the support of the United Nations
has been on ministries and other entities at the national
level. UNAMA has supported the planning and policy
elaboration functions of the Ministry of Rehabilitation
and Rural Development. Other United Nations agencies
have focused their efforts on building the capacity of
their respective counterpart line ministries. Finance and
accounting systems are also being strengthened at both
the central and provincial levels.
Concerning the Afghanistan Reconstruction Trust
Fund, at the Afghanistan High Level Strategic Forum
held in Brussels in March 2003, the Afghan
Government presented a combined recurrent and
development budget of $2.2 billion for fiscal year
1382, which runs from 22 March 2003 to March 2004.
At the same time, donor commitments exceeded $1.95
billion. This is very encouraging indeed, although it
should be recalled that additional resources will be
needed for critical non-budgetary items such as the
elections — which we think will run into something
like $80 million — mine action and disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration (DDR). The
Government remains reliant on donor funds to cover
funding shortfalls in the recurrent budget.
Turning to reconstruction more generally, the end
of winter has allowed a number of reconstruction
projects to begin. Foremost among these is the
international effort to rehabilitate key roads and
highways. For the road connecting Kabul to Herat via
Kandahar, plans call for the Kabul-to-Kandahar portion
to be completed by December of this year, while work
continues on the Kandahar-to-Herat segment.

4

Similarly, a consortium of international donors is
funding the roads from Kabul to Kunduz and from
Kabul through Jalalabad to Pakistan.
Much progress has been made on the
implementation of two of the key national priority
subprogrammes, the National Emergency Employment
Programme (NEEP) and the National Solidarity
Programme (NSP). The World Bank supports both of
these programmes, which are designed to inject central
Government funds into local economies. Discussions
are being finalized for the implementation of the $75
million NEEP, which is intended to, first, provide
productive employment opportunities for the most
vulnerable people; and secondly, to develop
infrastructure assets through labour-based methods,
using a private-sector-led approach. The NSP officially
commenced in April. At the time of launching, over
$11 million had been received by the Government for
this programme, which aims to empower local
communities through the direct allocation of
development funds to them.
With respect to the human rights situation, the
Afghan Independent Human Rights Commission has
taken encouraging steps to expand its work
programme, with satellite offices now open in Herat,
Bamyan, Mazar-e-Sharif, Jalalabad and Gardez. Others
will be opening in the near future in Kandahar and
Faizabad. The Commission, with the assistance of
UNAMA, is actively investigating reports of human
rights violations throughout Afghanistan. Afghanistan
also ratified, on 4 April 2003, the Convention on the
Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against
Women. This has sent an encouraging sign to
advocates, both within and outside the country, for
greater promotion and protection of the rights of
women in Afghanistan. Also on a positive note, the
Afghan Transitional Authority passed a new law
granting Afghans the right to hold public assemblies or
strikes. Afghanistan has also ratified the Rome Statute
of the International Criminal Court.
Yet despite gradual progress in some areas, the
human rights situation faced by Afghans throughout
the country remains serious. In Herat, UNAMA is
investigating alleged cases of summary executions,
rape and other forms of sexual violence, and continuing
political intimidation of journalists and civil society
actors. In Laghman, several women participants in
International Women’s Day celebrations were beaten
by armed groups allegedly linked to the authorities,

S/PV.4750

and the head of the Women’s Affairs Department in
Laghman has received several threats against her life,
possibly from Taliban remnants, warning her to stop all
activities in the province. Additionally, in Logar
province, reports of intimidation against women
delegates to the Emergency Loya Jirga have been
confirmed.

the Council, and unfortunately, as I said earlier, I must
inform members that it remains unstable and
insufficient in much of Afghanistan. Rivalries among
factions and local commanders, impunity with regard
to human rights violations and daily harassment of
ordinary Afghan citizens by both commanders and
local security forces are all too common.

In the North, particularly in Faryab and Jawzjan
provinces, fighting and insecurity have led to renewed
displacement of Pashtun families to Kandahar and the
internally displaced persons camp of Zar-a-Dasht in the
south. In Takhar province, local commanders have
prevented the return of Pashtun families to their
villages, while in the north of Kunduz province,
Pashtuns have been prevented from cultivating their
lands, threatening their forced displacement. The
Transitional Authority, the Human Rights Commission,
UNAMA, the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR) and the Return
Commission for the North are trying to help resolve
these tensions. However, continued insecurity and the
absence of effective State judicial institutions
unfortunately remains the rule rather than the
exception. These conditions not only enable local
commanders and Government officials to act with
impunity, but also threaten to undermine the stillfragile peace process and the confidence of Afghans in
it.

In addition, there are now almost daily attacks by
elements hostile to the central Government and to those
who support it. Forces believed to be associated with
the Taliban, with Al Qaeda and with Hekmatyar have
been stepping up operations against the coalition as
well as against Afghan military and non-military
targets in the south, the south-east and the east of the
country. On 3 May, a national member of a demining
non-governmental organization was shot dead and
another was seriously injured when their work vehicle
was fired upon on the main road from Kabul to
Kandahar, in Wardak province. Local authorities are
investigating. People who target these heroic deminers
are not the enemies of the Afghan Government or of
the coalition, and they are not foreigners. They are the
enemies of the Afghan farmers who are waiting for
their fields to be cleared and of the Afghan children
who want to play without risking their lives. Indeed,
people who attack deminers are the enemies of the
entire Afghan nation.

This is unfortunately not an exhaustive list of
human rights violations in Afghanistan over the
reporting
period.
International
human
rights
organizations and activists often express outrage at and
condemnation of cases of gross abuses. They also
express frustration with the perceived lack of action to
redress the situation. Obviously, we welcome such an
interest and fully share these feelings. It is, however,
important to note here that there is no quick fix here.
The correct route to follow is to work with
determination and patience to help Afghanistan build
the instruments and institutions which will allow it to
put an end to human rights violations: create a national
police and national army; revive the judicial system
and ensure the rule of law; and help the Afghan
Independent Human Rights Commission to become the
respected and effective watchdog the country needs.
Security — which casts a long shadow over the
whole peace process and, indeed, over the whole future
of Afghanistan — is the central issue. The security
situation has been a constant theme in my briefings to

Tensions and armed clashes occurred during the
last week of April in Zabul province, although the
causes of the violence are not yet clear. In early April,
a prominent local tribal elder, Akhundzadah Jailani
Khan, was assassinated. Most believe the Taliban to
have been responsible for the murder because of the
man’s close relationship with President Karzai. A week
later, a relative of the Governor of Kandahar, together
with a bodyguard, were killed by suspected Taliban
militants, not inside Afghanistan but in the Pakistani
border town of Chaman. Coalition forces have
regularly come under attack, and four of their number
have been killed in recent weeks. Many more members
of regional Afghan security forces in the south have
died in fighting and as a result of assaults on their
guard posts.
On 6 March, two International Security
Assistance Force (ISAF) vehicles were hit by a
remotely detonated explosive, which killed one ISAF
interpreter and injured a soldier. The device showed a
level of sophistication not previously seen in this kind
of incident in Afghanistan. At the end of March, the

5

S/PV.4750

ISAF headquarters complex in the capital received a
direct hit by a missile, but fortunately there were no
casualties. Nine days later, rockets landed short of
another ISAF compound in the city, and on 13 April an
explosive device was detonated as two ISAF vehicles
drove by. Once again, ISAF was extremely lucky not to
have suffered any injuries to its personnel — and here,
we too were lucky.
The threat posed by these elements to the
international community was driven home by the
shocking murder, in cold blood, of an International
Committee of the Red Cross (ICRC) worker in late
March — the first such killing of a foreigner since
1998. That incident was followed closely by the
murder of another foreigner, an Italian visitor, in Zabul
province. Indeed, a growing number of attacks have
been directed against foreign aid organizations and
against the United Nations. On 16 April, a grenade was
thrown into a United Nations Children’s Fund
(UNICEF) compound in Jalalabad. Eight days later, an
explosive device was thrown into a United Nations
Office on Drugs and Crime (UNODC) office, also in
Jalalabad. Fortunately, both of those incidents were
without injury. On 22 April, a United Nations mine
action vehicle came under sustained and targeted
small-arms fire on the road from Kabul to Jalalabad at
a point not far from Kabul near the Sarobi pass,
injuring two of the car’s three occupants. People trying
to come to the assistance of the United Nations
employees were fired upon to prevent them from
helping the injured.
As these attacks on non-governmental and
international organizations become more and more
threatening, the pressure to suspend or withdraw
operations increases. Already, the ICRC and a number
of non-governmental organizations are reducing their
operations in the south, with immediate consequences
for key programmes that provide support to local
populations. The United Nations is also currently
undertaking a critical review of its operations and of its
security measures. My colleagues and I have indicated
to the Government and to the diplomatic community in
Kabul that, while there will be no panic, we will
certainly not be irresponsible. We will continue
operations in all areas, where possible and to the
maximum extent possible, but we, of course, cannot
guarantee that United Nations and other civilian aid
organizations will maintain current operational levels if
the security of their personnel cannot be ensured. We

6

expect better information exchange among the United
Nations and coalition and Government authorities and
strengthened measures to improve security where
civilian aid workers are operating.
Afghanistan’s neighbours play a crucial role in
helping to ensure that the country’s security is
maintained, and the declaration they signed on
22 December 2002 is an important expression of
solidarity on their part in that regard. As the Council
will be aware, there are worrying reports of hostile
elements crossing into Afghanistan over the eastern
and southern borders. Pakistan has expressed its
continuing readiness to address that problem, and the
deployment of its armed forces in the border areas is a
concrete example of that. I had the privilege of meeting
President Musharraf in March, and he reaffirmed to me
his strong support for President Karzai and his
Government. He also expressed his readiness to discuss
all issues and to cooperate fully with Afghan
authorities, particularly in the area of security. On 22
April, President Karzai visited Islamabad. I think that
his talks with President Musharraf have been timely,
important and extremely useful for consolidating
brotherly relations and cooperation between the two
countries. It is my sincere hope that those and all of
Afghanistan’s other regional bilateral relations are
being consistently strengthened with a view to
protecting the fragile peace in the country.
Insecurity is also being exacerbated by the
continuing occurrence of factional clashes. In the
provinces of Badghis and Faryab, recent incidents have
left more than 50 people dead. According to reports, 15
women and children from Bala Murghab, in Badghis,
drowned in a river as they fled their attackers, while
houses and shops in the area’s villages were looted in a
continuing pattern of human rights violations targeted
against the ethnic Pashtuns in the area. In Maimana,
fighting between the opposing Jumbesh and Jamiat
factions broke out once again in a new manifestation of
their contest for dominance in the north, which has
terrorized the population. The impunity that the
perpetrators of such crimes enjoy threatens to damage
the integrity of the peace process and the support that
the Government enjoys.
Clearly, the ultimate solution to such problems
lies in creating Afghan security forces capable of
ensuring peace. President Karzai’s recent speech to the
Afghan nation placed security sector-reform once again
firmly at the centre of his Government’s agenda. The

S/PV.4750

President announced the start date of 22 June for a
programme of disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration that will be carried out by the Afghan
New Beginnings Programme, which is supported by the
international community, with Japan and the United
Nations in the lead. The planned DDR programme will
include those officers and soldiers who are currently in
military formations under the umbrella of the Ministry
of Defence, up to a maximum of 100,000 persons.
But before the DDR programme can start, the
letter and spirit of the presidential decree of 1
December 2002 on the formation of the National Army
needs to be implemented with respect to the reform of
the Ministry of Defence, as well as the Ministry of the
Interior and intelligence structures. Encouraging
progress has been made in the building of a new
national army and a national police service, with the
assistance of the United States and Germany as lead
nations, respectively. But these efforts and the
nationwide DDR programme will be successful only if
there is confidence among all Afghans that the new
security structures will have room for them and will
serve the interests of the whole nation. Recent
appointments in the Ministry of Defence represent a
timid but welcome start towards redressing the ethnic
imbalance in that key security institution, but more
needs to be done before most Afghans will accept the
security institutions as truly national.
There is also a heavy onus on the senior leaders
of the Afghan military, who gathered in Kabul on 19
and 20 April from across the country to discuss the
building of the new national army. Their verbal
expressions of support for a new multi-ethnic army
must now be matched by actions to demobilize their
own forces to ensure that the new army will be under
civilian control and will be the only instrument of force
remaining in the country. The factional leaders have to
face up to their responsibilities if they want to be part
of the new Afghanistan. To that end, they will have to
give up effectively the old ways, as there can be no
room in this new Afghanistan for private armies, for
private jails, for arbitrary arrests, for brutality, for
corruption or for discrimination on ethnic or any other
grounds. I think that the partners of Afghanistan,
starting with its neighbours — but not limited to
them — must signal in no uncertain terms that the
international community will not deal with factional
leaders, no matter what official titles they may have.
We all must make it clear that we deal only with the

Government of President Hamid Karzai and with those
who are loyal to that Government in both words and
deeds.
The nascent security institutions cannot be
expected any time soon to provide the security that is
desperately needed. The development of new security
institutions after they were torn apart by more than two
decades of vicious war is a time-consuming and
painstaking process. It has been a fundamental premise
since the time of the Bonn conference that the Bonn
process needs to be underpinned by an improving
security environment. The focus during the first year of
the peace process was on the capital, Kabul, where the
presence of ISAF over the past 16 months provided the
stability necessary for the holding of the Emergency
Loya Jirga and to start rebuilding the institutions of
central Government. But now the rest of the country
must experience increased security lest support for the
Government and the Bonn process erode dangerously.
The forthcoming stages of the Bonn process must by
nature be broad-based, covering the entire country. The
electoral registration this year and the elections in
2004, the consultation process and the national debate
on the new constitution are undertakings that will
require sufficient security across the whole of
Afghanistan.
Disarmament
and
demobilization,
themselves a prerequisite for free and fair elections,
cannot succeed if local confidence is eroded by
instability and insecurity.
In view of this, I would ask the Council once
again to carefully consider what international measures
are available to help ensure the security needed for the
Bonn process to effectively proceed. ISAF has shown
its effectiveness in Kabul, but we have seen from the
recent series of incidents there that insecurity outside
of Kabul will creep into the capital. The SecretaryGeneral and myself have advocated the expansion of
ISAF beyond Kabul and I believe this remains part of a
potential response to the question of security for the
Bonn process. I also think that the provincial
reconstruction teams deployed by the coalition can play
an important part in addressing the problem of security.
Also, the insecurity in the provinces could be
better addressed by a strengthened Afghan police
presence. The new Minister of the Interior, Ali Ahmad
Jalali, is injecting a new energy into the excellent
programme developed by Germany, as the lead nation
for the formation of the national police. A new
structure for the Ministry of the Interior has been

7

S/PV.4750

approved by the President, streamlining the institution
and creating a much more efficient and clear line of
command and control between Kabul and the
provinces. It also consolidates all the police functions
under the Ministry of Interior. Work is in progress to
create a highway patrol that will provide security along
the roads of Afghanistan. The Minister also hopes to
put together a rapid-reaction police force that can be
deployed quickly to any part of the country. This
concept has already been put to the test in Maimana,
where a small force was deployed to provide a neutral
security presence following the interfactional fighting
that I referred to earlier.
But these worthy initiatives require money and, to
date, the level of donor commitments to the United
Nations Law and Order Trust Fund for Afghanistan is
insufficient to allow the Ministry of the Interior to
effectively strengthen the Afghan police. Of the $120
million the Trust Fund is expected to cover until June
next year, only $11 million has been paid into the fund
to date and a further $35 million to $40 million
pledged.
I believe the Council would agree that the Bonn
process could never be expected to be easy. Hesitation,
doubt, frustration and setbacks are part of such an
endeavour. The progress made thus far has been
considerable, considering the state of the country after
three decades of instability, with more than two
decades of brutal civil war. But we must now be careful
not to let the current threats to the peace process and
the growth in the number of Afghans who are
becoming disaffected with the state of their nation
undermine this progress. The benefits of the peace are
still largely centred on Kabul and a peace dividend still
eludes the vast majority of Afghans.
As I have stressed today, there are many signs
that the security situation throughout Afghanistan is
worsening precisely as the next phases of the Bonn
process need it to improve. There is a real but still
avoidable risk that the Bonn process will stall if
security is not extended to the regions and that Afghans
will lose confidence in the central Government if it
cannot protect them. Further progress cannot be
achieved in a security vacuum, and if it is not,
dissatisfaction will grow. Reconstruction and recovery
are also being hampered by insecurity in the south and
elsewhere, and this will contribute, in a vicious cycle,
to further disaffection, increased crime and, in turn,
further insecurity.

8

The Government can, and must, do its part to
address this. One key element in doing so is to
accomplish reforms that ensure that all Afghans can
support the Government’s institutions and feel a sense
of responsibility for protecting those institutions. In
order to help the peace process along, those who do not
oppose the peace process and who are committed to
non-violent means, regardless of their political or
ethnic affiliation, must be provided with political space
and equal opportunities. Where there are constituencies
that feel left out of the process there is fertile ground
for those committed to violent opposition to find
sustenance. Creating the conditions necessary for truly
national participation in that process over the coming
months is therefore of the utmost importance.
I think that President Karzai and his colleagues in
the Government are very much aware that widely
shared perceptions of unfairness and discrimination on
ethnic and other grounds need to be corrected urgently.
President Karzai made that point very forcefully in a
speech he made last week to an assembly of religious
leaders. In particular, he reminded his audience, and
the country at large, that there must be room for
everyone in the political process, including people who
may have served the Taliban regime, if those people
genuinely support peace and national unity. The
President and his ministers have to act now. I very
much hope that the Security Council, the neighbours of
Afghanistan, the international community as a whole
and all of us who are engaged in the field with the
Afghan people will fully contribute our respective
share in support of this major effort at this very critical
time.
The President: I thank Mr. Brahimi for his
comprehensive briefing to the Council, as well as for
his kind words addressed to me.
In accordance with the understanding reached in
the Council’s prior consultations, I should now like to
invite Council members to informal consultations to
continue our discussion on the subject.
The meeting rose at 11.05 a.m.
