General Assembly-Forty-second Session

70

the decision of the Organization of African Unity for the
denuclearization of Africa, 33
Stressing the need to preserve peace and security in
Africa by ensuring that the continent is a nuclear-weaponfree zone,
1. Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General on
South Africa's nuclear capability;
2. Condemns the massive buildup of South Africa's
military machine, in particular its frenzied acquisition of
nuclear-weapon capability for repressive and aggressive
purposes and as an instrument of blackmail;
3. Further condemns ali forms of nuclear collaboration
by any State, corporation, institution or individual with
the racist régime of South Africa, in particular the decision by sorne Member States to grant licences to severa)
corporations in their territories to provide equipment and
technical and maintenance services for nuclear installations in South Africa;
4. Reaffirms that the acqmsttJon of nuclear-weapon
capability by the racist régime constitutes a very grave
danger to international peace and security and, in particular, jeopardizes the security of African States and increases the danger ofthe proliferation ofnuclear weapons;
5. Expresses itsfull support for the African States faced
with the danger of South Africa's nuclear capability;
6. Commends the actions taken by those Governments
which have taken measures to restrict co-operation with
South Africa in nuclear and other fields;
7. Demands that South Africa and ali other foreign interests put an immediate end to the exploration for and exploitation of uranium resources in Namibia;
8. Calls upan all States, corporations, institutions and
individuals to termínate forthwith ali forms of military
and nuclear collaboration with the racist régime;
9. Requests the Disarmament Commission to consider
once again as a matter of priority during its substantive
session in 1988 South Africa's nuclear capability, taking
into account, in ter afia, the findings included in the report
of the United Nations Institute for Disarmament Research on South Africa's nuclear capability;
10. Requests the Secretary-General to provide all the
necessary assistance that the Organization of African
Unity may seek regarding the modalities and elements for
the preparation and implementation of the relevant convention or treaty on the denuclearization of Africa;
11. Commends the adoption by the Security Council of
resolutions 558 (1984) of 13 December 1984 and 591
(1986) of 28 November 1986 on the question of South
Africa, with a view to blocking the existing loopholes in
the arms embargo so as to render it more effective and prohibiting, in particular, all forms of co-operation and collaboration with the racist régime of South Africa in the
nuclear field;
12. Demands once again that South Africa submit
forthwith ali its nuclear installations and facilities to inspection by the International Atomic Energy Agency;
13. Requests the Secretary-General to follow very
closely South Africa's evolution in the nuclear field and to
report thereon to the General Assembly at its forty-third
session.
Mth plenary meeting

42/35.

Prohibition of the development and manufacture of new types of weapons of mass destruction and new systems of such weapons

/'he General Assemb/y,
Reca//ing its previous resolutions on the prohibition of
the development and manufacture of new types of weapons of mass destruction and new systems of such weapons,
Reca//ing also the decision contained in paragraph 77 of
the Final Document of the Tenth Special Session of the
General Assembly, 11 to the effect that, in order to help
prevent a qualitative arms race and so that scientific and
technological achievements might ultimately be used
solely for peaceful purposes, effective measures should be
taken to prevent the emergen ce of new types of weapons of
mass destruction based on new scientific principies and
achievements and that efforts aimed at the prohibition of
such new types and new systems of weapons of mass destruction should be appropriately pursued,
Noting that in the course of its 1987 session the Conference on Disarmament considered the ítem entitled "New
types of weapons of mass destruction and new systems of
such weapons; radiological weapons",
Taking into consideration the section ofthe report ofthe
Conference on Disarmament relating to this question, 34
Convinced that ali ways and means should be utilized to
prevent the development and manufacture ofnew types of
weapons of mass destruction and new systems of such
weapons,
Determined to prevent modern science and technology
from leading to the development of new types of weapons
of mass destruction that have characteristics comparable
in destructive effect to those of weapons of mass destruction identified in the definition of weapons of mass destruction adopted by the U nited Nations in 1948, 35
l. Reaffirms, on the basis of the common desire of the
international community, the necessity of prohibiting the
development and manufacture of new types of weapons of
mass destruction and new systems of such weapons;
2. Requests the Conference on Disarmament, in the
light of its existing priorities, to keep constantly under review, with appropriate expert assistance, the question of
the prohibition of the development and manufacture of
new types of weapons of mass destruction and new systems of such weapons with a view to making, when necessary, recommendations on undertaking specific negotiations on the identified types of such weapons;
3. Ca/Is upan ali States, immediately following the
identification of any new type of weapon of mass destruction, to renounce practica! development of such a weapon
and to commence negotiations on its prohibition;
4. Once again urges ali States to refrain from any action that could lead to the emergence of new types of
weapons of mass destruction and new systems of such
weapons;
5. Ca/Is again upon ali States to undertake efforts to
ensure that ultimately scientific and technological achievements may be used solely for peaceful purposes;
6. Requests the Secretary-General to transmit to the
Conference on Disarmament ali documents relating to the
consideration of this ítem by the General Assembly at its
forty-second session;

3 11 Novemher /9fi7

33 See resolution S-10/2. para 61 (e)

34 Ojjicial Records o) che General Assembly. Forty-second Session,
Suf.p/ement No. 27 (A/42/27), sect. III.G.
_; The definition was adopted by the Commission for Conventional
.\ rmaments (see SIC.1, 12 IRcv.1).

III.

----

-

7. Requests the Conference on Disarmament to submit
to the General Assembly for consideration at its fortythird session a report on the results achieved;
8. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its
forty-third session the ítem entitled "Prohibition ofthe development and manufacture of new types of weapons of
mass destruction and new systems of <;uch weapons: report
of the Conference on Disarmament".
84th plenary meeting
30 November 1987

42/36.

71

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the First C'ommittee

Reduction of military budgets

The General Assembly,
Deep/y concerned about the ever-spiralling arms race
and growing military expend1tures, which constitute a
heavy burden for the economies of ali nations and have extremely harmful effects nn world peace and security,
Reaffirming once again the provisions of paragraph 89
of the Final Document of the Tenth Special Session of the
General Assembly, 11 the first special session devoted to
disarmament, according to which the gradual reduction of
military budgets on a mutually agreed basis, for example,
in absolute figures or in terms of percentage, particularly
by nuclear-weapon States and other militarily significan!
States, would contribute to curbing the arms race and
would increase the possibilities for the reallocation of resources now being used for military purposes to economic
and social development, particularly for the benefit of t he
developing countries,
Convinced that the freezing and reduction of military
budgets would have favourablc consequences on the world
economic and financia! situation and might facilitate efforts made to in crease internationa I assistance for the developing countries,
Recalling that at its twelfth special session, the second
special session devoted to disarmament, ali Member States
unanimously and categorically reaffirmed the validity of
the Final Document of the Tenth Special Session, as well
as their solemn commitment to it/6
Recalling also that in the Declaration of the 1980s as the
Second United Nations Disarmament Decade, it is provided that during this period renewed efforts should be
made to reach agreement 011 the redu..::tion of military expenditures and the reallocation of resourcc), thus saved to
economic and social develo~ment, especially for the benefit of developing countries,- 7
Recalling further the provisions of its relevant resolutions, in which it considered that a new ímpetus should he
given to the endeavours to achieve agreements to freeze,
reduce or otherwise restrain, in a balanced manner, military expenditures, including adequate measures of veritication satisfactory to ali parties concerned,
Aware of the vanous proposals submitted by Member
States and of the activities carried out so far within the
framework ofthe United Nations m the field ofthe reduction of military budgets,
Considering that the identitication and elaboration of the
principies that should govern further actions of States in
freezing and reducing military budgeh and the other curren! activities within the framework of the United Nations
related to the question of the reduct i()n of military budgets
36
Of]ic1ál Record,- of 1h,, Ge11cru/ ,lssembly. '/'weljih Spe.-wl Scrn,111,
Annexe.,, agenda items q tu 1_\, dncument l\/'i- l 2/J2. para t, 1
:n Sce rc<.,,o)utinn 1""./ lh, ·1111ll'X. par;1 l-:.

-- ----

-

- . -

should be regarded as having the fundamental objective of
reaching international agreements on the reduction of
military expenditures,
Noting that thc Disarmament Commission, at its 198ó
substantive session, agreed upon the above-mentioned
principies except eme, on which various alternatives were
proposcd by Member States, 38
\. Declares aga/11 its co11viction that it is possible to
achievc international agreements nn the reduction of military budgets without prejudice to the right of ali States to
und1minished security. self-defence and sovereignty:
2. Appeals to ali States, in particular to the most
heavily armed States. pending the conclusion of agreements on the reduction of military expenditures, to exercise ,elf-restraint in their military expenditures with a
view to realloca1ing the funds thus saved to economic and
socia I development. particularly for t he benefit of developing cnuntries;
3. Reajfirms that thc human and material resources
released through the reduction of military expenditures
could be reallocated for economic and social development,
particularly for the benefit of the developing countries:
4. Requests thc Disarmament Commission to continue
the consideration of the item entitled "Reduction of military budgets" and, in this context, to conclude, at its 1988
substantive session, its work on the last outstanding paragraph of the principies that should govern further actions
of States in the field of freezing and reduction of military
budgets, and to submit its report and recommendations to
the General Assembly not later than at the forty-third session nf the Assembly:
5. Draws anew thc attention of Member States to the
fact that the identification and elaboration of the principies that should govern further actions of States in freezing and reducing military budgets could contribute to har ..
monizing the views úÍ States and creating confidence
among them conducivc to achieving international agreements on the reductinn of military budgets;
6. Urges ali Member States, in particular the most
heavily armed States, to reinforce their readiness to cooperate in a constructive manner with a view to reaching
agre.::ments to freeze, reduce or otherwise restrain military
expenditures;
7. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its
forty-third session the item entitled "Reductinn of military budgets"
84th plenary meeting
30 November 1987

42/37.

Chemical
weapons

and

bacteriological

(biological)

A
C'HEMICAL ANO BACTERIOLOGICAL (BIOLOGICAL)
WEAPONS

Thc General Assembly,
Recalling its previous resolutions relating to the complete and effeetive prohibition of the development, produetion ami ~tockpiling ,)f all d1e111iL·al \H'apnns and to
tlwir (kstn1L'lion,

•,x Off1c1<,I Record, o} 11,,, Grncra/ !ls.wm/,/y.
\1rnn/1 ,m,,u Vn. J_'t t.-\ A) 4::1). p.11a. 2X ~

Fnrty-Jirst Sc.1.üo11.
