GeDenl AINmblJ-Tlllrty-fomtll SudoD

take such additional measures as will ensure preservation of the identity and cultural heritage of the people
of Guam;
S. Expresses its appreciation to the members of the
United Nations Visiting Mission dispatched to the Territory in )uly 1979 for the constructive work accomplished
and to the administering Power and to the Government
and people of Guam for the co-operation and assistance
extended to the Mission;
6. Takes note of the report of the Visiting Mission
and the observations, conclusions and recommendations
coptained therein; 88
7. Calls upon the administering Power to take all
possible steps to strengthen and diversify the economy
of Guam and to work out concrete programmes of assistance and economic development for the Territory;
8. Recalls that the administering Power has the
responsibility to ensure that the people of Guam are
kept fully informed of their inahenable right to selfdetermination and independence, in accordance with
the Declaration;
9. Further calls upon the administering Power to
take the necessary action to enable the inhabitants of
Guam to regain possession of unutilized land held at
present by the federal authorities and by the military;
10. Recalls its relevant resolutions concerning military bases in colonial and Non-Self-Governing Territories, recognizes that the presence of military bases
could constitute a factor impeding the implementation
of the Declaration and reaffirms its strong conviction
that the presence of military bases in Guam should not
prevent the people of the Territory from exercising their
inalienable right to self-determination and independence
in accordance with the Declaration and the purposes and
principles of the Charter of the United Nations;
11. Urges the administering Power, in co-operation
with the freely elected authorities and representatives of
the people of Guam, to safeguard the inalienable right
of the people of the Territory to the enjoyment of their
natural resources by taking effective measures which
guarantee the right of the people to own and dispose of ·
those natural resources and to establish and maintain
control of their future development;
12. Requests the administering Power to continue to
enlist the assistance of the specialized agencies and other
organizations of the United Nations system in accelerating progress in all sectors of the national life of Guam;
13. Requests the Special Committee to continue the
examination of this question at its next session, including
the possible dispatch of a further visiting mission to
Guam at an appropriate time and in consultation with
the administenng Power, and to report thereon to the
General Assembly at its thirty-fifth session.
75th plenary meeting
21 November 1979
34/40.

Question of East Timor

Bearing in mind the part of the Political Declaration
adopted by the Sixth Conference of Heads of State or
Government of Non-Aligned Countries, held at Havana
from 3 to 9 September 1979, relating to East Timor, 85
Having examined the chapter of the report of the
Special Committee on the Situation with regard to the
Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of
Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples relating
to the Territory,86
Having heard the statements of the representatives of
Portugal,87 as the administering Power, and Indonesia, 88
Having also heard the statements of the petitioners, 39
including the representative of the Frente Revolucionaria
de Timor Leste Independente, 40
1. Reaffirms the inalienable right of the people of
East Timor to self-determination and independence, in
accordance with the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples;
2. Declares that the people of East Timor must be
enabled freely to determine their own future, under the
auspices of the United Nations;
3. Expresses its deepest concern at the suffering of
the people of East Timor as a result of the situation now
prevailing in the Territory;
4. Calls upon all parties concerned to facilitate the
entry into the Territory of international relief aid in order
to alleviate the suffering of the people of East Timor;
5. Requests the United Nations Children's Fund
and the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner
for Refugees to render, within their respective fields of
competence, all possible assistance to the people of East
Timor, particularly the children and those seeking to
leave for another country for purposes of family reunion;
6. Requests the Secretary-General to follow the
implementation of the present resolution and to report
thereon to the General Assembly at its thirty-fifth
session;
7. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of
its thirty-fifth session the item entitled "Question of
East Timor".
75th plenary meeting
21 November 1979
34/41.

The General Assembly,
Having considered the item entitled "Activities of
foreign economic and other interests which are impeding
the implementation of the Declaration on the Granting
an See A/34/542, annex, sect. I, para. 155.

Official Records of the General Assembly, Thirty-fourth
Session, Supplement No. 23 (A/34/23/Rev.1), chap. XI.
87 Ibid., Thirty-fourth Session, Fourth Committee, 13th meeting, paras. 9-12.
88 Ibid., 3rd, 6th, 10th, 13th, 14th and 17th meetings.
89 Ibid., 13th meeting, paras. 24-50; 14th meeting, paras. 1447; 16th meeting, paras. 97-107; 17th meeting, paras. 52-60;
and 18th meeting, paras. 4-21; and ibid., Fourth Committee,
Session!'/ Fascicle, corrigendum.
,o Ibid., 14th meeting, paras. 25-37.
88

The General Assembly,
Recognizing the inalienable right of all peoples to
self-determination and independence in accordance with
the principles of the Charter of the United Nations and
of tlie I>eclaration on the Granting of Independence to
Colonial Countries and Peoples, contained in its resolution 1S14 (XV) of 14 December 1960,

Activities of foreign economic and other interests which are impeding the implementation of
the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples in
Southern Rhodesia and Namibia and in all
other Territories under colonial domination
and efforts to elhninate colonialism, apartheid
and racial discrimination in southern Africa

VD.

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fourth Committee

of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples in
Southern Rhodesia and Namibia and in all other Territories under colonial domination and efforts to eliminate colonialism, apartheid and racial discrimination in
southern Africa",
Having examined the chapter of the report of the
Special Committee on the Situation with regard to the
Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of
Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples relating to this question, 41
Taking into consideration the parts of the report of
the United Nations Council for Namibia relating to the
question, 42
Recalling its resolutions 1514 (XV) of 14 December
1960, containing the Declaration on the Granting of
Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples, and
2621 (XXV) of 12 October 1970, containing the programme of action for the full implementation of the
Declaration, as well as all other resolutions of the
United Nations relating to the item,
Taking into account the Maputo Declaration in Support of the Peoples of Zimbabwe and Namibia and the
Programme of Action for the Liberation of Zimbabwe
and Namibia,"i adopted by the International Conference
in Support of the Peoples of Zimbabwe and Namibia,
held at Maputo from 16 to 21 May 1977, as well as
the Lagos Declaration for Action against Apartheid, 44
adopted by the World Conference for Action against
Apartheid,
Recalling the Declaration on Namibia and. the Programme of Action in Support of Self-Determination and
National Independence for Namibia, contained in General Assembly resolution S-9 /2 of 3 May 1978,
Bearing in mind the relevant resolutions adopted by
the Council of Ministers of the Organization of African
Unity at its thirty-third ordinary session held at Monrovia from 6 to 20 July 1979,• 0
'
Bearing in mind also the Final Declaration of the
Sixth Conference of Heads of State or Government of
Non-Aligned Countries, held at Havana from 3 to 9
September 1979, 46
. Reaffirming the solemn obligation of the administermg Powers under the Charter of the United Nations
to promote the political, economic social and educational advancement of the inhabitan'ts of the Territories
under their administration and to protect the human and
natural resources of those Territories against abuses,
. Reafjirmin~ that any economic or other activity which
impedes the implementation of the Declaration on the
Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and
Peoples and obstructs efforts aimed at the elimination
of colonialism, apartheid and racial discrimination in
southern African and other colonial Territories violates
the political, economic and social rights and interests
of the peoples of the Territories and is therefore incompatible with the purposes and principles of the
Charter,
41
Ibid., Thirty-fourth Session, Supplement No. 23 (A/34/23/
Rev.I), chap. V.
2
an~ {td., Supplement No. 24 (A/34/24 and Corr. I), vols. I
4
a A/32/l~/Rev.l-S/12344/Rev.1, annex V. For the printed
text, see O/fic,al Records of the Security Council, Thirty-second
Year, Supplement for July, August and September 1977.
4
~ Report of the World Conference for Action against Apartheid, Lagos, 22-26 August 1977 (United Nations publication
Sales No. E.77.XIV.2 and corrigendum), sect. X.
'
45
See A/34/552, annex I.
0
• See A/ 34/542, annex.

207

Reaffirming that the natural resources of all Territories under colonial and racist domination are the
heritage of the peoples of those Territories and that the
exploitation and depletion of those resources by foreign
economic interests, in particular of southern Africa, in
association with the illegal racist minority regimes constitutes a direct violation of the rights of the peoples
and of the principles stated in the Charter and all relevant resolutions of the United Nations,
Noting with profound concern that the colonial
Powers and certain States, through their activities in the
colonial Territories, have continued to disregard United
Nations decisions relating to the item and that they have
failed to implement in particular the relevant provisions
of General Assembly resolutions 2621 (XXV) of 12
October 1970 and 33/40 of 13 December 1978, by
which the Assembly called upon the colonial Powers
and those Governments which had not yet done so to
take legislative, administrative or other measures in
order to put an end to enterprises in colonial Territories, particularly in Africa, which are owned by their
nationals or bodies corporate under their jurisdiction,
whenever such enterprises are detrimental to the interests of the inhabitants of those Territories, and to
prevent new investments which run counter to those
interests,
Condemning the intensified activities of those foreign
economic, financial and other interests which continue
to exploit the natural and human resources of the
colonial Territories and to accumulate and repatriate
huge profits to the detriment of the interests of the inhabitants, particularly in southern Africa, thereby impeding the realization by the peoples of the Territories
of their legitimate aspirations for self-determination and
independence,
Strongly condemning the support which the racist minority regime of South Africa and the illegal racist minority regime in Southern Rhodesia continue to receive
from those foreign economic, financial and other interests which are collaborating with them in their exploitation of the natural and human resources of, and
in the further entrenchment of their illegal and racialist
domination over, the international Territory of Namibia
and the Non-Self-Governing Territory of Southern
Rhodesia (Zimbabwe), respectively,
Strongly condemning the investment of foreign capital in the illegal production of uranium and the collaboration by certain Western countries and other States with
the racist minority regime of South Africa in the nuclear field which, by providing that regime with nuclear
equipment and technology, enables it to develop nuclear
and military capabilities, thereby promoting South Africa's continued illegal occupation of Namibia and enabling it to become a nuclear Power,
Deeply concerned at the fact that foreign economic,
financial and other interests continue to deprive the indigenous populations of other colonial Territories, including those in the Caribbean and Pacific Ocean
regions, of their rights over the wealth of their countries,
and at the continued loss of ownership of land by the
inhabitants of those Territories as a result of the failure
of the administering Powers to take effective steps to
safeguard such ownership,
Conscious of the continuing need to mobilize world
public opinion against the involvement of foreign economic, financial and other interests in the exploitation
of natural and human resources, which impedes the

208

General A.uembly-Tldrty-fourth s..ion

independence of colonial Territories and the elimination
of racism, particularly in Africa,
1. Reaffirms the inalienable right of the peoples of
dependent Territories to self-determination and independence and to the enjoyment of the natural resources
of their Territories, as well as their right to dispose of
those resources in their best interests;
2. Reaffirms the relevant provisions of the Maputo
Declaration in Support of the Peoples of Zimbabwe
and Namibia and the Programme of Action for the
Liberation of Zimbabwe and Namibia, adopted by the
International Conference in Support of the Peoples of
Zimbabwe and Namibia, as well as the Lagos Declaration for Action against Apartheid, adopted by the World
Conference for Action against Apartheid;
3. Reiterates that any administering or occupying
Power which deprives the colonial peoples of the exercise of their legitimate rights over their natural resources or subordinates the rights and interests of those
peoples to foreign economic and financial interests violates the solemn obligations it has assumed under the
Charter of the United Nations;
4. Reaffirms that, by their depletive exploitation of
natural resources, the continued accumulation and repatriation of huge profits and the use of those profits
for the enrichment of foreign settlers and the entrenchment of colonial domination over the Territories, the
activities of foreign economic, financial and other
interests operating at present in the colonial Territories
of southern Africa constitute a major obstacle to
political independence and to the enjoyment of the
natural resources of those Territories by the indigenous
inhabitants;
5. Condemns all activities of foreign economic and
other interests operating in Namibia, Southern Rhodesia
and South Africa and declares that their collaboration
with the racist minority regimes is detrimental to the
interests of the oppressed people and impedes the implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of
Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples;
6. Requests the Special Committee on the Situation
with regard to the Implementation of the Declaration on
the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries
and Peoples to continue to monitor closely the situation
in other Non-Self-Governing Territories so as to ensure
that all economic activities in those Territories are aimed
at strengthening and diversifying their economies in the
interests of the indigenous peoples and their speedy
accession to independence and that those peoples are
not exploited for political, military and other purposes
detrimental to their interests;
7. Condemns all those countries which continue
to maintain political, diplomatic, economic, trade, military, nuclear and other relations with the regimes in
South Africa and Southern Rhodesia in violation of
the relevant resolutions of the United Nations and the
Organization of African Unity, in particular the United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, the
United States of America, the Federal Republic of
Germany, France, Japan, Belgium, Israel and Italy;
8. Strongly condemns the collusion of France, Germany, Federal Republic of, Israel and the United States
with South Africa in the nuclear field, and calls upon
aU _other Governments to continue to refrain from supplymg the racist minority regime of South Africa, directly or indirectly, with installations that might enable
it to produce uranium, plutonium and other nuclear
materials, reactors or military equipment;

9. Calls once again upon all Governments which
have not yet done so to take legislative, administrative
or other measures in respect of their nationals and the
bodies corporate under their jurisdiction that own and
operate enterprises in colonial Territories, particularly
in Africa, which are detrimental to the interests of the
inhabitants of those Territories, in order to put an end
to such enterprises and to prevent new investments
which run counter to the interests of the inhabitants of
those Territories;
10. Requests all States to refrain from making any
investments in, or extending loans to, the minority racist regimes in southern Africa and to refrain from any
agreements or measures to promote trade or other economic relations with them;
11. Expresses its conviction that the scope of the
sanctions adopted against the illegal regime in Southern
Rhodesia should be expanded to cover all the measures
contemplated in Article 41 of the Charter and caUs
upon the Security Council to consider adopting appropriate measures to this end;
12. Condemns all violations of the mandatory sanctions imposed by the Security Council against the illegal racist minority regime in Southern Rhodesia, as
well as the continued failure of certain Member States
to enforce those sanctions, as being contrary to the
obligations assumed by them under Article 25 of the
Charter;
13. Strongly condemns the supply of petroleum and
petroleum products to Southern Rhodesia by United
Kingdom oil companies which, by that deliberate act,
are circumventing United Nations sanctions and
strengthening the illegal regime in Southern Rhodesia;
14. Deplores the complicity of successive Governments of the United Kingdom in the violation of United
Nations sanctions by United Kingdom oil companies, as
exposed in the Bingham report 47 on the supply of petrol•
eum and petroleum products to the illegal regime in
Southern Rhodesia;
15. Condemns those oil-producing or oil-exporting
countries which supply crude oil and petroleum products
to the racist regime of South Africa and demands that
they cease forthwith all exports of crude oil and petroleum products to the racist regimes in southern Africa
and take the necessary measures against oil companies
which, in violation of United Nations resolutions on
sanctions, continue to deliver oil to those regimes;
16. Commends the new Government of Iran for
severing diplomatic, military, economic, trade and other
links with the racist regime of South Africa and, particularly, for enforcing effectively the oil embargo
against that regime;
17. Requests all States to take effective measures to
end the supply of funds and other forms of assistance,
including military supplies and equipment, to the
regimes which use such assistance to repress the peoples
of the colonial Territories and their national liberation
movements;
18. Reiterates that the exploitation and plundering of the natural resources of Namibia by South African and other foreign economic interests, in violation
of the relevant resolutions of the General Assembly and
the Security Council and of Decree No. 1 for the Protection of the Natural Resources of Namibia, enacted
47 T. H. Bingham and S. M. Gray, Report on the Supply of
Petroleum and Petroleum Products to Rhodesia (London, Her
Majesty's Stationery Office for the Foreign and Commonwealth

Office, 1978).

VII.

Resolu1lolll adopted OD the repodl of the Fourth Committee

by the United Nations Council for Namibia on 27 Sc:Ptember 1974,48 is illegal and contributes to the mamtenance of the illegal occupation regime;
19. Strongly condemns South Africa for its continued exploitation and plundering of the natural r~sources of Namibia in complete disregard of the legitimate interests of the Namibian people;
20. Calls once again upon all States to discontinue
all economic, financial or trade relations with South
Africa concerning Namibia and to refrain from entering
into economic, financial or other relations with South
Africa, acting on behalf of or concerning Namibia,
which may lend support to its continued illegal occupation of that Territory;
21. Strongly condemns the racist minority regime of
South Africa which, in violation of the relevant resolutions of the United Nations and in open contravention
of its specific obligations under Article 25 of the
Charter, continues to collaborate with the illegal racist
minority regime in Southern Rhodesia, and calls upon
the Security Council to implement the provisions of
the present resolution by imposing economic sanctions
against South Africa, including an oil embargo and the
withdrawal of investments from that country;
22. Invites all Governments and organizations
within the United Nations system, having regard to the
relevant provisions of the Declaration on the Establishment of a New International Economic Order, contained in General Assembly resolution 3201 (S-VO
of 1 May 1974, and of the Charter of Economic Rights
and Duties of States, contained in Assembly resolution
3281 (XXIX) of 12 December 1974, to ensure in particular that the permanent sovereignty of the colonial
Territories over their natural resources is fully respected
and safeguarded;
23. Calls upon the administering Powers to abolish
every discriminatory and unjust wage system prevailing
in the Territories under their administration and to apply
in each Territory a uniform system of wages to all the
inhabitants without any discrimination;
24. Requests the Secretary-General to undertake,
through the Department of Public Information of the
Secretariat, a sustained and broad campaign with a view
to informing world public opinion of the facts concerning the pillaging of natural resources in colonial
Territories and the exploitation of their indigenous
populations by foreign monopolies and the support
they render to the colonialist and racist regimes;
25. Endorses the proposal of the Council of Ministers of the Organization of African Unity at its thirtythird ordinary session, held at Monrovia from 6 to 20
July 1979, to convene jointly with the United Nations
an international conference in 1980 to mobilize world
public opinion in support of the effective application
of economic and other sanctions against South Africa;' 9
26. Appeals to all international non-governmental
organizations to continue their campaign to mobilize
international public opinion for the enforcement of economic and other sanctions against the Pretoria and
Salisbury regimes;
27. Requests the Special Committee on the Situation with Regard to the Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial

,a Official Records of the General Assembly, Twenty-ninth
Session, Supplement No. 24A (A/9624/Add.1), para. 84. The
Decree has been issued in final form in Namibia Gazette No. 1.
•e See A/34/552, annex I, resolution CM/Res. 734 (XXXIII).

209

Countries and Peoples to continue to examine this question and to report thereon to the General Assembly at
its thirty-fifth session.
75th plenary meeting
21 November 1979

34/42. Implementation of the Declaration on the
Granting of Independence to Colonial Coun•
tries and Peoples by the specialized agencies
and the lntematlonal Institutions associated
with the United Nations
The General Assembly,
Having considered the item entitled "Implementation
of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to
Colonial Countries and Peoples by the specialized
agencies and the international institutions associated
with the United Nations",
Recalling the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples, contained
in its resolution 1514 (XV) of 14 December 1960, and
the programme of action for the full implementation
of the Declaration, contained in its resolution 2621
(XXV) of 12 October 1970, as well as all other relevant resolutions adopted by the General Assembly and
the Security Counc~l on this subject, including in particular Assembly resolution 33/41 of 13 December
1978,
Having examined the reports submitted on the item
by the Secretary-General, 00 the Economic and Social
Council61 and the Special Committee on the Situation
with regard to the Implementation of the Declaration on
the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and
Peoples/ 2 as well as the related report of the United
Nations Council for Namibia, 53
Taking into account the relevant provisions of the
Final Declaration of the Sixth Conference of Heads of
State or Government of Non-Aligned Countries, held at
Havana from 3 to 9 September 1979/4
Aware that the struggle of the peoples of Zimbabwe
and Namibia for self-determination and independence
is in its final and most crucial stage and that it is therefore incumbent upon the entire international community
to intensify concerted action in support of the peoples
of Zimbabwe and Namibia and their national liberation
movements for the attainment of this goal,
Deeply conscious of the critical need of the peoples
of Zimbabwe and Namibia and of other colonial Territories for concrete assistance from the specialized agencies and the international institutions associated with
the United Nations in their struggle for liberation from
colonial rule and in their efforts to achieve and consolidate their national independence,
Reaffirming the responsibility of the specialized agencies and other organizations of the United Nations system to take all the necessary measures, within their
respective spheres of competence, to ensure the full
and speedy implementation of the Declaration on the
Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and
A/34/208 and Add.1-3; see also A/AC.109/L.1313.
Official Records of the General Assembly, Thirty-fourth
Session, Supplement No. 3 (A/34/3/Rev.1), chap. XX\1111.
H lbid., Supplement No. 23 (A/34/23/Rev.1), chap. VII.
68 lbid., Supplement No. 24 (A/34/24 and Corr. I), vol. I,
part two, chaps. 11 and V; and vol. IV, annexes VI, XII, XIVXVI, XIX and XXI.
u See A/34/542, annex.
60
61
