59

Resolutions adopted on the reporte of the Second Committee

2811 (XXVI). Financial contributions to the
United Nations Development Programme

The General Assembly,
Considering the need for a fundamental and speedy
strengthening of operational activities for development
of the United Nations system in such a manner as to
enable the United Nations Development Programme
to carry, by 1976, a total programme of at least
$1,000 million,
Considering further the need for a substantial increase in the financial resources of the United Nations
Development Programme so as to enable it to utilize
as fully as possible its improved capacity,
Bearing in mind that planning estimates and procedures of the United Nations Development Programme
will take into account, ínter alía, the rate of growth
of delivery capacity already existing in the system in
terms of field programmes,
Endorses Econornic and Social Council resolution
1615 (LI) of 26 July 1971.
2017th plenary meeting,
14 December 1971.
2812 (XXVI).

United Nations Capital Development Fund

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 2186 (XXI) of 13 December 1966, 2321 (XXII) of 15 December 1967 and
2525 (XXIV) of 5 December 1969,
Recalling further its resolution 2690 (XXV) of
11 December 1970, in which it decided to continue
the provisional arrangements for the operation of the
United Nations Capital Development Fund and requested the Governing Council of the United Nations
Development Programme to consider, taking into
account the observations made by Member States, all
possibilities for reaching the objectives of the Fund,
Stressing the urgent need to rnake the Fund fully
operational as soon as possible, within the framework
of the expanded United Nations activities in the field
of development assistance,
Mindful of the fact that the International Development Strategy for the Second United Nations Development Decade, contained in General Assembly resolution 2626 (XXV) of 24 October 1970, calls for the
opening up of new avenues of international co-operation for development,
Regretting that it was not possible for the Goveming Council of the United Nations Development Programme at its eleventh and twelfth sessions to achieve
positive results on the subject,21
1. Reaffirms its resolution 2690 (XXV) and urges
Member States to continue the search for practica!
means of implementing the objectives of the United
Nations Capital Development Fund;
2. Expresses the hope that the report to be presented by the Adrninistrator to the Goveming Council
of the United Nations Development Prograrnme at its
thirteenth session will make possible, on the basis of
suggestions received from Member States, the begin21 See Official Records of the Economic and Social Council,
Fifty-first Session, Supplement No. 6 (E/4954 and Corr.1 ),
chap. VIII, and ibid., Supplement No. 6A (E/5043/Rev.1),
chap. IX.

ning of the effective operation of the United Nations
Capital Development Fund;
3. Decides to preserve the original functions of
the United Nations Capital Developrnent Fund until
31 Decernber 1972, in accordance with the measures
set forth in paragraph 1 of General Assembly resolution 2321 (XXII);
4. Requests the Secretary-General to invite Member States to contribute separately, at the sarne pledging
conference, to the United Nations Developrnent Programme and to the United Nations Capital Development Fund;
5. Appeals to Member States, and in particular to
developed countries, to provide substantial contributions
to the United Nations Capital Developrnent Fund so
as to make it fully operational and more effective.
2017th plenary meeting,
14 December 1971.
2813 (XXVI). Enlar~ement of the Governing
Council of the United Nations Development
Programme

The General Assembly,
H aving considered the reports of the Goveming
Council of the United Nations Development Prograrnme, in particular the report on its twelfth session, 22
Bearing in mind its resolution 2626 (XXV) of
24 October 1970 containing the International Development Strategy for the Second United Nations Development Decade,
Realizing the important role that the United Nations
Developrnent Prograrnme has to play in the achievernent of the goa1s, objectives and policy measures of
the Intemational Developrnent Strategy,
Recalling its resolution 2688 (XXV) of 11 December 1970 on the capacity of the United Nations development systern,
Recalling further its resolution 2029 (XX) of 22
November 1965 consolidating the Special Fund and
the Expanded Programrne of Technical Assistance in
the United Nations Developrnent Programrne, particularly the annex thereto concerning the composition
of the Goveming Council of the United Nations
Developrnent Programrne, which was to consist of
thirty-seven members,
Convinced that a strengthened and expanded United
N ations Developrnent Prograrnrne and the prospect of
its handling, by 1975, resources double that of present
resources necessitate the increased participation of
Mernber States in the work of the Governing Council,
Convinced further that a larger mernbership of the
Governing Council would mak:e the Council more
representative of both developed and developing
countries,
Aware that since the United Nations Developrnent
Prograrnme was established in 1965 a number of new
States have been admitted to membership in the United
Nations,
1. Decides to enlarge the mernbership of the Goveming Council of the United Nations Developrnent
Programme to forty-eight mernbers to be elected from
arnong States Mernbers of the United Nations or
rnembers of specialized agencies or of the Intema22 / bid.,

Supplement No. 6A (E/5043/Rev.1 ).

General Assembly-Twenty-sixth Session

60

tional Atomic Energy Agency, subject to the following
conditions:
(a) Twenty-seven seats shall be filled by developing
countries, allocated as follows:
(i) Eleven seats for African States;
(ii) Nine seats for Asían States and Yugoslavia;
(iii) Seven seats for Latin American States;
(b) Twenty-one seats shall be filled by economically
more advanced countries, allocated as follows:
(i) Seventeen seats for Western European and other
States;
(ii) Four seats for Bastero European States;
(e) Toe composition of seats in each group should
at all times give due expression to adequate subregional representation;
(d) Elections to these forty-eight seats shall be for
a term of three years and retiring members shall be
eligible for re-election;
2. Requests the Economic and Social Council to
elect at its resumed fifty-first session, the additional
elev¡n members of the Governing Council.
2017th plenary meeting,
14 December 1971.
2814 (XXVI). Capacity of the United Nations
development system

The General Assembly,
Considering the need for the United Nations Development Programme to ke_ep abreast. of ~e increasing
requirements of the _developmg countne~ m the context
of the implementat10n of the Intemat10nal Development Strategy for the S~ond United N ations Devel«;>Pment Decade, contained m General Assembly resolution
2626 (XXV) of 24 October 1970,
Mindful of the fact that the challenges of development require the continu~:ms adartation, improvement
and updating of the Umted Natlons system for development assistance,
Expressing its satisfaction with the steps taken by
the Goveming Council of the United Nations Development Programme during its eleventh23 and twelfth24
sessions to implement the reforms incorporated in
General Assembly resolution 2688 (XXV) of 11 December 1970 on the capacity of the United Nations
development system,
Aware of the significance and impact of subregional,
regional and interregional projects on the harmonious
and accelerated development of developing regions and
countries, particularly the least developed among them,
Bearing in mind that the Governing Council of
the United Nations Development Programme, in the
decision taken at its 262nd meeting, has agreed that
additional regional bureaux may be established when
appropriate in arder to meet the needs of the various
geographical areas, 25
Cognizant of the fact that global projects have a
special significance in terms of transfer as well as
creation of technology in conditions especially adapted
to the specific needs and requirements of the developing
countries,
23 [bid.,

Supplement No. 6 (E/4954 and Corr.1), chap. III.
(E/5043/Rev.1 ), chap. III.
25 [bid., Supplement No. 6 (E/4954 and Corr.l ), para. 52.
24 !bid., Supplement No. 6A

Bearing in mind also the need to maximize the
capacity of the United Nations development system
through the most effi.cient and rational utilization of
all its components,
Recalling the decisions taken by the Governing
Council of the United Nations Development Programme at its eleventh and twelfth sessions on the
criteria to be followed in calculating indicative planning
figures as reflected in paragraph 71 (h) of the report
on its eleventh session and paragraph 84 of the report
on its twelfth session,
Conscious of the fact that industrial development
constitutes one of the essential features of development policies and planning at every stage of development,
Conscious also of the equally essential role of agricultura!, pastoral, artisanal, tourism and mining development, as well as natural resources development in
general, for a fully integrated and independent economy,
Stressing the importance it attaches to the developing countries themselves determining the priorities they
attach to each sector of their economies, in accordance with paragraphs 5 and 22 of the annex to General
Assembly resolution 2688 (XXV),
A ware of the urgent necessity to improve the absorptive capacity of the least developed among the
developing countries through appropriate financia! and
technical assistance,
1. Reaffirms the authority of the Goveming Council
of the United Nations Development Programme, under
the guidance of the General Assembly and the Economic
and Social Council, as the main policy-formulating body
of the Programme from which the Administrator would
receive the neccssary directives for the general planning of the activities of the Programme, and commends
the Governing Council for the guidance given to the
Administrator in adapting the machinery of the Programme to the new demands made upon it, as reflected
!n the decision of the Goveming Council adopted at
1ts 262nd meeting on the organization, methods and
general procedures of the Programme;2 ~
2. Requests the Governing Council of the United
Nations Development Programme to study, within the
framework of the review of criteria for the indicative
planning figures at its fourteenth session, ways and
means of eliminating inequities due to historical circumstances, including those suffered by countries whose
indicative planning figures are already committed to
ongoing projects as a result of their special circumstances;
3. Stresses the importance it attaches to the regional
bureaux of the United Nations Development Programme
and to their operative capacity through direct access
to the Administrator of the Programme as essential
elements for the fulfilment of the objectives of the
Programme;
4. Calls upon the Goveroing Council of the United
Nations Development Programme to consider, within
the framework of the comprehensive review to be
undertaken at its fourteenth session, ways and means
of improving the procedures for global, interregional,
regional and subregional projects-in accordance with
paragraphs 21, 22 and 23 of the annex to General
Assembly resolution 2688 (XXV)-in order to make
them fully compatible with the country programmes
of the region or area concerned while according equitable emphasis to the interests and priorities of all
