S/PV.9392

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-eighth year

9392

nd meeting
Thursday, 3 August 2023, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Blinken/Mrs. Thomas-Greenfield/Mr. DeLaurentis. . .

(United States of America)

Members:

Albania . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Brazil. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ecuador. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Gabon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ghana . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Japan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Malta. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Mozambique . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Switzerland . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Arab Emirates . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 

Ms. Fino
Mr. França Danese
Mr. Zhang Jun
Mr. Pérez Loose
Mrs. Broadhurst Estival
Mr. Biang
Mr. Agyeman
Mr. Yamada
Mrs. Frazier
Mr. Afonso
Mr. Polyanskiy
Mr. Hauri
Ms. Al Kaabi
Dame Barbara Woodward

Agenda
Maintenance of international peace and security
Famine and conflict-induced global food insecurity
Letter dated 26 July 2023 from the Permanent Representative of the United
States of America to the United Nations addressed to the President of the
Security Council (S/2023/560)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of speeches delivered
in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records of the Security Council.
Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They should be incorporated in a copy
of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the
Verbatim Reporting Service, room AB-0601 (verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be
reissued electronically on the Official Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

23-23018 (E)
*2323018*

Accessible document

Please recycle

S/PV.9392

Maintenance of international peace and security

The meeting was called to order at 10.05 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Maintenance of international peace and security
Famine and conflict-induced global food
insecurity
Letter dated 26 July 2023 from the Permanent
Representative of the United States of America
to the United Nations addressed to the
President of the Security Council (S/2023/560)
The President: I wish to warmly welcome the
Ministers and other high-level representatives. Their
presence today underscores the importance of the
subject matter under discussion.
In accordance with rule 37 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the representatives
of Algeria, Argentina, Armenia, Australia, Azerbaijan,
Bangladesh, Belarus, the Plurinational State of Bolivia,
Burkina Faso, Cambodia, Chile, Cuba, Denmark, Egypt,
Estonia, Ethiopia, Germany, Guatemala, Guyana, Haiti,
India, Indonesia, Ireland, Israel, Italy, Jordan, Kenya,
Latvia, Lebanon, Liberia, Liechtenstein, Mexico,
Morocco, Myanmar, the Kingdom of the Netherlands,
Nigeria, Oman, Pakistan, Panama, Philippines, Poland,
Portugal, Qatar, the Republic of Korea, Romania, Saudi
Arabia, Sierra Leone, Singapore, Slovakia, Slovenia,
South Africa, Spain, Thailand, Tunisia, Türki̇ ye,
Ukraine, the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela, Viet
Nam and Yemen to participate in this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the following
briefers to participate in this meeting: Ms. Reena
Ghelani, United Nations Famine Prevention and
Response Coordinator; Mr. David Miliband, President
and Chief Executive Officer of the International Rescue
Committee; and Ms. Navyn Salem, Founder and Chief
Executive Officer of Edesia.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I also invite the
following to participate in this meeting: His Excellency
Mr. Thibault Camelli, Chargé d’affaires ad interim of
the Delegation of the European Union to the United
Nations; and His Excellency Mr. Paul Beresford-Hill,
Permanent Observer of the Sovereign Order of Malta to
the United Nations.
2/32

03/08/2023

I propose that the Council invite the Permanent
Observer of the Observer State of the Holy See to
the United Nations to participate in this meeting, in
accordance with the provisional rules of procedure and
the previous practice in this regard.
The Security Council will now begin its consideration
of the item on its agenda.
I wish to draw the attention of Council members
to document S/2023/560, which contains the text
of a letter dated 26 July 2023 from the Permanent
Representative of the United States of America to
the United Nations addressed to the President of the
Security Council, transmitting a concept note on the
item under consideration.
The Council has before it the text of a statement by
the President on behalf of the Council on the subject of
today’s meeting. I thank the Council members for their
valuable contributions to this statement.
In accordance with the understanding reached
among the members of the Council, I shall take it that the
members of the Security Council agree to the statement,
which will be issued as a document of the Security
Council under the symbol S/PRST/2023/4.
I now give the floor to Ms. Ghelani.
Ms. Ghelani: I thank you, Mr. President, for the
opportunity to take part in this briefing today.
The Security Council is more than aware of the
multiple challenges and threats the world is facing
today. But the threat of famine — people starving slowly
to death — must be a red line. And yet the number of
people suffering from acute food insecurity reached a
quarter billion last year. That is the highest recorded in
recent years. Of those people, some 376,000 were facing
famine-like conditions in seven countries. Another
35 million people were on the edge. As in all crisis
situations, women and children are the most impacted.
This situation has not come as a surprise. It is a manmade crisis that has been swelling for years. We are now
at the tipping point.
Hunger and conflict feed off of each other. Conflict
and insecurity remain key drivers of hunger and famine.
Every one of the seven countries where people faced
famine-like conditions last year were affected by armed
conflict or extreme levels of violence. Five of those seven
countries — Afghanistan, Haiti, Somalia, South Sudan
and Yemen — are regularly on the Council’s agenda.
23-23018

03/08/2023

Maintenance of international peace and security

Armed conflict destroys food systems, shatters
livelihoods and drives people from their home, leaving
many extremely vulnerable and hungry. Sometimes
those impacts are by-products of war, but all too often
they are inflicted deliberately and unlawfully, with
hunger utilized as a tactic of war.
Conflict does not spare those who are providing
assistance to stave off famine. Last year, dozens of
humanitarian workers were killed and many more
were kidnapped or injured in situations of conflict.
Humanitarian facilities and supplies also often come
under attack, are looted or used for military purposes.
The difficulties the United Nations, non-governmental
organizations and their partners are facing in the
Sudan are a stark reminder of that, and our deepest
condolences go to the families of the 11 humanitarian
workers killed in the Sudan in recent weeks.
Food insecurity itself also fuels instability. For
example, recent research highlighted by the World
Food Programme has shown how food insecurity, when
coupled with pre-existing grievances; desperation too
often fuelled by poverty and inequality; and governance
issues cause people to choose violence over peace. It is
the straw that breaks the camel’s back, often resulting
in conflict.
Conflict-induced hunger is compounded by a toxic
mix of climate change and economic shocks.
Climate change is increasingly becoming a
threat multiplier. As the stress on water and other
natural resources leads to increased competition and
displacement, conflicts and hunger spread. Of the 10
countries most vulnerable to climate-related risks,
seven are affected by conflict, six host a United Nations
peacekeeping or special political mission and four have
more than 1 million people one step away from famine.
At the same time, insecurity in conflict-affected
countries hinders climate adaptation efforts. That
leaves already vulnerable communities even poorer,
hungrier and less resilient.
The challenge may appear overwhelming, but
progress has been and is again possible. So, what can
we do?
First and foremost, we must redouble efforts to
prevent, reduce and end conflict in all its forms. There
needs to be a renewed commitment to peace though a

S/PV.9392

reinvigorated multilateral system where Governments,
the United Nations and regional organizations work hand
in hand.
Where peace may still take time, five things are
critical to reduce suffering and prevent famine.
First, we must ensure parties to conflicts respect
international humanitarian law. That includes protecting
objects necessary for survival such as food stocks, water
systems and other objects necessary for food production
and distribution systems. It also includes facilitating
unimpeded humanitarian access to all civilians in need
and protecting humanitarian staff and assets. States
must spare no effort in exerting their influence to ensure
parties respect the rules of war.
Secondly, we must make better use of existing early
warning mechanisms, such as resolution 2417 (2018),
in a focused and effective manner. Too often, we have
sounded the warning alarm without effective follow-up
and concerted action.
Thirdly, we must be bold and creative in finding ways
to mitigate the impact of war on the most vulnerable.
Such solutions are possible. We have seen agreements
between parties to conflict and resolutions in the Security
Council agreed to for that end, but they require political
courage and compromise.
Fourthly, women and girls must be at the centre of our
efforts. Crises and hunger affect them disproportionately,
and they also hold the key to lasting solutions. Research
has shown that involving local women in peacebuilding
increases the probability that violence will end by
24 per cent.
Fifthly, we also need to acknowledge that a halfway,
fragmented response to the interconnected risks will
not cut it. We need adequate humanitarian funding, on
which the lives of millions depend. And for lasting peace
and famine prevention, we must address the climate and
economic crises.
The Secretary-General has prioritized the threat of
famine and hunger. Among other initiatives, in 2021, he
created a High-Level Task Force on Preventing Famine
to lead and organize a cohesive system-wide response.
Together with the World Food Programme, the Food and
Agriculture Organization of the United Nations and the
International Rescue Committee, with David Miliband,
we are in the process of reorientating that forum to
provide dedicated support to countries. We really need
Council members’ support, and we count on it to make
that an effective forum.

23-230183/32

S/PV.9392

Maintenance of international peace and security

In this role, I have visited communities teetering
on the brink of famine. I have sat with mothers in too
many nutrition wards, in too many displaced camps,
and as their small children fought for their lives, they
were too weak to cry or even make a sound. That eerie
silence is deafening. It never leaves one.
That silence is also a call for action. As Martin
Luther King said in his Nobel Peace Prize lecture,
“famine is wholly unnecessary in the modern
world... There is no deficit in human resources; the
deficit is in human will.”
The President: I thank Ms. Ghelani for her briefing.
I now give the floor to Mr. Miliband.
Mr. Miliband: I thank you, Mr. President, and
your team for your leadership on this issue. It is a true
honour to speak today on behalf of 40,000 International
Rescue Committee employees and volunteers working
in 40 countries around the world. Our mission is defined
by conflict and its consequences, so this debate means
a lot to us and to our clients.
Every day, our staff live out a simple mantra: focus
on the solutions, not the suffering. So my briefing takes
the form of a plea to the Security Council: follow my
colleagues and focus on the solutions not the suffering.
Five years ago, the Council recognized “the need
to break the vicious cycle between armed conflict and
food insecurity” in resolution 2417 (2018). Five years
later, however, there is more armed conflict, more
famine, more malnutrition and more and more food
insecurity — the euphemism that is used for hunger and
starvation. So, today our call is for action to help the
375,000 people facing famine-like conditions at the end
of last year — a number that has only risen — and the
35 million on the brink.
We have more than enough analysis. There is
consensus that conflict is the primary driver of food
insecurity today, exacerbated by the climate crisis.
There is consensus too on the line of causation from
conflict to hunger. Planting is disrupted. Prices are
driven up. Combatants block supplies. Food storage is
targeted. Coping capacities are depleted.
We also know the countries. Every single
assessment has the same list: Somalia, Afghanistan,
Yemen, Nigeria, South Sudan, the Sudan, Burkina
Faso, Mali and Haiti. The analysis is not in dispute.
But analysis is too often followed by paralysis. We
4/32

03/08/2023

therefore need new muscle in the international system,
not the muscle of debating strategies and plans but
the muscle of taking action. Today I want to present
to the Council five current problems, matched by five
immediate solutions.
With regard to the first problem, my colleagues
in today’s debate will rightly draw attention to the
impact of last year’s funding increases, which led to
an increase in the number of children getting treatment
for their acute malnutrition. But the year-on-year
statistics show that 80 per cent of the world’s acutely
malnourished children are not getting any treatment
at all. I repeat: 80 per cent of acutely malnourished
children have been getting no help. The reason for
that is the different approaches to moderate and severe
acute malnutrition. There are different treatment and
diagnosis protocols, different United Nations agencies,
different products and complicated measuring systems
ill-suited to situations of conflict. However, the solution
is staring us in the face — a simplified system, in the
hands of parents and community health workers, who
use a simple upper-arm circumference measuring tape
to diagnose acute malnutrition and administer one or
two doses of ready-to-use therapeutic food per day,
depending on whether the case is severe or moderate.
Our own impact evaluation shows that this approach
is not a pipe dream. We tested the treatment on 27,000
children in Mal with a 92 per cent success rate and a
cost saving of 30 per cent, meaning that more children
can be reached for the same amount of money. That
approach should be made the norm — the default form
of provision — in humanitarian settings, with delivery
and funding to match, and it can be done right now.
Problem two is that there is a proliferation of global
initiatives on famine and food insecurity. The solution
is an empowered body that can galvanize collective
action and drive change. Fortunately, we do now have
the High-Level Task Force on Preventing Famine,
chaired by Ms. Ghelani, which has been given a new
focus and mandate. But frankly, Ms. Ghelani needs
support for national famine action plans in the countries
most at risk, and support from the national and local
authorities in developing those plans. She needs support
for engagement with regional and global financial
institutions in financing those plans and support in
diplomacy to remove barriers on the ground to scaling
up responses, as well as support in turning delivery
plans into action, starting with the meetings surround ing
the general debate in New York in September.
23-23018

03/08/2023

S/PV.9392

Maintenance of international peace and security

Problem three is that as has been reported by
the United Nations Development Programme, the
more fragile a context — in other words, the more
conflict there is in that context — the less money is
spent on climate adaptation. Yet our clients represent
a disproportionate amount of vulnerability to climate
risk. They are highly vulnerable and lack investment
in resilience. The solution is to give climate finance
a humanitarian face, addressing the finance gap and
the delivery gap. The finance gap arises because
adaptation is underfunded — it accounts for only 8 per
cent of all climate finance — and because adaptation is
geared to richer countries. We therefore argue that a set
percentage of every adaptation fund should be directed
to fragile and conflict States. We also argue that donors
should increase the ratio of grants to concessional
funding, because fragile and conflict States do not want
to take on new loans. That could be done, for example,
by trebling the World Bank’s international development
assistance funds, as a Group of 20 panel recommended
just two weeks ago. However, there is a delivery gap
as well, and the money will not be spent in fragile and
conflict States unless that gap is addressed. In conflict
situations, that means making it the norm — not the
exception — for funding to be directed through civil
society, not just Governments. That would represent
real localization.
Problem four is the rise of impunity in conflict.
Combatants attack civilians, deny humanitarian aid
and destroy farms and food warehouses, all of which
are both illegal and immoral. The solution is that the
perpetrators have to be held to account. We do not need
new resolutions for that. Rather, we need new resolve to
uphold the existing ones. For example, the next time the
Council is presented with evidence of hunger used as a
weapon of war, that should trigger action. Also, all nine
countries at risk of famine this year rank either high,
very high or extreme for their levels of constraints on
humanitarian access, which is a euphemism for stopping
humanitarian aid workers from reaching people in need.
We propose establishing an independent office for the
protection of humanitarian access, which would ensure
that when combatants deny aid, that information is
reported with fear or favour to the Council, supporting
efforts to drive accountability and diplomacy.
Turning to problem five, I know that
non-governmental organizations usually start by asking
for more money, but I will end rather than start with it.
The World Food Programme is cutting its life-saving
food assistance programmes today — some of them by as

much as half — because it does not have enough money
to do its job. The solution to that is not complicated.
The humanitarian response plans in the nine countries
at risk for famine were only 58 per cent funded in 2022
on average. Yet if their response plans were funded to
the same proportion as Ukraine’s last year, there would
be another $5 billion in the system to address the most
acute needs in those nine countries alone.
We need to address the threat of famine by looking
through the windshield, not the rear-view mirror.
Once famine is declared, it is too late for too many.
We know that half of the people who died in the 2011
famine in Somalia died before the famine declaration
was made. It is too late for too many to wait for a
famine declaration. Phase 3 of the Integrated Phase
Classification system — the crisis phase — is triggered
when one in five families are so desperate to find their
next meal that they are considering marrying off their
children or sending them out to work. But anticipatory
action depends on cash being available, and today it
is not. I want to conclude by quoting Nobel laureate
Amartya Sen, whose landmark work on famine of
nearly 50 years ago starts with these words.
“Starvation is the characteristic of some
people not having enough food to eat. It is not
the characteristic of there being not enough food
to eat”.
In other words, it is a political problem. Today, however,
the world is four times richer, but there is more famine,
not less. That is not fate but choice. And it is a choice
that will only be changed by action. We in civil society
do not lack ideas for which actions to take. What we
need is the will to enable them to happen.
The President:
his briefing.

I

thank

Mr.

Miliband

for

I now give the floor to Ms. Salem.
Ms. Salem: The day I first met a two-year-old who
weighed the same as my newborn daughter, it changed
me forever. I have been face-to-face with a mother
and her starving child, and I know that we do not have
time to spare. I feel the urgency and I see the fear in
her eyes. I have seen children take their last breaths. I
have watched their hearts stop beating. When I enter a
malnutrition clinic, the first thing I hear is a deafening
silence. The children do not have the strength to sit up
or cry. All of their energy is expended on keeping their
organs from shutting down. Their mothers sit anxiously
by, wishing for a miracle. We have that miracle.

23-230185/32

S/PV.9392

Maintenance of international peace and security

Today I am representing the private sector as
the founder and Chief Executive Officer of Edesia.
We make the food that saves lives, a ready-to-use
therapeutic food called Plumpy’Nut. It is used in the
treatment of severe acute malnutrition by UNICEF, the
World Food Programme and the United States Agency
for International Development. It is a highly fortified
peanut butter that is revolutionary in humanitarian
settings because it delivers life-saving nutrition, is
easy to distribute in complex humanitarian crises,
allows mothers to treat their children at home and has
the power to rehabilitate 92 per cent of children in just
two months.
Edesia is part of a community of factories around
the world. We work 24 hours a day, seven days a week,
to produce enough of those miracle foods, but every
day the needs grow. All of us have been adding shifts
and equipment, yet more is needed. We manufacture
here in the United States and have a partner in France,
but our other eight partners are in the global South.
Conflicts threaten to close the doors of those incredibly
important businesses that are set up in malnutrition
hotspots to deliver those life-saving foods using locally
grown raw materials. Just a few months ago, when the
conflict in the Sudan began, I was deeply saddened to
see that our partner factory in Khartoum was bombed.
Everything was destroyed, including thousands of
boxes of Plumpy’Nut waiting to be deployed to children
in the Sudan. And now, as of this past week, a coup
is threatening our partner factory in Niger. In Haiti,
violence persists at ever increasing levels, forcing us
to construct new security walls. In Ethiopia, Nigeria
and Burkina Faso, instability and uncertainty are ever
present. That ecosystem is a critical part of the supply
chain that United Nations agencies and children depend
on, and they must be protected.
The two biggest contributing factors to hunger and
malnutrition are climate change and conflict. We here
today have the easier problem to solve. Even with all the
efforts that are going into addressing climate change, it
requires work that will still take many decades. The
good news is that that is not true of conflict. We, right
here in this room, control the conflicts. Just as we can
decide to wage war, we can decide to end it. Right
now, we have two choices. We can feed all the severely
malnourished children in the world or we can stop
the conflicts. Annually, $1.7 billion is needed to feed
17 million severely malnourished children. Until we
end those conflicts, we have the responsibility to take
6/32

03/08/2023

action. Just $1.7 billion can save the lives of 17 million
children. A mere $100 per child covers the cost of a box
of Plumpy’Nut, distribution and access to community
health care.
But with conflicts increasing, our partners have to
make tough choices every day. They are struggling with
critical funding shortfalls and can meet only 50 per
cent of the need. They are faced with an impossible
decision — which half of the malnourished children in
the world can live and which half will be sentenced to
death. Every day they have to decide which countries
will receive funding and which programmes will be cut
or halved. A year ago, the world took notice of increasing
conflict-induced food insecurity, and the United States,
Canada, the United Kingdom, the Kingdom of the
Netherlands, Ireland and private philanthropies made
a historic commitment of $500 million to combating
malnutrition. The global momentum proved that we
could double the available supply of Plumpy’Nut in a
matter of months. The number of children’s lives saved
doubled as well, with 7.3 million children treated in
2022. That incredible effort should be recognized
and celebrated.
Doctors described that intervention as nothing short
of a miracle, but I want to stop producing that miracle.
I do not want to grow this business, add shifts or build
more warehouses. We should not be waiting until
children are days away from death to treat them with
life-saving food. Rather, the long-term goal should be a
shift towards prevention. Early-childhood development
depends on healthy food systems, a diverse diet and
the essential macronutrients and micronutrients that
the body and brain require. Early interventions ensure
that children will not only survive but thrive and reach
their full potential. I sit here today representing the
thousands of community-based health-care workers
and the millions of malnourished children who are
desperately asking for our help and partnership. After
all, we are responsible for their circumstances. I hope
that history will look at those of us sitting around this
table here today as people who stood up for humankind,
understood the power of our collective leadership here in
this Chamber and said, “Stop. Just stop these conflicts,
for the sake of our children”. There are many problems
in this world that we cannot solve, but malnutrition is
not one of them.
The President: I thank Ms. Salem for her
briefing. Indeed, I thank all three of our briefers for
23-23018

03/08/2023

Maintenance of international peace and security

their compelling and important contributions to our
discussion this morning.
I would like to draw the attention of speakers to
paragraph 22 of note S/2017/507, which encourages
all participants in Council meetings to deliver their
statements in five minutes or less, in line with the
Security Council’s commitment to making more
effective use of open meetings.
I shall now make a statement in my capacity as the
representative of the United States of America.
Once again, I thank our briefers for keeping our
focus on what is really at stake here, that is, the human
element in our discussions. It is easy to get caught up
in numbers, statistics and big concepts, but ultimately
it comes down to people and it comes down to children.
I therefore thank them for that focus and for their
focus on practical solutions to the problems before
us. All three of them have powerfully illustrated the
challenge before us, but even more important, they have
given us very good ideas for how to actually address
that challenge.
Last September, President Biden told the General
Assembly, “In every country in the world ... if parents
cannot feed their children, nothing else matters”
(A/77/PV.6, p.22). In some ways, it is as simple and
as stark as that. Too many families are experiencing
the overwhelming urgency, the consequence of an
unprecedented global food crisis that, as we have heard,
has been fuelled by climate and the coronavirus disease,
as well as by conflict, as we have discussed today.
Hunger and conflict are inextricably linked, with
scarce resources and heightened tensions affecting
communities and nations. Warring parties weaponize
food to subjugate local populations. Indeed, conflict
is the largest single driver of food insecurity, with
violence and unrest pushing 117 million people into
extreme deprivation last year. In the Sudan, fighting
has disrupted the summer planting season and driven
up the cost of food. In Myanmar, where one in five
people — one in five — are severely undernourished, the
military regime is making the problem worse in order
to tighten its grip, including by blocking aid convoys.
The deteriorating conditions have prevented the safe
return of the nearly 1 million Rohingya refugees who
have fled their homeland and now live in Bangladesh
on rations that are down to about 27 cents per day.
In Yemen, some families have reported resorting to
boiling leaves to stay alive. They call it famine food.

S/PV.9392

Unless the world acts, Burkina Faso, South Sudan and
Somalia could all experience famine next year. Again, I
ask all of us to pause for a moment and think about what
that actually means, and to imagine, just for a minute,
that these are their children, their sons, their daughters.
We have heard the compelling descriptions of what that
is actually all about, and I hope that if nothing else,
having that image in our minds and tying it to our own
life experiences will give us some added motivation
to act.
Since January 2021, the United States has provided
more than $17.5 billion to address famine and food
insecurity. In 2021 and 2022 (see S/PV.9036), we
convened the Council to focus on the intersection
between hunger and conflict. We chaired last year’s
ministerial meeting on food security, where we joined
more than three dozen countries in issuing a global
road map, committing to getting food to those in need
and to building greater resilience in the future. To date,
more than 100 countries have signed that pledge and
begun to take concrete steps to actually implement
it. Nevertheless, as this crisis ramps up, so must our
efforts. The Council is charged with maintaining
international peace and security, and we simply cannot
preserve peace and security without strengthening food
security. Each of us has a responsibility to act. This
morning, for the first time in three years, the Council
has unanimously put conflict, hunger and famine, as
well as climate change, at the centre of its agenda. That
is a noteworthy and welcome step. Let us now harness
that momentum to further combat food insecurity and
famine around the world and turn what we are talking
about into concrete action.
Five years ago (see S/PV.8267), as we have
heard, the Council adopted resolution 2417 (2018),
emphasizing that the intentional starvation of civilians
may constitute a war crime. Today we can build on
those efforts. Nearly 90 countries, including the United
States, have already signed a new joint communiqué
that we drafted and circulated, committing to ending
the use of famine, starvation and food as weapons of
war. Hunger must not be weaponized. I urge all Member
States to sign the communiqué.
We must also significantly increase aid to
tackle extreme hunger and avert famine. Last year,
Governments and private donors made record
contributions, providing direct relief, equipping
farmers with fertilizer and using satellite imagery
to maximize yields. Donations to the World Food

23-230187/32

S/PV.9392

Maintenance of international peace and security

Programme jumped by 48 per cent. The United States
alone provided more than $7.2 billion, funding roughly
half of the World Food Programme’s budget. Those
and other efforts helped the world to narrowly avoid
famine last year. But this year, as we have heard, the
World Food Programme estimates that it will have to
spend $25 billion to deliver relief to 171 million people.
To date, countries have funded only $4.5 billion — in
other words, a mere 18 per cent of what is required. The
cost of that shortfall will be measured in growth stunted
and in lives lost. While we welcome smaller countries
punching above their weight, the world’s largest
economies should be the world’s largest donors. For
Member States that consider themselves global leaders,
this is a chance to prove it. All of us can dig deeper.
But of course we know that while it is necessary,
it is not sufficient to meet immediate needs. We must
also increase agricultural productivity. We have got to
invest in adaptation. We have to build greater resilience
to future shocks, especially in regions that are affected
by conflict. Around the world, farmers are confronting
soaring temperatures, eroding soil and disappearing
groundwater. That reduces yields and makes crops less
nutritious. By 2050, climate change could cut output
by as much as 30 per cent, even as global food demand
increases by more than 50 per cent. We have a planet that
is heading in the coming decades towards a population
of as many as 10 billion people, with demand going
up accordingly. Yet supply is actually declining, not
increasing. As challenging and as urgent as the situation
is now, we can therefore also see what is coming if we
do not take the necessary steps to address it.
Mitigating climate impacts is central to the United
States’ Feed the Future initiative, a public-private
partnership for strengthening food systems, expanding
social safety nets and enhancing nutrition in 40 countries
around the world. We have devoted more than $1 billion
every year to that effort. Last year we expanded the
programme to eight more target countries in Africa. To
build on that work, in February, alongside the African
Union and the Food and Agriculture Organization of the
United Nations, we launched what we call our Vision
for Adapted Crops and Soils. Through the programme,
we are identifying the most nutritious indigenous
African crops, assessing how climate change will
likely affect them and investing in breeding the most
climate-resilient varieties and improving the soil that
they grow in. That focus on the quality of seeds and soil
can have a powerful impact on sustainable agricultural
productivity throughout Africa.
8/32

03/08/2023

Today I am also announcing another $362 million
for tackling the drivers of food and security and
enhancing resilience in Haiti and 11 African countries,
including by getting nutritious food to pregnant women
and helping farmers grow hardier and more diverse
crops. But while the United States will continue to
do its part, this is by definition a global challenge
that demands global resources. We will be looking to
Governments, companies and philanthropies to help us
continue to improve nutrition and invest in sustainable
and resilient food systems.
Finally, we must address Russia’s war of
aggression against Ukraine and the resulting assault
on the global food system. During the past year, the
Black Sea Grain Initiative, negotiated by the United
Nations and Türkiye, delivered more than 32 million
tons of Ukrainian foodstuffs to the world. The wheat
exports alone were the equivalent of 18 billion loaves
of bread. We should keep in mind that the Initiative
never should have been necessary in the first place.
That was only because of Russia’s invasion of Ukraine
and its blockade of Ukrainian ports. But the Initiative
produced concrete, demonstrable and powerful results,
making sure that those food products could continue to
reach world markets and those who needed them.
Let us be very clear about who benefited from the
Initiative. More than half of the food products exported
through the effort, and two thirds of the wheat, went
to developing countries. The shipments helped to lower
global food prices for everyone by roughly a quarter
after Russia’s full-scale invasion. Since 17 July, when
Russia pulled out of the arrangement, ignoring the
world’s appeals, grain prices have risen by more than
8 per cent around the globe. Kenya’s Foreign Ministry
called Russia’s move “a stab in the back”. The Kremlin
claims that it tore up the deal because international
sanctions were restricting its agricultural exports. In
reality, sanctions explicitly exclude food and fertilizer.
In fact, at the time it abandoned the Initiative, Russia
was exporting more grain at higher prices than
ever before.
What has Russia’s response been to the world’s
distress and outrage? It has bombed Ukrainian
granaries, mined port entrances and threatened to attack
any vessel in the Black Sea whatever its flag or cargo.
Those actions are consistent with Russia’s decision
last month (see S/PV.9371) to block the reauthorization
of critical cross-border humanitarian assistance to
Syria — a country where after February’s devastating
23-23018

03/08/2023

Maintenance of international peace and security

earthquake, 12 million people do not have enough to
eat. The United States is prepared to renew the efforts
to mandate that vital lifeline if the United Nations and
Syria cannot find a way forward. We also very much
appreciate the work that Türkiye and others are doing
to try to reinstate the grain deal. Every member of the
Council and every State Member of the United Nations
should tell Moscow that enough is enough. Enough of
using the Black Sea as blackmail, enough of treating
the world’s most vulnerable people as leverage and
enough of its unjustified, unconscionable war.
Strengthening food security is essential to realizing
the vision of the Charter of the United Nations for saving
generations from the scourge of war and reaffirming
the dignity and worth of every single human being.
That hope is embodied in one of the statues outside
this building, which is a figure fulfilling the biblical
directive to beat swords into ploughshares. Those
words of Scripture are not yet in reach, but we can at
least commit to not using our swords to destroy others’
ploughs. We can deliver life-saving aid to those in
urgent need. We can ensure that people around the globe
are fed, now and for years to come. If we do that — if
we build a healthier, more stable, more peaceful world
for all — we will at least have begun to live up to the
responsibility entrusted to us, to the Council and to
this institution.
I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.
I give the floor to those members of the Council
who wish to make statements.
Ms. Al Kaabi (United Arab Emirates): I thank
Secretary Blinken for convening this important meeting
today and our briefers for bringing their valuable
perspectives to our discussion.
We align ourselves with the statement to be
delivered by the representative of Oman on behalf of
the Gulf Cooperation Council.
More than 700 million people are going hungry
around the world, while access to food for a third of the
world’s population — almost 2.5 billion people — was
restricted last year. As we have heard from our briefers,
there is no single reason for global food insecurity.
Although the reasons for it are complex, the human
cost is plain to see. A total of 45 million children under
the age of five suffer from acute malnutrition. Millions
of people are driven to undertake dangerous irregular

S/PV.9392

migration journeys. There is increased sexual and
gender-based violence. We know that food insecurity
contributes to conflict and instability, while the reverse
is also true. As intricately linked as they are, we cannot
afford not to act within the Council and globally.
I would like to make three points today to that effect.
First, food insecurity is preventable. Preventing
food insecurity and famine is a political choice.
Bringing food insecurity to an end is a collective
endeavour. No one should experience famine. In
conflict, international humanitarian law is clear.
Parties to armed conflict must take constant care
to spare the objects necessary to produce food and
drinking water, and they must never target civilian
objects. There is not only a moral, but a legal, duty
to uphold those norms, and we call on all parties to
conflict to strictly adhere to their responsibilities. It is
also important that those in a position to support and
facilitate life-saving humanitarian efforts do so. For its
part, the United Arab Emirates has contributed more
than $1.4 billion in assistance over the past five years
to address food insecurity. Conflicts, such as the one
in Ukraine, can contribute to global food insecurity.
Its knock-on effects in world markets mean that those
living far beyond any battlefield often struggle to feed
their families, especially in the Middle East and parts of
Africa, where countries rely heavily on grain imports.
In such instances, we must support national strategies
and develop innovative approaches and partnerships
that meet the scale of the challenge.
Secondly, ensuring global food security requires
all hands on deck. We must deepen international
partnerships and make the most of multilateral forums
at both the international and regional levels. We saw the
potential of multilateral efforts to reduce food insecurity
through the establishment of the Black Sea Grain
Initiative. The rise in wheat prices since the agreement
came to an end is telling of the global importance of
such initiatives. Let me reiterate that the United Arab
Emirates is deeply saddened by that development. A
spirit of ambition and global collaboration is also needed
to tackle a growing driver of food insecurity — climate
change. July was the hottest month on record. As such,
we must seek unity of purpose at the highest levels to
reverse the disturbing trend by taking tangible measures
in order to prevent the rise of temperatures above
1.5°C degrees and ensuring climate adaptation and
mitigation measures are firmly in place, particularly in
fragile areas. All hands on deck truly means all hands,

23-230189/32

S/PV.9392

Maintenance of international peace and security

and all voices. Those disproportionately affected by
food insecurity and climate change, in particular
women and youth, must be front and centre when
designing responses. Recognizing that disparity is
not enough. We must encourage their full, equal and
meaningful participation.
Thirdly and finally, we need novel approaches to
overcoming this challenge. We commend the dedicated
efforts of Governments, international and regional
organizations, private sector actors, humanitarian
groups and their significant achievements in the area. Yet
food insecurity continues to rise. If we limit ourselves
to the same approaches, we will not turn the tide. It is
therefore time to expand our approaches. Public-private
partnerships are vital to tackling the huge challenge.
The United Arab Emirates is actively engaged in
public-private partnerships, such as the annual 1
Billion Meals Endowment campaign of the Mohammed
Bin Rashid Al Maktoum Global Initiatives. In 2021, the
United Arab Emirates and the United States launched
the Agriculture Innovation Mission for Climate to
catalyse innovation and climate-smart agriculture. It is
now working with more than 50 Government partners,
the private sector and civil society and has raised more
than $13 billion to accelerate transformational change.
The world cannot maintain peace and security
without one of the most basic needs of humankind. The
trend that we are witnessing is a testament to the need
to redouble our efforts. It is my hope that we seize the
opportunity provided by this meeting to take greater
concerted action globally to overcome this challenge.
Mr. Yamada (Japan): First of all, Japan
welcomes the issuance of the presidential statement
(S/PRST/2023/4) and commends all the tireless work
of you, Mr. President, and your United States team, as
well as all the constructive efforts made by each fellow
Member State. It is critical that the Security Council
speak as one voice on its commitment to address
conflict-induced food insecurity.
Japan is seriously concerned that a huge number
of people are facing famine and other forms of food
insecurity caused by conflict and climate change. Food
is a basic human need. Therefore, it should never be
weaponized at any time. Every day, we hear the voices
of those affected by food insecurity caused by manmade conflict. Japan deeply regrets Russia’s decision to
unilaterally terminate its participation in the Black Sea
Grain Initiative, which had allowed grain exports from
10/32

03/08/2023

Ukraine and contributed to global food security. Russia
has wasted tremendous amounts of grain by attacking
grain storage facilities and loading terminals in Odesa
and along the Danube. Meanwhile, Russia has announced
that it will replace Ukraine in supplying grains to
African countries. We should not accept Russia’s attempt
to weaponize food and destroy grain in Ukraine, while
it increases its own exports. Japan strongly urges Russia
to return to the international framework associated
with the United Nations to resume grain exports from
Ukraine in order to relieve food insecurity in the world.
Japan also continues to support the European Union-led
solidarity lanes, which work to ensure that Ukraine can
export grain.
The United Nations and the Council should play their
role in addressing food security issues, while exerting
their influence and solidarity. Addressing famine and
conflict-induced food insecurity requires not only
short-term efforts, such as emergency food assistance,
but also medium- and long-term actions based on the
concept of human security, such as strengthening the
resilience of food systems. Efforts to prevent conflicts,
which are root causes of food insecurity, are also
important. In this context, Japan believes that it would
be beneficial to reduce future humanitarian needs by
addressing them in a comprehensive way through a
humanitarian-development-peace nexus approach. In
conflict, it is crucial to protect vulnerable people, such
as women and children. In order to ensure the provision
of life-saving assistance for those vulnerable people,
the parties to conflict must comply with international
humanitarian law.
Food security and humanitarian assistance have
been top priorities for Japan. We have a long history of
providing various forms of assistance and international
cooperation, including humanitarian aid, necessary
for those suffering from famine and conflict-induced
food insecurity. Japan has also spoken out about the
necessity of humanitarian passage on the Black Sea to
ship grain from Ukraine immediately following Russia’s
aggression. Japan is proud to have issued the Hiroshima
Action Statement for Resilient Global Food Security
in May, together with countries representing various
regions around the world. It can serve as a comprehensive
guideline for responding to the current food security
crisis and for establishing resilient agriculture
and food systems in the medium- and long-term.
Before I conclude, allow me to touch on the issue of
famine and food insecurity in East Asia and beyond. It is
reported that many people in North Korea are suffering
23-23018

03/08/2023

Maintenance of international peace and security

from severe hunger. On the other hand, North Korea is
spending vast resources on unlawful nuclear and missile
development, diverting critically needed resources
away from its people at tremendous cost. In violation
of multiple Security Council resolutions, North Korea
has continued to repeatedly launch ballistic missiles and
threaten peace and stability in East Asia to this day. It
is extremely regrettable that the Security Council has
been unable to take tangible action on the matter. The
Council must overcome its prolonged silence, speak with
one voice and take meaningful steps. We ask sincerely
for everyone’s understanding and support.
Ms. Fino (Albania): Let me begin by thanking
the United States presidency for convening today’s
timely debate and by welcoming you to the Council,
Mr. President. We are grateful to the United States
for its coherence and continued action in keeping the
focus on this issue, which is of paramount importance
to all of us, especially the people all over the world who
continue to struggle to make ends meet. In that respect,
we welcome the presidential statement (S/PRST/2023/4)
proposed by the United States and adopted earlier as a
timely reminder of our collective duty to put everything
in place to ensure proper responses addressing conflictinduced food insecurity, including malnutrition
and famine. I also thank all three briefers for their
insightful briefings and for presenting the very real
needs worldwide.
Food insecurity is a pressing global challenge, and
a range of colliding factors, such as conflicts, climate
change, underdevelopment and macroeconomic shocks,
are threatening global food security worldwide more
than ever before. The number of people facing acute
food insecurity increased from 193 million in 2021 to
258 million in 2022. More than a quarter of a billion
people faced acute hunger in 58 countries and territories
last year. In 19 countries, approximately 117 million
people are suffering from high levels of acute food
insecurity due to conflict and insecurity. That has taken
a heavy toll on the efforts of humanitarian intervention
and food assistance to meet the growing needs.
Furthermore, acute hunger, which is just one step away
from famine, is increasingly alarming and constitutes
a threat not only to the communities and populations
concerned but to peace and security in many regions of
the world. That is happening now in Afghanistan, Haiti,
the Sahel, South Sudan, the Sudan and Yemen, where
the populations face starvation and a lack of urgent
humanitarian intervention.

S/PV.9392

That is also what is happening in Syria. Russia’s
veto of the reauthorization of cross-border assistance
at Bab Al-Hawa (see S/PV.9371) has endangered
life-saving aid and food security for more than 4 million
people in north-western Syria, leaving them at the
mercy of a ruthless regime notorious for its brutality.
Russia’s withdrawal from the Black Sea Grain Initiative
confirms its adherence to a policy of weaponizing food
and using famine as a bargaining chip for achieving
political gains. But it has not stopped there. With
its daily bombardment of seaports targeting grain
export facilities and civilian infrastructure, Russia is
committing crimes and playing on the anxiety of the
millions who are uncertain as to whether they will have
food in the coming days and weeks. Moscow’s promises
to several African countries of modest amounts of free
grain supplies, which are ridiculous compared to the
actual needs, are part of its efforts to capitalize on
the collapse of the Initiative and gain support on the
African continent. But they should beware. That kind
of humanitarian charity comes at a bitter price. Without
urgent action, more and more people in Africa, the
Middle East and beyond will slip into hunger.
The biggest challenge in every conflict is protecting
civilians. At the same time, it is a solemn collective
commitment. Resolution 2417 (2018) was a breakthrough
moment, because it represented the Security Council’s
acknowledgement for the first time of the link between
armed conflict and conflict-induced food insecurity and
the threat of famine. Using starvation as a weapon and a
tactic of warfare is wrong and criminal. It is prohibited
by international humanitarian law, and we should never
tolerate any unlawful denial of humanitarian access to
civilians or deprive them of something essential to their
survival. We must never tolerate impunity for violations
of international humanitarian law that target civilian
infrastructure and food-related services. Albania
commends the efforts and actions of Member States,
the United Nations, its implementing partners, civil
society and the private sector in addressing immediate
humanitarian needs and ensuring food security and
resilience for populations in need. But the best and
most effective way of preventing famine is to prevent
conflict, stop wars, tackle the root causes of insecurity
at an early stage and invest in peace and development in
order to secure sustainable, resilient and inclusive food
systems, in line with the objectives of the 2030 Agenda
for Sustainable Development and the Sustainable
Development Goals.

23-2301811/32

S/PV.9392

Maintenance of international peace and security

Let me conclude by saying that the world has enough
food, and no one needs to go hungry. But if we really
want to ensure food security, we should act to prevent
and stop conflicts by choosing peace and development,
engaging in inclusive peace processes leading to
sustainable political solutions and building resilience
and working together in favour of life with rights and
dignity. That can be done by saying no, strongly and
resolutely, to wars and conflicts and their devastating
consequences. It requires vision, leadership, political
will and decisive action.
Mr. Hauri (Switzerland) (spoke in French): I
would first like to congratulate the United Kingdom on
its presidency of the Council in July and to wish you,
Mr. President, and your team every success in our work
this month. You can count on Switzerland’s support.
I would also like to thank you for organizing today’s
timely debate and the briefers for their contributions.
And we welcome the presence of the high-level
representatives at today’s meeting.
War breeds hunger and hunger breeds war. The
global food crisis is unprecedented and destabilizes
countries and regions, as was also highlighted during
the debate on the protection of civilians held in May
under the Swiss presidency (see S/PV.9327). The
problem continues to worsen in Somalia, the Sudan,
including Darfur, South Sudan, the Sahel, Afghanistan,
Yemen, Syria and elsewhere in the world. We therefore
deplore Russia’s decision to stop implementing the
Black Sea Grain Initiative, and condemn the recent
attacks on Ukrainian ports, which risk making the
global situation deteriorate further.
Through its adoption of resolution 2417 (2018), the
Council recognized the need to put an end to the vicious
circle of armed conflict and food insecurity. It pledged
to pay full attention to the issue so as to better prevent
famine. The Council’s role in crisis prevention is also
at the heart of the New Agenda for Peace. Switzerland
calls for the full implementation of the prevention
mechanisms provided for in resolution 2417 (2018)
and welcomed the Security Council’s recent informal
meeting on food security in the Democratic Republic of
Congo, Burkina Faso and Haiti. With a view to better
preventing food crises, including famine, my country
calls for strengthening the following three areas.
First, respect from all parties concerned for
international humanitarian law and human rights is
imperative if we are to reduce the impact of armed
12/32

03/08/2023

conflict on the food situation. Civilians’ access to
essential goods and services must be preserved.
Essentials for civilian survival, such as food, water
installations and other infrastructure needed for food
production and supply, must not be attacked and must
be protected, as required by international humanitarian
law. We call on the parties concerned to guarantee the
rapid, safe and unimpeded delivery of humanitarian aid
to all in need. We deplore the fact that humanitarian
actors such as the International Committee of the Red
Cross are not always able to carry out their operations,
as is currently the case in the Lachin corridor in
the South Caucasus. We also recall the importance
of implementing resolution 2664 (2022), which
facilitates humanitarian operations in some of the most
difficult environments.
Secondly, in many fragile contexts, it is often
women and girls who eat last and eat least. That is
even truer in situations of conflict, where women and
girls also seek solutions. As pointed out by the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General on Sexual
Violence in Conflict, we must not underestimate the
fact that food insecurity increases the risk of exposure
to sexual violence. That is why we need to ensure that
a gender perspective is integrated into measures to
improve food security.
Thirdly, impunity, particularly for those who
deliberately starve civilians as a method of warfare,
must be resolutely combated. All too often, the civilian
population is deliberately deprived of its means of
subsistence, causing immense suffering and further
destabilizing conflict zones. In 2019, thanks to a
Swiss initiative, the Rome Statute of the International
Criminal Court was amended so that this crime can
also be prosecuted in situations of internal conflict. We
call on all States Parties to ratify that amendment.
“You cannot build peace on empty stomachs”,
as the American agronomist and Nobel Peace Prize
laureate Norman Borlaug reminds us. That makes it all
the more important to tackle the root causes of food
insecurity. Armed conflict and violence are the main
drivers, compounded by the growing pressure exerted
by economic crises and climate change. Political
solutions to conflict must be part of our global approach
to eliminating hunger, ensuring access to sufficient and
adequate food for all and promoting resilient, inclusive
and sustainable food systems.
23-23018

03/08/2023

Maintenance of international peace and security

Mr. França Danese (Brazil): I thank the briefers
for their compelling presentations. As focal points for
this issue at the Council, together with Switzerland, we
thank the United States for providing this opportunity
to advance our fight against conflict-induced food
insecurity and malnutrition. We also congratulate the
United States on the initiative and the Council on the
adoption of the presidential statement on conflictinduced food insecurity (S/PRST/2023/4).
According to the 2023 State of Food Security
and Nutrition in the World report, it is projected that
almost 600 million people will still be facing hunger
by 2030. In 2022 alone, 2.4 billion people lacked access
to adequate, nutritious, safe and sufficient food. The
combination of impacts from the pandemic, climate
shocks, high interest rates, high food and energy
prices and conflicts has put global food security and
nutrition in dire straits, with armed conflict figuring as
a prominent driver of hunger.
Brazil believes that the best way to prevent hunger
and malnutrition in the long term is to ensure that
countries have the capacity to build resilient agrifood
systems and markets. We must take into account
structural causes of hunger, including inequalities
between and within countries, barriers to food trade,
unilateral sanctions and weak or absent social-protection
and poverty-alleviation policies.
To ensure stability and continuity in food production,
international attention must be given to supporting
sustainable agricultural practices, developing disasterresilient infrastructure and promoting diversified
agrifood systems. Ensuring the proper functioning of
agrifood systems and markets is essential to sustain
food security in conflict situations, as recognized in
resolution 2417 (2018).
Facilitating the transfer and access to efficient
and productive technologies is central to ensuring
diversified, resilient and sustainable food systems. In
line with the Secretary-General’s Early Warnings for
All initiative, the international community must support
dedicated capacity-building in developing countries in
order to allow us to be better prepared for shocks on the
availability and accessibility of food.
To reach that goal, cash-transfer programmes should
be prioritized to sustain both local supply and demand.
Additionally, tools such as the Food Shock Window of
the International Monetary Fund or the Global Food
Import Financing Facility, proposed by the Food and

S/PV.9392

Agriculture Organization of the United Nations (FAO),
should be further explored to bridge financing needs,
while avoiding market distortions and disruptions.
The reform of multilateral agricultural trade rules
is also essential to prevent global food insecurity.
Many countries affected by conflicts had their
agricultural development restricted by trade and
price-distorting subsidies that negatively affect their
production capacities.
An important element of this open debate refers
to the collaboration between the Security Council, the
United Nations system and other actors to catalyse
global efforts, ensure delivery of humanitarian
assistance and minimize the effects of conflict-induced
food insecurity. Member States must fully incorporate
in their work the tools already in place in the United
Nations system to fight conflict-induced hunger.
Bodies such as the Office for the Coordination
of Humanitarian Affairs, the World Food Programme
and the FAO diligently inform on risks of acute
food insecurity in countries with conflict situations
through different reports, including the white notes
mandated by resolution 2417 (2018), to which the
Council must dedicate its full attention. An efficient
response to conflict-induced famine must encompass
the appropriate use of this information and timely and
decisive action in response to it.
International humanitarian law strictly prohibits
starvation of civilians as a method of warfare and
grants special protection to objects indispensable to
the survival of the civilian population, including food
crops, livestock and other essential resources necessary
for food production.
However, even when parties to a conflict
comply with international humanitarian law, food
systems can be disrupted by the secondary impacts
of conflict. Humanitarian exemptions, essential to
the survival of the civilian population, also need to
be systematically included in sanctions regimes and
counter-terrorism measures. Otherwise, humanitarian
actors have to overcome complex legal, financial and
logistical roadblocks to ensure that those in need get
appropriate assistance.
Humanitarian needs play a central role, but they
can be better supported if coupled with developmentoriented measures, such as dedicated agricultural,
technical and subsistence support. Generous, sustained

23-2301813/32

S/PV.9392

Maintenance of international peace and security

and result-oriented international cooperation, in its
many forms, is essential to achieve that goal. Brazil has
been active in promoting such cooperation with fellow
developing countries, especially in Africa and Latin
America, and we pledge to do more.
Each situation of conflict presents different
challenges for agrifood systems and the affected
populations. For instance, as recently reported by the
FAO, in many cases women are still more vulnerable
to food and nutrition insecurity, as they continue to
face additional risks, barriers and disadvantages due to
their gender.
Our response to conflict-induced food insecurity
must involve the three pillars of the United Nations.
Humanitarian needs must be met, and humanitarian
aid delivery allowed in an unimpeded and impartial
manner. The Council must use its political capacity
to push for solutions to conflicts that can alleviate
challenges related to food accessibility.
We will remain fully engaged in all these fronts
and continue to be a firm advocate of the right of every
person to sufficient, nutritious and adequate food. I
reaffirm that eliminating hunger in all situations and
achieving Sustainable Development Goal 2 by 2030 are
top priorities for the Brazilian Government.
The only assured way to end conflict-induced
hunger is peace.
Mr. Biang (Gabon) (spoke in French): I congratulate
the United States of America on its presidency of
the Council and on the initiative of convening this
important debate, which highlights the link between
food insecurity and armed conflict.
I would like to thank Ms. Reena Ghelani, United
Nations Famine Prevention and Response Coordinator,
for her valuable contribution. I listened carefully
to the poignant briefings of Ms. Navyn Salem and
Mr. David Miliband.
Our debate is taking place a week after the United
Nations Food Systems Summit, which raised universal
awareness of the alarming scope of global famine and
hammered home the urgent need to tackle it. Above
all, our meeting comes at a time when international
security is generating more questions than answers.
By adopting the Geneva Conventions and their
Additional Protocols, the nations of the world have
clearly and unanimously enshrined in their social
14/32

03/08/2023

contract that war has rules and that belligerence is
absolutely not a legal vacuum in which all cruelties and
atrocities are permitted.
That framework of war connects us to our humanity
even in the most troubled times. We cannot and must not
lose sight, at any point, of the fact that famine is shameful
and a serious affront to human dignity. It is even more
unbearable when it is planned or maintained, given that
resources are not lacking, as noted by Ms. Ghelani.
Unfortunately, in many battlefields and hotbeds of
tension around the world, famine is used as a weapon
of war. Through senseless calculations, access to food
is often impeded. The resulting shortages very often
generate famine and the diseases inherent in malnutrition
and contribute to unravelling the social fabric of entire
swathes of humankind. Civilians, in particular women
and children, are the most exposed to its impacts.
When it is not used as a weapon of war, famine is
very often a source of conflict and instability in fragile
States. As Africans, we know of what we speak. On the
African continent, over 80 per cent of people facing
food insecurity live in conflict-affected areas. The recent
United Nations report on food security and nutrition
in the world clearly highlights the impact of famine on
armed conflict, for which it acts as a catalyst, as it does
for other threats to international peace and security,
including climate change.
At the same time, armed conflicts trigger and
exacerbate humanitarian crises, poverty and famine.
Those factors interact and reinforce each other, creating
a vicious cycle of unsustainable suffering.
Resolution 2417 (2018), adopted by the Council on
24 May 2018, recognizes the close link between armed
conflict and food insecurity. The persistence of hunger
challenges not only our humanity but also reduces to
a fiction the international community’s efforts to end
armed conflict.
In many parts of the world, notably in the Sahel, the
Great Lakes region and the Horn of Africa, armed and
terrorist groups are deliberately destroying food stores,
burning fields, preventing farmers from cultivating
their land and destroying food production infrastructure
and food transport and distribution systems. In those
regions of chronic instability, skeletal children are dying
of hunger and are at the mercy of birds of prey. This
situation is morally unbearable.
23-23018

03/08/2023

Maintenance of international peace and security

We must respond as the Security Council to which
the peoples of the world have entrusted the fate of their
security and dignity. Our response must go beyond
superficial statements and must be commensurate
with the challenge. We must mobilize a global effort
to address the effects of armed conflict on global food
security and, ultimately, prevent the emergence of new
hotbeds of famine.
First, we must make a greater commitment to
financing adaptation to climate change and invest
more in sustainable agriculture and long-term food
security. That involves supporting small farmers,
improving agricultural infrastructure and promoting
environmentally friendly farming practices. The call
to action by Secretary-General António Guterres to
accelerate the transformation of food systems must be
welcomed and supported by all of us.
Secondly, we must strengthen emergency response
mechanisms to deal with acute food crises by reinforcing
early warning systems, providing emergency food aid
and coordinating efforts among humanitarian agencies
and Member States.

S/PV.9392

Mr. Agyeman (Ghana): I acknowledge the United
States’ leadership on the important issue of global food
insecurity, which thrice in its successive presidencies
has found expression in the Council’s work. I assure
you, Madam President, of Ghana’s support and
cooperation during your presidency this month and
congratulate Ambassador Barbara Woodward and the
United Kingdom delegation for effectively leading the
Council during the month of July.
We also thank Ms. Reena Ghelani, Mr. David
Miliband and Ms. Navyn Salem for their briefings
which underscored the magnitude of famine globally
and the severity of conflict-induced food insecurity,
including for vulnerable countries and populations
in Africa.
The stark reality of food insecurity across the
world is alarming: 828 million people are reported to
be suffering from hunger and some 50 million people
are on the brink of starvation. Those numbers reflect
the lives of real people and tell a harrowing story of
our collective failure to address that most basic of
human needs.

We must safeguard emergency food stocks, in
particular by consolidating existing mechanisms for postconflict prevention, resolution and consolidation and
integrate them absolutely into food crisis management,
in line with the provisions of resolutions 2217 (2015)
on hunger and security, resolution 2573 (2021) on the
protection of essential civilian infrastructure in times
of conflict and resolution 2417 (2018) which calls on
parties to conflict not to obstruct the proper functioning
of food systems and markets in conflict situations,
on the one hand, and, on the other, offers technical
assistance to fragile countries both in the areas of
stockpiling reserves and in appropriate technologies.

Five years since the adoption of resolution 2417
(2018), conflict has remained a primary driver of acute
food insecurity. However, food insecurity is not only a
consequence of violent conflict. Combined with other
factors, it can be a driver of violent conflict and a
contributory factor for their emergence and length.

It is clear that food insecurity is a threat to global
peace and security and exacerbates humanitarian
crises. Food insecurity is a reflection of the crisis of
solidarity that challenges us as representatives of the
peoples of the world and as human beings. We must
respond to it more effectively and in a concerted way
without further delay.

Today, as a result of the impact of the war on
Ukraine, we see the disruptive influence of food
insecurity in every country and on everyone. We are
bound in our experience by the strong headwinds that
the aggression against Ukraine has created in our
socioeconomic circumstances.

Now more than ever, it is time to tackle the root
causes of conflict. It is also essential to promote
dialogue, mediation and diplomacy to resolve the
disputes and tensions that lead to armed conflict.
Conflict prevention is a key factor in guaranteeing food
security and stopping the indignity of famine.

In several places across the world, rising food and
fuel prices have led to widespread unrest and instability
and, on the African continent, where the fragilities are
deep, sharp rises in food prices have often correlated
with political dissatisfaction, protests and agitations
that have affected political stability.

While we therefore welcome the recent
announcement by the Russia Federation at the second
Russia-Africa summit to provide grain shipments to
six African countries at no cost, we are concerned and
deeply disappointed that the Black Sea Grain Initiative
has not been renewed. A renewal of the Initiative,
accompanied by a resolution of the challenges related to

23-2301815/32

S/PV.9392

Maintenance of international peace and security

the export of Russian ammonia, agricultural products
and fertilizers to global markets, represents a more
durable way to prevent speculative spikes in global
food prices and strengthen global food security while
also mitigating their knock-on effects. We therefore
call on all the parties to work constructively to ensure
the renewal of the Initiative.
As we reflect on the implementation of resolution
2417 (2018) and the important contribution it has made
over the past five years, Ghana believes that we must
continue to focus on the important task of breaking the
destructive link between armed conflict and hunger
by ensuring that the associated positive effects of food
systems can promote peace and the supply of safe and
nutritious food to civilians. In that regard, we continue
to urge the international community to implement
a series of emergency measures and simultaneously
pursue long-term investments aimed at breaking the
vicious circle of hunger and conflict.
With respect to immediate measures, Ghana urges
for scaling up urgent action to respond to the acute
food insecurity and nutrition needs of the millions of
vulnerable people in conflict situations around the
world, especially in Africa, which is the hardest hit
region of all. We call on the international community
and donor agencies to prioritize the underfunded
humanitarian response plans for African countries, and
the implementation of those plans for countries in West
Africa and the Sahel, by helping to meet the $3.5 billion
target required to tackle the growing needs. We also
urge for strengthening prepositioned assets at global
and regional humanitarian hubs in order to ensure
that their food stocks meet people’s needs quickly and
effectively. We encourage making every possible effort
to reverse the rapid and dramatic deterioration in food
security observed in conflict-affected settings and urge
the international community to unite in demanding that
the parties to conflicts comply with their obligations
under international law, including international
humanitarian law and international human rights law.
We emphasize the need for long-term investment,
especially in countries where food insecurity and
conflict are acutely linked. In relation to that, I would
like to make three brief additional points.
First, our actions must continue to emphasize the
preservation of peace, the prevention of conflicts and
the rapid deployment of peaceful means for resolving
disputes before they lead to violence between States or
within a State.
16/32

03/08/2023

Secondly, we must focus on building resilience in
economies and food systems. Besides acknowledging
the effects that climate change has on food insecurity
and conflicts, we should work together to support
efforts for adaptation measures in developing countries
and agricultural initiatives such as the African Common
Position for Sustainable Food Systems, the further
implementation of the African Union’s Comprehensive
Africa Agriculture Development Programme and its
results framework, regional food security facilities
such as the Economic Community of West African
States Regional Food Security Reserve and the effective
implementation of the African Development Bank’s
facility, with a view to boosting food security, nutrition
and resilience on the continent.
Thirdly, we need to bridge the gap between needs and
supplies, especially for regions that may be experiencing
drought and where the impact of climate-change-induced
situations could aggravate conflicts. In that regard, we
urge support for the accelerated implementation of the
African Continental Free Trade Area Agreement to
help avert future disruptions of food supply chains on
the African continent.
In conclusion, Ghana welcomes the issuance of
today’s presidential statement (S/PRST/2023/4) and
would like to underscore the need to act with urgency,
at scale, and in concert in order to respond to the food
security and nutrition needs of the millions of vulnerable
people around the world whose situations have been
worsened by conflict. We must also be resolved to
provide immediate humanitarian assistance, build
the resilience of the most vulnerable and strengthen
sustainable, resilient and inclusive food systems, in line
with the 2030 Agenda for the Sustainable Development
and its Sustainable Development Goals.
Mrs. Frazier (Malta): Allow me to thank you,
Madam President, for organizing today’s important
debate, and to wish you and your team every success
during your presidency of the Security Council. Let me
also thank the United Kingdom for presiding over the
Council for the month of July. I thank today’s briefers
for their powerful testimony, analysis and direct calls to
action. Malta welcomes the issuance of the presidential
statement (S/PRST/2023/4) for today’s meeting.
Today the world is experiencing an acute, alarming
rise in food insecurity. It threatens not only the lives of
millions, but the societal fabric in myriad countries across
the globe, representing a grave threat to international
23-23018

03/08/2023

Maintenance of international peace and security

peace and security. Arresting the crisis will require
a response commensurate with the catastrophe itself,
with more than 258 million people globally requiring
urgent and sustained aid. From Afghanistan to Haiti and
the Sudan, populations are already at crisis levels, with
leading famine, food and agriculture and humanitarian
organizations projecting that the world is likely to reach
peak levels of global hunger this December. And as we
know, this crisis is not gender-neutral. Food insecurity
and gender inequality are interlinked, because women
and girls often have less access to and less control
over land, smallholder agricultural market support and
humanitarian assistance.
The conflict in the Sudan has severely disrupted
the production of crops throughout the country, with
estimates that 40 per cent of the population — 19 million
people — are already facing alarming levels of hunger.
As the conflict has disrupted farming, it has also
disrupted sowing and harvesting. With access to seeds
and fertilizers limited, next season’s yields are in major
doubt. Unless urgently addressed, that will compound
the hunger and guarantee human-induced famine in the
months ahead, with disastrous consequences for the
Sudan and the region, where agriculture is a principal
source of income and livelihoods for a majority of
the population.
Just as conflict is a driver of hunger, violence can
drive out humanitarian operations in areas of extreme
danger. It often constrains access for medical and
humanitarian organizations, leading them to work
where they can rather than where they are most needed.
We see instances of that today in Haiti, Yemen, the
Democratic Republic of Congo and Burkina Faso.
In civil conflict, humanitarian access can be denied
through arbitrary and bureaucratic measures, and the
Security Council should never accept such attempts
to instrumentalize international law or to shield such
actions from its scrutiny. We urge the United Nations
to continue detailing such impediments to access in its
reports to the Council and in the white notes mandated
by resolution 2417 (2018). When coordinating with
host States on the development of such documents,
the United Nations must always assert its operational
independence. Only in that way can we collectively act
in a timely manner.
Furthermore, the Council must take seriously
its obligation to ensure accountability for those who
order the destruction of civilian infrastructure critical
to food production, participate in that destruction or

S/PV.9392

prevent infrastructure from functioning. Impunity
only begets further violations. Whether committed
at the rank of general or local commander, violations
must be met with consequences. In that regard, we also
call on the United Nations to work more closely with
warring parties, especially States, to ensure that there
is adequate de-confliction of such infrastructure in
times of armed conflict.
Malta regrets the Russian Federation’s termination
of its involvement in the Black Sea Grain Initiative,
which ensured the safe passage of more than 32 million
metric tons of food commodities from Ukrainian ports,
relieving hunger in some of the hardest-hit corners of
the world. We urge the Russian Federation to re-engage
with the good offices of the Secretary-General and to
reconsider the tragic effects that its action will have.
In conclusion, without urgent, coordinated
humanitarian and emergency agricultural intervention,
our inaction could condemn millions to starvation. From
painful past experiences, we have learned that efforts
to avert famine are effective when the international
community works together in a goal-oriented manner.
Greater resourcing for climate resilience, agricultural
innovation, anticipatory action programmes and,
crucially, early agricultural interventions is now
paramount to stave off the worst of the coming global
hunger crisis. Alleviating acute hunger is the first step
on the road to peacebuilding.
Mr. Afonso (Mozambique): Madam President,
Mozambique congratulates Your Excellency and the
United States Government for assuming the presidency
of the Security Council. We pledge to cooperate fully
with you and the United States team in the Security
Council. We highly commend the United States for
placing the topic of famine and conflict-induced global
food insecurity on the Council’s agenda for three
consecutive years. In that connection, we welcome
the presidential statement just adopted this morning
(S/PRST/2023/4). We wish to pay tribute to Her
Excellency Ambassador Barbara Woodward and the
United Kingdom team as a whole for their excellent
presidency of the Security Council for the month of
July. We thank the distinguished briefers for their
important insights on this important topic.
“End hunger, achieve food security and improved
nutrition and promote sustainable agriculture”
is one of the stated goals of the 2030 Agenda for
Sustainable Development. One of the major obstacles

23-2301817/32

S/PV.9392

Maintenance of international peace and security

to achieving that noble goal is the growing incidence
in the world of armed conflicts, terrorism and other
related factors. They affect food security where
fighting takes place and beyond. Conflicts disrupt and
destroy food systems, decrease farming populations,
destroy infrastructure, reduce resilience and increase
vulnerabilities. According to the Global Report on Food
Crises, armed conflicts and other threats to security
pushed 139 million people into acute food insecurity
in 2021, amounting to an increase of almost 40 million
people over the previous year. In 2022, the situation
deteriorated further, as the impacts of armed conflicts
were felt across the globe. The 2023 Report suggests
that conflicts pushed more than 117 million people into
acute food insecurity in the first half of the year alone,
in addition to other negative factors, such as economic
shocks and extreme weather conditions.
We come from Africa, a region in which our Heads
of State and Government have committed themselves to
a collective policy of silencing the guns and promoting
development for the peace and prosperity of our nations.
We are therefore aware of this vicious link between
insecurity and armed conflicts. Many countries in
Africa and Asia are the focus of the attention of famine
reports. Those are countries in which the spectre of food
insecurity could be dramatic, if urgent and consistent
humanitarian action is not taken.
We believe that cooperation and understanding
between States or warring parties to extend
humanitarian aid and safeguard human dignity would
contribute immensely to minimizing the suffering
of those populations who live the tragedy of war
on a daily basis. Mozambique stands in solidarity
with all populations that, in the aftermath of various
conflicts, including those motivated by transnational
terrorism, are forced to leave their production areas,
thereby increasing the pressure for humanitarian aid.
We champion the creation of conditions for access to
humanitarian aid without hindrance, in full compliance
with international humanitarian law.
Countering the prevailing bleak situation requires,
among other things, an in-depth knowledge of the
evolving threats and challenges with which we are
confronted. It also requires the ability to reach the
affected segments of the population, provide them
with individualized and well-timed support in
response to their needs and strengthen their positive
coping mechanisms. Such work is best done through
partnerships and collaboration that reinforce existing
18/32

03/08/2023

support structures and leverage the comparative
advantages of the many organizations and entities
present in any humanitarian crisis, while taking into
account local, national and regional realities. To that
end, Mozambique encourages the adoption of an
integrated and inclusive humanitarian approach based
on intersectoral coordination at all levels between
local, national, regional and international partners. The
public and private sectors should be included in order
to ensure sustainable food and nutritional security for
needy populations, with a view to creating sustainable
food systems.
Based on our own experience in Mozambique,
we are of the view that food security at the national
or international level comes with peace and the
normalization of people’s lives. It comes with the
will and strength to negotiate and peacefully settle
disputes wherever they arise. In the meantime, to
mitigate dire humanitarian situations, certain actions
must be taken, individually or collectively, by States,
donors and organizations. Those actions include, first,
strengthening the productive capacity of concerned
countries by facilitating access to production
technologies, including adequate funding for the
agricultural, livestock and fisheries sectors in order to
prevent conflicts. Secondly, all constraints and barriers
to the distribution chain of fertilizers and inputs must
be lifted and protectionist measures rescinded.
Thirdly, strict compliance with obligations under
international humanitarian law should be encouraged
and all the parties to conflicts reminded that objects
indispensable to the survival of civilians are to be
respected and safeguarded.
Fourthly, it is essential to include and provide
technical assistance to the groups most vulnerable to
conflict in food-system value chains. They include
women, young people and individuals with disabilities.
Mozambique calls on the Security Council to
do everything in its power to achieve a cessation of
hostilities in all conflicts that continue to claim human
lives around the world. It is our duty under the Charter
of the United Nations to free innocent civilians from
the scourge of war and from continued situations of
hunger and famine. We urge Member States to channel
all possible means and resources into attaining peace,
security and stability. In our view those are solid
foundations for promoting and building global food
security worldwide.
23-23018

03/08/2023

Maintenance of international peace and security

Mr. Zhang Jun (China) (spoke in Chinese): I
thank Ms. Ghelani, Mr. Miliband and Ms. Salem for
their briefings.
The issue of food, which affects people’s livelihoods
and security, is complex and sensitive. With its
extensive dependence on supply and production chains,
it represents one of the most long-standing recurrent
global challenges. The Security Council attaches great
importance to the issue and has taken positive action on
it from various angles, including through its adoption of
resolution 2417 (2018), which sets out clear requirements
for protecting civilians, safeguarding agricultural
facilities and improving humanitarian access in armed
conflict. The international community should work
together to promote the effective implementation of the
relevant Council requirements, adhere to the political
settlement of disputes and break the vicious cycle of
conflict and famine.
The current global food security situation is
worsening. The data in United Nations reports and
the situations illustrated by today’s briefers are
shocking and worrying. China supports United Nations
agencies in utilizing their professional expertise
and coordinating roles to mobilize the international
community, especially developed countries, to increase
humanitarian assistance and bridge the funding gap
in the global humanitarian response so as to alleviate
the urgent needs of people in the countries concerned.
In addressing these urgent issues and with a view to
thoroughly resolving the food crisis, it is essential
to focus on the root causes and conduct systematic
reviews. Without exception, the primary victims of the
food crisis are the populations of developing countries.
Food insecurity is essentially a result of insufficient
and unbalanced development on a global scale and a
concrete manifestation of the development gap between
the North and the South. It is closely related to the
long-standing unjust and unreasonable systems of food
production and trade and international governance.
The international community should seize the
opportunity of the Sustainable Development Goals
(SDG) Summit in September and the Summit of the
Future next year to address both the symptoms and
root causes, improve rules and regulations and take
comprehensive measures to achieve Goal 2 — zero
hunger by 2030 — on schedule. In that connection, I
would like to make the following points.

S/PV.9392

First, we should firmly establish the concept of
common security, as the causes of the food crisis are
complex and intertwined with other traditional and
non-traditional security issues. Without efforts to ensure
the common security of the international community, it
will be difficult to achieve sustainable food security. We
should uphold common, comprehensive, cooperative
and sustainable concepts of security, remain committed
to the peaceful settlement of disputes, advocate for
dialogue and respond to challenges such as food
insecurity in a spirit of unity and a win-win mindset.
We must firmly oppose unilateral sanctions and actions
that affect international food security and global
cooperation, such as decoupling and breaking supply
chains, disrupting the market order and suppressing
enterprises from other countries. China urges the
countries concerned to immediately cease such
practices, which lack legal foundation and are contrary
to a spirit of fairness and justice.
The Black Sea Grain Initiative and the memorandum
of understanding on Russia’s grain and fertilizer exports
have had a positive impact on maintaining global food
security, and the window of opportunity for resuming
the package agreement still remains open. China hopes
that the relevant parties will intensify their dialogue
and consultations and meet each other halfway as they
strive to find a balanced solution to the legitimate
concerns of all the parties and restore the export of
food and fertilizers from Russia and Ukraine as soon
as possible. China supports the Secretary-General and
other stakeholders in their continued efforts to that end.
Secondly, the development gap between North and
South must be swiftly bridged. Sustainable development
is the most fundamental guarantee of the achievement
of common food security. The international community
should address the issue of food insecurity in the
context of sustainable development and take advantage
of the upcoming opportunities in 2023 for taking
stock, such as the SDG Summit and the United Nations
Food Systems Summit. The international community
should heed the voices of developing countries, seek
to strengthen North-South dialogue and coordination
and mobilize greater development resources to build
greater development synergies. We should make
diligent efforts to assist developing countries in need
in solving problems in agriculture, rural areas and
farming so as to enhance resilience to climate change
and natural disasters and increase food production and
self-sufficiency.

23-2301819/32

S/PV.9392

Maintenance of international peace and security

Developed countries should end unreasonable
agricultural subsidies and adopt responsible monetary
policies to reduce the impacts of imported inflation
and exchange-rate fluctuations, among other factors,
on food security in developing countries, while
working earnestly to fulfil their official development
assistance commitments. They should also refrain from
technology lockdowns and so-called small-yard, highfence practices. We should rather accelerate technology
transfers and the application and sharing of knowledge
in areas such as biology, the digital world and outer
space in order to create better conditions for developing
countries to strengthen capacity-building and achieve
sustainable development.
Thirdly, it is essential to improve the global food
and agriculture governance system. The international
grain market has long faced problems such as the
monopolization of pricing power by major grain
merchants, structural imbalances in production and
supply chains and the financialization of agricultural
commodities. Some countries have indiscriminately
implemented unilateral coercive measures, creating
serious obstacles to the agricultural and economic
development of the countries targeted. The international
community should focus on these types of persistent
problems, which undermine global food security, and
work hard to resolve them. In the preparatory processes
for the SDG Summit and the Summit of the Future,
it will be vital to comprehensively consider how to
improve the global governance of food and agriculture
at the institutional and rule-making levels, with a focus
on increasing the representation and decision-making
power of developing countries. Efforts should be made
to remove restrictions and unilateral sanctions on food
production and exports and combat speculative capital
and price gouging, in order to build a safe, stable,
efficient, open, inclusive and mutually beneficial
supply-chain system, as well as a fairer and more
reasonable international food trade order.
Actions speak louder than words. China has
contributed to maintaining global food security
by taking proactive measures. China has proposed
global development initiatives and an international
food security cooperation initiative advocating for
enhanced practical food cooperation. We have been
providing assistance to developing countries in the
form of funding, technology and access to markets
to improve their food production, storage and lossreduction capabilities. China has cooperated in the
20/32

03/08/2023

area of agriculture with more than 140 countries
and regions, has provided more than 1,000 types of
agricultural technology to developing countries and
has trained more than 14,000 professionals in hybrid
rice technology for more than 80 developing countries.
We have also provided emergency food aid to countries
in need. We stand ready to work with other countries
to contribute further to global food security through
enhanced exchanges and cooperation.
Mrs. Broadhurst Estival (France) (spoke in
French): I would like to congratulate you, Madam
President, and thank the United States for convening
this open debate on such an important subject, which
expands upon that of the meeting convened by the
United Kingdom presidency on 17 July (see S/PV.9380),
in which the Minister for Europe and Foreign Affairs
of France participated. I also thank each one of the
briefers for their informative briefings.
The year 2022 has been a bleak year for food
security. And, following Russia’s withdrawal from the
Black Sea Grain Initiative, we can expect our worst
fears to come true in the coming months. That acute
crisis is affecting the whole world. But it especially
hurting the most vulnerable and poorest countries.
I would like to begin by highlighting the following
point. Russia’s war of aggression against Ukraine
continues to exacerbate an already extremely worrisome
situation caused by the proliferation of armed
conflicts, the impacts of climate change, the erosion
of biodiversity and the coronavirus disease pandemic.
Russia is directly responsible for the exacerbation of
this multifactor crisis. In ignoring the efforts of the
Secretary-General and Türkiye, Russia has unilaterally
and brutally terminated the Black Sea Grain Initiative,
which had enabled the transport of grain to 45 countries
and vulnerable populations, including through
humanitarian aid from the World Food Programme, to
stabilize world prices and avoid shortages. In preventing
world markets’ access to Ukrainian grain and blocking
shipping in the Black Sea, Russia is posing a direct
threat to global food security and food supply to the
countries most affected. In that way, it is seeking to
destroy Ukrainian production and export capacities,
including by bombing port infrastructure and grain
depots, in flagrant violation of international law.
Its goal is to suffocate the Ukrainian agricultural
system, not only in order to reduce Ukraine’s revenue,
but also to ensure its position as a dominant player in
23-23018

03/08/2023

Maintenance of international peace and security

the markets and serve its own economic interests and
those of its agricultural industry. The increase in grain
prices that Russia intends to cause would be for its
own benefit and to the detriment of all other countries.
Following its inexcusable act of blackmail against the
renewal of the Black Sea Grain Initiative, in a further
demonstration of its cynicism, Russia is exploiting the
global food crisis. Russia must immediately stop using
hunger as a weapon of war.
Responding to food insecurity and malnutrition is
everyone’s responsibility. France is fully committed
to that struggle and immediately took the initiative
to respond to the global food crisis by launching
several initiatives, including the Food and Agriculture
Resilience Mission and Harvest Rescue Operation.
We have accordingly earmarked this year more than
€900 million for emergency food aid, agricultural
resilience and the development of agricultural systems
in the most vulnerable countries, including €160 million
for the World Food Programme, which is double the
amount for 2021. At the same time, I recall that Russia
halved its contribution to the World Food Programme
in 2022, and that it is furthermore depriving the World
Food Programme of Ukrainian wheat.
Together with our European partners, we are
supporting the solidarity lanes established by the
European Union, which have enabled the transport of
41 million tons of grains from Ukraine since March
2022. Currently, they represent the sole passageway
for Ukrainian grains, and we intend to strengthen
them. France will continue to take the initiative in the
coming months and will host the first global meeting of
the School Meals Coalition, in Paris, in October. The
Coalition’s goal is aimed at ensuring that every child
is able to receive at least one healthy, nutritious meal a
day, which is both a social safety net and an incentive
for school attendance. France will also host the next
Nutrition for Growth Summit.
At a time when food insecurity is reaching
unprecedented levels, respect for international
humanitarian law is imperative if aid is to be delivered
to populations in need. France recalls that deliberately
starving civilians is a war crime. That crime must not
go unpunished. Humanitarian aid must be allowed to
be delivered safely, rapidly and without hindrance to all
in need. As all our briefers reminded us, access to aid
is key and vital to all countries most at risk of famine.

S/PV.9392

France would also like to call today for obstacles
to the flow humanitarian and food aid to the population
of Nagorno-Karabakh, through the Lachin corridor, as
well as obstacles to freedom of movement, to be lifted
in accordance with the order of the International Court
of Justice of 22 February.
At a time when humanitarian space is shrinking,
France reiterates its full support for all humanitarian
actors in carrying out their difficult missions. France
supports and is grateful for the United States presidential
statement (S/PRST/2023/4).
Mr. Pérez Loose (Ecuador) (spoke in Spanish): I
thank you, Madam President, for convening this debate
and thank the briefers for their valuable presentations.
Ecuador aligns itself with the statement to be
delivered by the delegation of Ireland on behalf of the
Group of Friends of Action on Conflict and Hunger,
which we co-chair.
What did it cost the Security Council to adopt
resolution 2417 (2018) on hunger and conflict? Today,
it is a valuable early-warning and response tool. Last
week, we held an informal interactive dialogue to
discuss the warning note regarding food security risks
in Burkina Faso, the Democratic Republic of the Congo
and Haiti. We hope that today’s meeting will serve as
a sounding board for mobilizing efforts and resources
from the Office for the Coordination for Humanitarian
Affairs (OCHA), the World Food Programme, the Food
and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations,
humanitarian actors and donors to address the crises in
those countries. But what else can we do as a Security
Council? We do not claim that there is a generic solution
that is applicable to all States, but peace and stability
are essential conditions.
In the case of Haiti, with the adoption of resolution
2692 (2023) of 14 July, we embraced OCHA’s main
recommendations. The Council urged all parties,
including those with the ability to influence armed
groups, to take measures to put an end to the blockading
of roads, which are required to supply local markets,
and to the damaging of sources of food, crops, livestock
and medical supplies. The need for safe, rapid and
unimpeded humanitarian access was also taken into
account. We welcome the adoption of the presidential
statement (S/PRST/2023/4) today, which also includes
those recommendations. Of course, we hope that there
will be adequate support for them to be implemented
on the ground. The deployment of a specialized force

23-2301821/32

S/PV.9392

Maintenance of international peace and security

to support the Haitian police will shore up efforts in
Haiti. Security is essential, but it will not be enough.
Therefore, at the same time, we must advance the
implementation of other strategies requiring donor
cooperation for Haiti in the socioeconomic sphere.
Considering that since 2022 more than 250 million
people have been suffering from acute hunger in
one third of United Nations Member States, it will
be vital for us to focus on food security, and all the
more so when a majority of those cases involve crisis
scenarios and armed violence. We reiterate that all
parties are under an obligation to make every effort
to ensure that food systems and markets function
effectively and to protect food production, storage and
distribution facilities and water supplies. The Council
must ensure compliance with resolution 2573 (2021),
on the protection of essential goods, which Ecuador
co-sponsored in 2021. We therefore emphasize the
importance of the prohibition on attacking, destroying,
removing or rendering useless agricultural equipment
and crops. We condemn the use of starvation as a tactic
of war and any blockade or aggression directed at those
who provide humanitarian assistance.
If we know that nearly 25,000 people die every
day from hunger, how many must have died from acute
hunger in the past five years? How many have died
from lack of food since the Council’s debates in March
2021 (see S/2021/250) or May 2022 (see S/PV.9036)?
How many have died since the debate on the protection
of civilians (see S/PV.9327) just three months ago, and
since the start of today’s meeting? However, we must
also be able to ask ourselves how many lives have
been saved by the United Nations and the Council, and
what are we doing to prevent the risk of famine in an
even greater number of countries. In April of last year,
Ecuador hosted the Food and Agriculture Organization
of the United Nations Regional Conference for Latin
America and the Caribbean, because of concerns about
rising hunger and food insecurity in our region and
the world.

03/08/2023

an era when military spending has reached $2 trillion
and humankind wastes a third of the food it produces
while children eat dirt and mudpies.
Dame Barbara Woodward (United Kingdom):
Let me start by welcoming you, Madam President, and
your team to the presidency of the Security Council,
and thanking the United States presidency for bringing
the issue of food insecurity back to the Council,
following resolution 2417 (2018). I also want to thank
Reena Ghelani, David Miliband and Navyn Salem for
bringing their expertise and, critically, their proposals
for action to the Council.
As we have all heard, the number of people
facing acute food insecurity has skyrocketed from
193 million in 2021 to more than a quarter of a billion
today, with conflict as the main driver. Last week the
Council met to discuss the United Nations warning on
rapidly deteriorating food security in Burkina Faso,
the Democratic Republic of the Congo and Haiti. The
message was clear — we must act now to prevent further
deterioration. In that spirit, I want to join others in
focusing on actions and to propose three. They overlap
with those that have been proposed by others during
the course of our debate, and in particular with those
proposed by the United Nations Famine Prevention and
Response Coordinator.
First, the Council should take concerted action to
tackle the drivers of conflict and invest in inclusive,
sustainable peace. The Secretary-General’s New
Agenda for Peace calls for renewed multilateral
cooperation, and for putting women, who are uniquely
affected by food insecurity, at the centre of peace
initiatives. In Afghanistan, if they cannot bear to watch
their children die, some mothers face a harrowing
choice — to sell their children or starve. Congolese
women in displacement camps are forced into sex work
just to buy food.

We reiterate the need for a resumption of the Black
Sea Grain Initiative and the establishment of other
initiatives to prevent the deterioration of global food
insecurity. Trade in fertilizer, seeds and agricultural
inputs must not be restricted.

Secondly, we call on the parties to conflicts to
abide by international humanitarian law and allow
humanitarians rapid and unimpeded access to people in
need. In the Sudan and Somalia, starving communities
are surrounded by fighting and humanitarians
cannot reach them to bring them food. International
humanitarian law is our greatest defence against hunger
in armed conflict and those who violate it should be
held to account.

We must encourage all the organs and agencies
of the United Nations system and Member States to
intensify their efforts so that we can turn the page on

Finally, we need to protect global food systems.
The Black Sea Grain Initiative got nearly 33 million
tons of grain into world markets. Russia’s decision to

22/32

23-23018

03/08/2023

Maintenance of international peace and security

end the initiative has raised food prices, hitting the
world’s hungriest people. Russia’s offer to give 50,000
tons of grain to each of six countries will not bring
grain prices back down or help those facing famine
in other countries. That inadequate gesture falls far
short of solving the global problem that Russia has
created. Let us be clear. The sanctions from the United
Kingdom, the United States and the European Union
do not target food and fertilizer. They target Russia’s
war machine. As President Ramaphosa of South Africa
said, the Black Sea should be open. We call on Russia
to rejoin the Initiative immediately. We know what we
need to do to stop the soaring levels of hunger. Let us
now turn that into action.
Mr. Polyanskiy (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): I thank United Nations Famine Prevention
and Response Coordinator Reena Ghelani for her
briefing. We also listened to the representatives of
non-governmental organizations who were proposed as
briefers by the United States.
The topic of today’s meeting — combating
hunger — is unquestionably extremely important.
Russia, like the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics
before it, has prioritized the issue, and historically not
just in relation to specific conflicts but in the broader
context of the struggle for social and economic human
rights. The efforts of the Soviet Union in that area are
recalled with gratitude in many regions of the world.
We are pleased that our Western colleagues have also
begun to reflect on the issue, but regrettably, as is clear
from the statements we have heard, their interest is
purely opportunistic. The threat of world hunger has
only recently been of concern to them and only insofar
as they believe it can be exploited to vilify Russia.
Moreover, it is obvious to us that many food crises,
particularly the most acute, are directly or indirectly
caused by the actions of the United States and its allies
or are the consequences of their long-standing policies.
For example, Afghanistan, which was mentioned by
our colleague from the United Kingdom, is struggling
to climb out of the abyss of hunger and poverty for
over 20 years now owing to the experiments of the
United States-led coalition to democratize this deeply
traditional country in a Western fashion. Despite the
fact that our colleagues, the Western members of the
Security Council, did not have the courage to honestly
name the root causes of food and other crises in countries
such as Iraq, Libya and Syria, we all understand too
well that they are caused by illegal interventions by

S/PV.9392

Western States. In the case of Syria, which was once
a breadbasket for many of its neighbours, the United
States is still occupying large swathes of this country
and stealing oil, grain and other natural resources.
Be that as it may, I propose to begin by addressing
the root causes of threats to food security, about which
our Western colleagues are bashfully silent. According
to United Nations estimates, technically, there is no
acute food shortage in the world. That is, the problem
is not a lack of food. There is enough food produced in
the world. The problem is its uneven distribution, with
the West accumulating excess stocks and developing
countries experiencing a deficit. The second reason
is what economists call the food price environment.
Simply put, it is profitable for the largest producers of
agro-industrial products to maintain high prices. I am
referring here to the so-called “big four” — American
companies Archer Daniels Midland, Bunge and Cargill,
and the Dutch Louis Dreyfus Company, which account
for 75 to 90 per cent of global agro-industrial trade. In
the fiscal year of 2022, the Cargill corporation alone
increased sales by 23 per cent to $165 billion, posting a
record $5 billion net income.
We should ask ourselves why, as the Western agroindustrial complex is raking in superprofits, the threat
of famine is hitting developing countries with growing
populations the most? Why are their economies unable
to cope with it? The answer is very simple — in the
past, Western colonialists deliberately tailored them
to extract maximum profits for the metropole and not
so that they would be able to feed their populations.
Monocultural agricultural specialization was forced
upon them, resulting now in exports that often consist
of one or two types of goods. This economic structure
makes them extremely sensitive to price fluctuations in
the global food markets, whose current instability is due
to the fact that, during the coronavirus disease pandemic,
Western States rushed to save their economies, not
caring one bit about how their rash actions in the
financial, economic, energy and other sectors would
hit more vulnerable actors in the global economy.
A year ago, in response to the appeals of the United
Nations, we put aside our doubts and agreed to a grain
deal. But here too, Western countries managed to turn
everything in their favour. One of the two parts of
the deal, the Black Sea Grain Initiative, very quickly
turned from a humanitarian one into a commercial one.
As a result, only 3 per cent of the exported grain went
to countries in need, while the lion’s share ended up in
Western countries. Is that what we agreed to?

23-2301823/32

S/PV.9392

Maintenance of international peace and security

The duplicity of our former Western partners was
even more clear in their arrogant unwillingness to fulfil
the second part of the grain deal — the memorandum of
understanding between Russia and the United Nations
on the supply of Russian food and fertilizers to world
markets. And this is despite the fact that the Russia’s
share of the global wheat market is 20 per cent, while
Ukraine’s is less than 5 per cent. That means that Russia
makes a significant contribution to global food security
and is a solid, responsible international supplier of
agricultural products — not to mention the exceptional
role of Russian fertilizers in global food security.
It would seem that, given those obvious facts,
Western countries need to focus on ensuring that
Russian grain and fertilizers can reach countries in
need without hindrance. However, that is not part of
the plans of our Western colleagues, as unambiguously
confirmed by you, Madam President, the day before
yesterday. So how can we talk about any kind of desire
on your country’s part to address international food
security issues? All that drives you is the desire to punish
Russia and your pipe dreams of dealing it a strategic
defeat. You do not care at all about the interests of the
countries of the Global South, but we do. I therefore
repeat once again that if all of the problems that have
been publicly raised by us, including in this Chamber,
regarding the implementation of the Russia-United
Nations memorandum are eliminated, we will be ready
to once again take part in the Black Sea Grain Initiative.
Western delegations today literally poured forth
numbers detailing the humanitarian aid rendered by
them to developing countries. Whether that is enough
to compensate for the damage caused by centuries of
cruel colonial policies of plundering natural resources
and exploiting populations is not for us to judge, but
rather for those States that have suffered from it.
Do Western countries help a lot or a little? It is
not polite to count other people’s money, but it is hard
not to notice that the amount of assistance provided by
the United States and its allies to the countries of the
Global South cannot be compared to what the West has
spent on weapons in less than two years for its proxy
war with Russia to the last Ukrainian. According
to the most conservative estimates, that amounts to
€80 billion, while the total funds allocated to Ukraine is
€165 billion. And this is despite the fact that the Office
for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs requested
$55.2 billion from donors for all of its humanitarian
operations for 2023, and only 24.8 per cent of that
24/32

03/08/2023

amount has been funded to date. Imagine how much
good could be done in the world if the United States
and its allies spent money on development assistance as
readily as they sponsor wars around the world?
Now, I would like to draw attention to something
else — despite all their benevolent slogans, donor
assistance from Western countries is not selfless and
always comes with political preconditions. A clear
example of that is the situation with the cross-border
humanitarian mechanism for Syria, where Western
States are essentially openly blackmailing the Syrian
people, seeking a change of power. Another example is
the threats we are hearing now from Mr. Josep Borrell
Fontelles and from the leadership of the United Kingdom,
France and the United States to stop helping the Niger.
Did people suddenly stop starving there after the coup?
In other words, it is obvious that all of this humanitarian
aid is being used by the West solely as a tool of control
over States that are forced to resort to it. The needs
of the population are not being taken into account.
To my colleagues from developing countries, I
say — make no mistake, the habits and methods of
the former colonizers have not changed, only the
packaging has. For every dollar allegedly spent on
aid, they will demand a payment of sovereignty and
political independence. Many African States have
already experienced that first-hand and do not want to
put up with such an approach. That makes Mr. Borrell
Fontelles lose sleep in his Garden of Eden, as he
suddenly decided today that by selling grain at low
prices, Russia is somehow makes its buyers dependent.
I will not comment on the perverted logic of the head of
European Union diplomacy. I will simply say that the
facts are not in his favour.
Russia has never considered Africa, Asia or Latin
America as a space for extracting profit. Despite all
of the obstacles put in place by the United States and
its allies, we have helped, are still helping and will
continue to help those in need around the world free
of charge. We have built and will continue to build
factories, schools, hospitals and universities so that
they can use their natural resources to create goods
with added value, instead of exporting raw materials,
so that their young people can stay home, rather than
leaving their countries en masse.
We understand the importance of the uninterrupted
supply of food to African countries. That is important
for socioeconomic development and for maintaining
23-23018

03/08/2023

Maintenance of international peace and security

political stability. That is why we pay special attention
to shipments of wheat, barley, corn and other grains
to our African friends, including through the World
Food Programme.
Last year, trade in agricultural products between
Russia and African countries grew by 10 per cent and
amounted to $6.7 billion, whereas from January to June,
it has already increased by a record 60 per cent. Russia
exported 11.5 million tons of grains to Africa in 2022,
and in the first six months of this year alone, we have
already exported nearly 10 million tons. I want to stress
that all of this has taken place despite the illegal unilateral
sanctions imposed on our exports, which seriously
impede the supply of Russian food and complicate
transportation, logistics, insurance and bank payments.
Moreover, as announced at the recent Russia-Africa
summit, we will be able to provide Burkina Faso, the
Central African Republic, Eritrea, Mali, Somalia and
Zimbabwe with 25,000 to 50,000 tons of grain free of
charge in the coming months, and we will ensure the
free delivery of those products as well.
I also recall our readiness to donate mineral
fertilizers to the poorest countries in need. Of the
262,000 tons of those fertilizers, which are currently
blocked in European ports, only two shipments — 20,000
tons to Malawi and 34,000 tons to Kenya — have been
sent so far. The rest remains in the hands of European
States, despite the fact that we are talking about a purely
humanitarian action to which no sanctions should apply
in principle.
We believe that the vast majority of countries,
including African countries, which are seeing an
alarming trend in the area of food security, have
sufficient fertile lands. In other words, there is a
foundation for building food sovereignty, and it should
be strengthened not through humanitarian aid, but
through the implementation of projects in the area of
sustainable development in general and the transfer
of necessary technologies, fertilizers and weatherresistant seeds. We are convinced that, with the use of
appropriate agricultural technologies and the proper
organization of agricultural production, Africa will
in the future not only be able to feed itself and ensure
its own food security, but also become an exporter of
various types of food.
For its part, Russia is ready to share its expertise
in agricultural production with African States and
other interested developing countries and to provide

S/PV.9392

assistance in the introduction of advanced technologies.
Unlike Western neo-colonialists, we are interested
in building a more equitable system of resource
distribution, so that developing countries will not be
forever hooked on the needle of politically conditioned
Western humanitarian aid, which is nothing other
than primitive blackmail, so they overcome the
challenges of the transition period and form strong,
sustainable and self-sufficient economies, which will
help to ensure social stability and the well-being of the
population — that is, they will be absolutely free to
exercise their sovereignty in making all domestic and
foreign policy decisions. Russia is ready to assist them
with that in every possible way.
We note the work carried out by our American
colleagues in the run-up to today’s meeting to agree
on a statement by the President of the Security Council
on hunger and conflict. Although the document did
not include all the provisions we proposed, we felt able
to support it in a spirit of compromise. For example,
the consequences of illegitimate unilateral restrictive
measures and sanctions, which have a direct negative
impact on food security in the world, were left out of
the document. It would also have been appropriate to
recall paragraph 3 of article 54 of Protocol I Additional
to the Geneva Conventions of 1949, according to which
the prohibitions on attacking or destroying agricultural
infrastructure do not apply if such infrastructure is
used as sustenance for the members of its armed forces
or in direct support of military action.
During today’s debate, the representative of
Venezuela will speak on behalf of the Group of Friends
in Defence of the Charter of the United Nations. We
associate ourselves with that statement, which reflects
more fully the approach to addressing the issues that
are the focus of our meeting today.
In conclusion, I would like to say that since Russian
food and fertilizers are so important — and this is
obvious — for the socioeconomic development and
food security of the countries in Asia, Africa, Latin
America and the Middle East, the choice now lies with
the United States and its allies. Unless the illegitimate
obstacles artificially created by the West affecting
Russian economic operators in supplying agricultural
products are eliminated, it will hardly be possible to
restore the normal functioning of supply chains and
resolve other issues related to global food security.

23-2301825/32

S/PV.9392

Maintenance of international peace and security

03/08/2023

No matter how much the United States and its allies
try to shift the blame to Russia, the facts are not in their
favour. So, they must decide what is more important for
them: geopolitical considerations or the desire to help
the developing world. If the former, then there is no
need to mislead anyone, including by initiating debates
like today’s or drafting beautiful joint documents. We
need actions, not words.

The complete halt of any humanitarian supplies
by Azerbaijan since 15 June this year has led to a
critical shortage of food, medical supplies and other
essential goods, creating a full-fledged humanitarian
crisis. The disruption of electricity and gas supplies
has been paralysing social and health-care services
and the transportation system, depriving the besieged
population of their fundamental human rights.

We have been and remain ready to participate in
joint efforts to strengthen international food security.
Are the United States and its allies? We have serious
doubts about that.

The blockade has a particularly devastating impact
on the most vulnerable segments of the population.
Owing to the lack of essential foods and vitamins,
approximately 2,000 pregnant women, around 30,000
children, 20,000 older persons and 9,000 persons with
disabilities are struggling to survive under conditions
of malnutrition, the absence of basic supplies and
medicine. Moreover, Azerbaijan continuously targets
civilians conducting agricultural works, augmenting its
manifest intent to impose starvation on the population.

The President: I wish to remind all speakers to
limit their statements to no more than three minutes
to carry out its work expeditiously. Flashing lights on
the collars of the microphones will prompt speakers to
bring their remarks to a close after three minutes.
I now give the floor to the representative of Armenia.
Mr. Gevorgyan (Armenia): I would like to express
my appreciation to the United States for convening
this open debate on such a pertinent topic. I thank
Ms. Reena Ghelani, United Nations Famine Prevention
and Response Coordinator, and the other briefers for
presenting their views on the ways to prevent and
address famine by strengthening food security in
conflict situations.
Starvation has been repeatedly used as a method of
warfare and perpetuating genocide throughout history.
But today, I am not going to recall examples from the
past or assess future risks of famine in the context of the
conflict. Instead, I would like to bring to the attention
of the Council a situation that is happening right now,
a situation wherein people do not know whether today
they will be able to find milk formula for their babies,
a loaf of bread for their children or provide medicine to
critically ill relatives.
As we meet, the people of Nagorno-Karabakh
face a threat to their very existence resulting from the
complete blockade imposed by Azerbaijan. For more
than seven months, Azerbaijan has continued to block
the Lachin corridor, a humanitarian lifeline connecting
Nagorno-Karabakh with the outside world. That illegal
and inhumane action is in blatant violation of the order
of the International Court of Justice of 22 February and
reaffirmed by a 6 July order, norms of international
humanitarian law and the trilateral statement of
9 November 2020.
26/32

Those warning signs have already been
communicated by the International Committee of the
Red Cross (ICRC), which remains the only international
humanitarian mission in Nagorno-Karabakh. In its
25 July news release, the International Committee of
the Red Cross expressed concern over the growing
humanitarian needs and emphasized that it is not
currently able to bring humanitarian assistance to the
civilian population through the Lachin corridor, while
stressing that its humanitarian aid convoys are a lifeline
for the population in the area. After three days of that
communication, Azerbaijan arrested 68-year-old Vagif
Khachatryan, a person who was being transported
by ICRC from Nagorno-Karabakh to Armenia for
medical treatment. The arrest of a person under
ICRC protection whose transfer had been previously
agreed with Azerbaijan is not merely a perfidious act
but a well-calculated obstruction of ICRC work in
Nagorno-Karabakh.
To address the life-saving needs of the most
vulnerable, on 26 July, the Government of Armenia
decided to deliver a consignment of around 360 tons of
essential goods, mainly food and medical supplies, to
Nagorno-Karabakh. We appealed to the peacekeeping
forces of the Russian Federation to organize the
delivery of the humanitarian assistance to those in need,
which had been the established practice throughout the
past months. However, so far the humanitarian cargo
still remains at the entrance to the Lachin corridor
due to the Azerbaijani side’s obstruction and denial of
its transfer.
23-23018

03/08/2023

Maintenance of international peace and security

The dire humanitarian situation on the ground and
the risks of evolving hunger in Nagorno-Karabakh
require an efficient and timely response on the part
of the international community to ensure the full
and unconditional implementation of the decisions
of the International Court of Justice and full respect
for international human rights and international
humanitarian law. We hope that yesterday’s statement
by the Secretary-General, in which he expressed
deep concern about the humanitarian situation and
emphasized the need for implementing the Court’s
orders in order to ensure the unimpeded movement of
persons, vehicles and cargo along the Lachin corridor,
will be the first step towards full United Nations
engagement on the ground. That engagement is needed
more than ever. The cost of inaction is too high to be
sustained, and the mass atrocity being perpetrated
through starvation should and can be prevented
and stopped.
We call on the United Nations and the Security
Council to take urgent measures to ensure Azerbaijan’s
full compliance with its legally binding obligations
under the orders of the International Court of Justice
and international humanitarian law, immediately
restore freedom of movement across the Lachin corridor
and allow safe and unimpeded humanitarian access to
Nagorno-Karabakh for United Nations agencies and
the ICRC.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Cuba.
Mr. Peñalver Portal (Cuba) (spoke in Spanish):
We align ourselves with the statement to be delivered
by the representative of the Bolivarian Republic of
Venezuela on behalf of the Group of Friends in Defence
of the Charter of the United Nations.
At the 1996 World Food Summit, the historic leader
of the Cuban revolution, Fidel Castro Ruz, denounced
the root causes of inequalities and hunger when he said,
“It is capitalism, neoliberalism, the laws of a
savage market, external debt, underdevelopment
and unequal exchange that are killing so many
people in the world.”
A profoundly unjust, undemocratic and exclusionary
international order continues to exist. It has provoked
an exponential increase in poverty, hunger and food
insecurity. The current multidimensional global
crisis has contributed to widening the gap between

S/PV.9392

the increasingly wealthy North and the increasingly
poor and marginalized South. Big business is leading
the spread of protectionist policies and speculative
practices, driving up food prices. Irrational capitalist
production and consumption patterns continue to
destroy the planet’s ecological balance. Trillions
of dollars are invested and squandered on military
expenditures instead of being devoted to protecting life
and contributing to sustainable development.
In that complex context, there is also an increase in
unilateral coercive measures and illegal blockades, such
as the one against Cuba. The United States Government
has made the perpetual criminalization of millions
of people a cornerstone of its foreign policy through
measures aimed at strangling the economies of numerous
countries in order to gain political advantage. The main
obstacle to the food security of the Cuban people is the
economic, commercial and financial blockade that has
been imposed on the country by the Government of
the United States for more than 60 years, exacerbated
by its fraudulent inclusion of Cuba on its arbitrary list
of States that allegedly sponsor terrorism. That cruel
policy has an overwhelming impact on every sector
of life in our country and hinders our economic and
social development and our implementation of the 2030
Agenda for Sustainable Development. The embargo
seriously, flagrantly and systematically violates the
human rights of the Cuban people, including their right
to food and development.
The Security Council, which consists of a limited
number of members who can scarcely be said to represent
the international community as a whole, should stick to
its mandate and stop interfering in matters outside its
competence. The General Assembly is the organ called
on to lead the international efforts to achieve the goals
set out in Sustainable Development Goal 2, which are
ending hunger, achieving food security and improved
nutrition and promoting sustainable agriculture. There
is an urgent need to establish a just, democratic and
equitable international order that will make it possible
to eradicate the root causes of poverty and hunger and
promote sustainable development for all peoples, thereby
eliminating potential triggers of conflict affecting
international peace and security. Greater international
cooperation, solidarity and multilateralism are needed
to guarantee the full and universal realization of the
right to food and development. Cuba, together with the
countries of the South, will continue to firmly defend
those objectives.

23-2301827/32

S/PV.9392

Maintenance of international peace and security

The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Poland.
Mr. Gerwel (Poland): I would like to thank the
United States for convening this important and timely
debate. Poland aligns itself with the statement to be
delivered on behalf of the European Union.
We believe that a strong focus on famine and
conflict-induced global food insecurity is now of crucial
importance. Hunger should not be a weapon of war.
Global food supply chains must not be taken hostage by
aggressors in order to achieve their military goals. As
stated in the recent United Nations inter-agency report
entitled The State of Food Security and Nutrition in the
World 2023, global hunger is still far above pre-pandemic
levels. In that context, I would first like to address
two questions posed in the excellent concept note
(S/2023/560, annex) presented by the United States prior
to this open debate, on the importance of anticipatory
action and the role of investment in tackling the root
causes of food insecurity.
The international community should focus on
building the resilience of local food systems. Countries
that can increase their own food production and build
their own distribution systems are less vulnerable to
the conflict- and climate-induced food insecurity that
ultimately results in famine. Public-private-partnerships
should be mobilized to build reliable transport and
storage infrastructure. Such actions are being undertaken
through the Global Gateway Strategy of the European
Union and the Three Seas Initiative of 12 Central
European nations. Poland built on those examples in
initiating General Assembly resolution 77/282, which
emphasizes the critical role of resilient infrastructure in
safeguarding the delivery of essential goods and services.
Even if we cannot prevent all new conflicts or
stop existing ones, we can start to counter the food
insecurity crisis right now. It is worth considering the
International Monetary Fund’s recommendations in
that regard. They include, first, ensuring rapid and
adequate support to people vulnerable to food insecurity
through humanitarian assistance from the World Food
Programme and others, alongside effective domestic
fiscal measures; secondly, maintaining open trade,
including within regions, in order to allow food to flow
from surplus areas to those in need; thirdly, increasing
food production and improving distribution while
increasing trade financing and reinforcing supply chains;
and fourthly, investing in climate-resilient agriculture.
28/32

03/08/2023

Eighteen months after the launch of Russia’s fullscale aggression against Ukraine, there can be no
doubt that food has once again become a weapon. In
deliberately creating a food crisis, Russia has shown
contempt for resolution 2417 (2018), which condemns
starvation of civilians as a method of warfare. We
denounce Moscow’s decision to withdraw from the
Black Sea Grain Initiative, which played a stabilizing
role for global food security, a move that we see as
a manifestation of economic aggression against the
countries of the global South and of political hypocrisy
and cynicism. The recent escalation of Russian attacks
on Ukrainian ports and its mining of the sea corridors
used for transporting grain are yet more proof of
Russia’s determination to prolong its war of aggression
at any cost, including to the detriment of the people
who are most vulnerable to hunger and malnutrition.
Poland is ready not only to undertake emergency
actions, but also to facilitate the capacity-building of
more resilient production systems.
In 2022, we supported the World Food Programme
to ease the food security crisis in African countries. We
have engaged in food solidarity initiatives. In addition
to the European Union solidarity lanes and the Black
Sea Grain Initiative, we supported the Grain from
Ukraine humanitarian programme and declared that we
would finance shipments of grain worth €20 million.
In closing, let me emphasize that, for Poland, the
protection of civilians and the promotion of compliance
with international humanitarian law are long-standing
priorities. We remain committed to contributing to
actions aimed at protecting civilians in armed conflict
and tackling global food security crises.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Algeria.
Mr. Bendjama (Algeria): First of all, Madam
President, I congratulate you on assuming the presidency
of the Security Council for this month, and I wish you
every success in that endeavour. I also congratulate our
colleague from the United Kingdom and her team for
their excellent work last month.
Today’s topic is crucial, as we are facing a rise
in acute food insecurity worldwide. Various United
Nations reports underscore that millions face starvation,
while the necessary humanitarian assistance is lacking.
As mentioned recently by the Secretary-General, if
current trends continue, by 2030 nearly 670 million
23-23018

03/08/2023

Maintenance of international peace and security

people will suffer hunger. Moreover, the situation
differs from one region to another. Africa is, by far,
the most fragile region. Many of its inhabitants suffer
from food insecurity, particularly in the Sahel and the
Horn of Africa. It is a sad reality, especially given that
the African continent could become the breadbasket
of the world with more investment and technology
transfer. The United Nations system, but also financial
institutions, should catalyse global efforts and address
the root causes — namely, underdevelopment, climate
change and conflict — to reverse that situation.
We concur with the concept note (S/2023/560) that
the challenge of addressing food insecurity requires
resilient food systems. Furthermore, to prevent the most
severe forms of hunger and ensure the food security of all,
it is paramount, first, to adopt a holistic and integrated
approach that involves all relevant stakeholders. Such an
approach will build strong and resilient food systems, as
the cornerstone of food security. Secondly, efforts must
be accelerated for technology transfer to and capacitybuilding for developing countries, in order for them to
produce their own food. Achieving food security is a
precondition of lasting peace and stability. Thirdly,
international agreements, particularly those related
to climate financing, must be fulfilled, thus enabling
vulnerable countries to confront the adverse effects
of climate change on their food systems. Fourthly,
sustainable financing for agriculture in developing
countries, in particular African countries, should be
mobilized. International financial institutions should
adopt and implement solutions to support developing
countries, including through concessional financing
and grants. Fifthly, international humanitarian
law must be fully respected and Security Council
resolutions, in particular, resolution 2417 (2018), must
be implemented, as this is key to facilitating access to
humanitarian assistance, in line with General Assembly
resolution 46/182. It will reduce food insecurity and
prevent famine in the context of humanitarian crises.
Algeria has spared no effort in providing assistance
to its neighbours, especially in the Sahel, when they
have faced the consequences of conflict and natural
disasters.
Achieving
sustainable
development,
especially Sustainable Development Goal 2, is the
only way to break the link between conflict and food
insecurity. We therefore urge the Security Council
to work closely with the General Assembly and the
Economic and Social Council to promote development
solutions that leave no one behind in access to safe food.

S/PV.9392

The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Egypt.
Mr. Elshandawily (Egypt): Allow me at the outset
to congratulate the United States of America on its
assumption of the presidency of the Security Council
for the month of August 2023. I would also like to
express our appreciation to the initiative of the United
States to convene today’s high-level open debate.
Egypt is fully cognizant of the severe impacts that
hunger and the failure to achieve food security have
on human livelihood, in addition to contributing to an
increased risk of conflict, especially in economically
vulnerable countries. We therefore stress the strong and
deep links between food security, hunger and conflict.
The world is currently witnessing an unprecedented
food insecurity crisis that is a result of our failure to
achieve Sustainable Development Goal 2 to end hunger,
exacerbated by the repercussions of the coronavirus
disease pandemic and by conflicts.
Failure to achieve food security and end hunger will
pose a threat to the security and stability of countries
and will further fuel ongoing conflicts. The challenges
of achieving food security are further compounded by
other factors, such as the ongoing impacts of climate,
which, in turn, exacerbate risks related to energy
production, food security, the availability of water
and economic development. Water scarcity in several
regions in the world, especially in Africa, has severe
manifestations in agricultural activity and efforts to
achieve food security.
In view of the foregoing, we would like to highlight
the following points.
First, we underscore the importance of addressing
the challenges facing countries affected by and
emerging from conflict. Special attention must be paid
to food security and to the provision of health care
to the civilian population, based on the principles of
international humanitarian law and in keeping with
national sovereignty. Also, it is important to ensure
that civilians in conflict areas have access to food aid
and to protect them from the risk of famine, including,
in that connection, by providing food to forcibly
displaced persons.
Secondly, Egypt reaffirms that sustainable
solutions to current global conflicts hinge on promoting
the peaceful settlement of disputes; ensuring that all
such efforts take into account the need to preserve

23-2301829/32

S/PV.9392

Maintenance of international peace and security

the sovereignty and territorial integrity of States; and
addressing the root causes of armed conflict, which
includes promoting sustainable development.
Thirdly, I would like to highlight that Egypt is
the most densely populated water-scarce country in
the world. Currently, water scarcity affects 2.5 billion
people around the globe, and it is expected that climate
change will place half of the world’s population under
severe water stress by 2050. Moreover, water scarcity
could displace 700 million people by 2030. Those
figures provide clear proof of the negative impacts
of water scarcity on peace and security, sustainable
development and human rights. In that context, we urge
the international community to address the needs of the
most vulnerable water-scarce countries and to promote
transboundary cooperation, in accordance with the
applicable international law.
Fourthly, food security and conflict must be
addressed via a holistic and comprehensive approach
that takes into consideration humanitarian and
development factors. Immediate action must be taken
to alleviate hunger while also implementing plans
to assist developing countries, especially net foodimporting developing countries, in achieving food
security through sustainable agriculture. In that regard,
I would like to recall the Egyptian initiative to utilize
Egypt’s geographic location to establish a logistics
centre for grains to address the challenges facing global
food supply chains, especially in developing countries.
In conclusion, we would like to stress the urgency
of addressing the challenges posed by food security
and its linkages to conflict through a comprehensive
approach that, at its core, is aimed at achieving
sustainable development for developing countries while
ensuring their stability and prosperity.

03/08/2023

food insecurity. At the same time, food insecurity is
itself a driver of further violence in regions like the
Sahel, renewing the cycle of conflict and hunger. We
must therefore take a holistic approach that addresses
the catastrophe of hunger both as a cause and a
consequence of conflict.
If hunger as such is an affront to human dignity, the
weaponizing of food is an outrage and a criminal act.
The intentional starvation of civilians is a war crime
in international and non-international armed conflicts,
as reflected in the Rome Statute of the International
Criminal Court. We encourage all States to join us
in ratifying the amendments to the Rome Statute
presented by Switzerland, which deal with the inclusion
of the starvation of civilians in internal armed conflict.
In addition, Liechtenstein calls on conflict parties to
adhere to their obligations under international law, as
well as the relevant Security Council resolutions, in
particular resolutions 2417 (2018) and 2573 (2021).
In Ethiopia, armed conflict, along with a
devastating drought, has driven more than 20 million
people into food insecurity — a crisis that has persisted
even after last year’s ceasefire agreement. The conflict
in the Sudan, where reportedly over 40 per cent of
the population is experiencing hunger, also threatens
to have knock-on effects in Ethiopia and throughout
the region. The humanitarian crisis in Yemen remains
considerable, and we condemn the recent killing of the
head of the World Food Programme’s office in Yemen,
as well as of its workers in the Sudan earlier this year.

Ms. Oehri (Liechtenstein): Liechtenstein welcomes
this open debate on conflict and food security as hunger
reaches new and concerning levels.

Russia’s war of aggression against Ukraine
exemplifies the outsized impact that conflict can
have on food security both domestically and abroad.
Throughout the country, farms have been mined, water
systems destroyed and grain storage sites explicitly
targeted in attacks. By withdrawing from the Black Sea
Grain Initiative in mid-July, Russia once again acted in
direct opposition to the security of millions of people
worldwide. We also deplore the Russian veto blocking
cross-border humanitarian aid into Syria last month
(see S/PV.9371).

Conflict is a primary driver of food insecurity in
seven of the eight cases designated as hotspots with
catastrophic conditions by the World Food Programme
and the Food and Agriculture Organization of the
United Nations. It has a devastating impact on every
part of a food system, from planting to distribution.
It often exacerbates already dangerous conditions for

The challenges the world faces today — climate
disasters, conflict, displacement and food insecurity — are
deeply interconnected. We encourage the international
community and members of the Council in particular to
address those interlinkages through a human security
perspective, which acknowledges that peace and security
is about people and their survival, livelihoods and

The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Liechtenstein.

30/32

23-23018

03/08/2023

Maintenance of international peace and security

dignity. We can begin by responding to the immediate
needs of food-insecure people around the world,
including through increased funding for the World
Food Programme and humanitarian organizations, and
urging parties to armed conflict to protect food systems
and infrastructure and refrain from turning access to
food into a weapon of war.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Germany.
Ms. Leendertse (Germany): Resolution 2417 (2018)
has been a real landmark decision. In 2018, all Council
members condemned the starvation of civilians as a
means of warfare. Five years later, a permanent member
of the Security Council is using food as a weapon.
Russia has unilaterally withdrawn from the Black Sea
Grain Initiative and is destroying grain warehouses
and port infrastructure in Ukraine with missiles. The
Kremlin is doing so in order to recklessly fill its war
chest. As a consequence, global food prices are rising,
and access to food is getting much harder for millions
in need worldwide.
Germany urges Russia to immediately stop those
attacks, to stop blocking Ukrainian ports and to rejoin
the Black Sea Grain Initiative. We strongly support
the efforts of the United Nations and Türkiye to
reinvigorate the initiative. Ultimately, Germany calls
on Russia to immediately withdraw all its troops and
military equipment from the entire territory of Ukraine
within its internationally recognized borders. That will
not only allow for grain exports to resume but will also
restore peace to Ukraine.
Germany is strongly committed to combating global
food insecurity and malnutrition. Food security and
nutrition was high on our agenda during our presidency
of the Group of Seven in 2022. Germany is the second
largest donor to the World Food Programme, with a
contribution of €1.1 billion in 2022. We support farmers
and countries worldwide to produce their own food. We
will continue our efforts to export agricultural goods
from Ukraine through the European Union’s solidarity
lanes and other alternative routes.
Our joint efforts towards sustainable solutions need
to be comprehensive and creative. Allow me to touch
upon a few specific issues.
First, on climate change, the global community
needs to drastically lower its emissions to fight the
climate crisis and its negative repercussions on food

S/PV.9392

security and malnutrition in many parts of the world.
It is part of the nexus between climate change and
peace and security, and we believe that the Security
Council should discuss the issue systematically and on
a regular basis.
Secondly, we also believe that the Peacebuilding
Commission can play a more systematic role in
addressing those interconnected issues. It could,
for example, give advice to the Security Council on
country-specific situations in which armed conflict and
climate change exacerbate food insecurity.
Lastly, we need to be creative and specific and find
tailored solutions. For example, locally produced green
nitrogen fertilizer has a lot of potential to support food
security. It can increase resilience to price volatility
and supply chain disruptions, while also contributing to
reducing carbon emissions from the agricultural sector.
We hope to develop that technology in innovative
partnerships that enable more green growth.
Conflicts are among the main contributors to
humanmade global food insecurity locally but also
globally. Resolution 2417 (2018) is crystal clear in its
obligations for all Member States. We call upon all
Member States to respect them and start by stopping
the use of food as a weapon of war.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Mexico.
Mr. De la Fuente Ramírez (Mexico) (spoke
in Spanish): Mexico thanks the United States for
convening this open debate, which we hope will allow
us to identify specific actions to strengthen food
security systems around the world and prevent future
famines. We are also grateful for the briefings we heard
this morning.
The joint and coordinated work of United Nations
agencies is essential in order to effectively address
and mitigate the growing impacts of the food security
crisis. We therefore welcome the Secretary-General’s
decision to appoint Ms. Ghelani as the focal point to
prevent and respond in a timely manner to any threat of
famine. Early-warning mechanisms are key in avoiding
humanitarian catastrophes, but even more important is a
timely and effective response in the face of such events.
It is unacceptable that, in a world of plenty, the
number of people living in food insecurity is steadily
increasing. In May last year, we spoke in the Council
about the 193 million people who were food insecure

23-2301831/32

S/PV.9392

Maintenance of international peace and security

(see S/PV.9036). Today, 258 million people are
affected. That is a real tragedy. An increase of that
magnitude in just one year should be cause for concern
for all of us, without exception. Although the causes of
food insecurity are multidimensional, armed conflicts
are undeniably a decisive factor in exacerbating it. In
specific cases, such as those faced by Burkina Faso,
Haiti, Mali, the Sudan, Afghanistan, Nigeria, Somalia
and South Sudan, the situations are critical, which
demonstrates that protracted conflict almost inevitably
leads to food insecurity.
In our region, the most serious case is, unfortunately,
Haiti. Half of the country’s population — 4.9 million
people — requires food assistance. In Haiti, a series of
varied but interconnected factors have led to that tragic
situation. The economic recession, natural disasters,
the harmful effects of climate change and a decline in
agricultural production, which has been exacerbated
by an increase in armed violence and a sustained
lack of investment, have led to the country’s acute
food emergency.

32/32

03/08/2023

We must acknowledge that the world’s food systems
are interdependent. One armed conflict is capable
of disrupting the entire food system. In that regard,
Mexico hopes that the Black Sea Grain Initiative,
which had had a positive impact on food prices and had
consequently reduced food insecurity in the poorest
countries, can be reinstated.
In conclusion, Mexico once again calls on all
parties to conflicts to comply fully with the provisions
of resolution 2417 (2018) — that is, to refrain from
taking any action that could affect food production and
distribution and from attacking objects that are vital to
the survival of the civilian population, and to not lose
sight of the fact that starvation as a tactic of war is an
international crime that will not go unpunished.
The President: There are still a number of speakers
remaining on my list for this meeting. Given the lateness
of the hour, I intend, with the concurrence of members
of the Council, to suspend the meeting until 3 p.m.
The meeting was suspended at 1.10 p.m.

23-23018
