S/2002/1380

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
19 December 2002
Original: English

Letter dated 19 December 2002 from the President of the Security
Council addressed to the Secretary-General
I have the honour to refer to your letter of 18 November 2002 addressed to me
concerning your intention to extend the mandate of the United Nations Political
Office in Bougainville (UNPOB) for 12 months, and your expectation that UNPOB
can fulfil its mission within that period.
The Security Council takes note of your letter of 18 November 2002 and the
importance of elections to the continuing peace process, and endorses a final
extension of the mandate of the Office for 12 months to 31 December 2003.
The Council fully supports the important role UNPOB continues to play in
implementing the Bougainville Peace Agreement. The Council is concerned,
however, that delays in the implementation of the Agreement have led to the need
for an extension of UNPOB’s mission by a full year beyond the end-date envisioned
a year ago. Specifically, the Council is seriously concerned that ongoing delays in
the completion of stage two of the weapons disposal process, which must be
certified by UNPOB, are preventing progress towards the formation of an
autonomous Bougainville government and the coming into operation of the
guarantee of a referendum among Bougainvilleans on Bougainville’s political
future.
The Council strongly urges all parties to the Agreement to fully abide by their
obligations to the Agreement within the time frame of the UNPOB mandate, in
particular to turn in all outstanding weapons and respect the integrity of the arms
disposal process.
In order to better track and assess the progress of the UNPOB mission, the
Council requests that the Secretariat produce a written report, within existing
resources, on UNPOB progress prior to the Council’s next quarterly briefing on
Bougainville. The Council requests that the report include a clear exit strategy for
the completion of UNPOB’s mission and withdrawal, with a timetable and
benchmarks that incorporate the holding of elections, as well as details on what
specific steps UNPOB intends to take to meet each objective in its exit strategy on
time.

02-75066 (E)

201202

*0275066*

S/2002/1380

The Council requests that the Secretariat, through UNPOB, convey the present
letter to the parties to the Agreement.
The Council calls upon the donor community to continue supporting the
implementation of the Agreement, in particular the weapons disposal process.
(Signed) Alfonso Valdivieso
President of the Security Council

2
