A /75/PV.42

United Nations

General Assembly

Official Records

Seventy-fifth session

42nd plenary meeting

Friday, 11 December 2020, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Bozkir  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (Turkey)

The meeting was called to order at 10 a.m.
Agenda item 73
Strengthening of the coordination of humanitarian
and disaster relief assistance of the United Nations,
including special economic assistance
Report of the Secretary-General (A/75/246)
(a) Strengthening of the coordination of emergency
humanitarian assistance of the United Nations
Reports of the Secretary-General (A/75/75,
A/75/238 and A/75/317)
Draft resolutions (A/75/L.11, A/75/L.42 and
A/75/L.44)
(b) Assistance to the Palestinian people
Report of the Secretary-General (A/75/84)
Draft resolution (A/75/L.43)
(c) Special economic assistance to individual
countries or regions
(d) Strengthening of international cooperation and
coordination of efforts to study, mitigate and
minimize the consequences of the Chernobyl
disaster
The President: I thank members for joining today’s
plenary meeting on strengthening the coordination
of humanitarian and disaster relief assistance of the
United Nations, including special economic assistance.
This debate is a critical opportunity to stand in

solidarity with the millions of people caught in the
direst of circumstances and to reinforce our collective
commitment to supporting humanitarian action, which
is especially important in the light of the coronavirus
disease (COVID-19) pandemic. This discussion is
becoming more relevant by the day, and the recent
Global Humanitarian Overview 2021 notes that in
2021 235 million people will require humanitarian
assistance, of whom 160 million have been deemed the
most vulnerable, requiring urgent assistance at a cost
of $35 billion. This year we must also prepare for the
urgent possibility of famine, as 270 million people are
at risk of acute food insecurity.
Clearly, there is work to be done, and we have a
responsibility to ensure that every effort is made to
strengthen coordination and reach those most in need.
Particularly strong efforts must be made to support
internally displaced persons and refugees, who are
highly vulnerable to COVID-19 and struggle to
secure essential support. The importance of including
refugees and internally displaced persons in COVID-19
responses and recovery plans, including vaccine
distribution, cannot be overstated. Similarly, we must
ensure that our coordination efforts reflect gender
considerations. Women and girls have also been acutely
affected by the COVID-19 pandemic, with genderbased violence increasing substantially over the past 10
months, along with widespread socioeconomic impacts.
A gender-responsive approach to the COVID crisis is
essential to protecting that group.
Leaving no one behind is a cornerstone of the United
Nations, and the onus is on us to ensure that our efforts

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of speeches
delivered in other languages. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only.
They should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

20-35292 (E)

*2035292*

A/75/PV.42

to address the pandemic adhere to that principle. I want
to make two recommendations to that end. First, as we
heard during last week’s special session of the General
Assembly on COVID-19 (see A/S-31/PV.1 to A/S-31/
PV.4), there are multiple promising vaccines on the
horizon. That is indeed welcome news, but I must stress
that the approval of vaccines and their accessibility are
two very different things. Ensuring fair and equitable
access to vaccines is not only the right thing to do
but also the smart thing to do, and when it comes to
humanitarian needs and the subsequent costs and
resources, there is a clear rationale for ensuring quick
vaccination programmes for those in greatest need. It
is essential that the Access to COVID-19 Tools (ACT)
Accelerator, including the COVID-19 Vaccine Global
Access (COVAX) Facility, is adequately financed and
supported in order to ensure that it can reach those goals.
Secondly, we must not forget that humanitarian
crises were here well before COVID-19. The pandemic
has only exacerbated pre-existing inequalities and
vulnerabilities. We must continue every effort to
address conflict situations and tackle climate and
environmental concerns. As it is, people continue
to suffer in deteriorating and protracted conflicts.
Member States and parties to conflicts must take every
measure necessary for promoting and ensuring respect
for international humanitarian law and international
human rights law, including by ensuring the protection
of civilians and of humanitarian and health personnel
and their facilities. Nor can we allow COVID-19 to
deter us from the larger challenge of addressing climate
change, which risks fuelling humanitarian crises into
the future. As the international community pours
trillions of dollars into COVID recovery, it is important
that this is done through a lens of resilience focused on
a recovery that is better and greener.
In closing, I want to reiterate that the humanitarian
resolutions to be discussed today, and the foundational
resolution 46/182 on strengthening the coordination of
emergency humanitarian assistance, are critical to the
work of the Organization and to those we serve. We
owe it to the peoples of the world to give this issue our
full consideration.
I look forward to our discussion today and I now
give the floor to the representative of Guyana to
introduce draft resolution A/75/L.11 on behalf of the
Group of 77 and China.
2/34

11/12/2020

Mr. Pierre (Guyana): On behalf of the Group of 77
and China, I have the honour to introduce draft resolution
A/75/L.11, entitled “International cooperation on
humanitarian assistance in the field of natural disasters,
from relief to development”. Owing to the impact of
the coronavirus disease pandemic and the difficulties
in conducting substantive negotiations virtually, the
Group of 77 and China has opted for a technical update
of last year’s resolution 74/115. This common approach
has been agreed among the facilitators of the two other
humanitarian draft resolutions, “Strengthening of the
coordination of emergency humanitarian assistance
of the United Nations” (A/75/L.44) and “Safety and
security of humanitarian personnel and protection of
United Nations personnel” (A/75/L.42).
While this year’s text is a technical update, the draft
resolution remains fully relevant and its provisions
applicable. In that regard, the Group of 77 and China
continues to reaffirm the importance of international
cooperation in providing assistance to countries and
peoples affected by natural disasters, in accordance
with resolution 46/182 and the guiding principles for
the strengthening of the coordination of emergency
humanitarian assistance in the United Nations system,
while also recognizing that it is the States affected that
have the primary responsibility to initiate, organize,
coordinate and implement humanitarian assistance
within their territories.
The draft resolution reaffirms that in order to ensure
a smooth transition from relief to rehabilitation and
development, emergency assistance must be provided
in ways that will be supportive of short- and mediumterm recovery leading to longer-term development,
making clear the link between emergency response,
rehabilitation and development. The draft resolution
places particular emphasis on climate change and its
impact on natural disasters. In that regard, it welcomes
the holding of the Climate Action Summit convened
by the Secretary-General in 2019 and takes note of the
multi-partner initiatives and commitments presented at
the Summit.
The draft resolution underlines the importance
of taking early action with a view to minimizing and
mitigating the impacts of natural disasters. There are
provisions concerning the growing magnitude and scope
of natural disasters and the need to redouble efforts to
build community capacities and capabilities, as well as
to enhance resilience by helping communities prepare
for, respond to and recover from natural disasters.
20-35292

11/12/2020

Furthermore, Member States are encouraged to develop
coherent approaches to addressing the challenges of
displacement in the context of natural disasters. The
draft resolution encourages all States, United Nations
entities and other relevant actors to promote ecosystembased approaches and nature-based solutions for
disaster risk reduction at all levels and across all phases
of disaster risk reduction and management. Moreover,
it calls attention to the importance of the engagement
of the private sector in disaster risk management
activities and humanitarian assistance. It also
encourages stepping up efforts to mobilize additional
resources through anticipatory financing approaches
and predictable, multi-year support, as well as working
collectively on common results in order to reduce need,
risk and vulnerability. Importantly, the draft resolution
encourages Member States, humanitarian organizations
and other relevant stakeholders to ensure access in the
context of natural disasters to safe drinking water and
adequate and equitable sanitation and hygiene for all,
including women and girls.
The Group would like to thank the delegation
of Morocco for facilitating and coordinating draft
resolution A/75/L.11 on behalf of the Group of 77 and
China. We also appreciate the constructive approach
of all the Member States who expressed their support
for a technical update of the humanitarian resolution
this year. It is our hope that the draft resolution will, as
in previous years, receive a large number of sponsors.
Delegations wishing to become sponsors are invited to
do so. The Group of 77 and China hopes that the draft
resolution will be adopted by consensus and appeals
to all delegations to demonstrate solidarity on this
critical issue.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Germany to introduce draft resolution
A/75/L.42.
Mr. Sautter (Germany): I have the honour to
present, on behalf of the European Union (EU) and its
member States, draft resolution A/75/L.42, on the safety
and security of humanitarian personnel and protection
of United Nations personnel.
We are all aware of the complexity of the current
humanitarian landscape, where the sheer numbers and
magnitude of humanitarian needs far outpace available
resources and crises are increasingly protracted. The
coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic has only
added layers of complexity and volatility and further

A/75/PV.42

exposed the underlying causes of insecurity and
social and economic inequality, leading to increasing
humanitarian needs.
The United Nations and humanitarian personnel
have responded to the pandemic with inspiring
commitment. It is therefore even more troubling that
the COVID-19 context has had additional adverse
operational and security implications for their work,
which further exacerbate existing impediments to
relieving human suffering and even threaten the lives of
humanitarian workers. Humanitarian work depends on
the people whom we deploy in the field to actually do
the job. Without humanitarian workers, no assistance
is possible. The equation is simple. But that simplicity
conceals the most complex and difficult task facing
humanitarian organizations today, that of accessing the
people most in need, often in hard-to-reach areas, while
guaranteeing the safety and security of their personnel.
The draft resolution before us embodies the commitment
of the international community to ensuring and further
strengthening the implementation of the international
protection framework for all humanitarian workers.
This year the world has continued to witness
violations of international humanitarian law and
disrespect for the humanitarian principles of humanity,
impartiality, neutrality and independence. We have
seen an increase in the absolute numbers of both United
Nations and humanitarian personnel affected by safety
and security incidents and in the number of humanitarian
personnel who have lost their lives in the line of duty
as a result of violence. The percentage of fatalities
among locally recruited United Nations personnel and
the staff of non-governmental organizations has also
risen, which illustrates how those who work in the
most dangerous areas remain particularly vulnerable.
Their security must remain a priority for all of us if we
want them to continue to deliver their crucial mandate.
Accountability for violations of the rules that protect
this crucial work remains alarmingly low, contributing
to a general sense of impunity and the recurrence of
heinous actions. International and national laws provide
solid frameworks for the safety and security of United
Nations and humanitarian personnel, but accountability
lags behind. We have a collective responsibility to
protect United Nations and humanitarian personnel and
to hold accountable those who put their security at risk.
This year, after consulting the United Nations
membership, we have made an exception by proposing
to adopt a technical update of the draft resolution, given

20-352923/34

A/75/PV.42

the current COVID-19 situation and limitations. As the
issue of ensuring the safety and security of humanitarian
workers remains a major priority for the EU, we intend
to resume substantive negotiations on this resolution
next year. On behalf of the European Union and its
member States, I would like to take this opportunity
to commend the work of the Department of Safety and
Security (DSS) under the guidance of Under-SecretaryGeneral Gilles Michaud. This draft resolution reiterates
the strong mandate and additional guidance from the
General Assembly for the essential work performed
by DSS and the United Nations security management
system more broadly.
The European Union and its member States firmly
believe that it is our duty to acknowledge the commitment
of humanitarians and United Nations and associated
personnel, support their work and do everything in our
power to further enhance their safety and security. I
would like to express my warm thanks for the support
we have received across the membership in the difficult
decision to opt for a technical update this year given the
extraordinary circumstances. In particular, I would like
to express our gratitude to the delegations sponsoring
this important draft resolution. I also want to thank
the Department of Safety and Security, the Office
for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs and the
International Committee of the Red Cross for their
continued valuable support.
This resolution has been and should remain
genuinely consensual, as a testimony to our shared
humanity. We owe that to the people risking their own
lives on a daily basis in order to save the lives of others.
They need the collective, unequivocal and unqualified
support of the entire General Assembly.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Sweden to introduce draft resolution
A/75/L.44.
Ms. Eneström (Sweden): First, let me note that
Sweden fully aligns itself with the statement to be made
on behalf of the European Union.
On behalf of the 98 sponsors, it is my great privilege
to introduce to the General Assembly this year’s
draft resolution, contained in document A/75/L.44,
on strengthening the coordination of United Nations
emergency humanitarian assistance, the so-called
humanitarian omnibus resolution. This year marks the
twenty-ninth anniversary of the landmark resolution
46/182, presented and adopted in December 1991,
4/34

11/12/2020

which created the very foundation of today’s United
Nations humanitarian system. Sweden has facilitated
the negotiations on this resolution ever since.
Humanitarian needs have grown exponentially in
recent years because of war, protracted conflicts, natural
disasters and the impact of climate change. Since the
last humanitarian debate (see A/74/PV.49), these factors
have been compounded by the coronavirus disease
pandemic and its direct and indirect consequences.
As the Global Humanitarian Overview 2021 shows,
this has resulted in the number of people in need of
humanitarian assistance growing by 40 per cent. The
goal of our collective efforts, as set out in December
1991, is to effectively assist our fellow women and
men, girls and boys affected by crisis. If anything, the
pandemic has further underscored the relevance of that
goal, and we are convinced that humanitarian assistance,
delivered in line with humanitarian principles, remains
the best way to reach it.
The pandemic has also had a profound impact
on our work here at the United Nations. As physical
meetings were restricted this autumn, we have proposed
a technical update of the draft resolution for this year.
Apart from some minor technical adjustments, the
text before the Assembly today is the same as the one
that we adopted last December (resolution 74/118).
That approach has been coordinated with every State
Member of the United Nations, and I would like to
thank everyone for taking a constructive approach
throughout the consultation process. At the same
time, I would like to stress that this year is exceptional
and should not be seen as a precedent for the future.
We believe that the text enables humanitarian actors
worldwide to carry out their invaluable work in support
of those most affected by humanitarian crises. For the
year ahead, we look forward to close consultations and
full-fledged negotiations on the text to be adopted next
year, which will mark the thirtieth anniversary of this
important resolution.
The President: I now give the floor to the observer
of the European Union.
Mr. Skoog (European Union): The mask I am
wearing today was made in Malaysia by Afghan
refugees. I am wearing it in honour of all the refugees
of the world and in order to help keep their plight as a
very high priority.
I have the honour to speak on behalf of the
European Union (EU) and its member States. The
20-35292

11/12/2020

candidate countries North Macedonia, Montenegro,
Serbia and Albania; the country of the Stabilization
and Association Process and potential candidate Bosnia
and Herzegovina; as well as Ukraine, the Republic
of Moldova and Georgia, align themselves with
this statement.
The year 2020 has been like no other. The
coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic has
triggered the deepest global recession since the 1930s,
setting back decades of development gains. The virus
and its socioeconomic effects, including a hunger
pandemic, have hit the most vulnerable members of
society hardest and added yet another layer of hardship
on top of the adverse effects of climate change, food
insecurity and conflicts. Humanitarian needs, already
considerable, now surpass even the worst-case scenario
projections at the beginning of the year. The Global
Humanitarian Overview 2021 captures that sobering
and bleak picture: 235 million people are projected to
be in need of assistance. There is a risk that the number
of people facing starvation will double. Extreme
weather events and natural hazards are expected to be
more frequent and severe due to the impact of climate
change. In the absence of political solutions, conflicts
continue to take a heavy toll on civilians, causing the
forced displacement of millions. The challenges facing
the humanitarian community are daunting, not only
because of the exponential rise in humanitarian needs
amid constrained resources but also the very nature of
those challenges, in which the humanitarian space is
increasingly compromised.
I want to highlight three points. First, COVID-19
has had a negative impact on our ability to access
people in need. United Nations and humanitarian
personnel have responded to the pandemic with
inspiring commitment. Despite their vital role, we are
particularly concerned about the fact that the COVID-19
context has had additional adverse operational and
security implications for humanitarian personnel and
their work, thereby exacerbating existing impediments
to the ability to relieve human suffering. While some
restrictions were rightly put in place to curb the spread
of the virus, the limited access to populations and the
bureaucratic barriers that have been raised have gravely
hampered the ability to access those in need and deliver
aid to the communities affected. Since the pandemic
started, people in more than 50 countries have not
been getting the humanitarian assistance they require

A/75/PV.42

for their survival and welfare owing to constraints on
humanitarian access.
Secondly, the humanitarian operating environment
is immensely constrained due to a systematic and
continued disregard for international humanitarian law
and a lack of respect for humanitarian principles. The
EU and its member States will continue to promote
compliance with international humanitarian law and
to insist on accountability. Full, prompt, impartial and
effective investigations are crucial. In that regard, the
EU and its member States remain a driving force in
strengthening support for international criminal justice
and the International Criminal Court in particular, as a
key actor in the fight against impunity.
Humanitarian assistance and, tragically, aid
workers themselves are increasingly under attack.
Despite their vital role, at least 125 humanitarian
workers were killed last year while carrying out their
duties. The international community has both a moral
duty and an obligation to those who put their lives
at risk in order to make a difference on the ground.
Saving lives should not cost lives. The protection of
humanitarian and medical workers continues to be a
priority for the EU. Whether internationally or locally
recruited, whether from the United Nations, the Red
Cross movement or non-governmental organizations,
humanitarian workers are essential workers who must
be respected and protected.
Respect for the humanitarian principles of humanity,
neutrality, impartiality and independence remains
critical to ensuring that humanitarian actors can safely
conduct operations. We will therefore continue to oppose
any efforts to undermine humanitarian principles
in United Nations forums. We must all also continue
making every effort to avoid any negative effects
that sanctions and counter-terrorism measures may
have on exclusively humanitarian activities, including
medical work, carried out by impartial humanitarian
actors in full compliance with humanitarian principles
and international humanitarian law. To that end, the
EU commits to preserving the humanitarian space,
including through the development of best practices
and the adoption of mitigating measures, among them
the introduction of exceptions.
Thirdly, this is a moment to demonstrate strong
collaboration and synergies and to jointly address the
needs of the most vulnerable. It is also an opportunity
to lay the foundations of a sustained post-COVID-19

20-352925/34

A/75/PV.42

recovery in the spirit of building back better and
greener. The operationalization of the humanitariandevelopment-peace nexus is critical to enabling
United Nations agencies to leverage their respective
comparative advantages and to achieve the object
of “Delivering as One”. That is fully in line with the
United Nations reform process that the EU and its
member States have supported since its outset and
should also be reflected in the work of the executive
boards of United Nations funds and programmes.
We reiterate our commitment to putting people
at the centre of the humanitarian response. Women,
children, the elderly and persons with disabilities are
disproportionately affected by disasters and conflicts.
Many girls currently out of school will never go back.
Sadly, the pandemic has provided clear evidence
that crises exacerbate structural gender inequalities,
with a worrying rise in gender-based violence. All
humanitarian operations should take into account those
groups’ needs and capacities. That includes assistance
to women and girls on sexual and reproductive health,
as well as actions to prevent, mitigate and respond to
gender-based violence. We also continue to support
ongoing efforts related to the prevention of sexual abuse
and exploitation and to ensuring that mental health and
psychosocial support become an integral part of the
humanitarian response.
The EU and its member States are committed to
remaining at the forefront of the work of addressing
current humanitarian challenges. The strategic
framework for the EU’s response, which is centred
on respect for international humanitarian law,
safeguarding the humanitarian space, including by
ensuring unimpeded access to people in need, as well as
the protection of civilians in situations of conflict and
disaster, remains unchanged. At the same time, it will
be ever more important to expand the donor base. The
world’s top 10 donors currently contribute 80 per cent
of humanitarian funding. That is unsustainable in the
light of budgetary constraints and, more importantly,
it falls short of addressing the increase in humanitarian
needs. It is quite telling that the Global Humanitarian
Overview 2021 aims to assist 160 million people,
though it is estimated that 235 million people will
actually require humanitarian assistance. Contributions
from other donors, including flexible funding, are thus
essential if we are to live up to the commitment of
ensuring that no one is left behind.
6/34

11/12/2020

We want to stress that humanitarian aid is never the
solution to conflict. We therefore urge the international
community to work on political solutions for putting
an end to conflicts, which are still the main drivers
of humanitarian needs worldwide. And we reiterate
our call to respect the Secretary-General’s call for a
global ceasefire.
Today’s humanitarian challenges are enormous.
Supporting the work of the humanitarian community
through the draft resolutions we will adopt today and by
maintaining an international consensus on the United
Nations normative frameworks for humanitarian action
is key. We do so by reaffirming the need to ensure
the safety and security of humanitarian and United
Nations personnel, in a resolution facilitated by the EU
on behalf of its member States, by better addressing
the consequences of natural disasters, through a draft
resolution submitted by Morocco on behalf of the
Group of 77, and by reaffirming the agreed framework
for humanitarian action in the successor resolution to
resolution 46/182, introduced by Sweden. Getting back
on track is not impossible. Tackling these enormous
challenges will take conscious action and collective
effort in a spirit of effective multilateralism. The EU
and its member States remain committed and ready to
take our share of that responsibility. We count on the
rest of the international community to stay the course
and step up for this common endeavour.
Ms. Sulaiman (Brunei Darussalam): I am
honoured to deliver this statement on behalf of the 10
member States of the Association of Southeast Asian
Nations (ASEAN) — Cambodia, Indonesia, the Lao
People’s Democratic Republic, Malaysia, Myanmar,
the Philippines, Singapore, Thailand, Viet Nam and
my own country, Brunei Darussalam. At the outset,
ASEAN would like to express its appreciation to the
Secretary-General for his reports under this agenda
item (A/75/75, A/75/238 and A/75/317).
We acknowledge that it is getting harder to save
lives as crises and conflicts grow in complexity,
gravely endangering the lives of humanitarian workers,
and that the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic
is creating unprecedented risks for them. It is therefore
important that we recognize the contributions made by
all humanitarian workers who sacrifice their lives to
help people affected by global crises.
The ASEAN region is vulnerable to several types of
natural disasters, including typhoons, floods, droughts,
20-35292

11/12/2020

earthquakes and volcanic eruptions. It is estimated that
on average the region suffers damages amounting to
more than $4.4 billion every year as a consequence of
disasters resulting from natural hazards. Indonesia,
the Philippines and Viet Nam were among those most
exposed to natural disasters in 2019. This year alone
several typhoons made landfall, and as of last month,
floods and landslides have caused extensive damage and
loss of life in five of our member States — Cambodia,
the Lao People’s Democratic Republic, the Philippines,
Thailand and Viet Nam. While battling the pandemic is
a vital task, natural disasters have further complicated
the attempts to control the spread of COVID-19, as they
limit the work of both health and humanitarian workers.
We in ASEAN are fully aware that natural disasters
are often transboundary in nature and therefore require
coordinated transnational and multilateral responses.
In that regard, ASEAN places great importance on the
need to work closely with regional and international
agencies to strengthen the coordination of humanitarian
responses and disaster relief. With the assistance of
United Nations agencies and other external partners
such as the European Union, the Asian Development
Bank and the Government of Canada, the ASEAN
Guidelines on Disaster Responsive Social Protection
to Increase Resilience were officially launched on
14 October. They outline a multisectoral approach
aimed at building resilience as well as strengthening
and expanding existing social protection systems
to anticipate, respond to and mitigate the impact of
potential crises. In that connection, I would like to
share with the General Assembly that on 21 October,
ASEAN and the United Nations adopted a five-year
plan of action to implement their Joint Declaration on
Comprehensive Partnership. Among other things, the
plan of action outlines our commitment to enhancing
ASEAN-United Nations cooperation in disaster risk
reduction, emergency response and management
through ASEAN-led initiatives such as its disaster
emergency logistics response system and its military
ready group on humanitarian assistance and disaster
relief, and by enhancing the capacity of the ASEAN
Coordinating Centre for Humanitarian Assistance on
Disaster Management (AHA Centre).
As the main operational engine of the ASEAN
Agreement on Disaster Management and Emergency
Response, the AHA Centre plays a crucial role in
facilitating cooperation and coordination for disaster
management and emergency response within the region

A/75/PV.42

and with relevant international organizations such as the
United Nations. Its work includes developing knowledge
in the region by facilitating and promoting exchanges of
expertise, best practices and lessons learned on disaster
management. In 2019, the AHA Centre facilitated
$81,500 worth of assistance for approximately 18,300
individuals in ASEAN. Some 188 disaster events were
registered, affecting an estimated 13 million people
across the region, displacing more than 1.2 million and
damaging more than 1 million homes.
Our Vision 2025 calls for ASEAN to become a
global leader in disaster management. The leveraging
of local knowledge and ASEAN experience related to
disaster management is central to that vision. ASEAN’s
progress in emergency and disaster risk management
has enabled us to realize a “One ASEAN One Response”
approach for faster, collective responses to disasters
inside and outside the region. To achieve that vision,
ASEAN recognizes the need to build and strengthen
capacity in disaster management. In that regard, we
have engaged with external partners for relevant
projects such as the ASEAN Standards and Certification
for Experts in Disaster Management (ASCEND), an
initiative aimed at enhancing and improving the quality
of human resources in this sector by establishing a
common set of standard skills and competencies for
each profession in the disaster management sector.
This year the Republic of Korea generously committed
to supporting ASCEND’s operationalization for the
period from 2020 to 2023. Through that support, the
AHA Centre will pilot and further institutionalize the
ASCEND programme within the region.
In conclusion, ASEAN remains committed to
improving its humanitarian and disaster relief efforts
to better serve its people, as well as to upholding
multilateralism and working with all partners to improve
its regional capacity and save more lives in the future. To
that end, we look forward to continuing our engagement
with partners in the international community.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Germany to introduce draft resolution
A/75/L.43.
Mr. Sautter (Germany): I have the honour to
speak on behalf of the European Union (EU) and its
member States to introduce this draft text (A/75/L.43)
of the Assembly’s annual resolution on assistance to
the Palestinian people. The candidate countries North
Macedonia, Montenegro, Serbia and Albania; the

20-352927/34

A/75/PV.42

country of the Stabilization and Association Process
and potential candidate Bosnia and Herzegovina;
and the European Free Trade Association country
Liechtenstein align themselves with this statement.
The EU remains gravely concerned about the
difficult living conditions and the humanitarian situation
affecting the Palestinian people, especially women and
children, throughout the occupied Palestinian territory,
including in Area C and in particular in the Gaza Strip,
which have been further aggravated by the coronavirus
disease (COVID-19) pandemic. The political and
security situation in Gaza remains volatile, and the
humanitarian situation continues to be a matter of grave
concern. The European Union strongly supports the
work being done by Mr. Nickolay Mladenov, Special
Coordinator for the Middle East Peace Process, and
commends his efforts to alleviate the humanitarian
crisis in Gaza. The immediate priority must be to
reduce tensions and avoid more conflict there. The
return of the Palestinian Authority to the Gaza Strip
is essential to sustained improvement of the conditions
and humanitarian situation. But to ensure lasting
results, fundamental change in the situation in Gaza is
crucial. We once again call on all the parties to take
urgent steps in line with Security Council resolution
2334 (2016), leading to a fundamental change in
the humanitarian, political, security and economic
situation in Gaza, including through an end to the
policy of closure and the full opening of crossing points
and humanitarian access, while addressing Israel’s
legitimate security concerns.
The EU will continue to support United Nations
and Egyptian efforts to achieve the reunification of
Gaza and the West Bank under a single, legitimate
Palestinian Authority. The EU will continue to work
with its partners, the Israelis, the Palestinians, regional
actors and international partners to that end. In that
context, the EU is determined to sustain its assistance
in support of the Palestinian people, including Palestine
refugees. The European Union and its member States
are collectively the largest contributors to the budget
of the United Nations Relief and Works Agency for
Palestine Refugees in the Near East. We were among
the first to answer the Agency’s call for additional
funds during the extraordinary financial crises of the
past three years, and this year we have also provided
additional support for its response to the COVID-19
pandemic. We will continue to be strong, reliable and
8/34

11/12/2020

predictable supporters of the Agency, whose role also
remains crucial to the stability of the region.
We would like to thank all parties and the rest of the
membership for joining the consensus again this year
and for rallying behind the principles and objectives
outlined in the draft resolution.
Mrs. Manav (Turkey): The humanitarian landscape
has been changing rapidly. While projections were
already depicting 2020 as one of the worst humanitarian
crises since the Second World War, new challenges
emerged with the coronavirus disease (COVID-19)
pandemic. People are facing its severe economic
and social consequences. According to the Global
Humanitarian Overview 2021, a record 235 million
people will need humanitarian assistance next year,
a 40 per cent increase over 2020. In addition to the
pandemic’s devastating impact, massacres and atrocities
resulting from conflicts have continued unabated. It is
more than urgent to ensure that the Secretary-General’s
appeal for a global ceasefire is implemented in order to
help create the conditions necessary for the unimpeded
delivery of humanitarian assistance.
Vulnerable groups continue to bear the brunt
of instability, with women and children paying the
heaviest price. In some parts of the world, COVID-19
is used as a pretext to neglect international obligations
and discriminate against refugees and migrants. While
149 countries have fully or partially closed their
borders, the Secretary-General has highlighted in his
policy brief COVID-19 and People on the Move that the
COVID-19 crisis is an opportunity to reimagine human
mobility. As a country that is hosting 20 per cent of all
the refugees around the globe, Turkey fully subscribes
to his approach.
The humanitarian system must adapt to the changing
nature of emergencies. This week we acknowledged
the remarkable work done by the Central Emergency
Response Fund through its rapid and effective response
in the most fragile contexts. I also want to emphasize
the positive impact of country-based pooled funds,
which offer one of the easiest and most efficient ways
of addressing urgent needs. The growing dichotomy
between increasing needs and limited resources
compels us to do further work on innovative financing.
We should explore new sources of investment to create a
better toolkit with a wide spectrum of public and private
partnerships. As Member States, we must increase our
20-35292

11/12/2020

financial resources in order to help the United Nations
in its humanitarian action.
Turkey gives priority to human-centred policies in
the conduct of international diplomacy. According to the
Global Humanitarian Assistance programme, Turkey
remained the world’s leading donor country in 2019,
with $7.6 billion worth of humanitarian assistance. In
addition, as part of our contribution to the global fight
against COVID-19, we have responded to the medical
needs of more than 156 countries and 11 international
organizations. Since 2014, all the humanitarian needs
in northwest Syria have been addressed through the
United Nations cross-border mechanism in Turkey, with
the support and facilitation of our Government. There
is no alternative to that mechanism, and cross-border
aid should continue without any hindrance. In Yemen,
where we have been witnessing the largest humanmade humanitarian crisis, our agencies reach those in
need through their staff permanently stationed in the
country. This year, from Africa to the Asia-Pacific and
Central Asian regions, we responded to urgent needs in
areas hit by conflict or disasters. We have also joined
the international efforts to help those who are in need
or have been displaced as a result of the catastrophic
explosion in Beirut.
While extending our helping hand, we have had the
privilege of working with international humanitarian
and health workers. We would like to commend the
tireless efforts of the Office for the Coordination of
Humanitarian Affairs, as well as other United Nations
agencies, in their life-saving work. Turkey is committed
to continuing to play its leading role in the global
response to humanitarian emergencies. While doing
so, we will also continue to underscore the need to
strengthen multilateralism, solidarity and cooperation
across borders for collective outcomes.
Mr. Norapoompipat (Thailand): At the outset,
Thailand wishes to thank the Secretary-General for
his reports on this agenda item (A/75/75, A/75/238
and A/75/317). We appreciate their recommendations,
which remain relevant and essential to the international
community’s efforts to coordinate and respond to
humanitarian needs around the world, particularly at
this time of crisis. Thailand also aligns itself with the
statement just delivered by the representative of Brunei
Darussalam on behalf of the Association of Southeast
Asian Nations (ASEAN).

A/75/PV.42

The coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic
and its effects have created greater humanitarian
needs, compounded the plight of the most vulnerable
and complicated our assistance efforts, thanks to
shrinking humanitarian access and financial support.
The pandemic also threatens to hinder, and even
reverse, our hard-earned development gains, and
it disproportionately increases the vulnerability of
people and societies. At the same time, the serious
challenges that we faced before the pandemic began are
continuing. In particular, food insecurity has gone on
increasing, climate change and disasters are becoming
more acute and the threat posed by communicable
diseases is growing. Thailand believes that the response
to and recovery from the COVID-19 pandemic presents
a valuable opportunity for us all to reflect on our
efforts, regarding which we would like to emphasize
the following areas.
First, the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development
and humanitarian action are interrelated. Inclusive
social protection enables us to ensure that all sectors
of a society, particularly the most vulnerable, are
well provided for in time of emergencies. Universal
health coverage puts countries in a better position
to prepare for and respond to pandemics and other
health challenges and emergencies. Advancing the
implementation of the Sustainable Development Goals
and commitments under the Addis Ababa Action
Agenda and the Paris Climate Agreement also helps
to create an enabling environment and complements
our endeavours under the Sendai Framework for
Disaster Risk Reduction and the New Urban Agenda.
In addition, particular attention should be paid to the
disproportionate effects that COVID-19 has on women
and girls. The pandemic has exacerbated pre-existing
gender inequalities and increased sexual and genderbased violence, and lockdown measures have limited
people’s access to education. It is therefore imperative
that our emergency responses are gender-sensitive and
focused on strengthening women’s leadership and their
full, effective and meaningful participation in all areas.
Secondly, preparedness and resilience remain key.
Thailand has relied on a homegrown development
approach based on a sufficiency-economy philosophy
that centres on people and communities and promotes
the building of resilience to shocks and interruptions.
Thailand also takes pride in being an important part of
the global health workforce. Last year, our emergency
medical team received well-deserved recognition from

20-352929/34

A/75/PV.42

the World Health Organization for the high standard
of the medical teams that it can deploy internationally
in emergency situations. We continue to strengthen
our efforts in that regard, especially by building the
capacity of our urban search and rescue team to meet
international standards, which will enable us to work
alongside international humanitarian professionals.
Thirdly, the success of humanitarian action
depends on sufficient funding and resources. Thailand
has been a modest but consistent contributor to the
Central Emergency Response Fund. This year we
contributed to the United Nations multi-partner trust
fund for COVID-19 response and recovery. In the
region, we have made contributions to the ASEAN
COVID-19 Response Fund and the Economic and Social
Commission for Asia and the Pacific multi-donor trust
fund for tsunami, disaster and climate preparedness
in the Indian Ocean and countries of South-East Asia.
We strongly encourage Member States and other
partners to consider enhancing their contributions
to the humanitarian pooled fund. Once developed,
the vaccines and medicines for COVID-19 should be
global public goods and their universal, timely, fair and
equitable access and distribution should be ensured.
Over the past 75 years, the banner of the United
Nations has brought courage and hope to people in
vulnerable and dire humanitarian situations. Thailand
welcomes and commends all active responses, including
through the coordinating role of the Office for the
Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs and the Global
Humanitarian Response Plan for COVID-19. We join
others in congratulating the World Food Programme
on being awarded the Nobel Peace Prize for its critical
role not only in alleviating hunger but also in securing
logistical lines for aid delivery in this time of crisis.
Our applause and heartfelt gratitude also go to all frontline humanitarian and health personnel, as well as to
others working on the ground and risking their lives to
provide assistance to people in need.
Mr. Hauri (Switzerland) (spoke in French):
The disaster of the coronavirus disease (COVID-19)
pandemic has exacerbated existing humanitarian crises
in the world’s most fragile and vulnerable countries.
In recent months, the United Nations system as a
whole has mobilized and responded rapidly to reduce
the humanitarian impact of the pandemic, including
through numerous appeals, resolutions and initiatives,
which we welcome. We were particularly impressed
by the preparation and launch of the first Global
10/34

11/12/2020

Humanitarian Response Plan for COVID-19, just two
weeks after the pandemic was officially declared.
In parallel with the unprecedented crisis that we are
currently experiencing, humanitarian needs are only
increasing, further exacerbated by the pandemic, which
highlights the challenges of protection in particular.
The numbers of those forcibly displaced by conflict or
disaster are growing. In that connection, we welcomed
the establishment last year of the High-level Panel
on Internal Displacement, whose secretariat is based
in Geneva. Civilian populations, like humanitarian
workers, are regularly targets for attacks. Ensuring
humanitarian access and assistance is an increasingly
complex task. In addition, the lockdown measures
implemented during the crisis have led to a shadow
pandemic of increased sexual violence. In that context,
we must provide an urgent, effective, coordinated
response based on the principles and values of humanity.
The resolutions we adopt today must be the expression
of those principles. In keeping with its tradition,
Switzerland strives to promote a culture of negotiation
that fosters the most ambitious compromises possible so
as to best support populations in need. We are delighted
that Switzerland will chair the humanitarian segment of
the Economic and Social Council next year in Geneva.
Before concluding, I would like to emphasize four
fundamental points. First, humanitarian assistance
should be provided in accordance with the principles
of humanity, neutrality, impartiality and independence.
This year, the world’s attention has been focused on the
pandemic. However, we must also ensure that we do not
neglect the humanitarian needs that existed before the
pandemic. The principles of humanitarian assistance
outlined in the draft resolutions before us (A/75/L.11,
A/75/L.42 and A/75/L.44), including the facilitation
of humanitarian access and the protection of civilians
by all parties to conflict, must always be respected,
especially in these difficult times.
Secondly, we must be innovative and avoid
taking a vertical approach. We must localize aid and
adapt to local needs by promoting the participation of
those directly concerned, especially women and other
vulnerable groups. It is also essential to adapt our
funding decisions in line with the principles of Good
Humanitarian Donorship.
Thirdly, international humanitarian law represents
a universal legal framework for the protection of victims
of armed conflict and the provision of humanitarian
20-35292

11/12/2020

assistance. The COVID-19 crisis must not be used as
a pretext for violating those rights. The pandemic is a
protection crisis as well as a health crisis.
Fourthly,
new
technologies
are
making
humanitarian action more effective, and the fight
against the pandemic has demonstrated that. However,
respect for confidentiality and the protection of data
collected for exclusively humanitarian purposes are
both a sine qua non.
Ms. Abdul Ghani (Malaysia): Malaysia aligns itself
with the statements delivered by the representatives of
Guyana, on behalf of the Group of 77 and China, and
Brunei Darussalam, on behalf of the Association of
Southeast Asian Nations.
At the outset I would like to thank the SecretaryGeneral for his comprehensive report (A/75/75), which
highlights the new challenges posed by a worsening
global security environment for humanitarian and
disaster relief assistance efforts, particularly under
the difficult conditions arising from the coronavirus
disease (COVID-19) pandemic. The recent onslaught
of COVID-19 has not spared a single country. It is a
humanitarian crisis as well as a health crisis. Malaysia
commends the efforts of the United Nations to ensure
that the international humanitarian assistance system
remains operational and the crucial life-saving work
of United Nations humanitarian response agencies
continues, despite the complexities and challenges of
working in the COVID-19 context.

A/75/PV.42

part, continues to work hand in hand with the United
Nations system to ensure the provision of high-quality
services and facilities for humanitarian and disaster
relief efforts. Within its capacity, Malaysia continues
to assist communities and countries in need. We have
made both monetary and in-kind contributions to
humanitarian and disaster relief assistance. This year,
Malaysia has pledged a financial contribution to OCHA
aimed at humanitarian relief in Iraq.
In the region, Malaysia, together with the World
Food Programme, continues to support COVID-19
operations and humanitarian relief efforts through the
United Nations Humanitarian Response Depot located
in Subang. Subang is one of six such United Nations
depots, and it provides storage, logistical support and
services for our humanitarian partners. The Malaysian
Government contributes $1 million annually in the form
of a grant to cover the centre’s operating costs. This
year, large-scale humanitarian operations have used
the Subang depot as part of United Nations efforts to
combat the pandemic, an important factor in ensuring
that comprehensive emergency humanitarian missions
within the region continue unhindered.

We believe that a timely, predictable, coordinated
and accountable response to humanitarian needs is
essential to saving lives and alleviating suffering.
However, that has been made more difficult as the
pandemic has exacerbated existing humanitarian
challenges to delivering an effective response. The
scale and intensity of human suffering inflicted by
the COVID-19 pandemic has had grave effects on
vulnerable communities, and even more so in countries
that are facing poverty, conflict, the effects of natural
disasters and climate change and unilateral sanctions.
We reiterate the call to all the relevant parties in conflict
areas to adhere to the Secretary-General’s appeal for a
global ceasefire at this critical time.

We are concerned about the security challenges
that United Nations personnel and aid workers face
in providing humanitarian assistance, particularly in
areas where violations of international humanitarian
law continue, humanitarian access is impeded, and
the protection of civilians remains a serious concern.
With regard to Palestine, we note with great concern
the ongoing protracted protection crisis, the major
shortfalls in funding and the restricted access to
essential services, as outlined in the SecretaryGeneral’s report (A/75/84). Malaysia reiterates the call
to all relevant parties to make every effort to safeguard
the safety and security of humanitarian personnel by
ensuring the full and effective implementation of
the relevant principles and rules of international law,
including international humanitarian and human rights
law, as well as Security Council resolutions. In that
connection, Malaysia has consistently contributed
financially to the United Nations Relief and Works
Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East to
alleviate its severe funding shortfall.

We would like to thank the Office for the
Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs (OCHA)
and other relevant United Nations agencies for
their commendable work in effectively delivering
humanitarian relief around the world. Malaysia, for its

Many have warned that next year we may be facing
a humanitarian crisis of a kind that the world has never
seen before. Humankind’s future is already in peril
from the reversals and loss of gains in meeting the
Sustainable Development Goals. We need to continue

20-3529211/34

A/75/PV.42

on the path of solidarity and international cooperation.
We need to make sure that the predictions of a global
humanitarian crisis will not materialize next year.
In conclusion, Malaysia would like to reiterate
its call for continued coordination and collaboration
between United Nations mechanisms and Member States
in order to guarantee effective delivery of humanitarian
assistance to those affected and ensure that humankind
triumphs in the fight against the COVID-19 pandemic.
Ms. Melfald (Norway): We are at the end of 2020,
a year that has been extraordinary, bringing yet another
record in the number of people affected by humanitarian
crises. Let me start by commending the World Health
Organization and the Office for the Coordination
of Humanitarian Affairs for their leadership and
coordination during the pandemic. The humanitarian
system has adapted its responses to meet the challenges
in an impressive way.
We want to stress the key role of local front-line
humanitarian workers. Resources must reach frontline responders so that they can take action to mitigate
the consequences of the pandemic. If we are to curb
the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic, global
equitable access to vaccines is key. Together with South
Africa, Norway is co-chairing the Access to COVID-19
Tools Accelerator Facilitation Council to that end.
As we will join the Security Council as an elected
member from 1 January, we would like to highlight
some areas of particular concern to Norway. First, we
have to strengthen the protection of civilians in armed
conflict. It is crucial to ensure that all parties respect
international humanitarian law. That includes granting
safe, unhindered access to civilians in need of protection
and assistance. Humanitarian principles should always
be the foundation of our humanitarian response.
Secondly, the protection of children in armed
conflict is a key issue for peace and security. Norway
will be an active member of the Working Group
on Children in Armed Conflict and will look for
opportunities to promote the protection of education
and mobilize support for the Safe Schools Declaration.
Thirdly, we must strengthen our ability to protect
people from sexual and gender-based violence. The
increase in sexual and gender-based violence during the
pandemic has been dramatic and is having devastating
effects on individuals and societies. We must step up
our efforts to fund protection programmes, as well
12/34

11/12/2020

as sexual and reproductive health services. Norway
encourages more States and organizations to join
the Call to Action on Protection from Gender-Based
Violence in Emergencies.
Fourthly, we need a particular focus on refugees
and internally displaced persons. In the current crisis,
the need for protection, shelter, food, water and
basic health-care services is growing. Norway has
championed the establishment of the High-level Panel
on Internal Displacement and we look forward to its
report and recommendations on how to deal with what
is one of the major humanitarian challenges of our time.
Finally, we would like to commend the humanitarian
workers who risk their lives while saving others. We can
and must do more to protect them. We must move from
words to action in order to end impunity for attacks
on humanitarians.
In conclusion, Norway stands in solidarity with the
people across the world who are affected by humanitarian
crises and the effects of the COVID-19 pandemic. No
country can address those challenges alone. As we end
the commemoration of the seventy-fifth anniversary
of the United Nations, and as an incoming member of
the Security Council, we can assure the Assembly that
Norway will continue to do its part.
Ms. Alnaser (Kuwait) (spoke in Arabic): My
country’s delegation is pleased to be participating in the
debate on this agenda item, given our steadfast belief
in its importance, and we want to express our gratitude
to all those who contribute to humanitarian and other
additional assistance. We reaffirm the importance of
promoting and coordinating the humanitarian assistance
and emergency relief that the United Nations provides
expeditiously to regions affected by disasters and crises
in order to save threatened lives. This is all the more
true considering that we are currently experiencing
increasing conflicts and disasters around the world,
demanding that we promote international partnerships
for greater effectiveness.
My country has been characterized since its
beginnings by its deep love for charitable action, which
has become a feature of our foreign policy that we can
describe as humanitarian diplomacy. Moreover, the fact
that our late Amir, Sheikh Sabah Al-Ahmad Al-Jaber
Al-Sabah, was named a humanitarian action leader is
eloquent testament to the importance that my country
has attached to humanitarian assistance for more than
half a century.
20-35292

11/12/2020

We would like to take this opportunity to express our
sincere thanks and appreciation for the roles played by
Secretary-General António Guterres and by Mr. Tijjani
Muhammad Bande, President of the Assembly at its
seventy-fourth session, and you, Sir, as President of
the Assembly’s current session, in providing support
and aid for every area of humanitarian assistance,
sustainable development, human rights, peace and
security, particularly in the context of the coronavirus
disease (COVID-19) pandemic and its ramifications.
My country has assumed its regional and
international responsibilities as a centre for humanitarian
action and continues to support efforts to tackle global
humanitarian issues and provide assistance during
incidents, crises and disasters wherever they occur. The
official development assistance my country provides
is double the internationally agreed percentage,
with a view to always promoting a humanitarian and
development approach at both the Government and
population levels. My country is fulfilling its noble
humanitarian vocation through that approach, which
exemplifies the values and principles of the true
Kuwaiti people.
Since 2008, my country has been providing
10 per cent of its total aid to affected States through
United Nations organizations and agencies. The State
of Kuwait’s contributions to the Central Emergency
Response Fund therefore amount to $1 million, in
addition to next year’s voluntary contributions of
$1 million to the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees and $2 million to the
United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine
Refugees in the Near East.
Regarding the COVID-19 pandemic, my country
has contributed approximately $290 million to combat
the spread of the virus and mitigate its multiple and
complex effects through solidarity mechanisms and
initiatives in support of United Nations efforts and
those of the worst-affected countries. We do that
through our support for the World Health Organization
(WHO) in order to help a number of brotherly and
friendly States relieve the pressure on their health
systems and provide them with what they need to build
their capacity and improve their services. In addition,
my country made pledges during the international
donor conference organized by the European Union
in support of vaccine development through the Gavi
Alliance and the Coalition for Epidemic Preparedness
Innovations, since they are both European Union focal

A/75/PV.42

points and in line with the WHO initiative to accelerate
the development of a COVID-19 vaccine, ensure its
equitable distribution and provide it to countries that
cannot afford it.
In addition, the Kuwait Fund for Arab Economic
Development has made donations and provided
financial assistance to brotherly and friendly countries
to help them meet the challenges of the pandemic.
For example, we supported the establishment of an
epidemiological centre for Africa in cooperation with
the African Union and instituted a moratorium on
loan repayments due between 1 May and 31 December
of this year in response to the World Bank Group’s
initiative launched at a Group of 20 meeting. As a
result, Kuwait’s total contributions to the effort to
address the pandemic and its consequences amount to
nearly $287.4 million. Kuwait has also responded to a
request by the United Nations to receive and provide
medical care to international civil servants working
for the Organization, its agencies or other international
organizations active in Central and West Asia who
contracted the virus.
In conclusion, my country’s delegation would like to
thank United Nations officials and humanitarian actors
for their tireless efforts to implement their humanitarian
activities, especially amid the COVID-19 pandemic.
We look forward to realizing a world characterized
by an efficient and effective humanitarian response to
other such challenges.
Mr. Santos Maraver (Spain) (spoke in Spanish):
Spain aligns itself with the statement made earlier by
the observer of the European Union.
The year 2020 has been a crucial one for
multilateralism and for humankind. Conflicts and
geopolitical tensions, demands for social justice,
instability, the risk of acute food insecurity, high levels
of forced displacement, disasters and the adverse effects
of climate change, in addition to the coronavirus disease
(COVID-19) pandemic, are projected to continue next
year, and 235 million people are in urgent need of
humanitarian assistance.
We have an opportunity today to join together and
realize the effective multilateralism we need by adopting
by consensus the three humanitarian draft resolutions
(A/75/L.11, A/75/L.42 and A/75/L.44) before this
plenary meeting of the General Assembly. They deal
with fundamental issues — the safety and security of
humanitarian personnel, international cooperation on

20-3529213/34

A/75/PV.42

11/12/2020

humanitarian assistance in the area of natural disasters,
and the strengthening of the coordination of emergency
humanitarian assistance of the United Nations.

Declaration to do so. The 106 States that are already
signatories should coordinate its implementation and
compliance with it.

The Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian
Affairs has done an excellent job this year in
extremely difficult circumstances, bringing coherence
to the humanitarian system, analysing needs and
supplementing the response in underfunded contexts.
The World Health Organization is coordinating
the global health response and leading the crisis
management team; the World Food Programme is
providing logistical and food support; UNICEF is
maintaining education and child protection efforts.
The rest of the system has also shown a high level of
commitment. We hope that the development system
will also make progress on coordination. That will
represent a decisive step towards the realization of the
humanitarian-development-peacebuilding nexus and
the achievement of one United Nations. That nexus will
be one of our priorities in the coming year and must be
achieved while ensuring full respect for the principles
of neutrality, impartiality, humanity and independence.
The problems we face are multifaceted, and the
solutions to them must therefore also be multifaceted
and complementary.

Medical services and the safety of health-care
workers are another priority of the Spanish Government.
Spain remains committed to the development and
implementation of resolution 2286 (2016), which
we co-facilitated during our time on the Security
Council. We would like to publicly condemn attacks
on all humanitarian workers, which have increased
exponentially in recent months. States must investigate
such attacks, and their perpetrators must be brought
to justice.
Another challenge facing the international
community is in the area of the defence of humanitarian
access, respect for international humanitarian law and
principled humanitarian action. I would like to thank
the International Committee of the Red Cross for its
contribution to ensuring respect for international
humanitarian law and for its efforts to humanize
situations of armed conflict. It deserves recognition for
its work in general but also for its leadership.

The year 2021 will be a year when we make an even
stronger case for women’s inclusion and leadership
throughout the humanitarian response cycle. Their
role in the localization agenda and in recovery will be
key. In addition, we must recognize the importance
of sexual and reproductive health services, which in
humanitarian contexts are essential for saving lives.
Women and girls who find themselves in armed conflict
or emergency situations cannot escape the scourges of
gender-based violence or human trafficking. I want to
acknowledge the work of the United Nations Population
Fund and UN-Women in this area, as well as the Central
Emergency Response Fund’s gender-based-violence
funding window.

There are many humanitarian crises around the
world, and they all deserve our attention — the crisis in
Venezuela and its neighbours, forced displacement in
Central America, the Sahrawi refugee camps, the tragic
situations in Palestine, Syria and the Sahel and that of
the Rohingyas, to name but a few. They all require
our attention. An example of Spain’s commitment is
its assumption of the Chair of the support platform for
the comprehensive regional protection and solutions
framework to forced displacement in Central America
and Mexico. Similar initiatives have been established
in the Sahel and the Horn of Africa. Where the United
Nations system is concerned, I also want to recognize
the generosity of Spanish civil society, which will have
contributed more than €90 million to the Office of
the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees
in 2020. Spain’s decentralized cooperation has
also made an important effort this year to meet the
humanitarian agenda.

Education is an essential pillar of any humanitarian
response that aspires to social justice. It is the
most powerful tool we have for people’s growth
and development and the most influential in the
development of countries. We must support education in
emergencies and ensure that schools are safe places. We
call on States that have not yet signed the Safe Schools

Finally, I would like to thank the non-governmental
organizations and humanitarian workers without
whose work humanitarian action would not function.
Their efforts, vocation and dedication are a source of
inspiration to us all. We have a decade ahead of us
to fulfil the agenda for humankind, the Sustainable
Development Goals and the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable

Mr. Arriola Ramírez (Paraguay), Vice-President,
took the Chair.

14/34

20-35292

11/12/2020

Development. Let us work in the short term in order to
alleviate suffering in the medium term, recover better
and develop in a greener, fairer and more inclusive way.
Mr. Rae (Canada) (spoke in French): The year 2020
has been particularly difficult for populations affected
by the crisis. At the beginning of the year, millions
of people were already dealing with conflict, climate
change, natural disasters and food insecurity. The
pandemic and its side effects have exacerbated those
challenges, threatening critical development gains. As
the people who care for their families and patients and
work on the front lines, women are the worst affected.
They face increasing risks of sexual and gender-based
violence and have limited access to services, including
in the area of sexual and reproductive health. At their
peak, school closures affected more than 1.5 billion
children, with particularly devastating consequences
for girls and young women.
(spoke in English)
An unprecedent global food security crisis is
emerging, with 270 million people likely to fall
deeper into hunger, in addition to the 690 million
who were already food insecure before the pandemic.
David Beasley, Executive Director of the World Food
Programme, warned us in his Nobel Peace Prize
acceptance speech yesterday that we are on a knife’s
edge. The prospect of famine is staring us in the
face. Looking to 2021, the recently released Global
Humanitarian Overview 2021 estimates that $35 billion
will be required to provide life-saving assistance to
160 million of the most vulnerable. To this point, we
have not acted as energetically as we should. It is time
now for us to act, and to act together.
First, we must provide predictable and flexible
humanitarian financing in line with the Grand Bargain
on humanitarian financing and the Good Humanitarian
Donorship principles. We must explore innovative
partnerships, including with the private sector.
Secondly, humanitarian workers must have rapid,
safe and unimpeded access to ensure that they can
deliver assistance to those in need, based on fundamental
humanitarian principles. Their safety and security must
be protected. That is not happening right now. Let me
put it bluntly. Many nation-States and private armies
are preventing assistance from reaching people who
are starving and sick. That is clearly unlawful, but it
is happening. Children at school, women at home or
working in hospitals are killed because those places

A/75/PV.42

and people are being deliberately targeted. They are
not what is euphemistically called “collateral damage”.
They are tracked and they are killed. The perpetrators
of such atrocities must be held accountable.
Thirdly, our national Governments in the Assembly
must support local and national responders, including
women- and refugee-led organizations, on the front
lines of humanitarian response. Gender-responsive
humanitarian action is fundamental to the effectiveness
of our collective responses. For responses to be needbased, the voices of women and girls, refugee and
migrant populations, persons with disabilities and other
marginalized people must be meaningfully included at
every single stage.
Fourthly, we must prioritize education, particularly
for girls, who are at the greatest risk of dropping out of
school and thereby being more exposed to child, early
and forced marriage, human trafficking and sexual and
gender-based violence. Refugee children are also five
times more likely to be out of school than non-refugee
children. We must ensure that they are not denied
their right or access to education. The future of this
generation of young people is very much at stake.
(spoke in French)
Canada is working tirelessly to do its part. To
date, Canada has launched more than $1.1 billion for
the response to coronavirus disease (COVID-19) in
developing countries, including $100 million provided
early in the pandemic in flexible humanitarian funding
to address needs arising specifically by the pandemic.
Nor have we lost sight of the humanitarian crises that
existed prior to COVID-19. Canada is providing more
than $800 million in quality, flexible humanitarian
funding. That is directed to humanitarian responses in
the Sahel region, Yemen, South and Central America in
response to the Venezuelan crisis and, more recently, to
the Tigray crisis.
(spoke in English)
Over the past two years, Canada has also led the
global Call to Action on Protection from Gender-based
Violence in Emergencies. We launched the 2021–2025
road map, setting the strategic framework to guide
collective action to prevent, mitigate and respond
to gender-based violence in humanitarian settings.
We are pleased to be passing the leadership torch to
Denmark in 2021 for the next stage of implementation.
We are very proud to be actively contributing to the

20-3529215/34

A/75/PV.42

implementation of the Global Compact on Refugees
through the fulfilment of our pledges from the Global
Refugee Forum and our work to support comprehensive
refugee responses worldwide. We remain committed to
doing more in 2021.
This year, the international community has
reaffirmed its collective commitment to international
cooperation. We have pledged to protect our planet.
We have agreed to work to address the root causes,
starting with conflict, that are driving so many
humanitarian needs. And we continue our commitment
to accelerating action to achieve gender equality,
women’s participation and the empowerment of women
and girls. Those goals will not be easy to achieve, and
we have to recognize, looking in the mirror, that we
are already falling behind on the commitments we have
made. However, together we can embrace the challenges
that 2021 will bring us, stand in solidarity and deliver
with, and for, those living in crisis globally, because we
share a common humanity.
I look forward to a consensus-based adoption of the
humanitarian draft resolutions (A/75/L.11, A/75/L.42
and A/75/L.44) later today and would like to thank the
facilitators for their excellent work.
Mr. Dai Bing (China) (spoke in Chinese): As
we speak, global humanitarian needs are increasing
significantly owing to the continued spread of the
coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic, intensifying
regional conflicts, the rising threat of climate change,
frequent natural disasters and extreme weather events,
desert locust infestations, the worsening food security
situation and the effects of unilateral coercive measures.
In such a grim context, it is imperative to ensure that
the international community upholds multilateralism,
strengthens solidarity and cooperation, works together
to combat COVID-19 and supports countries and
peoples in humanitarian emergencies in overcoming
these increasingly serious humanitarian challenges.
China would like to emphasize the following.
First, we should strictly abide by international
law and the norms governing international relations.
Humanitarian assistance must be based on the
principles of the Charter of the United Nations and
resolution 46/182 and must remain humanitarian and
professional. The sovereignty of recipient countries
must be respected, their internal affairs must not be
interfered with and any politicization of humanitarian
issues should be avoided. All the parties to conflicts
16/34

11/12/2020

should respond positively to the Secretary-General’s
call for a global ceasefire and work for political
settlements through inclusive dialogue, while all
the parties concerned must observe international
humanitarian law and fulfil their obligation to protect
civilians and ensure humanitarian access and effective
humanitarian delivery. We must coordinate the efforts
of the international community and push for any
unilateral coercive measures to be lifted immediately in
order to facilitate a full, effective and efficient response
to COVID-19 by all Member States.
Secondly, we should increase humanitarian
assistance and effectively improve the emergency
response capabilities of developing countries. That
means sharing anti-epidemic experience, providing
material and technological support and engaging in
cooperation on medicines and vaccines. More resources
should be channelled to areas such as infectious-disease
control, public-health capacity-building and food
security. Humanitarian assistance should be scaled
up for vulnerable people, including women, children,
the elderly and persons with disabilities. COVID-19
vaccines should be considered a global public good
and made accessible and affordable for vulnerable
countries. The international community should help
developing countries strengthen their capacities in
disaster prevention, preparedness and response and risk
reduction, foster the exchange and sharing of disaster
information and enhance disaster monitoring and earlywarning capabilities.
Thirdly, we should put people at the centre of
our efforts and fundamentally reduce humanitarian
needs. All our efforts, from offsetting the impact
of COVID-19 and getting back to normal to ending
conflicts and humanitarian crises, ultimately depend
on the realization of people-centred development.
The international community should place the
implementation of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development at the heart of international development
cooperation. Poverty eradication must be made a
primary goal, and more resources should be directed to
poverty reduction, education, health and infrastructure
development in order to achieve better social and
economic recovery and address both the symptoms and
root causes of humanitarian crises.
China commends the United Nations system
and humanitarian organizations for their efforts to
coordinate and provide humanitarian assistance and
to rapidly respond to COVID-19. We pay tribute to the
20-35292

11/12/2020

A/75/PV.42

dedication of the humanitarian and medical personnel
on the front lines. China firmly supports the United
Nations in leading and coordinating international
humanitarian assistance and global cooperation in
fighting COVID-19. We welcome the SecretaryGeneral’s call for a global ceasefire, as well as the
Global Humanitarian Response Plan for COVID-19 and
other relevant initiatives.

working together to save lives and alleviate suffering
within a diverse and varied system of humanitarian
partners, including Member States, the United Nations,
its funds and programmes, international, regional,
national and local humanitarian organizations and civil
society. It is therefore vital to intensify our cooperation
and collaboration at every level in order to contain,
control and mitigate the COVID-19 pandemic.

Upholding the vision of a community with a shared
future for humankind, China has been vigorously
engaged in international cooperation against the virus
since the first outbreak of COVID-19. We have sent
36 medical expert teams to 34 countries and extended
assistance to more than 150 countries and international
organizations. China has donated $50 million to the
World Health Organization and the Global Humanitarian
Response Plan for COVID-19 and has worked with the
United Nations to set up a global humanitarian response
depot and hub in China. Once the COVID-19 vaccines
have been developed and deployed in China, we will
make them global public goods and provide them
to other developing countries as our contribution to
building a community of health for all. China will work
with the international community, actively participate
in bilateral and multilateral humanitarian relief
operations and continue to support other countries in
need within its capacity.

Thanks to the enlightened vision of His Majesty
King Mohammed VI, Morocco has made humanitarian
action a fundamental and structural pillar of its foreign
policy. Morocco has therefore always been among the
first whenever necessary to provide people affected
by natural disasters or armed conflicts with initial
humanitarian aid, including food, medicines, tents
and multidisciplinary field hospitals. Morocco also
continues to strengthen its participation in mitigating
humanitarian crises around the world through its
effective contributions to peacekeeping operations
and humanitarian efforts. In that spirit, Morocco has
been contributing since the 1960s to peacekeeping
operations and humanitarian action around the world,
particularly in Africa, notably through the deployment
of contingents of the Royal Moroccan Armed Forces
and medical and surgical field hospitals and the
delivery of direct humanitarian aid to the populations
of affected countries.

Mr. Hilale (Morocco) (spoke in French): The
situation around the world is more alarming than ever
as the number of people affected by humanitarian
emergencies grows. At the end of 2019, 145 million
people were in need of humanitarian assistance.
In 2020, a year marked by the coronavirus disease
(COVID-19) pandemic, that figure has risen to nearly
168 million people, or one in 45 people worldwide.
In 2021, 235 million people will need humanitarian
assistance. That is an increase of almost 40 per cent
compared to this year and accounts for one in 33 people
in the world, the highest figure in decades, according
to analysts. That is a call to reflect together in order to
better understand the challenges we face. The time has
come to act and mobilize in the service of the people
and communities ravaged by conflict, climate change,
rising world hunger and the COVID-19 pandemic.

Morocco’s humanitarian action has become a model
based on the principles of regional and international
solidarity. With that in mind, and on the instructions
of King Mohammed, the Royal Moroccan Armed
Forces have so far deployed 17 hospitals and provided
around 2.65 million medical services for the benefit
of local populations and refugees in 14 countries on
four continents. Similarly, in 2020, King Mohammed
ordered medical aid to be sent to some 20 brother
African countries to support them in their efforts to
fight the COVID-19 pandemic.

It is crucial to ensure that the United Nations
continues to be the voice of the most vulnerable and
a catalyst for unified global action in the service of
humankind. That is the ultimate goal of humanitarian
work and humanitarian coordination. It is primarily about

Morocco’s efforts and action in the humanitarian
field are not limited to emergency aid but are part of
a comprehensive approach to alleviating the suffering
of the most vulnerable, particularly through sustainable
development projects. In that respect, the experience
accumulated by Morocco in South-South cooperation
in recent years in Africa and other continents reflects
its strong commitment to assisting populations in
humanitarian crises. Morocco remains committed to
impartiality, neutrality and independence as essential
principles for the delivery of humanitarian assistance.

20-3529217/34

A/75/PV.42

Violations of the human rights of displaced persons are
reprehensible crimes under international law and any
exploitation of their suffering for political purposes
is unacceptable.
In June 2020, Morocco, as Chair of the
Humanitarian Affairs Segment of the Economic and
Social Council, launched a call for action, endorsed
by 173 delegations, in support of the humanitarian
response to COVID-19. That appeal is not just another
document on COVID-19 but a call to action. It proposes
concrete operational measures that are essential to
meeting the challenges of the pandemic. It calls for
practical actions such as facilitating the access, passage
and transport of humanitarian aid, health and medical
personnel and equipment, without which humanitarian
suffering, loss of life and the needs of those affected
could be exacerbated. In that connection, the call for
action addresses the issues of speculation and undue
stockpiling that can impede access to safe, effective
and affordable essential medicines, vaccines, personal
protective equipment and medical equipment, as
well as other humanitarian supplies and equipment.
It calls for universal, timely and equitable access to
and distribution of all essential health technologies
and products that are of high quality, safe, effective
and affordable. Finally, the call for action also aims
to respond to the humanitarian impact of increasing
food insecurity in the world arising from the pandemic,
which has been worsened by recent locust infestations
in some developing countries. It calls for ensuring that
the needs and priorities of vulnerable populations are
fully taken into account.
Morocco commends the humanitarian system for
its coordinated response aimed at preventing sharp
increases in hunger, poverty, violence and disease due
to the pandemic and the resulting global recession. We
would also like to commend the strong commitment
and leadership of the Secretary-General, Mr. António
Guterres. His various appeals and initiatives are
essential to our collective effort to fight the pandemic
and its impact. His call for an immediate global
ceasefire, widely supported by Member States, including
Morocco, is an important step towards mitigating the
devastating humanitarian effects of armed conflict
and enabling a greater focus on the response to the
pandemic. In addition, the Global Humanitarian
Response Plan is an excellent initiative that requires
our full support, including through urgent funding to
meet its needs. Morocco, as a donor and member of the
18/34

11/12/2020

Central Emergency Response Fund Advisory Board,
also greatly appreciates the Fund’s added value in
enabling rapid, timely and better coordinated responses
to emergency crises. In that regard, Morocco has just
announced a significant increase in its voluntary
contribution to the Fund. Humanitarian assistance is an
expression of the positive moral value of solidarity. Let
us therefore show solidarity today more than ever.
Mr. Fifield (Australia): The events of 2020 have
devastated lives and livelihoods around the globe.
The front line of the humanitarian response has
been local staff, national organizations, community
groups, friends and families, all rallying to support
one another through this dreadful year. The United
Nations system has adapted and reprioritized, and the
international presence in many operations has been
drawn down. Although there are few silver linings
this year, the situation has forced us to recognize the
central and invaluable role of local and national actors.
International humanitarian organizations do incredible
work, but that work will be at its most powerful when
conducted in genuine partnership with local actors and
with the views of affected populations at the heart of
decision-making.
In 2020, Australia has focused its efforts on
addressing the serious effects of the coronavirus disease
(COVID-19) pandemic on our nearest neighbours.
Many countries in the Pacific have avoided the worst
health aspects of the crisis, but the secondary effects on
their economies have been profound and compounded
by the disasters that continue to strike the region with
increasing ferocity.
Two weeks ago, the United Nations presented
the Global Humanitarian Overview 2021, painting
a bleak and catastrophic picture of humanitarian
need. In the year ahead, we will face compounding
challenges — responding to the COVID-19 pandemic,
rising food insecurity, protracted conflicts and
increasingly intense disasters. However, humanitarian
assistance is not a solution. We must find political
solutions, hold warring parties accountable for
violations of international humanitarian law and
ensure humanitarian access. Now more than ever is
the time to invest in a multi-hazard, cross-sectoral
approach to disaster risk reduction, preparedness
and resilience-building. That is why Australia is so
pleased to be hosting the ninth Asia-Pacific Ministerial
Conference on Disaster Risk Reduction virtually in
2021, in partnership with the United Nations Office
20-35292

11/12/2020

A/75/PV.42

for Disaster Risk Reduction. The Conference will
focus on resilient investment and recovery, resilient
systems, services and infrastructure and resilient
communities. It will highlight the experiences of
women, girls and people with disabilities, as well as
local and indigenous knowledge. As host, Australia
will also draw greater attention to the challenges faced
by remote island and coastal communities, particularly
our Pacific neighbours.

coherence among our humanitarian, peacebuilding
and development efforts, empowering local actors
and improving transparency, joint and impartial needs
assessments and prioritized appeals. We must also
press Governments and parties to conflict to uphold
their obligations under international law. That includes
our long-standing work to keep the humanitarian
consequences of crises such as those in Yemen and
Syria on the agenda of the Security Council.

I conclude today with Australia’s thanks to the
humanitarian personnel of the United Nations who
continue to work tirelessly in the back offices and on
the front lines to deliver urgent humanitarian assistance
to millions of people in need.

The United States is pleased to be a sponsor of
draft resolution A/75/L.42, on the safety and security
of humanitarian personnel and the protection of United
Nations personnel, which sends an important message
of solidarity to the many courageous people who risk
their lives to deliver humanitarian assistance to millions
of people across the world. As the Secretary-General’s
report (A/75/75) documents, instability has increased
across the globe owing to the unprecedented conditions
caused by the COVID-19 pandemic. The continued rise
in attacks on humanitarian workers, and in their deaths,
due to terrorism is abhorrent. Also troubling this year is
the marked increase in attacks affecting humanitarian
and United Nations premises and vehicles. We are
concerned about humanitarian workers who are held
hostage, such as those who were held by the Houthis
in Yemen.

Ms. Barber (United States of America): The
United States remains deeply concerned about the
unprecedented rise in humanitarian needs in recent
years, as well as the severe increase in the number
of people in need since the onset of the coronavirus
disease (COVID-19) pandemic. Last week, the United
Nations released the Global Humanitarian Overview
2021. The figures are stark. In 2021, 235 million people
will need humanitarian assistance and protection. That
means that one in 33 people worldwide needs help — a
significant increase from the one in 45 people a year
ago, which was already the highest figure in decades.
The United States has long been a world leader in
providing humanitarian assistance, including through
the United Nations, and we remain committed to
supporting those in need. The United States remains
the largest single humanitarian donor, giving more than
$10.5 billion in humanitarian assistance in fiscal year
2020. The United States is committed to multilateralism
and to delivering humanitarian assistance around
the world. Deputy Secretary Biegun and Acting
Administrator Barsa of the United States Agency
for International Development hosted a virtual side
event this year, highlighting the top 10 humanitarian
donors, recognizing key United Nations bodies for their
partnership and encouraging other donors to increase
their contributions. This year donors have given more
than $17 billion to inter-agency humanitarian plans.
That is very generous, but we can still do more. We call
on others to join us by doing their share in supporting
the humanitarian response.
We must continue to improve efficiency and
effectiveness through reforms of the international
humanitarian system, including by increasing

With humanitarian needs at already unprecedented
levels, existing global security threats have exacerbated
those challenges and made safe access to populations in
need even more difficult for those working on the front
lines of disasters and crises. Despite those constraints,
humanitarian personnel risk their lives and well-being
every day to carry out vital work. We thank aid workers
for their courage and honour the humanitarians who
have lost their lives as a result of accidents and acts
of violence. We condemn the significant increase in
critical incidents affecting the humanitarian personnel
of United Nations implementing partners.
Attacks on civilians and humanitarian workers
in armed conflicts reflect a systemic disregard for
international humanitarian law and human rights law.
We call for respect for international humanitarian law
and unequivocal respect for humanitarian and United
Nations workers, including humanitarian assets,
premises and the delivery of humanitarian assistance.
We continue to call for greater accountability for
violence against humanitarian personnel in countries
such as Syria, as well as greater accountability
when humanitarian personnel are the perpetrators of

20-3529219/34

A/75/PV.42

exploitation, abuse or violence. We also reaffirm the
Secretary-General’s zero-tolerance policy on sexual
exploitation and abuse of the world’s most vulnerable
people. We strongly encourage others in the Assembly
to strengthen their efforts to counter sexual exploitation
and abuse.
The United States remains firmly committed to
its multifaceted role as a leader in humanitarian action
and diplomacy around the world. We will continue to
pursue improved coordination and efficient delivery
of humanitarian aid for the millions across the globe
in need of relief from conflict and other tragedies.
We proudly stand behind these resolutions and would
like to convey our sincere thanks and support to all
humanitarian personnel working in many of the world’s
most dangerous places.
The United States would like to take this opportunity
to clarify some key priorities. Resolutions are
non-binding documents that do not create or affect rights
or obligations under international law. Moreover, the
fact that the United States sponsors or joins a consensus
on draft resolutions does not imply endorsement.
The United States has committed $20.5 billion to the
international COVID-19 response, including for the
development of vaccines and therapeutics, foreign
assistance and other preparedness efforts. We do
not support references to the International Criminal
Court and the Rome Statute that do not distinguish
sufficiently between parties and non-parties or are
otherwise inconsistent with our positions.
Consistent with the Geneva Consensus Declaration
on Promoting Women’s Health and Strengthening the
Family, we assert that there is no international right to
abortion and that each nation has the sovereign right to
legislate its own position on the protection of life at all
stages without external pressure.
The United States maintains the sovereign right to
facilitate or restrict access to its territory in accordance
with its national laws and policies and subject to its
existing international obligations. We do not endorse
or affirm the Global Compact for Migration, the New
York Declaration for Refugees and Migrants or the
International Convention on the Protection of the Rights
of All Migrant Workers and Members of Their Families.
With respect to the Paris Climate Agreement and
climate change language, we note that the withdrawal
of the United States from the Agreement took effect
on 4 November. Any references to the Paris Agreement
20/34

11/12/2020

and climate change are therefore without prejudice
to United States positions. We affirm our support for
promoting economic growth and improving energy
security while also protecting the environment. The
United States does not support references to climate
change in resolutions that are inconsistent with that
approach or that do not respect national circumstances
and approaches. With respect to references to the
special reports of the Intergovernmental Panel on
Climate Change (IPCC), the United States has indicated
at the IPCC that the Panel’s acceptance of those reports
and its approval of their respective summaries for
policymakers do not imply United States endorsement
of the specific findings or underlying contents of the
reports. References to the IPCC special reports are also
without prejudice to United States positions.
When our children remember this time years from
now, they may ask us to tell them stories about what we
did. We would like to tell them that speaking on behalf
of the American people, we lifted up the voices of the
world’s most vulnerable people in the virtual halls of
the United Nations and provided life-saving aid during
the greatest international crisis the world has faced
since the Second World War. Let our new legacy be that
we put aside our differences and gave the world hope
during its darkest hour.
Ms. Engelberg (Denmark): Denmark aligns itself
with the statement delivered earlier by the observer of
the European Union.
With 235 million people in need of humanitarian
assistance worldwide, we are facing one of the
greatest humanitarian challenges in our lifetime. The
coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic has created
an exponential rise in humanitarian needs by adding
to the adverse impact of conflict, climate change and
food insecurity, among other things. The global level
of extreme poverty has risen for the first time in 22
years, and several decades of development risk being
undermined. The needs are immense, and we need
global solidarity more than ever.
I want to focus on what the Secretary-General
has rightly described as a shadow pandemic, and
that is the increasing level of gender-based violence,
especially against women and girls. With the pandemic
and its side effects relating to security, health and
financial worries, violence against women and girls has
intensified. That is true in countries all over the world,
including my own. Globally, every three months of
20-35292

11/12/2020

lockdown in response to the pandemic means 15 million
new cases of gender-based violence, and the risk is
even higher in humanitarian emergencies. All forms of
gender-based violence, every act of forced submission
and degradation, is a barrier to the achievement of
gender equality and the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development and is among the most widespread and
devastating human rights abuses in the world. Every
humanitarian effort should therefore include the
policies, systems and mechanisms necessary to prevent,
mitigate and respond to gender-based violence. That
includes providing safe and comprehensive services to
those affected.
Starting on 1 January, Denmark will take over the
leadership of the Call to Action on Protection from
Gender-based Violence in Emergencies, which is a
multi-stakeholder initiative aimed at fundamentally
changing the way that gender-based violence is
addressed in humanitarian emergencies. As part of
those efforts, we need more partnerships with local
women’s organizations to promote women and girls’
safe and meaningful participation, as well as influence
and leadership, in our humanitarian efforts. We need
to focus on gender equality and the empowerment of
women and girls in order to promote girls’ access to
quality education and to use the potential of education
to create gender-equal societies. We need emphasis on
gender in our analysis and more data disaggregated by
sex and gender. Finally, we need to increase support
for the core work of the United Nations agencies,
non-governmental organizations and their local
partners that are dedicated to the advancement of
women and girls’ full enjoyment of human rights.
United Nations partners must prioritize and streamline
efforts to counter gender-based violence in their work.
The Call to Action has become a strong coalition of
global stakeholders, and we thank Canada for its able
stewardship in the past few years, as the Permanent
Representative of Canada just mentioned. We look
forward to working with Member States, United
Nations partners and civil society to halt this pandemic
within a pandemic and end gender-based violence
in emergencies.
Ms. Karmazinskaya (Russian Federation) (spoke
in Russian): This year has been a serious test for the
entire international community. The coronavirus
pandemic and its long-term consequences for every
area of people’s lives have demonstrated the urgent
need for solidarity among all Member States in order

A/75/PV.42

to combat the crisis and help the neediest. In that
regard, we would like to begin by expressing our deep
gratitude to the humanitarian and medical workers who
are providing urgent humanitarian assistance to all
those in need in the farthest corners of the planet and
in the current difficult conditions. In that context, we
strongly condemn attacks on humanitarian and medical
personnel, which only create more suffering and
deprive those waiting for help of the hope of salvation.
The estimates of the Global Humanitarian
Overview 2021 are alarming. The number of those
in need is growing rapidly, record donor funding is
required and the United Nations humanitarian response
system is constantly dealing with new challenges. We
firmly believe that the only way to resolve the issues
facing the international community is by uniting in an
atmosphere of mutual trust and respect. That is the main
condition for ensuring that we leave no one behind.
Developing countries and countries experiencing
humanitarian crises face special difficulties during the
pandemic, and it is therefore important to have a direct
and open dialogue about existing problems.
For our part, we would like to touch on two key
issues in the context of humanitarian response. The
first is the importance of getting and using reliable
data, including on attacks on medical and humanitarian
targets, in order to assess needs and plan humanitarian
operations. We have recently been seeing humanitarian
organizations relying on unverified sources of
information, often located outside the territories of
the affected States. It is important that we preserve the
impartial status of the United Nations, which is so vital
for the universal legitimacy of its agencies’ work.
Secondly, problems are often created by donors
themselves through restrictions that bypass the Security
Council and in the context of a pandemic appear even
more inhumane. Unilateral sanctions are an obstacle to
the supply of humanitarian aid and essential medicines.
Ms. Alena Douhan, Special Rapporteur on the negative
impact of unilateral coercive measures on the enjoyment
of human rights, has spoken about that on the basis of
serious evidence, and the Secretary-General has called
for such measures to be lifted. So-called humanitarian
exceptions simply do not work. Contractors refuse to
implement humanitarian projects out of fear of ending
up on the so-called blacklists of sanctions regime
violators. The authors of these inhumane restrictions
prefer to ignore these situations. They impose sanctions
on the one hand while on the other calling for respect

20-3529221/34

A/75/PV.42

for human rights and humane treatment in the forums
of the United Nations. It is time to listen to the urging
of the United Nations leadership and to stop politicizing
humanitarian and development assistance.
The Russian Federation has consistently advocated
for expanding cooperation in the field of humanitarian
aid under the auspices of the United Nations. We
have consistently done our part, both through regular
donor contributions to the budgets of United Nations
humanitarian agencies and by sending humanitarian
aid and Russian relief workers to regions with the most
acute humanitarian needs. We are scaling up assistance
to countries in support of their efforts to combat the
pandemic’s effects. In 2020, total Russian funding to
United Nations humanitarian agencies amounted to
more than $80 million. We contributed $1.5 million
to the Central Emergency Response Fund, which we
consider a key operational mechanism for financing
United Nations humanitarian activities.
Next year we will mark the thirtieth anniversary
of the adoption of resolution 46/182, which laid the
foundation for the work of United Nations humanitarian
agencies and their partners in situations of conflict and
natural disaster. We believe that the guiding principles
of the United Nations on humanitarian emergency
assistance, which are the bedrock of that work, remain
relevant to this day. We think it is important that we all
confirm their inviolability.
To sum up, we would like to express our gratitude
to the delegations of the European Union, Sweden and
Morocco on behalf of the Group of 77 and China, the
facilitators of the negotiation processes on the three
humanitarian draft resolutions (A/75/L.11, A/75/L.42
and A/75/L.44). Although the texts have undergone
only technical amendments, it is important in the
current environment that we adopt them by consensus,
thereby reaffirming our unity and commitment to the
noble goal of providing humanitarian assistance to
those in need.
Mr. Skoknic Tapia (Chile) (spoke in Spanish):
In today’s debate, Chile welcomes our forthcoming
adoption of draft resolutions A/75/L.11, A/75/L.42 and
A/75/L.44, and hopes to contribute to the discussion
on the safety and security of humanitarian personnel,
international cooperation on humanitarian assistance
in the field of natural disasters and the strengthening
of the coordination of such emergency assistance
next year.
22/34

11/12/2020

We are living in unprecedented circumstances, but
in order to move forward constructively it is important
to remember that the coronavirus disease (COVID-19)
pandemic is not the first we have faced this century, nor
will it be the last. As in the past, we must now adapt to
new challenges and identify emerging needs and gaps
in order to strengthen our partnerships and combat the
humanitarian effects of the pandemic. We commend
UNICEF, the United Nations Population Fund and all
humanitarian actors for their resilience, adaptability
and the tremendous work they have done to provide
assistance to more than 200 million people.
According to the Global Humanitarian Response
Plan COVID-19, as of November there were more
than 15.7 million confirmed cases of COVID-19 and
518,000 deaths in the countries with the most urgent
humanitarian needs. It is clear that beyond the health
crisis, the pandemic has had devastating side effects for
the population in many areas, exacerbating pre-existing
and current drivers of humanitarian needs by causing
declines in economic activity, reducing households’
purchasing power and creating numerous obstacles in
food systems.
We recognize that the protection of vulnerable
groups remains an issue of concern along with conflicts,
climate change and natural disasters. Older adults in
particular have been one of the worst affected and most
at-risk groups. The health of such vulnerable groups
suffers from the effects of COVID-19, as well as from
their increased risk of discrimination and the physical
and financial barriers that prevent them from accessing
essential services. We believe it is vital to establish
multisectoral partnerships to address the obstacles to
the provision of humanitarian access and resources. In
that regard, we believe that the continuation of essential
medical services must be guaranteed, and health-care
systems reformed, based on a faithful commitment
to dignity, human rights and greater social inclusion.
Measures must be taken to enable access to information
for vulnerable people and provide psychosocial support
so that they can cope with emotional distress and
anxiety related to the pandemic.
We would like to emphasize that the dissemination
of accurate, timely and science-based information has a
direct impact on the cohesion of every integrated publichealth response, particularly in humanitarian settings.
Humanitarian health responses to vulnerable situations
should therefore incorporate access to information as
a component of response and prevention campaigns,
20-35292

11/12/2020

which are also an effective strategy for countering
misinformation about the virus.
Lastly, we should emphasize the leadership of
women in humanitarian contexts, as they make up as
much as 75 per cent of the humanitarian workforce
worldwide. In addition, local organizations led by women
have been shown to be the first line of defence and key
actors in humanitarian responses. We have seen them
work tirelessly since the onset of the pandemic, even
with limited humanitarian access and resources. We
must therefore respond to their commitment and ensure
their access to decision-making processes, coordination
mechanisms and funding for international responses so
that they can better assist their communities.
We understand that we are in a situation of global
economic fragility, but it is precisely because of this
that we must innovate in order to ensure that we do
not leave behind the one in 45 people in the world who
are currently trapped in humanitarian crises. Chile
reiterates its commitment to contributing to the full
realization of the right of every person to the enjoyment
of the highest attainable standard of physical and mental
health, especially those who find themselves in such
vulnerable situations.
Mr. Kakanur (India): It is my privilege to deliver
a joint statement on behalf of India and Sweden on this
important issue. We would first like to pay tribute to
the tens of thousands of United Nations humanitarian
and medical personnel around the world who have been
at the front lines of a joint response to the coronavirus
disease (COVID-19) pandemic, often at immense
personal risk and sacrifice.
India and Sweden share a strong commitment to
strengthening the United Nations system to respond to
the complex humanitarian challenges of our time. The
humanitarian crises of today are more complex and
protracted and make greater demands on the international
community. Better coordination and complementarity
in action among the various humanitarian actors are
therefore crucial. The latest Global Humanitarian
Overview 2021 report, released just a few days ago,
is a sobering document. Humanitarian emergencies,
primarily driven by natural disasters and armed
conflicts but compounded this year by the pandemic,
have reached a new high. The pandemic has triggered
the deepest global recession since the 1930s, extreme
poverty has risen for the first time in 22 years and the
unemployment situation has worsened globally. Women

A/75/PV.42

and young people aged between 15 and 29 and working
in the informal sector have been hit the hardest. Almost
24 million children, adolescents and young people,
including 11 million girls and young women, are at risk
of not returning to school.
Amid that bleak outlook, however, the report does
have some positive take-aways as well. First, despite
facing dire employment prospects and the impact
of COVID-19, we have seen young people mobilize
at an unprecedented scale in response to the crisis.
That is an opportunity for the humanitarian system
to better integrate the perspectives and leadership of
young people into humanitarian action. Secondly,
increased global Internet access, coupled with new
innovative technologies, offers the potential to
improve humanitarian action. For example, artificial
intelligence is being used for mapping outbreaks,
drones are delivering medical supplies and testing
samples and three-dimensional printers are helping to
produce face shields, personal protective equipment
kits and ventilators. Thirdly, the collaboration between
humanitarian, development and peacebuilding efforts
has increased during the pandemic and the localization
of humanitarian work has also been strengthened.
Building on that will help meet the needs of those
targeted for humanitarian assistance in the future.
The Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian
Affairs estimates that 235 million people will need
humanitarian assistance and protection in 2021. That
essentially means one in 33 people worldwide. The
United Nations and its partner organizations aim to
help about 160 million people across 56 countries.
That itself will require approximately $35 billion,
the highest-ever humanitarian funding requirement.
The persistent shortfall in financing of humanitarian
appeals remains a challenge. We call on Member States
to consider increasing their contribution to the United
Nations humanitarian assistance system, including the
Global Humanitarian Response Plan for COVID-19,
country-based pooled funds and the Central Emergency
Response Fund (CERF), to which both India and
Sweden are long-standing donors. We would also like to
emphasize the value of non-earmarked, flexible funding
and predictable support to our humanitarian partners.
India and Sweden reaffirm that humanitarian
principles and international law provide the basis
for humanitarian assistance. We remain committed
to preserving the principles of humanity, neutrality,
impartiality and independence in responding to all

20-3529223/34

A/75/PV.42

humanitarian situations. The primary responsibility for
providing protection and assistance in a humanitarian
crisis lies with the country concerned. International
humanitarian assistance must be provided impartially
in accordance with the guiding principles outlined in
resolution 46/182 and subsequent resolutions. While
United Nations agencies and partners are responding
commendably to several complex emergencies, evolving
a coherent and comprehensive approach remains a
significant challenge. More coordination is required
to achieve responses that are effective and tailored to
their context, which facilitates greater participation of
local actors.
Repeated violations of international humanitarian
law and international human rights law are persistent
challenges. Parties to armed conflicts, including
non-State actors, continue to flout international
humanitarian law and perpetrate human rights abuses
with impunity. We must continue to strengthen the
international cooperation framework to bring such
perpetrators to justice. Women and children need
special measures for their protection. We believe
that our approach to humanitarian response must put
those affected at the very centre. That shows respect
for human dignity and ensures the flexibility that is
needed to make choices about the goods and services
that the populations affected need the most. We must
also continue our efforts to develop a multisectoral
needs assessment and build strong databases in order
to enhance the effectiveness, accountability and
transparency of humanitarian action. The need for
greater complementarity between humanitarian action
and development cooperation is well recognized.
Development action by national Governments and the
international community should focus on reducing risk
and vulnerability, which will help to build resilience
and capacity.
Access for humanitarian workers, and their
protection, especially in situations of armed conflict,
remains a concern. Attacks on humanitarian personnel
are unacceptable, and we welcome draft resolution
A/75/L.42, on the safety and security of humanitarian
personnel and the protection of United Nations
personnel. All humanitarian actors must strictly adhere
to the zero-tolerance policy on sexual exploitation and
abuse and ensure that victims are adequately protected.
Guided by its ancient philosophy of viewing the
world as one family, India has been at the forefront
in supporting fellow developing countries through
24/34

11/12/2020

assistance and relief efforts in humanitarian emergencies,
including natural disasters. Those efforts have ranged
from the immediate supply of relief materials to the
emergency evacuation of very large numbers of people
of various nationalities from affected zones. During the
unprecedented COVID-19 crisis, India emerged as a net
provider of health security and successfully shouldered
its responsibility as the pharmacy of the world, sending
consignments of medicines and medical supplies to
all 150 partner countries. As a responsible member
of the world community, India’s vaccine production
and delivery capacity will be deployed to help all of
humankind in fighting the crisis. Going forward, we
must look beyond immediate relief and rehabilitation.
India remains committed to addressing the challenges
of complex humanitarian emergencies by building
disaster-resilient infrastructure. It was in that context
that India took the initiative at the 2019 Climate
Action Summit to launch the Coalition for DisasterResilient Infrastructure, in partnership with several
other countries.
In the face of the unprecedented increase in
humanitarian needs, largely linked to the COVID-19
pandemic, Sweden has responded and acted swiftly.
Since the beginning of the pandemic, the Swedish
Government has provided close to $200 million in
additional, unearmarked humanitarian funding.
Sweden is proud to remain one of the largest donors to
the United Nations humanitarian system. In line with
its Grand Bargain commitments, Sweden will continue
to provide multi-year core funding to major United
Nations agencies such as the World Food Programme
(WFP), the United Nations Relief and Works Agency
for Palestine Refugees in the Near East, the Office of
the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees,
the United Nations Children’s Fund and CERF. The
COVID-19 pandemic has clearly demonstrated the
importance of flexible humanitarian funding. It
enables timely, independent, effective and efficient
humanitarian action, and that is why Sweden strongly
believes that this is the right path to pursue and
encourages other donors to follow suit.
Sweden and India remain particularly concerned
about the pandemic’s impact on hunger. The awarding
of this year’s Nobel Peace Prize to the World Food
Programme is richly deserved and constitutes an urgent
call to action, with increasing hunger and several
countries now on the brink of conflict-induced famine.
The cycle of conflict and hunger recognized in Security
20-35292

11/12/2020

Council resolution 2417 (2018) must be broken. Sweden
is proud to be a key partner and top donor for the World
Food Programme and has doubled its WFP funding to
record levels in order to contribute to the fight against
hunger across the globe.
The creativity and magnitude of our response must
match the unique nature of the challenge. The choices
we make now will determine how soon we build back
better from the crisis. We, India and Sweden, reiterate
our commitment to working with all Member States
to ensure a unified and robust response to the world’s
humanitarian challenges. Our debate today represents
an opportunity to send a strong and unified message of
support to those in need of humanitarian assistance and
to humanitarian actors worldwide. We therefore call on
all delegations to adopt the three draft humanitarian
resolutions (A/75/L.11, A/75/L.42 and A/75/L.44)
by consensus.
Ms. Offermans (Netherlands): We align ourselves
with the statement delivered earlier by the observer of
the European Union (EU).
Another shock — that is how the coronavirus disease
(COVID-19) pandemic is seen in the humanitarian
community, as an additional dimension of humanitarian
vulnerability, an add-on to the challenges we will
confront in 2021 and beyond. Ambassador Skoog of
the EU clearly described how COVID-19 has resulted
in grim and daunting challenges for the world, the
humanitarian sector and people caught in crisis. But in
the rapid reaction to the pandemic, we have witnessed
the launch of a global response plan that reflects the
professional attitude characterizing the humanitarian
sector. It is that attitude the Netherlands would like
to commend.
The Netherlands considers the response to the
COVID-19 crisis to be an example of the resilience
and perseverance of the humanitarian community. It
shows that United Nations agencies, non-governmental
organizations, Member States and other actors are able to
come together and develop a truly coordinated response.
That is something to keep in mind, to be proud of and
to follow through on. It is the avenue we need for future
humanitarian action. It is the only way to collectively
address the impact of overarching challenges such as
conflict, food insecurity and climate change. In the
light of that, I would like to highlight two topics that
reflect the commitment and agility of the humanitarian
community — the important role of aid workers in

A/75/PV.42

the field and the need to integrate mental health and
psychosocial support into humanitarian action.
First, we should pay tribute to all those who deliver
humanitarian assistance to people in need. They work
tirelessly and are faced with increasing hardship
every day. We should never forget that humanitarian
and United Nations personnel are victims of great
violations of international humanitarian law. In 2019,
more than 125 aid workers were killed while doing their
work, and the number may be even higher in 2020. We
all need to use our influence to hold those responsible
for violations of international humanitarian law to
account. Attacks on aid workers are unacceptable. With
regard to 2020, we should of course pay a very special
tribute to local responders. They are the ones who have
enabled the international system to actually reach and
help people. When international staff were recalled or
unable to travel, local responders kept the humanitarian
aid vehicle moving. Localization has been on the
radar for some time, but COVID-19 has enforced and
accelerated it.
My second point will not come as a surprise. Here
in the General Assembly Hall, at the end of 2020,
I would like to stress once again the importance of
mental health and psychosocial support. If 2020 has
taught us one thing, it is that mental health is just as
important as physical health. The Netherlands, with
the support of the co-Chairs of the Group of Friends of
Mental Health and Well-Being, has therefore facilitated
a process whereby the United Nations humanitarian
agencies drafted an inter-agency call for action on
mental health and psychosocial support. In the call
for action, they draw a clear conclusion and commit
to taking the next steps in the integration of mental
health and psychosocial support into the humanitarian
response, while calling on their partners to do the same.
The call was launched last Wednesday.
In conclusion, let us celebrate successes, but let us
also do justice to what happened this year. Let us show
our support to all humanitarians by adopting today’s
draft resolutions A/75/L.11, A/75/L.42 and A/75/L.44
by consensus.
Mr. Vitrenko (Ukraine): Ukraine aligns itself with
the statement delivered by the observer of the European
Union and would like to add the following remarks in
its national capacity.
In recent years we have witnessed a rapid
increase in humanitarian needs in the world, mainly

20-3529225/34

A/75/PV.42

caused by armed conflicts and climate change. But
we are now facing an unprecedented challenge to
the global humanitarian situation in the coronavirus
disease (COVID-19) pandemic, whose impact is
also significantly worsened by the economic crisis,
reduced social protection, food security challenges and
other factors.
In this challenging time, a timely and comprehensive
response on the part of the United Nations to global
humanitarian needs has become more essential than
ever. In the light of that, we fully support prioritizing
the current programming of United Nations agencies,
focusing on the response to the COVID-19 pandemic,
including the procurement of medical supplies and
campaigns on infection prevention and control and the
promotion of hygiene. Ukraine welcomes the SecretaryGeneral’s leadership in the global response to the
COVID-19 pandemic. We believe that coordinating
the activities of all United Nations agencies aimed at
countering the pandemic must remain a core priority
of the Organization. We commend the United Nations
agencies’ comprehensive integrated approach to
providing assistance to countries in contending with
the pandemic, including the rapid pandemic response.
Ukraine places humanitarian issues high on its
agenda. The more than six years of armed conflict
caused by the ongoing Russian aggression have resulted
in a protracted and complex humanitarian crisis in
eastern Ukraine. The United Nations is well aware of
the deteriorating humanitarian situation in that conflict
zone. Despite every effort by Ukraine to implement
a ceasefire, civilians continue to face serious risks to
their safety, well-being and fundamental rights due to
the hostilities, as well as the saturation of landmines and
other explosive ordnance. The Government of Ukraine
has persisted in its efforts to alleviate the suffering of
Ukrainian citizens affected by the foreign aggression,
particularly internally displaced persons (IDPs). It is
currently focused on improving their social integration
and adaptation and is exploring best practices in the
work of integrating IDPs into host communities.
Ukraine is interested in seeing continued United
Nations involvement in overcoming the humanitarian
challenges in the occupied territories. In October,
President Volodymyr Zelenskyy of Ukraine called on
the United Nations to jointly develop a plan of action
to restore the Donbas region after its occupation ends
and to promote the social and economic development of
uncontrolled territories. Together with its humanitarian
26/34

11/12/2020

partners, Ukraine continues to implement humanitarian
actions, including humanitarian response plans. In
order to overcome the consequences of the RussianUkrainian conflict, United Nations agencies have
mobilized more than $500 million over the past six
years for the humanitarian response across various
sectors, such as the provision of food, shelter and
household items, winterization support and access to
clean water, education and adequate health care. The
humanitarian response plan for 2021 aims to provide
critical humanitarian assistance and protection to
1.9 million people in need in eastern Ukraine.
The existing global humanitarian emergencies
created by armed conflict, natural disasters and
other causes should remain the focus of the attention
of humanitarian organizations. It is essential that the
United Nations continue its life-saving work in the
countries concerned and sustain the humanitarian
response across the world.
In conclusion, we would like to underscore
that only a united global response to a significant
deterioration in the world’s humanitarian situation
will enable us to overcome the consequences of the
current crisis on the health, economic and social fronts.
That will demonstrate the unity and solidarity of the
international community and will be the best testament
to the effectiveness of the United Nations in its seventyfifth year.
Mr. Kelsey (United Kingdom): The year 2020 has
been like no other. Tragically, many have died or fallen
ill as a result of the coronavirus disease (COVID-19)
pandemic, and the virus has triggered a global
recession not seen since the 1930s. We risk losing
decades of human progress, extreme poverty is rising
for the first time in more than 20 years, and as the
Global Humanitarian Overview 2021 laid out in stark
terms, 235 million people are in need of humanitarian
assistance. That is one in 33 people across the globe.
But the story of 2020 is not just about COVID-19.
The main drivers of humanitarian crises have not
gone away. Conflict continues to take a heavy toll on
civilians, and violence against humanitarian workers
remains rife. The effects of climate change and weatherrelated disasters continue to grow. The most vulnerable,
including women and girls, are being hit hardest. As
a result, we are now facing the daunting prospect of
famine and acute food insecurity in multiple contexts.
20-35292

11/12/2020

The United Kingdom is particularly worried about the
risks in Burkina Faso, Nigeria, South Sudan and Yemen.
As we look ahead to 2021, how do we meet the
humanitarian needs of 235 million people? How can we
slow the rising funding requirements and how can we
support humanitarians in the field? The United Kingdom
remains committed to the global humanitarian cause.
In September, we appointed our first special envoy
for famine prevention and humanitarian affairs. His
immediate focus is building the necessary alliances to
drive up levels of humanitarian funding and to develop
political solutions to prevent the most acute food
insecurity crises.
The United Kingdom remains a leading
humanitarian donor. We have provided $1.8 billion
over the course of 2020, and in the past week alone we
announced almost $90 million in funding for the Central
Emergency Response Fund and $80 million for Yemen.
It is no secret that budgets are under pressure across
the world. But it is staggering that the top 10 donors
account for 83 per cent of humanitarian funding. Words
are not enough. The major economies outside that top
10 need to step up. The trajectory of ever-increasing
funding needs — $28.8 billion needed at the start of
2020, leaping to $35 billion for 2021 — is simply not
sustainable, so we need to be better at anticipating
crises. Investing in a more proactive response aimed at
averting humanitarian crises could reduce the cost by
as much as 30 per cent. That means using early-warning
analysis and data more effectively, but also, crucially,
ensuring that data is linked to plans in advance of crisis
and tied to practical early action.
Humanitarian response alone is not enough,
however. Humanitarian crises require political
solutions. We need to ensure that the United Nations
is making full use of all the levers at its disposal.
Development, peace and political actors all have a role
to play in preventing crises. We also have to ensure that
humanitarian assistance reaches those in need and is not
obstructed or frustrated, and that civilians and civilian
objects are not the targets of violence. International
humanitarian law must be respected, and we must
unequivocally support the humanitarian principles of
humanity, neutrality, impartiality and independence. A
weak normative framework helps no one.
The President returned to the Chair.
Amid those unprecedented challenges, I want to
finish by celebrating the successes of the international

A/75/PV.42

humanitarian community and, indeed, the successes
of multilateralism. Humanitarian workers, at great
personal cost and risk, have adapted and innovated to
ensure the delivery of aid and services to 98 million
people worldwide. I congratulate the World Food
Programme on receiving the Nobel Peace Prize for its
commitment to tackling global starvation. Those are
extraordinary achievements that we must all build on to
overcome the grave challenges we will face in 2021. On
that basis, we offer our full support for the consensus
adoption of draft resolutions A/75/L.11, A/75/L.42 and
A/75/L.44, which are before us today.
Mr. Foshanji (Afghanistan): Afghanistan expresses
its sincere gratitude to the Secretary-General for his
reports presented under agenda item 73 (A/75/75,
A/75/238, A/75/317 and A/75/84). They depict a rapidly
deteriorating humanitarian situation around the world,
driven by conflict and natural disasters and exacerbated
by climate change. Since the end of the reporting
period, the humanitarian situation has deteriorated
even further. In Afghanistan and around the globe,
that situation, aggravated by the coronavirus disease
(COVID-19) pandemic, is creating an unprecedented
level of need.
Afghanistan would like to take this opportunity to
commend the efforts of humanitarian workers, agencies
and civil-society organizations in responding to
humanitarian emergencies wherever they occur. Their
bravery and commitment are a shining example of our
shared humanity. We pay tribute to the United Nations
staff and other humanitarian personnel who have
lost their lives in the service of the most vulnerable.
Afghanistan deplores all violations of international
humanitarian law and the targeting of humanitarian
workers by any actors, including the Taliban and other
terrorist groups.
According to the Global Humanitarian Overview
2021, 18.4 million Afghans are in urgent need of
humanitarian assistance. That level of need is an
increase of almost 100 per cent since the beginning
of 2020, when the level of need had already increased
by 49 per cent compared to the previous year. It is a
staggering number, almost incomprehensible and
utterly devastating. But we cannot let the magnitude
of need overwhelm us or force us into giving up.
The Afghan Government is fully committed to doing
everything within its limited resources to address the
needs of every girl, boy, woman and man within our

20-3529227/34

A/75/PV.42

borders. We ask the international community to help us
overcome those challenges.
Our top priority is an immediate and comprehensive
ceasefire, as called for by the Government of
Afghanistan and the Secretary-General and supported
by almost all Member States. We call on the Taliban
to consider the implication of its escalating violence at
a time when 18.4 million people lack the most basic
necessities and need humanitarian aid to survive. The
violence must end now. We must also ensure that all
people in humanitarian emergencies gain access to
COVID-19 vaccines. The international community’s
ability to vaccinate the most vulnerable is a test we
cannot fail. In collaboration with our humanitarian
partners, the Government of Afghanistan is preparing
to distribute the vaccine in every province. We have
established a dedicated national technical working
group for COVID-19 response at the Ministry of
Public Health. We have worked through the COVID-19
Vaccine Global Access (COVAX) Facility to gain
access to vaccines for 20 per cent of our population.
But 20 per cent is not enough, and we need further help
from our partners to vaccinate everyone.
The Government is also working with partners to
implement existing frameworks and policies to make
humanitarian assistance more effective and efficient.
For such assistance to become more sustainable, we must
strengthen the collaboration between humanitarian,
development, peace and climate efforts. We should fund
and empower local actors in a spirit of true partnership.
We should make greater use of innovative financing
mechanisms, including anticipatory finance and pooled
funding. Country-based pooled funds and the Central
Emergency Response Fund have been invaluable in the
response to the pandemic, including in Afghanistan, and
they must now be replenished to the necessary levels.
By implementing such policies, empowering the
United Nations to deliver its mandate and mobilizing the
necessary resources, we can address the challenges that
we are currently facing. Decisive action and funding
to address the needs of today will prevent further
deterioration of the global humanitarian situation and
help to address the global spread of the pandemic. We
must remember that no one is safe until everyone is safe.
The President: I now give the floor to the observer
of the International Committee of the Red Cross.
Ms. Courtois (International Committee of the
Red Cross): The year 2020 has been unlike any other
28/34

11/12/2020

in recent memory. States, international and local
organizations, the private sector and communities the
world over are dealing with the staggering impacts of
a pandemic that is still unfolding, a pandemic that has
exacerbated humanitarian needs, exposing individual
vulnerabilities and pre-existing systemic fragilities,
including in health systems weakened by conflict. We
already know that the pandemic is affecting important
health activities, leading to backsliding in areas such
as routine immunization against other diseases. But
it has also shown vividly that in places where people
already face compound vulnerabilities, the nature and
impact of a pandemic is immediately multifaceted,
with health, social, economic, protection and political
dimensions. The broad destructive trends that existed
before the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic,
including intensifying conflicts, climate change, rising
inequality and protracted displacement, remain and
will stay with us, making systemic responses even
more essential. What we put off today will be more
entrenched tomorrow.
Furthermore, many of the people we serve in
affected communities express concerns that are far
removed from the pandemic as solely a health issue.
Protracted displacement due to expanding hostilities
and rising instability, as well as the inability to access
basic services, are the issues that communities affected
by the crisis often identify as their more immediate
concerns. We must ensure that people are supported
so that they can deal with shocks to their well-being,
livelihoods and aspirations, regardless of who they are
and where they live. What lies at the heart of this is
a question of dignity — the dignity that comes when
parents do not have to choose between medical care and
food for their children, the dignity of ensuring quality
education for girls and boys even amid conflict and
violence, the dignity of ensuring access to appropriate
physical and mental health care without discrimination.
As the crisis continues into 2021, what steps can we
take? The International Committee of the Red Cross
(ICRC) would like to offer some recommendations
for States.
First, States must meet their commitments
and obligations relating to support for principled
humanitarian action, including in the most complex
contexts. For instance, preserving humanitarian access
requires well-crafted humanitarian exemptions in
counter-terrorism and sanctions provisions, so that
humanitarians can reach people in need and remain
20-35292

11/12/2020

close to those affected. The impartial delivery of
assistance enables organizations like the ICRC to build
and sustain relationships of trust over the long term
with the populations affected and with all the parties
to a conflict. Trust and humanitarian access will be
essential to ensuring that COVID-19 vaccines, as
well as routine vaccinations, reach all those in need,
particularly in areas that States themselves may not be
able to reach.
Secondly, States must ensure that in the pandemic
response and beyond, those delivering vital health
services can carry out their work without fear of
attack, discrimination or stigma. Between February
and August alone, ICRC delegations monitored 650
reports of incidents of violence directed at healthcare provision linked to COVID-19 — a figure that
represents a mere fraction of the actual number of
incidents. The rules of international humanitarian law
are very clear: medical personnel and medical facilities
performing exclusively humanitarian functions must be
respected and protected at all times. Civilians as well as
belligerents must refrain from violence against patients
and providers of medical care. Furthermore, in line
with their obligations under human rights law, States
must not interfere directly or indirectly with access to
health care for people under their jurisdiction.
Thirdly, whether during peacetime or in armed
conflict, the health-care sector is also particularly
vulnerable to cyber harm. We do not accept attacks on
physical health infrastructure, and we should not accept
such attacks in cyberspace. Such attacks endanger
human lives by impairing the ability of health-care
facilities to function and disrupting the delivery of care
to patients. We call on States to affirm unequivocally
that cyberattacks against medical infrastructure are
unacceptable and unlawful and to take action to stop
such attacks.
Fourthly, we — States and humanitarians — must
use this once-in-a-generation disruptive event to
reflect, adapt and innovate to improve responses. We
see the pandemic accelerating the digital delivery of
humanitarian services, such as mental-health responses.
But transformation carries risks alongside benefits. We
urge States, humanitarian organizations and service
providers to take concrete action on effective data
protection and on online misinformation, disinformation
and hate speech. Humanitarian protection obligations
must be made real in the digital arena.

A/75/PV.42

Finally, States should support humanitarian action
beyond short-term paradigms. The pandemic has lent
new gravity to the understanding that we must address
humanitarian challenges comprehensively and with
a longer-term perspective focused on building the
resilience of systems and the communities that depend
on them. As attention turns to the post-COVID-19
recovery, we urge States and international finance
institutions to ensure that people and communities
living in areas affected by conflict, fragility and
violence are served by financing that recognizes
and meets their needs and that strengthens essential
services. The ICRC is ready to assist States in fulfilling
their commitments under international humanitarian
law and their humanitarian obligations and to keep
delivering for those affected.
The President: I now give the floor to the observer
of the International Federation of Red Cross and Red
Crescent Societies.
Mr. Blewitt (International Federation of Red Cross
and Red Crescent Societies): Thank you, Mr. President,
for this opportunity to address the General Assembly
on behalf of the International Federation of Red
Cross and Red Crescent Societies (IFRC). Our 192
national societies and 14 million volunteers are on
the front lines, responding day and night to the crisis
of the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic.
Local and national actors are doing the humanitarian
work, including by addressing challenges in the area
of mental health, supporting access to health-care
services, providing cash assistance for those who
need it and reaching the most at-risk and marginalized
communities, including migrants, women affected by
domestic violence and older people. I would like to
emphasize three critical points.
First, humanitarian needs have increased, and
climate change is exacerbating that. The IFRC’s World
Disasters Report 2020, entitled “Come Heat or High
Water”, notes that in the past 10 years 83 per cent of all
disasters triggered by natural hazards have been caused
by extreme weather and climate-related events such
as floods, storms and heatwaves. They have claimed
more than 410,000 lives, mostly in low- and lowermiddle-income countries. Around the world another
1.7 billion people have been affected by climate and
weather-related disasters in the past decade. We see a
clear link between the climate crisis and the growing
food crisis, as well as the COVID-19 crisis going on
at the moment. Last year, the IFRC’s report The Cost

20-3529229/34

A/75/PV.42

of Doing Nothing projected that a decade from now as
many as 150 million people per year will be in need if
the world does nothing to address the climate crisis.
That would require as much as $20 billion per year in
additional humanitarian assistance. The COVID-19
pandemic took the world by surprise and further
unravelled the fragility and gaps in our systems, so
we are faced with this massive humanitarian challenge
today and over the coming decade.
That brings me to my second point, which is that
it is the most vulnerable and those with the lowest
capacity to adapt who suffer the most from the
combined effects of climate change and COVID-19.
The IFRC has found that in 2020 alone, 132 extreme
weather events have occurred so far, 92 of which
overlapped with the COVID-19 pandemic. At least
51.6 million people worldwide have been affected by
floods, droughts or storms, while a further 2.3 million
have been affected by major wildfires and 437 million
members of vulnerable groups have been exposed to
extreme heat, all while dealing with the direct effects
of COVID-19 or struggling to cope with lockdown and
control measures.
The world’s most vulnerable — those who do not
have the resources to protect themselves from disasters
and have no access to social protection — are the hardest
hit. Lockdowns and restrictions designed to prevent the
spread of the virus also mean that jobs and livelihoods
are scarce and markets and supply chains disrupted.
Food insecurity, sexual and gender-based violence and
restricted human mobility are only some of the clear
effects we are seeing. The health, social and economic
fallout from COVID-19 will affect many countries,
particularly low- and middle-income countries and
small island States, for years to come. Climate-related
disasters and the COVID-19 pandemic highlight even
more the urgent need to invest in preparedness and early
action. This is a wake-up call for all of us. We need
to factor climate, health and other risks into decisions
more consistently. We need to recognize the scale of
these crises and have the right plans and systems in
place before we have to face them.
Thirdly, and perhaps most importantly, the global
response is not commensurate with global needs. We
are concerned about the fact that the world is failing
to seize an opportunity to recover in a greener, more
inclusive and resilient manner, in effect locking in
policies and structures that will cause further and
irreparable damage to the climate system and pose an
30/34

11/12/2020

existential threat to many communities and nations. Yet
there are myriad ways to ensure a climate-smart future.
For instance, the IFRC, as a host of the Risk-Informed
Early Action Partnership, launched by Bangladesh last
year at the Climate Action Summit, can see that this
is an opportunity to protect and keep safe as many as
1 billion people by 2030.
We are concerned about the possibility that the
COVID-19 vaccine may reach only a few countries
and leave the rest of the world struggling to curb the
spread of the virus while losing out economically. We
joined the Secretary-General in his call earlier this year
for a people’s vaccine. A vaccine by itself, however, is
not enough. The roll-out of a COVID-19 vaccine will
be successful only if there is an immediate effort to
build trust in communities through scaled-up risk
communication and community engagement activities.
Through the Collective Service risk communication
and community engagement launched by the IFRC,
UNICEF and the World Health Organization, we aim
to strengthen risk communication and community
engagement coordination and practice, providing
more consistent, systematic and quality support to
Governments and partners in adopting communitycentred approaches in response to the pandemic.
Furthermore, the IFRC and national Red Cross and
Red Crescent societies are working in partnership
with GAVI, the Vaccine Alliance, and the COVID-19
Vaccine Global Access (COVAX) Facility to support
the advocacy and roll-out of an equitable distribution
of COVID-19 vaccines to the most vulnerable
communities and people, especially in hard-to-reach
places. Ensuring equitable access to those most at risk
is not only an issue of fairness and humanity, but a
public-health imperative.
Lastly, we are concerned that migrants and refugees
will be left even farther behind. Least Protected, Most
Affected, a report we published a few weeks ago,
highlights the extraordinary health and safety risks
faced by migrants and refugees during the COVID-19
pandemic. They are stranded, often unable to return
home, left without any access to social safety nets and
facing increasing risks of unwarranted deportation
and detention, as well as stigma and discrimination.
Humanitarian support for migrants and refugees is more
critical now, and we need to ensure they are protected
and supported in the time of COVID-19.
We do not have the luxury of tackling only one
problem at a time. As the risks compound and overlap, so
20-35292

11/12/2020

our approaches must be streamlined. Time is not on our
side. We must get our act together now. In conclusion,
the IFRC and its national Red Cross and Red Crescent
societies, through their 14 million volunteers around the
world, stand ready to work with the United Nations and
other partners in supporting Governments to continue
to strive to meet the increasing humanitarian needs
around the world.
The President: We have heard the last speaker in
the debate on this item.
We shall now proceed to consider draft resolutions
A/75/L.11, A/75/L.42, A/75/L.43 and A/75/L.44.
Delegations wishing to make statements in explanation
of vote or position before action on any of the draft
resolutions are invited to do so now in one intervention.
Before giving speakers the floor, I would like to remind
delegations that explanations are limited to 10 minutes
and should be made by delegations from their seats.
Ms. Goebel (Germany): I have the honour to
speak on behalf of the European Union (EU) and its
member States. The candidate countries Turkey, North
Macedonia, Montenegro, Serbia and Albania; the
country of the Stabilization and Association Process
and potential candidate Bosnia and Herzegovina; the
European Free Trade Association countries Iceland,
Liechtenstein and Norway, members of the European
Economic Area; as well as the Republic of Moldova,
Australia, Mexico, New Zealand and Canada align
themselves with this statement.
The EU deeply regrets the decision by the United
States, for the second time, to call for a vote on operative
paragraphs 58 and 59 of the draft humanitarian omnibus
resolution (A/75/L.44) and on operative paragraph 62
of the draft resolution on natural disasters (A/75/L.11),
which have traditionally been adopted by consensus. We
believe that Sweden and Morocco have explained in a
transparent and fair manner their desire not to open the
draft resolutions this year and opt instead for technical
updates. There was wide agreement among all those
present not to open discussions this year. We therefore
do not understand the need to call for a vote on draft
resolutions that were not negotiated this year. Moreover,
there was wide agreement among delegations during
the negotiations last year on reverting to the previously
agreed language in operative paragraphs 58 and 59
of the omnibus resolution and operative paragraph
62 of the natural disaster resolution when it became
clear that lengthy concerted efforts to find alternative

A/75/PV.42

wording would not lead to an agreement acceptable to
all delegations. The United Nations members, many of
whom hold divergent views on the issue at hand, have
always been able to agree on that language, illustrating
how carefully crafted and balanced those long-standing
paragraphs are.
In that context, let us not forget that the international
community made a shared commitment in the 2030
Agenda for Sustainable Development to achieve gender
equality and the empowerment of all women and
girls, which includes universal access to health-care
services. Weakening that language would set a negative
precedent, sending us backwards in time and neglecting
and undermining the commitments made by all the
States Members of the United Nations. International
cooperation and strengthening the coordination of
United Nations emergency humanitarian assistance
are crucial matters that require us to act responsibly.
Undermining consensus on those draft resolutions can
only have negative consequences, and their impact is
first and foremost on the most fundamental rights of the
women and girls who need humanitarian assistance. For
those reasons, the 27 member States of the European
Union will vote in favour of those paragraphs, and we
call on all other States to do the same.
Mr. Kelsey (United Kingdom): The United Kingdom
is grateful to the facilitators for their leadership on the
draft resolutions (A/75/L.11, A/75/L.42, A/75/L.43 and
A/75/L.44) before us, and we welcome the approach
taken not to reopen the text.
We would like to express our disappointment at the
call for a vote by the United States, seeking to delete
agreed language on access to sexual and reproductive
health services. The United Kingdom is unwavering
in its commitment to gender equality in sexual and
reproductive health and to rights for all, and we are
concerned about the repeated attempts to push back
against those long-standing rights. The United Kingdom
is concerned about any attempts to curtail access to
sexual and reproductive health services for women and
girls, particularly as access to these vital services is
being diverted during the coronavirus disease pandemic
response. Sexual and reproductive health services are
often life-saving, and women and girls affected by
conflict and crisis need sexual and reproductive health
services more than ever. Those needs are particularly
acute in crises, conflict and humanitarian settings.
Sexual and reproductive health and rights, which
include access to quality and comprehensive health

20-3529231/34

A/75/PV.42

11/12/2020

services, are critical to the empowerment of women and
girls everywhere. We will not achieve the global goals
if we do not ensure all people have access to and can
realize their rights.
It is therefore essential that the international
community reaffirm its long-standing resolve to defend
and implement its commitments on gender equality and
the rights of women and girls. That is why we cannot
accept this attempt to walk back previously agreed
language and why the United Kingdom will support the
paragraphs on which a vote has been called and urges
all Member States to do the same.
The President: We have heard the last speaker in
explanation of vote before the voting.
The Assembly will now take a decision on
draft resolution A/75/L.11, entitled “International
cooperation on humanitarian assistance in the field of
natural disasters, from relief to development”.
I give the
the Secretariat.

floor

to

the

representative

of

Mr. Nakano (Department for General Assembly
and Conference Management): I should like to
announce that since the submission of the draft
resolution, and in addition to those delegations listed
in document A/75/L.11, the following countries have
also become sponsors: Albania, Armenia, Australia,
Belgium, Bulgaria, Canada, Croatia, Cyprus, Denmark,
France, Germany, Greece, Ireland, Israel, Italy, Japan,
Lithuania, Luxembourg, Malta, Mexico, Monaco,
Montenegro, the Netherlands, New Zealand, North
Macedonia, Norway, Palau, Portugal, Romania, the
Russian Federation, Serbia, Slovenia, Spain, Sweden,
Switzerland, Turkey and the United Kingdom of Great
Britain and Northern Ireland.
The President: A separate, recorded vote has been
requested on operative paragraph 62 of draft resolution
A/75/L.11.
A recorded vote was taken.
In favour:
Afghanistan, Albania, Algeria, Andorra, Argentina,
Armenia, Australia, Austria, Azerbaijan, Bahrain,
Belarus, Belgium, Belize, Bhutan, Bolivia
(Plurinational State of), Bosnia and Herzegovina,
Brazil, Bulgaria, Cabo Verde, Cameroon, Canada,
Chile, China, Colombia, Costa Rica, Côte d’Ivoire,
Croatia, Cuba, Cyprus, Czech Republic, Denmark,
32/34

Djibouti, Dominican Republic, Ecuador, Egypt,
El Salvador, Estonia, Ethiopia, Finland, France,
Georgia, Germany, Ghana, Greece, Guatemala,
Guinea-Bissau, Guyana, Hungary, Iceland, India,
Indonesia, Iran (Islamic Republic of), Iraq,
Ireland, Italy, Jamaica, Japan, Kenya, Kiribati,
Kuwait, Lao People’s Democratic Republic, Latvia,
Lebanon, Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg,
Madagascar, Malaysia, Maldives, Mali, Malta,
Mauritania, Mauritius, Mexico, Monaco, Mongolia,
Montenegro, Morocco, Mozambique, Namibia,
Nepal, Netherlands, New Zealand, Nicaragua,
Nigeria, North Macedonia, Norway, Pakistan,
Panama, Paraguay, Peru, Philippines, Poland,
Portugal, Qatar, Republic of Korea, Republic of
Moldova, Romania, Russian Federation, Samoa,
San Marino, Sao Tome and Principe, Saudi
Arabia, Senegal, Serbia, Singapore, Slovakia,
Slovenia, South Africa, Spain, Sri Lanka, Sweden,
Switzerland, Syrian Arab Republic, Thailand,
Timor-Leste, Togo, Tunisia, Turkey, Ukraine,
United Arab Emirates, United Kingdom of Great
Britain and Northern Ireland, Uruguay, Vanuatu,
Venezuela, Viet Nam, Yemen, Zambia.
Against:
Libya, Sudan, United States of America
Abstaining:
None
Operative paragraph 62 was retained by 128 votes
to 3.
[Subsequently, the delegations of Bangladesh,
Honduras and Myanmar informed the Secretariat
that they had intended to vote in favour.]
The President: May I take it that the Assembly
decides to adopt draft resolution A/75/L.11?
Draft
resolution
(resolution 75/124).

A/75/L.11

was

adopted

The President: The Assembly will now take a
decision on draft resolution A/75/L.42, entitled “Safety
and security of humanitarian personnel and protection
of United Nations personnel”.
I give the
the Secretariat.

floor

to

the

representative

of

Mr. Nakano (Department for General Assembly
and Conference Management): I should like to announce
that since the submission of the draft resolution, and
20-35292

11/12/2020

A/75/PV.42

in addition to those delegations listed in document
A/75/L.42, the following countries have also become
sponsors: Angola, Belize, Bolivia (Plurinational
State of), Burkina Faso, Cabo Verde, Colombia, Côte
d’Ivoire, Dominican Republic, Ecuador, El Salvador,
Equatorial Guinea, Ghana, Guatemala, Guinea-Bissau,
Indonesia, Madagascar, Malawi, Maldives, Sao Tome
and Principe, Senegal, Serbia, Viet Nam and Zambia.
The President: May I take it that the Assembly
decides to adopt draft resolution A/75/L.42?
Draft
resolution
(resolution 75/125).

A/75/L.42

was

adopted

The President: The Assembly will now take
a decision on draft resolution A/75/L.43, entitled
“Assistance to the Palestinian people”.
I give the
the Secretariat.

floor

to

the

representative

of

Mr. Nakano (Department for General Assembly
and Conference Management): I should like to
announce that since the submission of the draft
resolution, and in addition to those delegations listed in
document A/75/L.43, the following countries have also
become sponsors: Equatorial Guinea, Georgia, Iceland,
Monaco, Norway, Pakistan, Palau and Serbia.
The President: May I take it that the Assembly
decides to adopt draft resolution A/75/L.43?
Draft
resolution
(resolution 75/126).

A/75/L.43

was

adopted

The President: The Assembly will now take
a decision on draft resolution A/75/L.44, entitled
“Strengthening of the coordination of emergency
humanitarian assistance of the United Nations”.
I give the
the Secretariat.

floor

to

the

representative

of

Mr. Nakano (Department for General Assembly
and Conference Management): I should like to announce
that since the submission of the draft resolution, and
in addition to those delegations listed in document
A/75/L.44, the following countries have also become
sponsors: Afghanistan, Bangladesh, Cabo Verde, Côte
d’Ivoire, Dominican Republic, El Salvador, Ghana,
Guatemala, Guinea-Bissau, India, Indonesia, Lebanon,
Madagascar, Maldives, Montenegro, Namibia, Nigeria,
Palau, Qatar, Samoa, Sao Tome and Principe, Senegal,

Sierra Leone, the United Republic of Tanzania
and Zimbabwe.
The President: A single separate, recorded vote
has been requested on operative paragraphs 58 and 59
of draft resolution A/75/L.44.
A recorded vote was taken.
In favour:
Afghanistan, Albania, Algeria, Andorra, Argentina,
Armenia, Australia, Austria, Azerbaijan, Bahrain,
Belarus, Belgium, Belize, Bhutan, Bolivia
(Plurinational State of), Bosnia and Herzegovina,
Brazil, Bulgaria, Cabo Verde, Cameroon, Canada,
Chile, China, Colombia, Costa Rica, Côte d’Ivoire,
Croatia, Cuba, Cyprus, Czech Republic, Denmark,
Djibouti, Dominican Republic, Ecuador, Egypt,
El Salvador, Estonia, Ethiopia, Finland, France,
Georgia, Germany, Ghana, Greece, Guatemala,
Guinea-Bissau, Guyana, Hungary, Iceland, India,
Indonesia, Iran (Islamic Republic of), Iraq,
Ireland, Italy, Jamaica, Japan, Kenya, Kiribati,
Kuwait, Lao People’s Democratic Republic, Latvia,
Lebanon, Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg,
Madagascar, Malaysia, Maldives, Mali, Malta,
Mauritania, Mauritius, Mexico, Monaco, Mongolia,
Montenegro, Morocco, Mozambique, Namibia,
Nepal, Netherlands, New Zealand, Nicaragua,
Nigeria, North Macedonia, Norway, Pakistan,
Panama, Paraguay, Peru, Philippines, Poland,
Portugal, Qatar, Republic of Korea, Republic of
Moldova, Romania, Russian Federation, Samoa,
San Marino, Sao Tome and Principe, Saudi
Arabia, Senegal, Serbia, Singapore, Slovakia,
Slovenia, South Africa, Spain, Sri Lanka, Sweden,
Switzerland, Syrian Arab Republic, Thailand,
Timor-Leste, Togo, Tunisia, Turkey, Ukraine,
United Arab Emirates, United Kingdom of Great
Britain and Northern Ireland, Uruguay, Vanuatu,
Venezuela, Viet Nam, Yemen, Zambia
Against:
Libya, Sudan, United States of America
Abstaining:
None
Operative paragraphs 58 and 59 were retained by
128 votes to 3.
[Subsequently, the delegations of Bangladesh and
Myanmar advised the Secretariat that they had
intended to vote in favour.]

20-3529233/34

A/75/PV.42

11/12/2020

The President: May I take it that the Assembly
decides to adopt draft resolution A/75/L.44?
Draft
resolution
(resolution 75/127).

A/75/L.44

was

adopted

The President: We shall hear speakers in
explanation of vote or position after adoption at 3 p.m.
this afternoon in this Hall.
I call on the representative of the Russian
Federation, who has requested to speak in exercise of
the right of reply.
Ms. Karmazinskaya (Russian Federation) (spoke
in Russian): I would like to exercise my right to reply
to the delegation of Ukraine. We regret that Ukraine
has once again been unable to refrain from using
the platform of the United Nations to politicize our
discussion on the basis of a distorted picture of what is
taking place in south-eastern Ukraine. It compels us to
remind the Assembly that the humanitarian challenges
facing the inhabitants of that part of the country are
due to the military actions of the Kyiv authorities
against members of their own population who did not
recognize the overthrow of the Government in 2014.
As for Russia, we are familiar with the humanitarian
problems in our neighbour Ukraine. The numbers speak
for themselves. Since April 2014 more than 1.5 million
Ukrainian citizens have applied for Russian citizenship,
refugee status or temporary residency in the Russian

34/34

Federation. In that connection, we have a very simple
question. Do people really flee a good life? And why
are they fleeing to another country rather than asking
the Government of Ukraine for this kind of assistance?
That is all.
The President: I welcome the contributions that
have been made to this debate on strengthening the
coordination of United Nations humanitarian and
disaster relief assistance, including special economic
assistance. After listening to the participants’
insightful statements, I feel it is abundantly clear that
75 years after the creation of the United Nations, the
humanitarian assistance the Organization provides is
more essential than ever. I would like to express my
deep appreciation to all United Nations agencies and
their extremely dedicated staff, particularly those
working in the humanitarian arena, including the Office
for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs, UNICEF
and the World Food Programme. I also commend the
local, national and international humanitarian aid and
assistance organizations whose work is essential to the
continued delivery of humanitarian aid to those who
desperately need it. The coronavirus pandemic has
made the needs of the most vulnerable more acute. Our
efforts to coordinate humanitarian assistance can and
will save lives and help to protect those in need.
The meeting rose at 1.15 p.m.

20-35292
