XVII
RESOLUTIONS ADOPTED WITHOUT REFERENCE TO A COMMITIEE
490 (V).

Question of the representation of
China in the General Assembly
The General Assembly,
Taking note of differences of view concerning- the
representation of China in the United Nations,
Establishes a Special Committee consisting- of seven
Members nominated by the President and confirmed
by the General Assembly to consider the question of
Chinese representation and to report back, with recommendations, to the present session of the General Assembly, after the Assembly shall have considered item
62 of the provisional agenda (item proposed by Cuba) ;1
Resolves that, pending a decision by the General
Assembly on the report of this Special Committee, the
representatives of the National Government of China
shall be seated in the General Assembly with the same
rights as other representatives.
277th plenary meetina.
19 September 1950.

•
• •

At its 321st ple1•:1ry meeting on 12 nrcrmbcr 1950, tlzc
General Assembly, on the nomination of the President,
elected by secret ballot the f ollowin_q States Members to
the Special Committee: CANADA, EcuAnOR, TNmA, IRAQ,
MEXICO, the PHILIPPINES and Pm.A:--;D.

491 (V). Admission of the Republic of Indonesia to membership in the United Nations
The General Assembly,
Noting the recommendation 2 of the Security Council
of 26 September 1950 that the Republic of Indonesia
should be admitted to membership in the United
Nations,
Noting also the declaration 3 made by the representative of the Republic of Indonesia to the effect that it
will accept the obligations contained in the Charter of
the United Nations,
Admits the Republic of Indonesia to membership in
the United Nations.
289th plenary meeting,
28 September 1950.
492 (V).

Continuation in office of the SecretaryGeneral of the United Nations
The General Assembly,
Having received communications" from the President
of the Security Council, <iated 12 October and 25
1 Item 61
2

of the agenda as approved by the General Assembly.
See Official Records of the Security Council, Fifth Year,

No. 45.
3 See document A/1393.
4 See documents A/1439 and A/1460

October 1950, stating that the Security Council has
been unable to agree on a recommendation to the General Assembly regarding the appointment of a Secretary-General,
Considering the necessity to ensure the uninterrupted
exercise of the functions vested by the Charter in the
office of the Secretary-General,
( onsidcrinq that the Security Council recommended 5
to the first regular session of the General ;\ssembly
the appointment of Mr. Trygve Lie as Secretary-General and that, on 1 February 1946, the General Assemblv appointecl 6 Yl r. Trygve Lie as Secretary-General
for a five-year term,
/)ccidcs that the present Secretary-General shall be
continued in office for a period of three years.
298th plenary meeting,
1 November 1950.
49:J ( V). Convention on the D~laration of Death
of Missing Persons: International Bureau for
Declaration!-l of Death
rite (;eneral Assembly,
l laving regard to article 15 of the Convention on the
I kcbration of Death of Missing Persons established by
thr TJ nitc<l Nations Conference on Declaration of Death
uf ,\1 issing Persons,7
1. {)ccidcs to approve the establishment of the International Bureau for Declarations of Death provided for
in :1rticle 8 of the aforementioned Convention;
' /)ccidcs that the expenses of the International
Bureau should he assessed upon such non-member
States as may become parties to the Convention, in accordance with the principle acloptecl in this respect in
cmmexion with the expenses of the International Court
of rustic<'.
305th plenary meeting,
16 November 1950.
494 (V). Development of a 20-year programme
£01· achieving peace through the United
Nations
/'he (;eneral .1 sscmbly,
! laving considered the "Memorandum8 of points for
consideration in the development of a 20-year programme for achieving peace through the United Nations" submitted hy the Secretary-General,
'· See Official Records of the Security Council, First Year,
First Series, No. 1, page 44.
fi See Official Records of the General Assembly, First part of
the first session, Plenary Meetings, page 304.
7
See United Nations Conference on Declaration of Death
of Missing P,•rsons, United Nations Publications, sales number: 1950.V.1.
"See document A/1304.

79

80

General Assembly-Fifth Session

Noting that progress has been made by the present
session of the General Assembly with regard to certain
of the points contained in the memorandum of the Secretary-General,
ReaiJirming its constant desire that all the resources
of the United Nations Charter be utilized for the development of friendly relations between nations and
the achievement of universal peace,
1. Commends the Secretary-Ccneral for his initiative in preparing his memorandum and presenting it to
the General Assembly ;
2. Requests the appropriate organs of the United
Nations to give consideration to those portions of the
memorandum of the Secretary-Ceneral with which they
are particularly concerned;
3. Requests these organs to inform the General Assembly at its sixth session, through the SecretaryGeneral, of any progress achieved through such
consideration.
312th plenary meeting,
20 November 1950.
495 (V).

Admission of new Members to the
United NatiomThe General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 296 (IV) A to l and K of
22 November 1949 concerning the reconsideration, by
the Security Council, of pending applications for membership,
Noting that the General Assembly has not received
recommendations for the admission of any of the applicants,
Requests the Security Council to keep the applications ·under consideration in accordance with the terms
of the above-mentioned resolutions.
318th plenary meeting,
4 December 1950.
496 (V).

International control of atomic energy

The General Assembly,
Recognizing that the effective regulation and reduction of national armaments would substantially diminish the present danger of war, relieve the heavy economic burden placed upon the peoples of the world in
the absence of a system of armaments control, and
permit the greater use of man's resources to projects
devoted to his betterment,
Recognizing that the regulation and reduction of
armaments to be effective must cover weapons of all
kinds, must be based on unanimous agreement, and so
must include every nation having substantial armaments
and armed forces,

N.,·coyni::;:ny further that any plan for the regulation
and reduction of armaments and armed forces must be
base( I upun safeguards that will secure the compliance
ui all na rions,
N.,·cog111~;ing the inahility to date to achieve agreement among nations on the elimination of atomic weap( ,11s under a svstem of effective international control of
;1to111ic encrg:,~ and on the regulation and reduction of
, ,t her ar111aments and armed forces,
N.c, o!liny that a plan" has been developed in the
Lnikd '.\ations Atomic Energy Commission, and approvl'd'" \,y the c;eneral Assembly, for the international
control ui atomic energy, which would make effective
the prohibition of atomic weapons; and that much useiul planning work has been accomplished in the Commission for Conn:ntional Armaments,
/!csirin,1;, ho\\'evn, to carry this work forward toward
;, curnprl'hensi \'(' system of armaments control,
I i,·cides ro cscalilish a committee of twelve, consisting ()J rcpresent:ttives of the members of the Security
Council as uf i _l;muary llJSl, together with Canada,
to cunsidn and rqiurt to the next regular session of
the l~eneral Assembly on ways and means whereby the
work of the Atomic Energy Commission and the Commission for Conventional Armaments may be co-ordinated and on the advisability of their functions being
merged and placed under a new and consolidated disarmament commission.
323rd plenary meeting,
13 December 1950.

497 (V). Place of meeting of the sixth regular
session of the General Assembly

/'he Grneral Assembly,
Considering that the building intended for the holding
of the Ceneral Assembly will not be completed until
J()52.
Considering that in these circumstances there may
arise technical difficulties liable to impede the normal
functioning of the G.eneral Assembly and the convenience of its deliberations,
1. Decides, in conformity with rule 3 of its rules of
procedure, to convene its sixth re,gular session in
Europe;
2. Instructs the President of the General Assembly
and the Secretary-General to select the city most suitable for the above purpose and to make the necessary
arrangements.
324th plenary meeting,
14 December 1950.
9 See Official Records of the Atomic Energy Commissio"
Special Supplement, Report to the Security Council, Part II C
and Part III; and Ibid., Second Year, Special Supplefflfflt,
Second Report to the Security Council, Part II.
10 See resolution 191 (III).

Printed in U.S.A. - 40897-February 1951-4,650
Reprinted in U.N., N.Y. - 07119-May 1968-200
May 1974-250
Reprinted in U.N., N.Y. · 10351 · May 1980-200
