United Nations

S/PV.4208 (Resumption 1)

Security Council

Provisional

Fifty-fifth year

4208

th meeting
Tuesday, 24 October 2000, 3.15 p.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Gurirab . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (Namibia)

Members:

Argentina . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Bangladesh . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Canada . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Jamaica . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Malaysia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Mali . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Netherlands . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Tunisia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Ukraine . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . . .
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Mr. Listre
Mr. Chowdhury
Mr. Heinbecker
Mr. Wang Yingfan
Mr. Levitte
Miss Durrant
Mr. Hasmy
Mr. Kassé
Mr. Hamer
Mr. Lavrov
Mr. Ben Mustapha
Mr. Krokhmal
Mr. Grainger
Ms. Soderberg

Agenda
Women and peace and security.

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room C-178.

00-70601 (E)
`````````

S/PV.4208 (Resumption 1)

The meeting was resumed at 3.15 p.m.
The President: The next speaker inscribed on my
list is the Deputy Minister for Foreign Affairs and
Cooperation of Mozambique, Mr. Hipólito Patricio. On
behalf of the Council, I welcome him. I invite him to
take a seat at the Council table and to make his
statement.
Mr. Patricio (Mozambique): It gives me great
pleasure to join previous speakers in congratulating
Namibia on its assumption of the presidency of the
Security Council and for the brilliant manner in which
you, Mr. Minister, and your able Permanent
Representative are conducting the work of the Security
Council during the month of October.
I wish to commend your initiative to convene this
open debate on “Women and peace and security” on
this very important day — United Nations Day. This
debate is certainly an excellent occasion for us to once
again join efforts and exchange views on the search for
appropriate and concerted actions. It is also an
opportunity to delineate adequate follow-up procedures
to implement the decisions taken and the
recommendations made during the Millennium Summit
and the twenty-third special session of the General
Assembly, entitled “Women 2000: gender equality,
development and peace for the twenty-first century”,
with a view to ensuring the more active participation of
women in the promotion of peace and security
worldwide.
Peace and security will continue to be the major
concern of humanity in the new millennium, as
conflicts continue to grow and devastate many parts of
the world. Women and girls are vulnerable both in time
of peace and in time of war, due to the profound gender
inequalities that still characterize our societies. It is
estimated that 80 per cent of internally displaced
persons and refugees are women and children. Women
and girls are also victims of rape, domestic violence,
sexual exploitation, trafficking, sexual humiliation and
mutilation.
The reversal of this situation requires from all of
us great political will and determination to fulfil our
commitments with regard to all decisions and
recommendations relating to the protection and
promotion of the rights of women.
As stated by our heads of State and Government,
assembled here at the Millennium Summit,

2

“No individual and no nation must be denied the
opportunity to benefit from development. The
equal rights and opportunities of women and men
must be assured”. (A/RES/55/2, para. 6)
Against this background, women must play a role
of relevance in conflict prevention, the resolution of
disputes, peacekeeping, post-conflict peace-building
and the reconstruction process, and development.
In this regard, my delegation appreciates the
dedication shown by United Nations bodies such as the
Department for Disarmament Affairs and the
Department of Peacekeeping Operations, which, in
close collaboration with the Office of the Special
Adviser on Gender Issues and Advancement of
Women, are joining efforts to ensure the participation
of women in the promotion of peace and security, as
stated this morning by Ms. King and Ms. Heyzer. We
also commend the leadership role that the SecretaryGeneral has provided throughout the United Nations
system on the advancement of women, which he
reconfirmed in his statement today.
We very much appreciate the decision by the
Government of Namibia to host the seminar on
“Mainstreaming
a
Gender
Perspective
in
Multidimensional
Peace
Support
Operations”,
organized by the Department of Peacekeeping
Operations. The seminar adopted the Windhoek
Declaration and the Namibia Plan of Action,
documents that identify actions to be taken to ensure
that a gender perspective is adopted in all
multidimensional operations in support of peace.
In order to protect and promote the rights of
women, including their involvement in maintaining
peace and security, the Government of Mozambique
adopts political, social, and economic policies which
envisage gender perspectives in all spheres of activity.
This is done in conformity with our Constitution and
the many international legal instruments and
declarations that have been incorporated into our
internal laws, including the 1995 Beijing and
Copenhagen Declarations.
The Government has committed itself to
increasing the effectiveness of all regional and
international legal instruments to which it is a party,
through reviewing national legislation. Accordingly, in
close cooperation with civil society, the Government
has embarked on the process of reviewing national
legislation aimed at incorporating into our internal laws

S/PV.4208 (Resumption 1)

the main provisions contained in the Convention on the
Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against
Women and other related international and regional
instruments. The Government has also been taking
action to increase awareness of women’s rights in
Mozambican society. As part of this process, a national
debate is taking place on the review of the law of the
family, in which women from different social groups
and religious backgrounds are actively participating in
order to express and defend their rights on such matters
as marriage and related issues.
To enhance the institutional mechanisms for the
advancement of women, the Government has
established a Ministry of Women and Coordination of
Social Affairs, which coordinates the activities of an
operative group, including Government officials and
representatives from civil society and academia, whose
objective it is to supervise and enhance the
implementation of policies and programmes for the
advancement of women.
The participation of women in leadership and
decision-making has also been encouraged by the
Government. For instance, representation of women in
Parliament increased from 65 to 80 between 1995 and
2000, out of a total of 250 Members of Parliament. At
the executive level, the number of women increased
from one minister and four vice-ministers to three
ministers and five vice-ministers.
The Ministry of Education, in collaboration with
the United Nations Children’s Fund, is promoting
access to education for the girl child so that women
will be able to take their rightful position in society.
In the context of the implementation of the
Government’s Action Plan for the Reduction of
Absolute Poverty, for the period 2000-2004, the role of
women is being underlined as a matter of priority, with
special attention being paid to women in rural areas
and to women as heads of family.
Women are also accorded priority among
vulnerable groups with regard to HIV infection and the
impact that the HIV/AIDS epidemic is having in the
country. For that reason, they deserve special attention
in the context of the national response to the epidemic,
a response that is being led by the Government, with
the participation of various social groups, through the
implementation of the National Strategic Plan to
Combat HIV/AIDS. The implementation of these
policies and programmes is enabling the protection of

the rights of women and their participation at all levels
in the national reconstruction process and in social
development. In order to defend and promote their
rights, Mozambican women are organizing various
specialized associations, and they are also members of
international women’s organizations. Earlier this month
they organized various rallies and marches throughout
the country as part of the 2000 World Women’s March.
In the capital city, Maputo, thousands of women and
men participated in a march that culminated in a big
rally where they conveyed to His Excellency Joaquim
Chissano, President of the Republic of Mozambique,
their demand for the protection of women’s rights and
protested against domestic violence.
Durable peace and security will be obtained only
if all peace-loving nations dedicate themselves to
tackling the root causes of conflict in the world. One of
them — for developing countries, the most urgent — is
the eradication of poverty. This noble task requires the
commitment of all international and national actors,
including women.
In Mozambique and many other African
countries, women have played, and still play, an
important role in looking for urgent ways to bring
about durable solutions to the conflicts still prevailing.
They are always at the forefront of peace and economic
development in Africa and all over the world. Women
and girls need to have greater access to education,
employment and social and political participation in
this noble endeavour to maintain peace and security.
In the Southern African Development Community
(SADC), we also develop and implement programmes
that enhance women’s participation in the process of
economic cooperation and integration, following the
guidelines of the Beijing and Copenhagen Declarations
as well as of the recent Millennium Declaration. It is
now time for all of us to translate commitments already
made into concrete action.
In conclusion, we commend the Security Council
for its initiative and urge it to continue its endeavour to
ensure that all concerned refrain from human rights
abuses in conflict situations — particularly abuses of
women and children, as highlighted in Ms. Graça
Machel’s report — respect international law and
promote non-violent forms of conflict resolution and a
culture of peace.

3

S/PV.4208 (Resumption 1)

The President: I thank the Deputy Minister for
Foreign Affairs of Mozambique for his kind words
addressed to Namibia.
I should like to inform the Council that I have
received a letter from the representative of Nepal in
which he requests to be invited to participate in the
discussion of the item on the Council’s agenda. In
accordance with the usual practice, I propose, with the
consent of the Council, to invite that representative to
participate in the discussion, without the right to vote,
in accordance with the relevant provisions of the
Charter and rule 37 of the Council’s provisional rules
of procedure.
At the invitation of the President, Mr. Sharma
(Nepal) took the seat reserved for him at the side
of the Council Chamber.
The President: The next speaker inscribed on my
list is the representative of Egypt. I invite him to take a
seat at the Council table and to make his statement.
Mr. Aboulgheit (Egypt) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I should like to express my delegation’s deep
appreciation to you, Sir, and to your sisterly country,
Namibia. I also wish to emphasize Egypt’s full
commitment to and support for all efforts to protect and
advance women, as well as to foster their participation
in all fields of peacemaking.
Before touching on the subject under discussion, I
should like to stress Egypt’s firm position, which we
have stated time and again before this Council, with
regard to the need to place the protection of women
and children in armed conflict in the broader context of
the protection of all civilians. In this connection, I also
wish to make two main points that should be taken into
account when the Council deals with humanitarian
issues. The first is the need for the Council to deal with
these subjects in an atmosphere of full respect for the
delicate balances among the main organs of the United
Nations, as specified in the Charter, particularly the
inherent role vested in the General Assembly, in
addition to other United Nations bodies and
organizations outside, whether governmental or nongovernmental, whose main task is the protection of the
civilian population.
The second point is the pivotal principle that
implementation of international humanitarian law
should not contradict the need to respect and carry out
the provisions of the Charter. We welcome and support

4

the Council’s readiness to respond to cases where
civilians are targeted and where humanitarian
assistance is deliberately blocked. Yet this should be
viewed only in line with Chapter VII of the Charter and
Article 39 thereof. In cases where the Council fails to
exercise its responsibilities for reasons that go beyond
the topic under discussion, we should always consider
the viability of benefiting from General Assembly
resolution 377 (V), on Uniting for Peace, in this
connection.
Last June, for the first time, the United Nations
witnessed the largest international gathering —
governmental and non-governmental — in five years. It
was designed to emphasize political commitment
towards enhancing the role of women and achieving
the goals of equality, development and peace for all
women of the world, through the General Assembly
special session held to follow up on the implementation
of the recommendations of the Fourth World
Conference on Women. We, the participants in the
special session, pledged to leave no stone unturned in
order to elevate the status of women and to preserve
their rights, stemming basically from human rights.
The international community has recognized the
need to take care of women and support gender
equality in order to achieve development, peace and
security. When we deny women the right to justice and
participation in all aspects of socio-economic, cultural
and political life, we are actually delaying desired
development and prosperity. We are also reducing
chances for just peace throughout the world.
Egypt believes in the need for the Security
Council to perform its role in solving disputes and
conflicts that threaten international peace and security,
in a comprehensive and integrated manner, while
addressing their root causes, so that the worsening of
such conflicts would not lead to further hostilities
among the parties to the conflict or to horrendous
humanitarian conditions, such as the displacement or
eviction of populations or their fleeing to neighbouring
States. Hence the derogation of the sanctity of
civilians, particularly women and children, and the
entry into endless vicious cycles of violence.
Violence against women constitutes a main
obstacle to achieving the goals of equality,
development and peace. Undoubtedly, the violations to
which women are subjected when caught in the heat of
armed conflict, such as murder, rape, slavery, forced

S/PV.4208 (Resumption 1)

conception, torture and arbitrary detention are among
the most glaring manifestations of civilizational
backwardness and run counter to the simplest meaning
of humanity. Consequently, Egypt calls for the pursuit
of an effective policy to integrate the gender
perspective within public policies and private
programmes dealing with conflict and post-conflict
periods, in order to enhance women’s status at all times
and under all conditions.
While recognizing the important role undertaken
by women in preventing and settling disputes and in
peace-building, we emphasize the need to adopt swiftly
specific, practical measures that would encourage
women’s equal participation, as well as achieving equal
opportunity in terms of their contribution to all
activities relating to peace. This is particularly so in
cases of decision-making, mediation, diplomatic
negotiation and preventive negotiation.
The role of women is important in the course of
armed conflict and deterioration of societies through
their preservation of social order. Their role is equally
important in post-conflict periods, with their resolve
and efforts to foster stability, peace and development.
We cannot ignore the achievements made by women in
all walks of life. They have rightfully and deservedly
proven themselves to be an effective and productive
element, taking decisions in our societies.
Last but not least, I wish to touch upon the
deteriorating situation of Palestinian women under the
yoke of occupation. We give highest importance and
attention to this matter in my country. Women are
suffering from manifestations of violence, suppression,
despotism and injustice. They also feel bereaved on
account of the loss of their husbands, brothers,
children — wiped out, regrettably, by the bullets of the
Israeli forces, putting aside any political, international
or even ethical obligations on this score.
While we are discussing today the means for
protecting women in armed conflict, as well as
enhancing their role and participation in post-conflict
time, we cannot ignore the appeals for dignity and
succour launched by Palestinian women who live under
the most severe inhuman conditions, conditions
troubling to the world’s conscience. Hence our
delegation calls upon the Security Council to discuss
the conditions of women under occupation, by
identifying the Israeli agents who violate the simplest
rules of international law and human rights and the

protection of humankind, with a view to trying them
for acts of blatant injustice and unjustified violence
they have perpetrated against the Palestinian people.
This will prove the Council’s seriousness and will
foster its credibility when it tackles humanitarian
matters that may threaten international peace and
security. There should be no double standards in
dealing with such matters in the future.
The President: I thank the representative of
Egypt for his kind words addressed to Namibia.
The next speaker inscribed on my list is the
representative of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, whom I invite to take a seat at the Council table
and make his statement.
Mr. Ileka (Democratic Republic of the Congo)
(spoke in French): My delegation is very pleased to see
presiding over the Security Council the leading
diplomat of a friendly country, Namibia, with which
the Democratic Republic of the Congo has excellent,
long-standing relations marked by mutual confidence
and esteem.
I congratulate you, Mr. President, on having
devoted today’s meeting of the Council to the issue of
women and peace and security. I also sincerely thank
the Secretary-General, the Special Adviser on Gender
Issues and the Advancement of Women and the
Executive Director of the United Nations Development
Fund for Women (UNIFEM) for their significant
contributions this morning to the discussion, which is
part of the momentum generated by the twenty-third
special session of the General Assembly, “Women
2000: gender equality, development and peace for the
twenty-first century”.
That special session was a unique opportunity to
marshal the efforts to reaffirm and ensure
implementation of the commitments made at the Fourth
World Conference on Women, held in Beijing in 1995.
These commitments were strengthened by the adoption
of the Political Declaration and new measures and
initiatives to implement the Beijing Declaration and
Platform for Action, through which the General
Assembly, as part of its effort to achieve a more just
society, stressed in particular that peace is indissolubly
linked to equality between women and men, as well as
to development.
My delegation is pleased that during the
celebration of International Women’s Day, the Security

5

S/PV.4208 (Resumption 1)

Council, in its presidential statement of 8 March 2000,
stressed the complex links between peace, gender
equality and the need for women to participate fully in
all efforts to prevent and resolve conflicts. This
recognition of women as an equal partner in the
prevention of war could be considered a very
significant step. However, a great deal remains to be
done to recognize fully the role of women in
peacekeeping and peace-building.
My
delegation
supports
the
Windhoek
Declaration and the Namibia Plan of Action, adopted
last May, because they are valuable documents that
should be applied, particularly in the implementation of
the Brahimi report, in order to enhance effectiveness.
It is absolutely essential that initiatives aimed at
resolving conflicts and consolidating peace take into
consideration women’s concerns, experience and
perspective. My delegation dares to hope that the
organs of the United Nations will be able to incorporate
these concerns and work to promote increased
awareness of the capacities of women, in particular
those affected by armed conflicts, as well as their
ability to contribute to the promotion of a gender
perspective in all peace-building activities. Women
must be involved in the conflict-prevention and
conflict-resolution mechanisms so that they can give
humankind the benefit of their ability to build
consensus, resolve conflicts and build peace. There can
be neither equality nor development without peace and
justice.
Here I should remind the international
community, through the Security Council, the principal
United Nations body charged with the maintenance of
international peace and security, that my country is the
target of aggression by a coalition of armed forces from
Rwanda, Uganda and Burundi, in flagrant violation of
the Charter of the United Nations. This conflict, with
its attendant violence, continues to create enormous
movements of internally displaced persons and
refugees, the vast majority of whom are women and
children. One result of these exoduses is to increase
considerably the poverty of the civilian population.
Women and children are the main victims of this
senseless, unjust war, which has done such harm to all
aspects of life in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo.
The education sector has been particularly
affected. The war has prevented many Congolese from

6

pursuing a normal education programme. However, it
has been proved that for a developing country such as
ours schooling allows women to preserve their health
and that of their families, plan their pregnancies and
participate in the political, social and economic life of
their country. Therefore, to deprive women of
education is to do a kind of violence to them.
Women and children have also been the object of
attacks on the civilian population by the regular armies
of Uganda and Rwanda during their three ruthless
actions against Kisangani to expropriate the
underground wealth of this region — not only gold and
diamonds, but above all niobium. Though extremely
rare in the earth as a whole, this metal is found in
relatively large quantities in the eastern province. It is
used in some alloys to strengthen armour plating and
spacecraft.
This war has destroyed all the country’s efforts to
rebuild and revive its economy, efforts that could in
particular lift women and the whole Congolese
population out of the indescribable poverty in which
they now find themselves. Today close to 80 per cent
of the Congolese population is living in absolute
poverty.
Worse than the poverty is the inhuman and
degrading ill-treatment of Congolese women by armed
elements of the aggressor countries, which have made
such ill-treatment a means of waging war. Women have
been massacred, as they were last year, during the week
of 15-22 November 1999, in Mwenga, where the
Armée patriotique rwandaise, assisted by armed
elements of the Rassemblement congolais pour la
démocratie, buried women alive, as ordered by their
commander, Kasereka. Those women’s crime: trying to
resist the mass rape that the aggressors were getting
ready to commit. Their punishment: they were bled
white, their bodies coated with pepper, which was then
inserted into all their bodily orifices — their eyes, their
mouths, their noses, their ears and their genitals —
before being thrown into a common grave.
In addition to the incident in Mwenga, many
cases of violations of women’s rights have been
recorded and denounced in white papers issued by my
Government and in various reports of the Special
Rapporteur on human rights in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, Mr. Garretón, the most recent
of which revealed many cases of imprisonment of
militant feminists, of the rape and beating of high

S/PV.4208 (Resumption 1)

school students for requesting the validation of their
exams, and of rape of women prisoners.

Burundi and Uganda to outrage the entire world with
impunity.

The criminal, barbaric and inhumane practice of
mass rape is also responsible for the spread of
HIV/AIDS. This scourge has ceased to be simply a
health problem in my country. With its tragic
consequences, it now has a worrying effect on
development. AIDS is a significant obstacle to progress
and national development.

It is obvious that Congolese women are directly
involved in the promotion of peace in their country.
Their search for a liberating peace should be supported
by all the members of the Security Council, because
the restoration of peace in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo will help Congolese women to pursue their
struggle against poverty and all forms of violence
against them. The Council must assist them in
achieving this goal by denouncing the war of
aggression and discouraging all those countries
involved in the war against my country, which
dehumanizes Congolese women.

It was estimated at the end of 1999 that 1,100,000
adults and children in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo had been infected with this fatal virus. Children
orphaned by the disease are estimated to number
800,000, of whom 450,000 are still alive. In the eastern
part of the Democratic Republic of the Congo — the
part occupied by Ugandan troops — in the space of two
years the prevalence of AIDS has increased from 4.5
per cent, the national average, to 22 per cent. In other
words, it has increased by five times. The catastrophe
looming on the horizon is attributed to sexual contacts
with Rwandan and Ugandan soldiers, who come from
countries where the disease is widespread.
Besides AIDS, it is worth noting here the
resurgence of diseases such as malaria, now
responsible for 500,000 deaths a year, many of which
are of children under five years of age. The national
maternal mortality rate is 1,837 deaths per 100,000
births, compared with 3,000 in the occupied provinces,
which is one of the highest rates in the world.
On 9 June the American non-governmental
organization, the International Rescue Committee
(IRC), announced that at least 1,700,000 people, out of
a population of 20 million, in the eastern part of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo had died since 1
January 1999 as a result of combat and the breakdown
of infrastructures. In the village of Moba, Katanga,
alone, 47 per cent of infants under one year of age have
died since 2 August 1998. Throughout this area, to
escape the violence, people are fleeing into the forest,
where, completely neglected, they are dying of malaria.
It would be useful for the international
community to get accurate figures of the number of
people who have died, directly and indirectly, in the
fighting throughout our national territory, and to study
the impact of these deaths on the Congolese family.
Congolese women have lost their lives, husbands, sons,
daughters, brothers and fathers in this absurd war,
which for three years now has allowed Rwanda,

Given that the Council has asked my Government
and the other parties to demonstrate their commitment
to peace in the weeks to come, it has no right to
withdraw from the peace process; rather, it should
mobilize as it did so well in Kosovo, in East Timor
and, more recently, in the crisis in the Middle East. My
delegation can in no way believe that, on 15 December,
the international community will decide to withdraw
from the search for peace in my country because
powerful and differing interests do not wish it to be
restored there. If it were to do so, the international
community would be abandoning millions of
Congolese citizens, men and women, to their sad fate
and to the schemes of those who were so recently
lauded as a new breed of leader in Africa. Abandoning
us would mean not helping people at risk. It is
inconceivable and unimaginable that the Governments
of people who claim to be steeped in humanism and to
respect human rights could even consider taking such
an attitude.
In conclusion, let me reiterate what my delegation
has continuously stated to a world dedicated to peace
and justice. My delegation wants the entire world to
understand that the men, women and children of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo are tired of a war of
aggression that is futile and stupid. My people want
and seek peace. They want to live in a Democratic
Republic of the Congo that is strong and united,
enjoying full sovereignty and territorial integrity. They
want to live in understanding with the peoples of the
nine States bordering my country.
My Government is open to any proposal or
initiative aimed at putting a speedy end to the barbaric
bloodshed that has engulfed the entire Great Lakes

7

S/PV.4208 (Resumption 1)

region. Whether it comes via the Lusaka Ceasefire
Agreement, as amended by resolution 1304 (2000), in
which the Security Council demanded that Uganda and
Rwanda, which have violated the sovereignty and
territorial integrity of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, withdraw all their forces from the territory of
the Democratic Republic of the Congo without further
delay; via direct negotiations between the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and aggressor countries; or via
direct negotiations between the Government and our
Congolese brothers who have chosen to resolve their
differences by violence, the main thing is that we
should be able to work together to achieve a lasting
peace for the entire region. Such a peace could be
guaranteed by the international community through an
international conference to address the thorny problems
of law and order in the region and to consider what is
needed to achieve peace and sustainable development
throughout the region, so that the underlying and
immediate causes of the disaster overwhelming our
subcontinent can be eliminated once and for all.
Given their rich social, cultural and ethnic
diversity, the peoples of our subregion deserve such a
peace. They are entitled to peace, without which any
hope for human dignity, for the advancement of
women, for wellbeing and for development would be
futile and compromised.
The President: I thank the representative of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo for his kind words
addressed to my country and to me.
The next speaker inscribed on my list is the
representative of South Africa. I invite him to take a
seat at the Council table and to make his statement.
Mr. Kumalo (South Africa): I thank you, Sir, for
conducting this meeting today. I know that, in the next
few days, you will be returning home to a warm, sunny
Namibia — for a while, I hope — and I just want to
pay tribute to you and to tell you before this body that
you have made us proud to be people of southern
Africa and, more importantly, to be Africans. Your
stewardship in the General Assembly and in this body
has made us keep the faith that things could, indeed,
get better. I thank you very, very much for everything
you have done for us during your term of visit in New
York.
In our commitment to dealing with conflicts in a
comprehensive manner, including addressing the root
causes of conflicts, we must acknowledge that the

8

widespread exclusion of women from political and
economic decision-making is a significant obstacle to
the realization of sustainable global peace and security.
In other words, and as was so concisely summed up in
a very powerful and simple statement in the final
declaration of the All-Party Burundi Women’s Peace
Conference, held in Arusha from 17 to 20 July 2000,
“women’s rights are human rights”.
The significance of women’s active contributions
to South Africa’s liberation and their relevance to
today’s debate go far beyond South Africa, our
subregion and even our continent. Indeed, for South
Africa and the rest of us in the region of the Southern
African Development Community, this topic has
special relevance, bearing in mind the critical and
essential roles played by women in our struggles for
liberation from colonization, apartheid, conflict and
repression. These women, and many others elsewhere
in the world, have demonstrated that women have an
indispensable social, political and economic role to
play in bringing about sustainable peace and security.
It was for this reason that, on 9 August this year,
at our National Women’s Day celebrations, the South
African President dedicated a monument in tribute to
the role played by women in shaping a democratic,
non-racist and non-sexist South Africa. In that
ceremony, President Mbeki unveiled the portraits of
courageous and dedicated women leaders, such as
Lilian Ngoyi, Helen Joseph, Raheema Moosa and
Sophie de Bruyn. These leaders were at the forefront of
the struggle for a just society in South Africa. We pay
special tribute to them for their role in leading the mass
defiance campaigns against apartheid legislation and to
the many unsung heroines of that struggle, which
culminated in 1956 with a march by tens of thousands
of women to Pretoria. Thanks to the positive examples
and contributions of pioneering leaders such as these,
South Africa is today committed to achieving and
sustaining equal participation and representation of
women in our Parliament and Government, which
currently stand at about 30 per cent.
It is true that, in today’s conflicts, it is civilians,
and women and children in particular, who bear the
brunt of gross abuses of human rights. There is another
dimension, however, and we need to move beyond the
limited approach of portraying women solely as
victims in conflicts.

S/PV.4208 (Resumption 1)

For all societies in this world, and more so for
societies in conflict, women play a key role in
sustaining both the family and the wider community. In
many developing countries, our communities are
fracturing under the combined weight of internecine
conflicts, poverty, communicable diseases such as
HIV/AIDS,
tuberculosis
and
malaria,
mass
urbanization, economic restructuring and other effects
of globalization. More often than not, it is the working
women who must quite literally put bread on the table
and hold families together.
Given the central role that women play in the
social, political and economic development of our
societies, it is morally right and logical that the full
realization of equal political and economic rights for
women must be treated as an essential component of
our collective approach to preventing and resolving
conflicts.
In Africa, where there are already signs that there
is a political and economic revival, it is clear that
women have played, must play and will continue to
play a full role in the renaissance of our continent.
Anything less, therefore, would be short-sighted, and
despite our best intentions, our collective commitment
to address the root causes of conflicts will come to
naught unless women are afforded an equal role.
In her address to the General Assembly on 13
September 2000, South Africa’s Foreign Minister,
Ms. Nkosazana Dlamini-Zuma, said,
“The founders of the United Nations based the
Charter on the assertion of human dignity, human
rights and the equality of women and men and the
aim of promoting better social standards.
(A/55/PV.13, p.11)
The equality of women and men still
remains a subject of great concern. All we need to
do is look around this Hall to realize how far we
are from realizing the vision of the founding
Members of the United Nations. Secondly, the
feminization of poverty is a big problem. The
marginalization of women, both in their countries
and in the multilateral forums, means that our
countries and organizations, including the United
Nations, are functioning at half-capacity and are
deprived of the unique qualities, energies and
creativity that women would bring.” (ibid., p.12)

We have all already agreed that the root causes of
conflict are poverty, disease, lack of education, lack of
human and political rights and a lack of economic
opportunity and justice. We must now equally agree
that we cannot adequately address these problems if we
exclude over half of humanity from enjoying these
rights. Neither can we do so if we continue to prevent
womankind from participating in the process of finding
and implementing solutions.
As a minimum, we suggest that we must pay
special attention to the impact of armed conflicts on the
rights of women and girls and promote and implement
specific strategies to protect and assist women and girls
in armed conflicts. We must promote strategies that
maximize women’s participation in domestic, regional
and international conflict prevention, management and
resolution initiatives. The United Nations must set an
example by making sure women are represented
adequately at all decision-making levels. In addition,
we must promote and strengthen women’s participation
in
comprehensive
post-conflict
peace-building
initiatives, including in such areas as electoral,
constitutional, legal and judicial reforms.
In conclusion, let me say that it is my
delegation’s hope that today’s debate in the Security
Council will strengthen existing efforts in the United
Nations system, including in the General Assembly and
in the relevant United Nations agencies, to improve the
status of women globally.
My delegation would like to express its profound
thanks to the presidency of the Council for this month
for placing the issue of women and peace and security
on the agenda. We also welcome the transparent and
participatory approach adopted by the presidency this
month in arranging today’s debate. The imaginative use
of the Arria formula to hold yesterday’s consultations
between Council members and non-State actors from
international women’s rights organizations and other
human rights organizations is further welcome, as they
have much to offer our deliberations and decisions.
This is further evidence of the positive trend
towards the adoption of more open working methods
and procedures in the Security Council. We indeed
appreciate that.
The President: I thank the representative of
South Africa for his kind words addressed to the
Namibian delegation and to me.

9

S/PV.4208 (Resumption 1)

The next speaker is the representative of
Liechtenstein. I invite her to take a seat at the Council
table and to make her statement.
Mrs. Fritsche (Liechtenstein): At the outset, I
wish to express my delegation’s gratitude and
satisfaction to you, Mr. President, and to the
Government of Namibia for organizing today’s open
debate on women and peace and security. You have, in
addition, chosen 24 October, United Nations Day, for
this debate, thereby underscoring the commitment of
the Security Council to pay special attention to the role
of women in preventive diplomacy, armed conflict,
peacekeeping and peace-building.
I would also like to thank Angela King and
Noeleen Heyzer for their thought-provoking statements
and the suggestions contained therein.
The United Nations engagement in peace
operations has evolved from peacekeeping in its
traditional sense towards multidimensional peace
support operations. Despite this, the gender
considerations in peace processes have not been
adequately addressed. A full understanding of the
impact of armed conflict on women and girls is
necessary in order to effectively promote and maintain
international peace and security. Women and children
constitute a disproportionate number of civilians
affected by armed conflict. An estimated 80 per cent of
all internally displaced persons and refugees are
women and children. During armed conflict, women
and girls are threatened by rape, sexual exploitation,
trafficking and sexual humiliation. Every setting
presents risks, whether at home, while fleeing or in
camps for displaced persons. Sexual violence has
devastating effects on the life of women and children,
ranging from sexually transmitted diseases and
HIV/AIDS to humiliation and trauma.
Humanitarian assistance in armed conflict should
therefore include psychosocial and reproductive health
services, and relief workers have to be trained to
respond to needs of victims of sexual violence. My
delegation would welcome the establishment of
systems for reporting on sexual violence, abuse,
exploitation and trafficking of women and girls within
military and civilian populations, to be followed by
enforcement and
monitoring
mechanisms
for
peacekeeping personnel. It is, in our view, also
necessary to establish disciplinary and oversight
mechanisms in all peace support missions.

10

Peacekeeping personnel must meet the highest
standards of conduct. Training in international human
rights and humanitarian law, including gender training
and instruction on their responsibility towards civilian
communities, should be an integral part of the
preparatory process. We all know that violations
against women and children have also been committed
by United Nations personnel. These offences must be
investigated and the offenders punished.
The authorization or perpetration of sexual
violence during armed conflict constitutes a violation
of international law. If these violations happen on a
large scale or as a matter of policy, they constitute a
crime against humanity. Historic precedents have been
set by the International Criminal Tribunals for the
former Yugoslavia and for Rwanda. These Tribunals
have, for the first time in history, punished sexual
violence in a civil war and have classified rape as an
act of genocide. My delegation is very gratified at the
fact that the Statute of the International Criminal Court
will have the potential to protect and promote the
human rights of women and girls. The Statute also
addresses trauma counselling, rehabilitation and
compensation to the victims of war crimes and calls for
gender and child-sensitive court procedures.
Although the contribution of women in peacebuilding, peacemaking and conflict resolution is being
increasingly recognized, the role of women in
preventive diplomacy has so far been very limited. The
Secretary-General’s strategic plan of action (A/49/587)
calls for an increase in the participation of women at
decision-making levels in conflict resolution and peace
processes. The Beijing Declaration and Platform for
Action stress the need for an increased participation of
women in conflict resolution at decision-making levels.
The Beijing + 5 outcome document, inter alia,
encourages the involvement of women in decisionmaking at all levels and the achievement of gender
balance in the appointment of women and men with
full respect for the principle of equitable geographical
distribution, including as special envoys and special
representatives and the performance of good offices on
behalf of the Secretary-General, in matters relating to
peacekeeping, peace-building, and in operational
activities. The women Ambassadors to the United
Nations began to address this problem in 1996 by
establishing and updating a list of female candidates,
and we intend to continue our efforts to considerably
enhance the role of women in preventive diplomacy.

S/PV.4208 (Resumption 1)

In this context, my delegation welcomes the
Windhoek Declaration, issued on the tenth anniversary
of the United Nations Transition Assistance Group,
which proposes that an advisory board should be set up
within the Department of Peacekeeping Operations to
ensure that a comprehensive database as well as
existing lists of female candidates be given due
consideration. My delegation is furthermore of the
opinion that gender issues need to be mainstreamed
into the actions that will result from this debate and, in
particular, also in the implementation of the
recommendations contained in the Brahimi report,
which lacks a chapter on gender.
Every attempt towards democratization and
peace-building must be based on fundamental values,
including the principles of gender equality. Women
must therefore be participants in all peace processes
and at any stage of these processes. Today’s debate is a
concrete step towards realizing this goal.
The President: I thank the representative of
Liechtenstein for her kind words addressed to Namibia.
The next speaker on my list is the representative
of Singapore. I invite him to take a seat at the Council
and to make his statement.
Mr. Mahbubani (Singapore): Mr. President, few
leaders have had the honour and distinction of
presiding over both the General Assembly and the
Security Council in the same year. You belong to a
small, distinguished league. I am confident that your
unique experiences with both the key organs of the
United Nations will result in an unusually productive
month in the Council.
The decision of Namibia to place the issue of the
role of women in peace and security on the Council’s
agenda reflects Namibia’s keen awareness of the
impact of peace and security issues upon women. We
are equally pleased that the discussion will not be onedimensional. It will not reflect just women’s traditional
role as victims of war but also, more recently, as key
victors in several peace processes. The role of women
has changed significantly in the twentieth century, and
the Council should recognize this.
Clearly, over the course of human history, more
men than women have died in armed conflict. But
women have also suffered in countless ways. Mothers
grieve when they lose sons in battle; so do wives when
they lose husbands. We saw this most recently in

Bosnia when men were separated from women and
brutally slaughtered.
Women have also suffered more directly. Over the
ages, in armed conflicts women have been victims of
direct and immediate physical injury that involve rape,
forced prostitution, sexual slavery, forced pregnancy,
abduction and even slaughter. Women also make up the
majority of refugee and internally displaced
populations that result from the outbreak of conflicts.
Downstream consequences of sexual violations, loss of
male family members and eviction from their homes
impose incalculable burdens on women, and these may
last several years after the end of conflict.
Clearly, these barbaric practices must come to an
end. One of the greatest contributions of the twentieth
century the clear spelling out of the norms that should
govern armed conflict. But as the International
Committee of the Red Cross (ICRC) recently observed,
“If women are subject to so many of the
tragic repercussions of armed conflict, it is not
from any shortcoming in the rules protecting
them, but rather because the laws are not
observed. International humanitarian law grants
wide-ranging protection to women. There are
more than 560 articles in the Geneva Conventions
of 1949 and their Additional Protocols of 1977,
which protect both women and men, as civilians,
and also as combatants who have fallen into
enemy hands. Among these, more than 40 are of
specific concern to women.”
The tragedy we face today is that these norms
were written on the assumption that armed conflict
would take place between well-trained and welldisciplined armies which could be schooled in the rules
of war. Unfortunately many combatants today are
young and lack the basic rudiments of education. In a
speech to the Council in April this year, we quoted
from a booklet published by the ICRC entitled,
“International humanitarian law: Answers to your
questions”:
“The lack of discipline among belligerents, the
arming of the civilian population as weapons
flood the territory and the increasingly blurred
distinction between combatants and noncombatants often cause confrontations to take an
extremely brutal turn, in which there is little
place for the rules of law.”

11

S/PV.4208 (Resumption 1)

Realistically, we could do little at this stage to try
to educate such combatants on the civilized rules of
war. The only solution is for the international
community to deliver robust responses when major
infractions take place. This is too large a subject to be
covered in this debate. But we are pleased that the
Summit meeting of the Council endorsed in general the
Brahimi report. If the Council can now follow through
with deeds that match its words, all victims of armed
conflict, women as well as men and children, will
benefit enormously.
The resolve of the international community to
tackle the issue of impunity should be demonstrated by
meting out swift and effective justice to those who
violate universally accepted norms. Indeed, the death
penalty would be both an appropriate judicial response
and a key deterrent to prevent a recurrence. The
International Criminal Tribunals for the former
Yugoslavia and Rwanda, which the Council established
in response to the widespread violations of
international humanitarian law, have done much good
work. Unfortunately, many key perpetrators remain
unapprehended. Many have not even had charges filed
against them. The wheels of justice have to be seen to
be moving more swiftly if they are to provide any
deterrence at all.
One major change between the second half of the
twentieth century and earlier times was the growing
recognition that women can play an effective role in
ending or resolving conflict. You expressed this well,
Mr. President, when you addressed the gathering on the
occasion of International Women’s Day on 8 March
this year:
“Women know intimately the horrific warfare and
bloodshed that they face daily in conflict zones,
but they also know the conditions that need to be
met to ensure that the peace in their countries is
sustainable, equitable and just. Women and
children are the first victims of conflicts. Is it any
wonder, then, that women are uniting to end the
conflicts that destroy the lives of their loved ones,
as well as of their communities? Women are half
of every community. Are they, therefore, not also
half of every solution?” (GA/SM/157)
The United Nations Development Fund for
Women (UNIFEM) should be commended for
highlighting the significant contributions women have
made towards both achieving and consolidating peace.

12

In this regard, we also commend both Ms. Noeleen
Heyzer and Ms. Angela King for the excellent
statements they made earlier today. I would also
recommend that we read carefully UNIFEM’s
publication entitled “Women at the Peace Table:
Making a Difference”. It has captured well many
examples of the achievements of women all over the
world in fostering the conditions for peace and
stability. I will cite a few examples.
In South Africa, women formed a strong
Women’s National Coalition that cut across racial,
social and political lines, contributing in no small
measure to South Africa’s success in establishing a
democratic Government today. In Northern Ireland,
another women’s coalition, the Northern Ireland
Women’s Coalition, which drew its membership from
both the Catholic and Protestant communities, also
succeeded in galvanizing the grassroots and securing a
seat at the peace table. In Guatemala, women’s voices
and visibility in the peace process were achieved again
through the existence of a cross-party and crosssectoral women’s coalition. The exertions of their
sisters in Georgia, Palestine and Cambodia, often in
difficult and even hostile environments, have also led
to positive outcomes. This morning we saw a video
presentation of the determination of the women of
Burundi and elsewhere in their efforts to contribute to
the peace process. Their courage should set an example
for us all.
Having praised the contributions of women
towards peace, I hope that I will be forgiven for
introducing a slightly politically incorrect note. It is
true that women have often sought peace. But it is also
true that women have on occasion displayed equal
propensity to encourage human rights violations. When
they were not in positions of leadership, women have
sometimes, as wives, supported and participated in the
evil deeds of their husbands. As some of those present
may be mystified by these comments, let me explain
that we in South-East Asia have had direct experience
of this, as some of the wives of the Khmer Rouge
leaders were as brutal as their husbands during the
genocide in Cambodia. Lady Macbeth was certainly no
solitary exception. As we reflect on this issue, we may
have to acknowledge that neither vice nor virtue is
gender based, nor is it confined to young or old.
In considering how we can better harness the
potential of women playing a role in enhancing peace
and security, we should therefore be honest and

S/PV.4208 (Resumption 1)

realistic. In not all situations have women marched for
peace. Some have marched for war. We see this on our
CNN screens occasionally. To achieve real peace and
security, we must gain the commitment of both men
and women to enhance peace.
To our mind, the surest way of developing and
sustaining peace is to make all citizens of the society
stakeholders in peace. For this reason, development
issues cannot be divorced from peace. Those who live
in abject poverty, as many do, have no vested interest
in pursuing peace if peace fails to uplift them. The
temptation to loot, pillage, rape and murder grows
more acute when there is little to lose. But a population
that believes that tomorrow will be better than today
will be more inclined to pursue peace. Peace and
development should therefore be seen as two sides of
the same coin. Both women and men can and should
play an equally important role.
The President: I thank the representative of
Singapore for his kind words addressed to me and my
delegation.
Mr. Ahmad (Pakistan): I first express our
appreciation to you, Mr. President, for convening
today’s open debate on an important subject of interest
to all of us. We are particularly pleased to see you, as
Foreign Minister of a great country, Namibia, preside
over this Security Council meeting only a few weeks
after the Millennium Summit, which owed its success
to your diplomatic skills and true qualities of a freedom
fighter.
We all have a shared concern about the plight of
women in armed conflicts. This is an issue that has not
received adequate attention from the international
community. We therefore view the present initiative as
an important opportunity to reflect on issues
concerning the protection of women in conflict
situations and their role in conflict resolution, conflict
prevention and peace-building.
The issues raised in the background paper
circulated by Ambassador Andjaba and the elements
proposed for incorporation in the draft resolution
which — we are happy about the change in working
methods — will be considered by the Security Council
this afternoon, on the subject of women and peace and
security, are most pertinent. However, their detailed
consideration and implementation cannot be the
exclusive responsibility of the Security Council. The
Council can focus on some aspects that fall within its

domain. In fact, most of the issues covered in the
background paper are currently being discussed in the
Economic and Social Council and other relevant bodies
of the General Assembly. So, instead of duplicating our
efforts, we must focus our attention on strengthening
the existing mechanisms. Each organ of the United
Nations has its own defined sphere of responsibilities
that must be respected.
Mr. Andjaba took the Chair.
We all know that the Beijing Declaration and the
Platform
for
Action
contain
comprehensive
recommendations on women and armed conflicts.
Unfortunately, there is less enthusiasm about ensuring
implementation of the relevant provisions of the
Beijing Declaration. There is a need to ensure their
early and effective implementation. It would not be
prudent to start the process anew at a forum that does
not have the mandate to deal with all the relevant
issues in a comprehensive manner.
Having said that, my delegation notes with
concern that during the last decade the number of
conflicts has increased manifold. So has the
devastation that has been inflicted upon civilian
populations around the world, particularly women,
children and the elderly. In recent years a number of
United Nations reports have highlighted the suffering
of women and children in armed conflicts. This
catalogue of violations of human rights and
international humanitarian law is an affront to
humanity.
Violence against women has taken on myriad
shapes and forms, including sexual slavery, rape,
systematic rape, sexual abuse and forced pregnancies.
Displacement compounded by the loss of home and
property, poverty, family disintegration, separation and
other consequences of armed conflict is severely
affecting target populations, especially women and
children. Girls are also abducted or recruited, in
violation of international law, into situations of armed
conflict, including as combatants, sexual slaves or
providers of domestic services. The recommendations
contained in various reports on violence against women
and children should be implemented to improve their
plight in conflict situations.
Article 7 of the Universal Declaration of Human
Rights affirms that

13

S/PV.4208 (Resumption 1)

“All are equal before the law and are
entitled without any discrimination to equal
protection of the law.” (General Assembly
resolution 217 A (III))

Afghanistan. Instead of measures to address their
genuine humanitarian needs, sanctions have been
imposed on the people of Afghanistan that have further
compounded their suffering.

Article 55, subparagraph (c), of the Charter
stresses

We also cannot ignore the plight of Palestinian
women, and their agony, as they see their young sons
killed before their eyes — not for committing any
crimes, but for raising their voices for freedom, justice
and their right to self-determination.

“universal respect for, and observance of, human
rights and fundamental freedoms for all without
distinction as to race, sex, language, or religion.”
The Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of
Discrimination Against Women is a giant step towards
protection of the rights of women against all forms of
violence.
Unfortunately, civilians are subjected to
enormous suffering despite the existence of
comprehensive
international
legal
instruments.
Violations of the rights of women in conflict situations
are indeed violations of fundamental human rights and
principles of international humanitarian law. Respect
for these legal instruments needs to be ensured by all
the Member States of the United Nations through
intergovernmental processes. It cannot be imposed
from outside, nor can it be subjected to any imaginary
so-called international standards.
It is unfortunate that rape is used as a tactical
weapon of war to humiliate and weaken the morale of
the perceived enemy. This pernicious weapon is used to
terrorize a population or to force civilians to flee, as
has recently been practised in the territory of the
former Yugoslavia — particularly in Bosnia and
Herzegovina and in Croatia — and in the Great Lakes
region of Africa. Even today, rape is being used as a
weapon of war against innocent women and girls in
Jammu and Kashmir, where people are struggling for
their right to self-determination. Amnesty International
catalogued such incidents in Jammu and Kashmir as
early as 1993, highlighting that
“rape and ill-treatment of women are usually
reported to have taken place during counterinsurgency operations”.
In Afghanistan the reluctance on the part of the
international community to engage in the country’s
reconstruction and rehabilitation process continues to
compound the suffering of the civilian population,
particularly that of women and girls. Apparently, there
is a cultural bias when it comes to dealing with the
problems and issues relating to the womenfolk in

14

Sanctions imposed on other countries also need to
be revisited to minimize the suffering of civilian
populations, particularly the suffering of women and
children. Notably, the background paper on women and
peace and security and the proposed draft resolution do
not say anything about sanctions and their impact on
women and children. Due consideration must therefore
be given to this important aspect of the debate.
It has also been widely reported that poverty,
hunger and desperation in conflict situations may force
women and girls into prostitution, obliging them to
offer sex for food, shelter or safe conduct through war
zones. This aspect has not been highlighted in the
background paper that is under review in the Council
today.
The focus of the international community should
be
devoted
equally to
poverty
eradication,
development, conflict resolution and conflict
prevention so that crimes in any form or manifestation
against any section of a society, be it men or women,
are not allowed to take place in the first instance. The
Charter places a clear obligation on the Security
Council to uphold international peace and security.
There can be no two views on the fact that prevention
is better than cure. The Council therefore needs to act
to treat the disease itself, rather than to react to deal
with the symptoms subsequently — with the attendant
high costs in terms of widespread death and
devastation. In meeting its Charter obligations, the
Security Council must not only ensure prompt and
effective responses to crisis situations irrespective of
their geographical locations, but also avoid selectivity
in the implementation of its resolutions and the
application of different standards to conflicts in
different parts of the world.
In conclusion, may I reaffirm that Pakistan
remains committed to the peace, prosperity, progress
and development of peoples in all parts of the world.
We will continue to extend unflinching support and

S/PV.4208 (Resumption 1)

cooperation to achieve these goals, particularly the
alleviation of the sufferings of women and children in
armed conflicts around the world.
Lastly, I need not elaborate on the role of women
in my country. We have produced women heads of
Government, women leaders of opposition parties,
women elected leaders, women doctors, professors,
academics, scholars, newspaper editors and diplomats.
In order to see this reality, one need only look right
here.
The President: I thank the representative of
Pakistan for the kind words he addressed to my
Minister for Foreign Affairs and to the Namibian
delegation.
The next speaker is the representative of Japan. I
invite him to take a seat at the Council table and to
make his statement.
Mr. Akasaka (Japan): Having experienced
frequent outbreaks of regional conflict since the end of
the cold war, the international community has come to
realize the need to address major issues relating to
conflicts, such as the protection of innocent civilians in
armed conflict and the prevention and settlement of
conflicts, from a wider perspective and in a more
comprehensive manner, in order to put an end to the
scourge of armed conflicts in the new century. In this
context, for example, significant progress has been
made in the field of the protection of children during
and after conflicts through efforts to put emphasis on
that issue.
From that standpoint, Japan shares the view that a
gender perspective must be taken into account, and that
concrete issues such as the protection of women in
armed conflicts and their participation in peacemaking,
peacekeeping and peace-building should be further
discussed if progress is to be made in this area.
I should therefore like to pay high tribute to you,
Mr. President, for your thoughtful initiative in
convening this open debate. My delegation also
commends Ms. Angela King, Special Adviser on
Gender Issues and Advancement of Women, and Ms.
Noeleen Heyzer, Executive Director of the United
Nations Development Fund for Women (UNIFEM), for
their efforts in this regard.
This year, at the Beijing + 5 special session of the
General Assembly, the international community
reaffirmed its strong commitment to mainstreaming a

gender perspective in every area of human endeavour.
Among the efforts being made to follow up that
commitment, this discussion in the Security Council is
particularly timely and meaningful, as the issue of
conflict is the most critical issue that we have to tackle
in the twenty-first century.
In that context, we welcome the efforts already
made in this area, such as the participation of women
in the Burundi peacemaking process and the adoption
of the Namibia Plan of Action on the occasion of the
Windhoek seminar on mainstreaming a gender
perspective in multidimensional peace support
operations. I believe that, with these precious inputs,
our discussion today will lead us to an exploration of
further concrete actions in this area.
I would like to take this opportunity to state the
views of Japan on some important points relating to
this issue. First of all, there is a clear need to
strengthen efforts to provide protection to women and
girls in conflict situations. In view of the horrific
reality that we are facing, where innocent civilians
continue to be victimized in armed conflicts, the
protection of women and girls should be our paramount
concern. I would like to appeal to all the parties to
conflicts and to the international community as a whole
to form as clear a picture of the situation as possible,
face up to it and together take the measures necessary
to protect women and girls and to introduce the
viewpoint of women victims into the peacemaking
process.
The second point I would like to emphasize is the
importance of the role of women, especially in peacebuilding. Because women are such a vital part of every
grass-roots community, it is essential that they be
involved if the vicious circle of poverty and conflict is
to be broken and if rehabilitation is to be successful.
Japan has long attached special importance to the role
of women in addressing poverty, which is a root cause
of conflict, and for that reason has promoted the
Women in Development initiative that it launched at
the Fourth World Conference on Women.
In view of the need to enhance the participation
of women in the rehabilitation process, which makes an
important contribution to peace-building, Japan
actively supported the convening of a symposium on
empowerment
of
women
in
post-conflict
reconstruction, held by the United Nations
Development Programme (UNDP) in Tokyo last July.

15

S/PV.4208 (Resumption 1)

Further, Japan has been implementing many projects in
areas such as education, health and the economic
independence of women in countries in Asia and
Africa, such as Cambodia and Ethiopia, all of which
have been severely damaged as a result of conflict.
Japan intends to continue those efforts.
My third point is the importance of a
comprehensive approach to this issue, and the
concomitant need for cooperation among international
organizations,
Governments,
non-governmental
organizations and other partners of the international
community. Today’s debate should be a turning point
for us. We should move from a phase of advocacy to
one of concrete action. Japan is of the view that
relevant international organizations, such as UNIFEM,
that have gender expertise should strengthen their
efforts to study specific measures to achieve gender
mainstreaming in conflict prevention, peacemaking,
peacekeeping and peace-building, and to implement
programmes to assist women in the field.
Japan believes deeply that we should put
emphasis on a human-centred approach which gives
priority to respect for the life and dignity of every
human being in order to achieve in the coming century
an international society characterized by peace and
stability. We are convinced that greater participation by
women in the process of peacemaking, peacekeeping
and peace-building would greatly contribute to the
consolidation of peace and stability, as women are the
ones who have been experiencing a serious degradation
of life and dignity in armed conflict.
I would like to conclude my statement by
reaffirming Japan’s readiness to take an active part in
the efforts of the international community to address
this issue, guided by the Council’s debate here today.
The President: I thank the representative of
Japan for the kind words he addressed to the Namibian
delegation.
The next speaker is the representative of Cyprus.
I invite him to take a seat at the Council table and to
make his statement.
Mr. Zackheos (Cyprus): Although my delegation
aligns itself with the statement made on behalf of the
European Union, I would like to make a few additional
remarks. I would like at the outset to express my
appreciation to you, Mr. President, for convening this
open meeting of the Security Council on this most

16

important and relevant subject. This initiative of the
Namibian presidency confirms the principled and
important role that Namibia, and you personally, Sir,
play with respect to international issues and, in
particular, in the promotion of human rights. We
welcome this initiative as yet another step forward in
the efforts of the international community, as expressed
through open discussion in the Security Council, on
matters pertaining to conflict prevention, peacemaking,
peacekeeping and peace-building.
The most tragic aspect of armed conflict has been
the heavy toll that civilians usually bear when caught
between opposing armies. The proliferation of conflict
in many areas of our planet and the gross violations of
the most basic human rights of civilians have been a
major concern of the international community, as
testified to by the open debates that have taken place in
this very Chamber concerning the protection of
civilians in armed conflict, the protection of children
and the protection of humanitarian assistance to
refugees and others in conflict situations.
The most negative aspect of armed conflict, with
both short- and long-term effects, is the plight of the
most vulnerable groups of civilians, namely women
and children. During armed conflict, the effect on
families and traditional ways of life can be devastating.
Great numbers of women are not only under the
constant threat of sexual violence and death; but often
have to endure the loss of parents, children or husbands
and are forced to assume the role of main breadwinner
and carry the heavy economic burden of the survival of
their families.
It is imperative for the international community,
and constitutes a special duty of the Security Council,
to assist and protect these women and children. The
Security Council, in responding to such crises, should
always take into consideration their situation and
suffering, and pursue solutions that are based on its
resolutions. We hope that this open debate of the
Security Council will lead to practical measures on the
role of women in peace-building and on humanitarian
issues and the protection of women during
peacekeeping and post-conflict support operations.
One way to achieve this would be through the
establishment of an independent panel of experts with
the participation of the Secretariat, relevant agencies
and civil society.

S/PV.4208 (Resumption 1)

One of the areas on which my delegation places
utmost importance is the plight of refugees and
internally displaced persons. The painful experience of
the displacement of almost one third of the population
of my country in 1974 demonstrated to the Government
and the people of Cyprus the central role of women in
post-conflict and peace-building situations. Their role
in facing the adverse consequences of the invasion,
occupation and displacement and in rebuilding our
economy, despite their suffering, has been immense.
That is why we fully support the position that women’s
rights during and following armed conflict must be
safeguarded, and their participation in efforts to rebuild
war-torn societies supported by every means possible.
In this respect, we fully subscribe to the
recommendations proposed by the United Nations
Development Fund for Women (UNIFEM) and in the
significant report entitled “Impact of armed conflict on
children”, prepared by Ms. Graça Machel, to whom I
take this opportunity to express our deep appreciation.
Another issue which I would like to stress, with
regard to the positive developments that have taken
place in the last few years on the accountability of
human rights violators, is the question of impunity.
Cyprus warmly welcomes the efforts undertaken by the
community of nations to finally put an end to impunity,
as demonstrated in the inclusion, in the international
criminal tribunals for the former Yugoslavia and for
Rwanda, of the obligation to prosecute those
responsible for the crimes of rape and sexual violence
in civil war as perpetrators of grave breaches of
international humanitarian law. The inclusion, as a war
crime, of all forms of sexual violence against women in
the Rome Statute of the International Criminal Court
has been a major achievement in our common pursuit
to end impunity for these abhorrent crimes.
The Representative of the Secretary-General on
Internally Displaced Persons estimates that 40 million
people live today as refugees or internally displaced
persons. Close to 80 per cent of these people are
women and children. Their tragic situation and their
vulnerability do not usually stop with the end of armed
conflict. The vast majority of them continue to face the
threat of violations of their human rights long after the
conflict has ended.
The phenomena of sexual exploitation and
trafficking and child labour, including the use of
children as soldiers, are realities that we cannot ignore.

That is why it is of extreme importance that the rights
of women in post-conflict situations be secured through
constitutional means, so that the injustices and
suffering inflicted on them not be allowed to continue.
Their contribution to rebuilding their societies is
important and must be guaranteed.
One final point I would like to make concerns the
incorporation of the gender dimension in the approach
of the United Nations, its specialized agencies and
other actors involved in peacekeeping, peace-building
and reconciliation efforts associated with situations of
armed conflict. My delegation strongly supports the
inclusion of a gender perspective in the provision of
humanitarian aid and in the reconciliation efforts
following ceasefire agreements. We would also like to
pay tribute to the crucial role played by nongovernmental organizations in highlighting the issue
and in providing practical assistance on the ground.
Before concluding, I should also like to thank Ms.
Angela King and, through her, the Division for the
Advancement of Women, and Mrs. Noeleen Heyzer
and UNIFEM for their devotion and considerable
efforts in promoting the rights of women.
The President: I thank the representative of
Cyprus for the kind words he addressed to me and to
the Namibian delegation.
The next speaker inscribed on my list is the
representative of the Republic of Korea. I invite him to
take a seat at the Council table and to make his
statement.
Mr. Sun Joun-yung (Republic of Korea): Mr.
President, I would like to begin by offering my
delegation’s thanks to you for organizing this open
debate on the important issue of “Women and peace
and security”. Recalling last June’s twenty-third special
session of the General Assembly, entitled “Women
2000: gender equality, development and peace for the
twenty-first century,” my delegation welcomes today’s
meeting as a timely effort to build on the outcome of
the special session.
Although the threat of an armed conflict at the
global level has continued to diminish since the end of
the cold war, rampaging armed conflicts at the
regional, national and local levels have increased,
posing challenges to international peace and security.
Though armed conflicts affect both women and men,
the current patterns of conflicts make women and girls

17

S/PV.4208 (Resumption 1)

particularly vulnerable to numerous threats because of
their status in society and their gender. In most cases,
casualties among combatants are outnumbered by
civilian deaths, mostly women and children.
Increasingly, parties to a conflict even engage in
deliberate violence against women as a strategy of war
and terrorism. The fear of such violence has created a
mass flow of refugees and displaced persons, the
majority of whom are women, adolescent girls and
children.
Fortunately,
there
have
been
important
developments in the treatment of violence against
women in armed conflict. We welcome the Rome
Statute of the International Criminal Court, which took
gender concerns into account when defining genocide,
crimes against humanity, war crimes and crimes of
aggression. This Statute validates our agreement that
no impunity is to be granted for the perpetrators of
specific gender-related crimes.
I also appreciate the work of relevant United
Nations agencies, such as the Office of the United
Nations High Commissioner for Refugees, the United
Nations Children’s Fund, the United Nations
Development Fund for Women and the United Nations
High Commissioner for Human Rights for their
coordinated and dedicated efforts. Nor should we
forget the contributions of non-governmental
organizations in raising awareness about the situation
of women and girls in armed conflicts and in assisting
them.
Despite the progress that has been made so far,
much remains to be done to ensure gender-sensitive
justice, to address the specific needs of women affected
by armed conflicts and to increase the participation of
women
in
peacekeeping,
peace-building
and
reconciliation processes.
The relative absence of women in decisionmaking processes with regard to armed conflicts is also
a cause for concern. My delegation shares the view of
the Security Council that peace is inextricably linked
with equality between women and men, and that
women should play an equal part in maintaining peace
and security. We urge the Security Council to continue
to expand its involvement in this issue.
Having said that, I should now like to make a few
points which in our view deserve the urgent attention
and action of the international community. First of all,
we must ensure, without further delay, the full

18

participation of women at all levels of decision-making
and implementation in peacekeeping and peacebuilding. We encourage gender balance in peace
negotiations and in the appointment of special envoys
and representatives of the Secretary-General. We also
encourage States participating in peace negotiations to
include women representatives, in order to reflect the
special needs of women and girls.
Secondly, my delegation believes that United
Nations peacekeeping operations should pay more
attention to gender mainstreaming in their work. With
the expansion of the work of peacekeeping operations
in political affairs, public information, humanitarian
assistance and refugee return, among other areas, the
role of peacekeeping personnel in meeting women’s
and girls’ specific needs is also being enlarged. To
ensure the effective work of protecting and promoting
women’s needs and rights, specialized gender training
should be provided to all peacekeeping operation
personnel. In this respect, my delegation welcomes the
Secretariat’s efforts to provide Member States with
gender awareness guidelines and materials. In addition,
the number of female personnel in peacekeeping
operations, in particular those personnel addressing
women’s special needs, should be increased. The
Republic of Korea, for its part, has included women
officers in its peacekeeping operation missions and
plans to expand their number in the future.
Thirdly, considering that women are more likely
than men to be placed in refugee camps, we believe
that women refugees and displaced women should be
more involved in the design and management of
humanitarian activities so that they can benefit from
these activities as much as men do. To this end, we ask
the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner
for Refugees and other relevant United Nations
agencies to provide all women and girls in refugee
camps with appropriate health care and education and
to ensure their safety.
Without full gender equality and the advancement
of women, we cannot achieve the world envisioned in
the Charter of the United Nations. All Members should
make the utmost effort and fully cooperate with the
relevant United Nations agencies to effectively protect
women and girls in armed conflict, redress violations
of their human rights and empower women as equal
partners at every step of the process to achieve peace
and security. My delegation wishes to reaffirm the
strong commitment of the Republic of Korea to

S/PV.4208 (Resumption 1)

contribute to the efforts of the international community
to this end.
The President: I thank the representative of the
Republic of Korea for his kind words addressed to my
delegation.
The next speaker inscribed on my list is Mrs.
Krishna Bose, Member of Parliament and Chairperson
of the Parliamentary Standing Committee on External
Affairs of India. On behalf of the Council, I welcome
her and invite her to take a seat at the Council table and
to make her statement.
Mrs. Bose (India): We are very pleased to see
you, Sir, presiding over the Council. The subject
chosen for this debate is important to me as a woman
and as a politician whose interests lie in foreign policy
and security issues. We thank you for very thoughtfully
sending around to your colleagues a folder of
background reading which contains suggestions,
presumably made by the Secretariat, for Council
action.
In addressing a subject that is vast and complex, I
will limit myself, as I hope the Council will, to those
areas which are properly within its mandate: the impact
on women when peace breaks down, and their role in
conflict and its resolution.
The first point of concern must be that women
bear a disproportionately large share of the burden of
conflict, but have a marginal say in matters of war and
peace. That is perhaps a function of the gender
imbalance in our societies, which is reflected in
positions of power and influence. On International
Women’s Day this year, the President of the Council
issued a statement affirming that the equal access and
full participation of women in power structures and
their full involvement in all efforts for the prevention
and resolution of conflict were essential for the
maintenance and promotion of peace and security. I
thank the Council for those sentiments, but, looking
around this table, I should also like to say that a
Security Council dominated by men illustrates the
problem, not the solution.
The second point is, of course, where the equality
of the sexes — which we believe is a necessity — will
lead us. Women form such a large proportion of the
casualties of modern war because throughout the last
century military doctrines no longer distinguished
between combatants and civilians. From the Second

World War onwards, civilians became preferred targets
both because they were more vulnerable and because it
was believed that the national will had to be broken to
win a total war. Paradoxically, women became the
favoured victims of modern war because they were not
combatants.
Does the answer lie, therefore, in giving women
the dubious right to fight alongside their menfolk in
modern armies? Throughout history, women have taken
up arms when the need has been desperate. The Rani of
Jhansi led our first War of Independence in 1857, and
died fighting. Kaipkire of the Herero led her people in
battles against European slave traders. Those, however,
and others like them, were women who took up arms to
fight against injustice. We need to consider the impact
on our societies, and on their tendency to war, if
women become part of and glorify the military culture.
Who should women take as their model — Lysistrata,
using her femininity to force men from war, or the
Amazon, joining and beating men at their own bloody
game? A generation ago, two psychologists, Eleanor
Maccoby and Carol Jacklin, established that while
certain gender stereotypes could not be proved, one
could: men were the more aggressive sex. In every
culture, the organized violence of war and conflict has
been a male preserve. That is a steel purdah in which
we can leave our men.
There is also the question of the technology of
war. Until the two world wars, weapons were heavy
and hard to use, designed for soldiers who had to meet
minimum physical standards and be trained in their
use. In total war, weapons had to be designed for
conscripts who were not fit and had little or no
training; they became light and simple to use. As Graça
Machel pointed out in her study on children and armed
conflict, light automatic weapons were what made it
easy and tempting to use child soldiers. If women
become a significant percentage of armies, it is a
foregone conclusion that weapons will be adapted even
more to suit them, and what is light enough for a
woman to use is also very well suited for a young boy
or girl. These new weapons will make for even more
indiscriminate use and could very well increase the use
of children in conflict.
These are not academic points, because in the
Western societies whose norms tend to dominate
thinking at the United Nations, women are now
increasingly permitted by law to go into combat. At the
United Nations, including in this Council, there are

19

S/PV.4208 (Resumption 1)

repeated calls for a gender balance in the composition
of peacekeeping forces, which, as the Brahimi report,
prepared by a Panel dominated by men, has pointed
out, increasingly go into situations where robust
military action might be needed. Is it in the interest
either of women or of peace, or of gender equality, for
women to embroil themselves in conflict, even if it is
in the cause of the United Nations? We have problems
enough with the feminization of poverty; we need not
feminize violence. It would be much better, surely, if
women had a larger and more visible role in helping
the United Nations to resolve conflicts, for instance, as
special representatives of the Secretary-General. This
the Council can and should encourage.
I want to make one more point about
peacekeeping practices. The Council has decided that
AIDS is a threat to security, and peacekeepers must all
be issued contraceptives by the United Nations.
Unfortunately, as the United Nations knows, to its cost,
a large number of the troops it fields are poorly trained;
others, in the 1990s, trafficked in women. Blue
Helmets might very well now believe that if the United
Nations is giving them contraceptives, they are
expected to use them. AIDS has never been a problem
in any United Nations peacekeeping operation; the
exploitation of women unfortunately has. The
Council’s decision could make this worse.
Feminist lawyers argue that human rights law and
international humanitarian law do not offer enough
protection to women. This is a bit extreme; women’s
rights and needs have received the attention they
deserve in the codification of international law. I do
agree that there are loopholes even in the much
stronger walls of legal protection that have been raised
over the last 50 years, and these must be closed.
However, insofar as these are treaty-based protections,
action must be taken within the terms of these treaties,
and by the States parties. Otherwise, in seeking to
strengthen law, we would be undermining it. Therefore,
unless there are treaties that give the Security Council a
role in their implementation, we would urge the
Council not to assume to itself rights and
responsibilities that it does not have.
There is a further point, which we have made in
this Council before. By definition, it is States that are
parties to the treaty-based system of international law.
By and large, they respect them, and when they do not,
penalties arise, through the provisions of the treaties.
When their actions gravely threaten peace and security,

20

sanctions can be brought against them by action in this
Council. The most egregious crimes against women in
times of conflict, however, have been and are
committed by irregular forces, often warring against
Governments; they obey no laws and are, as experience
has shown throughout the 1990s, much more immune
to sanctions than Governments are. How, in practical
terms, will the Council tackle these forces, which are
responsible for the bulk of the crimes that continue to
be committed against women?
Situations of conflict vary. Each has its own
causes and consequences. Clearly, there cannot be offthe-shelf remedies or panaceas. We need to take
practical and effective steps to mitigate the impact of
conflict on women and to enhance their ability to
restore and preserve peace. The Namibia Plan of
Action on Mainstreaming a Gender Perspective in
Multidimensional Peace Support Operations has many
useful elements. We support the call in the Windhoek
Declaration of 31 May 2000 urging the SecretaryGeneral to ensure that appropriate follow-up measures
are taken to implement this Plan of Action, in
consultation with Member States.
The World Bank estimates that by 2015 the world
will have more than 1.9 billion poor, most of them
women. Globalization has affected both men and
women, but women bear the double burden of
inequality and marginalization. Empowering them is
therefore both crucial and urgent. The Council will
remember that the theme of the special session of the
General Assembly in June this year was “Women 2000:
gender equality, development and peace for the twentyfirst century”. In considering the role of women in
peace and security, the Council will, I am sure, bear in
mind this wider perspective of the empowerment of
women.
This may well be the last statement we will make
in the Security Council before Namibia completes its
current two-year term. We would therefore like to place
on record our very warm appreciation for the work of
the Namibian delegation in the Council, and for the
courageous and independent stand Namibia has taken
on difficult issues on its agenda.
The President: I thank the Member of
Parliament and Chairperson of the Parliamentary
Standing Committee on External Affairs of India for
her kind words addressed to my delegation.

S/PV.4208 (Resumption 1)

The next speaker inscribed on my list is the
representative of New Zealand, whom I invite to take a
seat at the Council table and to make his statement.
Mr. Powles (New Zealand): May I congratulate
you, Mr. President, on taking the initiative of holding
this timely and relevant open debate, and also join the
previous speaker in congratulating your delegation
generally on its performance during its presidency. I
would also like to recognize the substantial
contribution to this debate made by Ms. King and Ms.
Heyzer this morning.
I have the honour to make this statement on
behalf of the countries of the Pacific Island Forum
represented in New York — namely, Australia, Fiji, the
Federated States of Micronesia, the Marshall Islands,
Papua New Guinea, Samoa, Solomon Islands, Tonga,
Vanuatu and my own country, New Zealand.
The past few years have seen increasing
recognition of the many roles of women in relation to
peace and security, and the effects on women of armed
conflict. The rights of women, their empowerment and
the maintenance of peace and security are
fundamentally linked. The Beijing Declaration notes
that
“Women’s
empowerment
and
their
full
participation on the basis of equality in all
spheres of society, including participation in the
decision-making process and access to power, are
fundamental for the achievement of equality,
development and peace”. (A/CONF.177/20/Rev.1,
Annex I, para. 13)
It also recognizes the leading role that women have
played in the peace movement and that women’s full
participation in decision-making, conflict prevention
and resolution and all other peace initiatives is
essential to the realization of lasting peace. In other
words, women have both a key interest and a key role
in the maintenance of peace and security.
The Beijing + 5 review reaffirmed the importance
of gender-sensitivity and analysis in assessing the
impact of conflict, in working with those affected by it
and in action to bring about lasting peaceful solutions.
Beijing + 5 also recognized that situations of
armed conflict are inextricably linked to violations of
women’s human rights, including through violence
against women. It was noted that such violence was
often of a sexual nature. Our delegations welcome the

recognition of the seriousness of such acts in the
Statute of the International Criminal Court, which
makes certain forms of violence against women war
crimes and crimes against humanity.
The differential impacts of conflict on women,
and the important role women have in peace-building,
have been apparent from experience in the Pacific
region. Women have disproportionately borne the
effects of conflicts in the region, such as the
secessionist crisis that stretched from 1989 to 1998 on
the Papua New Guinea island of Bougainville.
Women’s insistence that peaceful means be found to air
grievances and attain a durable peace has been a
constant underlying strength of the Bougainville peace
process.
Women’s groups in the Solomon Islands have
played a key role in bringing the parties together and
maintaining the momentum that culminated in the
recent settlement agreed in Australia at Townsville. We
hope they and other members of civil society will
continue to be involved closely in the peace-building
process.
In these countries, as in the aftermath of recent
events in Fiji, women’s full participation in peacebuilding is essential.
A gender-sensitive approach to peacemaking,
peacekeeping and peace-building is essential and
underlines the importance of ensuring adequate gender
representation in all areas of the United Nations work
dealing with peace and security issues. While the
number of women serving in peace and humanitarian
operations has been growing in recent years, the
number of women employed in professional and policy
positions continues to be low. We urge the SecretaryGeneral to work to achieve gender equity throughout
the Secretariat, including in the Department of
Peacekeeping Operations, and to ensure that sufficient
women officers and gender expertise are included in
United Nations peace processes and operations and
fact-finding missions. In this regard we welcome, as
some others have today, the Brahimi report’s
recommendation
regarding
equitable
gender
distribution in the appointment of mission leaders.
Accordingly we hope that Member States will
incorporate a gender perspective into their decisions on
the implementation of the report.
In particular we are concerned by the complete
absence of women envoys or special representatives

21

S/PV.4208 (Resumption 1)

and encourage the Secretary-General to urgently
address this imbalance.
I would now like to say a few words on behalf of
my own delegation only.
New Zealand was proud to host the
Commonwealth South Pacific Gender Symposium on
Peace and Politics in June of this year. The participants
noted that women and children suffer the impacts of
violent conflict disproportionately — yet they are often
the ones left to cope with these impacts. The
symposium recognized women’s roles as mediators and
leaders for peace and called upon Governments to
increase women’s participation in the process of peacebuilding. Participants considered it essential that
gender and conflict training be provided for armed
forces and police. New Zealand strongly supports this
proposal and commends the Secretary-General’s efforts
to include gender affairs officers in operations such as
the United Nations Transitional Administration in East
Timor (UNTAET). Through their work, the rights of
women and girls are being promoted in all areas of
UNTAET’s activities.
The Commonwealth Symposium also noted the
increase in domestic violence during armed conflict
and the need to address this during and after the
conflict. We are pleased to note that the police training
curriculum developed by UNTAET in East Timor
includes modules on human rights, including women’s
human rights, and that recruitment for the East Timor
Police Academy has attracted a substantial and
growing proportion of women. This should help to
ensure gender-sensitive perspectives in the local police
force and attention to women’s well-being in situations
of domestic and wider violence.
Women and children also tend to suffer
disproportionately
from
the
imposition
of
comprehensive economic sanctions. As we noted
earlier this year, New Zealand supports “smart
sanctions” to reduce the incidence of humanitarian
suffering and mitigate any unintended negative
consequences, particularly on women and children. The
Council should also encourage impact-assessment
studies before, during and after the imposition of
sanctions to ensure that their effects are appropriately
focused and monitored.
In conclusion, the Pacific Islands Forum
delegations appreciate the opportunity to emphasize the
need to integrate a gender perspective into this

22

Council’s work. A dual approach is needed. First,
gender issues must be mainstreamed into all aspects of
United Nations activities for the maintenance of peace
and security. Secondly, women’s participation in those
activities must be improved. Today’s open debate is a
welcome step towards achieving those goals, and we
hope that the Council will formulate an innovative and
comprehensive programme for progress in these two
very important respects.
The President: I thank the representative of New
Zealand for his statement and for his kind words
addressed to me and my delegation.
The next speaker is the representative of
Zimbabwe. I invite him to take a seat at the Council
table and to make his statement.
Mr. Muchetwa (Zimbabwe): I wish to
congratulate you, Sir, on your initiative to convene a
meeting of the Security Council on such an important
subject as “Women and Peace and Security”. Your
Government and country are well known for providing
leadership and a good example in promoting an active
and visible policy of mainstreaming a gender
perspective into all policies and programmes.
Today’s subject matter lies at the very centre of
our endeavours to promote the culture of peace in
human society. Rather than being treated as an agenda
item to be ticked off the Council’s work programme at
the end of this meeting, this issue must be pursued on a
continuing basis, and can be ignored only at our peril.
When war breaks out, invariably we all pay a cost
as individuals, families and societies, and as nations
and members of the international community. Every
occurrence of an armed conflict is a serious indictment
of humanity. War is, in fact, a dehumanizing
experience. To the extent that armed conflict is a
challenge to all of humanity, everything relating to
peace and security becomes the responsibility of all of
us.
Today’s specific reference to “women and peace
and security” reflects our acknowledgement of the
particular vulnerabilities of women in conflict
situations. It also reflects our acknowledgement of
current inequalities in decision-making and power
structures and, happily, our sincere endeavour to
address that untenable condition.
That women have everything to lose and an
unbearable cost to pay in the wake of armed conflict

S/PV.4208 (Resumption 1)

establishes an undisputed mandate and role for them in
all matters of peace and security. Unfortunately, and as
correctly observed in the Windhoek Declaration of 31
May 2000 on the tenth anniversary of the United
Nations Transition Assistance Group:
“So far, women have been denied their full role in
these efforts, both nationally and internationally,
nor has the gender dimension in peace processes
been adequately addressed.”
Every episode of war is accompanied by
chronicles of horrendous assaults on the dignity and
humanity of women.
Dastardly as it is, the victimization of womenfolk
has even been employed as a tool for the perpetration
of war in some cases. The humanitarian fallout of
armed
conflict
has
almost
always
been
disproportionately burdensome on women as refugees,
as displaced persons or as traumatized heads of
households with nothing but debris for a new
beginning. Nobody can understand, let alone address
this fallout better than women themselves.
There is a glaring need for mechanisms that
enhance the protection of women and girls in conflict
situations. Current statistics show that more than three
quarters of all internally displaced persons and
refugees are women and children. My delegation
therefore supports Security Council calls upon all
concerned to refrain from committing human rights
abuses in conflict situations, to respect international
humanitarian law and to promote non-violent forms of
conflict resolution and a culture of peace.
However, it is obvious that preventive measures,
which have the potential to resolve disputes before they
erupt into violent confrontations, offer the best possible
protection to all members of society. In this regard, it is
crucial that we recognize the important role of women
in the prevention and resolution of conflicts and in
peace-building. The organized involvement of women
at the grass-roots and other levels makes them the
linchpins of any early-warning mechanism.
This meeting offers us an opportunity to once
again call upon the United Nations and the
international community at large to assist and
cooperate with regional and subregional arrangements,
such as the Organization of African Unity’s Mechanism
for Conflict Prevention, Management and Resolution,
as they seek to build their capacity and develop

common indicators for early warning, taking into
account women and gender issues.
While distant international actors have tended to
highlight only political and economic disruptions in the
aftermath of armed conflict, the victims of war often
wake up to social disorientation and disorder. In these
collapsed communities, the role of women in reestablishing and preserving social order is unparalleled.
As primary and continuing educators both in their
families and in their communities, women play an
important role in fostering a culture of peace in strifetorn societies. We call for the promotion and
sustenance of this role on a continuing basis in order to
prevent the resurgence or escalation of conflict, so that
the culture of peace is inculcated in current and future
generations. This constitutes a sure way of planting the
seeds of a sustainable peace.
While women are not necessarily better
connected to the grass roots or more committed to
conveying the concerns of marginalized people, and
while there is no evidence to suggest that women at the
peace table are more committed than men to promoting
the greater good of the population at large, women are
more likely than men to have arrived at the peace table
via civil activism, often with first-hand experience of
the brutal consequences of violent conflict. Both men
and women suffer during war, but women are more
likely to be the targets of gender-based violence.
Furthermore, the direct participation of women at the
peace table is the most secure way to ensure that
women’s demands are incorporated into the
agreements.
The maintenance and promotion of international
peace and security cannot be realized without fully
understanding the impact of armed conflict on women
and girls, without effective institutional arrangements
to guarantee their protection and without women’s full
participation in the peace process. We are pleased to
note that, in many parts of the world representing all
continents, from Africa to the Middle East and Asia,
from Latin America to Europe, women have not waited
to be invited to the peace table, but have risen to meet
the challenge, with an impact that has been, in some
cases, nothing short of legendary. While women clearly
need access to the peace table in order to advance
towards the goal of gender equality, the peace table
also requires women’s participation to truly uphold the
principle of democracy and to lay the foundations for
sustainable peace.

23

S/PV.4208 (Resumption 1)

The President: I thank the representative of
Zimbabwe for his kind words addressed to my country
and to my delegation.
The next speaker inscribed on my list is the
representative of Indonesia. I invite him to take a seat
at the Council table and to make his statement.
Mr. Widodo (Indonesia): I have the honour to
address the Security Council in the debate on the issue
of women and peace and security. Allow me first to
express my appreciation to you, Sir, for your initiative
on this issue as President of the Security Council for
the month of October.
I would like to welcome the statements delivered
earlier by the Secretary-General, Mr. Kofi Annan; by
the Assistant Secretary-General and Special Adviser on
Gender Issues and Advancement of Women, Ms.
Angela King; and by the Executive Director of the
United Nations Development Fund for Women
(UNIFEM), Ms. Noeleen Heyzer.
The issue of women and peace and security is
among the paramount items on the global agenda and,
in fact, has been addressed over several decades. At the
international conferences on women, the issue of
women and peace was taken up as early as the Nairobi
World Conference to Review and Appraise the
Achievements of the United Nations Decade for
Women and has since been more than adequately
considered in United Nations forums, such as in the
annual meetings of the Commission on the Status of
Women and of the Third Committee of the General
Assembly, and also by various United Nations bodies,
such as UNIFEM and the United Nations Educational,
Scientific and Cultural Organization (UNESCO).
At the Fourth World Conference on Women in
Beijing in 1995, it was clearly recognized that the
larger goals of equality, development and peace could
not be achieved without the incorporation of the
women’s perspective at all levels of decision-making.
One of the important steps taken on that occasion was
to stress that women’s involvement in decision-making
was not only a question of quotas for women, but a
process that also entails increased gender sensitivity in
general, requiring appropriate training and more
research on gender issues.
My delegation would also like to draw attention
to the efforts that have been made at the regional level
to address this issue. We commend the work that has

24

been accomplished under the auspices of the Economic
and Social Commission for Asia and the Pacific
(ESCAP), especially in convening the regional
preparatory meeting for the follow-up of the Beijing
Conference on Women in June 2000, which, inter alia,
highlights peace processes with action to encourage the
full participation of women at all levels of decisionmaking
in
conflict
resolution,
peacekeeping,
peacemaking and preventive diplomacy.
We also welcome the initiative of ESCAP and
UNESCO to convene a Regional Conference on Asian
Women for a Culture of Peace, to be held in Hanoi in
December this year. The plan of action to be adopted at
that Conference is expected to promote equal
participation in peacekeeping, peacemaking and
preventive diplomacy. Moreover, it will outline the
contribution of women to a culture of peace and
sustainable development in Asia. We are confident that
this forum will provide a comprehensive assessment of
Asian women’s political, social and economic
empowerment and the educational requirements needed
to strengthen their capacities to transform societies
towards a culture of peace.
Let me underscore that violence against women
should remain at the forefront of all agendas
concerning the situation of women and should be
regarded as a criminal offence. In that regard, I would
note that Indonesia has adopted a “zero tolerance”
policy on violence against women, and we are working
with national women’s groups, law enforcement and
legislators to comprehensively address this serious
problem. In fact, the State Minister for Women’s
Empowerment officially announced a joint State and
community proclamation to eliminate violence against
women, involving the Vice President, all Cabinet
ministers
and
parliamentarians,
including
representatives of national and regional groups. The
international community and regional and national
groups should no longer accept the committing of acts
against women with impunity. My delegation
underlines the importance of such national efforts to
address violence against women receiving the full
support of the international community.
My delegation underlines that this issue should be
addressed not only from the perspective of treating
women as victims of armed conflicts, but also as
makers of peace. Although historically women have
maintained the family structure under the most difficult
of circumstances and have very often assumed the role

S/PV.4208 (Resumption 1)

of head of household, there is still a lack of
participation of women in the peace process. The
burden is disproportionately borne by women when
peace breaks down, and seldom are women given a
visible role in the decision-making process for making
and maintaining peace.
I would like to note that one of the strategic
objectives of the Beijing Fourth World Conference on
Women is to increase the participation of women in
conflict resolution at decision-making levels and to
protect women living in situations of armed conflict
and other conflicts or under foreign occupation. While
this goal must be pursued at the national level, it is
important also to pursue it within the United Nations
itself, with the appointment of women to senior posts
and with equal participation in peace processes and
conflict resolution. Indonesia therefore joins all those
who call for a concerted effort by the international
community to increase the participation of women in
negotiations on conflict resolution and in decisionmaking positions at both national and international
levels.
The Security Council itself could consider the
importance of injecting the gender dimension into its
decisions on conflict resolution and of its resolutions
providing for a clear mandate on gender
mainstreaming. With regard to fact-finding missions,
the Council could include gender issues in their terms
of
reference.
Likewise,
the
Department
of
Peacekeeping Operations could provide gendersensitivity training for peacekeepers in the field and
foster an awareness of the traumatic circumstances
faced by women.
In considering the issue of women and peace and
armed conflict we must not lose sight of the need to
also address the root causes of conflicts and the link
between social and economic development and peace
and stability — especially so given the fact that women
are disproportionately burdened by poverty. There is a
need to develop and strengthen strategies and
initiatives to reduce women’s poverty levels and to
protect women from the rapid changes inherent in
globalization.
In addressing the overall issue of women and
peace and security, Indonesia would agree that
measures for that purpose could be developed through
close cooperation between the Security Council, the
General Assembly and the Economic and Social

Council, noting that none of these organs is equipped
to exclusively and comprehensively deal with these
issues.
In concluding, while we support the initiative of
the United Nations to deliberate on any areas relating
to peace and security, we do hope that its activities will
not duplicate those of other intergovernmental bodies,
but rather will serve to complement those efforts.
The President: I thank the representative of
Indonesia for his kind words addressed to my
delegation.
The next speaker is the representative of the
United Republic of Tanzania. I invite him to take a seat
at the Council table and to make his statement.
Mr. Mwakawago (United Republic of Tanzania):
It gives my delegation particular pleasure to see you,
Sir, presiding over this open debate on women and
peace and security. My delegation warmly welcomes
the convening of this meeting and hopes that the
outcome of this historic debate will contribute to a
better understanding of the gender dimension of peace
processes.
It is significant that in recognition of the
importance that your country attaches to this issue, the
seminar on “Mainstreaming a Gender Perspective in
Multidimensional Peace Support Operations” was held
in Windhoek from 29 to 31 May 2000. In this regard
my delegation supports the Namibia Plan of Action and
the call made to the Secretary-General to ensure that
appropriate follow-up measures are undertaken to
implement it.
This debate on women, peace and security is an
important reminder to all of us of the need to resolve
conflicts, particularly those in Africa and elsewhere
which are of grave concern to all of us. Due to these
conflicts, about six million Africans are refugees and
over 15 million people are displaced, between 60 and
80 per cent of whom are women and children.
The 2000 Machel review points out, in chapter 5,
that:
“During armed conflict, women and girls are
continually threatened by rape, domestic
violence, sexual exploitation, trafficking, sexual
humiliation and mutilation.”
They are at risk in all settings – be it at home, in flight
or in camps. In some cases, systematic rape and terror

25

S/PV.4208 (Resumption 1)

are used as weapons of war. After having been
subjected to such atrocities, they are left with scars that
take longer to heal.
There is no denying that it is women who
shoulder the responsibility of supporting their families
and communities. Women serve alongside their male
counterparts in times of war. It is also women who
serve at the forefront of peace movements. Under these
circumstances, it is evident that we cannot continue
excluding women from conflict resolution processes.
Expanding the role of women in this area is imperative,
not only to address inequities but also to ensure that
our societies benefit from their approaches to
preventing conflicts, solving conflicts and building
peace.
Being
direct
victims
of
violence
and
discrimination, women have gained a great
understanding of the need to address peace
comprehensively. It is encouraging to note that given
the prevalence of conflicts, particularly in Africa today,
women have taken some initiatives to promote peaceful
resolution of conflicts and to generate a culture of
peace. In this context, the role of Burundian women in
the peace process in their country — and the
recognition of that role by President Nelson Mandela,
the Facilitator of the Burundi peace process — should
serve as an example and as a source of inspiration to
the international community. It is the hope of my
delegation that the Council will adopt a resolution that
gives due weight to the role that women can play in
peace negotiations and accord them due recognition.
The international community needs, therefore, to agree
on a framework that guarantees women that right.
Both the final outcome document of the twentythird special session of the General Assembly entitled
“Women 2000: gender equality, development and peace
for the twenty-first century” and the Millennium
Summit Declaration place emphasis on shared
responsibility to maintain international peace and
security. On the occasion of International Women’s
Day on 8 March, the then President of the Security
Council, Ambassador Chowdhury of Bangladesh,
observed in a statement to the Press:
“Members of the Council note that although
women have begun to play an important role in
conflict resolution, peacekeeping and peacebuilding, they are still under-represented in
decision-making in regard to conflict. If women

26

are to play an equal part in security and
maintaining peace, they must be empowered
politically and economically, and represented
adequately at all levels of decision-making, both
at the pre-conflict stage and during hostilities, as
well as at the point of peacekeeping, peacebuilding, reconciliation and reconstruction.”
In reiterating this position, we call on the international
community and Governments to intensify efforts aimed
at the realization of the objective set out in that
statement, including the enhancement of the role of
women in various phases of the transition to peace and
post-conflict reconstruction.
The President: I thank the representative of the
United Republic of Tanzania for the kind words he
addressed to my delegation.
The next speaker inscribed on my list is the
representative of Australia. I invite her to take a seat at
the Council table and to make her statement.
Ms. Wensley (Australia): Thank
President, for organizing this open debate.

you,

Mr.

As violence continues in the Middle East - and
the United Nations and its Member States struggle to
service a growing number of peace operations around
the world — some may wonder about the value of the
Council holding a thematic debate such as this. What
does it really achieve?
Well,
worthwhile
participate.

my
and

delegation
welcomes

certainly thinks
the opportunity

it
to

We consider it valuable for several reasons. First,
it contributes to the ongoing process of opening up the
Council, not just to non-members, but to new ways of
thinking about what constitute threats to international
peace and security and, more important, how to deal
with them.
Secondly, it helps us to move forward our broad
agenda for the advancement of women, raising
awareness of gender factors, moving consideration of
so-called women’s issues out of the enclaves of the
Third Committee and the Commission on the Status of
Women and into the central, vital organs of the United
Nations.
Thirdly, this thematic debate should assist the
United Nations in dealing with a range of other major
challenges that it is confronting. There are real and

S/PV.4208 (Resumption 1)

practical linkages to be made here with implementation
of the Millennium Summit report and of the Brahimi
report on peace operations; with the effort to establish
the International Criminal Court; with the United
Nations development agenda; and with the efforts to
reform the United Nations and make it more effective.
This debate could inform our thinking on how to deal
with all these major areas of concern.
Of course, we are not starting from scratch. The
building blocks are there, going back to the
codification of the laws of armed conflict in the 1949
Geneva Conventions and their additional Protocols of
1977, in which the special needs of women in
situations of armed conflict, both as combatants and as
civilians, were recognized through clauses providing
for their special protection.
As so many of the preceding speakers in the
debate have recognized, the negotiation of the Statute
of the International Criminal Court represented a
quantum leap forward, recognizing specific crimes
against women as both war crimes and crimes against
humanity.
But I want to focus more today on women not so
much as victims of armed conflict, as sufferers, as
vulnerable people whose rights need protecting, but as
contributors and active participants in problem solving.
This is the important direction in which our thinking,
as an international community, is evolving and where
the Council can bring much needed momentum and
muscle.
Just as we came to recognize — not so long
ago — the critical link between gender and
development, and to recognize that achieving
sustainable
development
required
the
active
participation and involvement of both women and men
in the development process, so we are moving, I think
relatively rapidly, to recognition that the same, vital
linkage exists in relation to effective conflict
resolution, peacemaking, peace-building and postconflict activities.
As we have heard, the Council itself gave a
valuable boost to this in March this year, in the
statement it issued on International Women’s Day,
when it recognized publicly the link between peace and
equality between men and women. Today’s debate
builds on that acknowledgement - that equal access and
full participation of women in power structures and
their full involvement in all efforts for the prevention

and resolution of conflicts are essential for the
maintenance and promotion of peace and security. The
Windhoek Declaration of May 2000 and the Namibia
Plan of Action on “Mainstreaming a Gender
Perspective in Multidimensional Peace Support
Operations”, which were informed by the laborious
three-year study conducted by the Division for the
Advancement of Women and by the Department of
Peacekeeping Operations, were another very important
step. Australia certainly can support many of their key
conclusions and recommendations: that the gender
dimensions of peace processes have not been
adequately recognized; that women have so far been
denied their full role in national and international
peacekeeping and peacemaking operations; that the
mandates of United Nations preventive peace missions,
peacekeeping operations and peace-building should
include provisions for women’s protection and address
gender issues; and that peace support operations should
include appropriately staffed and integrated gender
units and gender advisers.
The recent review on war-affected children by
Graça Machel is also very important. A new chapter
that she added to the review, on the role of women and
the peace process, recognized that building peace from
the grass-roots level is an important aspect of women’s
participation — that even as they are trying to hold
their families together in war and post-war conditions,
women are creating and sustaining peace at the
community level. But this chapter went further, to
argue that the role of women must go beyond this
informal grass-roots level; that women have potential
to make a greater contribution to peacemaking and
peace-building; and that they should be given an active
role in the formal processes of conflict resolution and
post-conflict reconstruction. I am very happy that so
many speakers in the debate have picked up on this
new chapter.
So the gaps — and the possibilities — in relation
to women’s participation have been identified; the
linkages are becoming more evident and acknowledged
by authoritative voices; the lessons learned are being
examined and placed before the United Nations system
and before Member States; and the calls to action — to
factor women into the peace and security equation in
new ways — are loud and becoming louder.
The question is: how do we, how should we, heed
them?

27

S/PV.4208 (Resumption 1)

Australia believes there are a number of practical
steps that can be taken. We are applying these in our
own development assistance programmes, in our region
in particular. I do not want to take the time of the
Council to go into details here, but we would be happy
to share our experience in programmes in Bougainville,
Solomon Islands and East Timor, which have been
designed to support the role of women in peace
processes, all the while operating alongside other
programmes to empower women and to provide greater
protection for them in situations of armed conflict.
But beyond our national efforts, we want to see a
more deliberate and concentrated effort at the regional
and international levels to increase women’s
participation in peacemaking and peace-building
operations. At the very top of the spectrum, renewed
attention should be given to the consideration of
qualified women for appointment as special
representatives and deputy special representatives of
the Secretary-General and as senior field staff for peace
support operations. This requires effort on the part of
the United Nations and Member States to identify
suitably skilled and qualified women, both those
already within the United Nations system and those
from outside, for leadership positions. Partly as a result
of the initiative taken by the women Permanent
Representatives described earlier today by Ambassador
Claudia Fritsche of Liechtenstein and partly because
the United Nations Secretariat wants to update its
database, my Government has just completed a lengthy
and intensive exercise to do just that: identify suitably
qualified women. We hope that other Governments will
do likewise.
In addition to identifying suitable women for
these specialist tasks, or I might call them troubleshooting tasks, we should all be working to place more
women generally in the international legal system — in
the Tribunals, in the courts, in the International Law
Commission, which I understand has never had a single
woman serve on it in its 50-year history. What sort of
message does that send about women’s participation?
We should also be thinking now and preparing actively
to be ready to meet the requirement of the Statute of
the International Criminal Court (A/CONF.183/9).
Perhaps not everybody has read the fine print and is
aware that article 36, paragraph 8, imposes on States
parties an obligation to take into account, when
selecting Judges, the need for a “fair representation of
female and male judges” within the membership of the

28

Court. This requirement is also found in the associated
article concerning the staff of the Prosecutor’s Office
and the Registry. The inclusion of these gender
provisions, specifying the need for qualified women to
be employed in all organs of the Court, grew in part
from the United Nations experience with the two
special Tribunals and the report produced by the
Secretary-General that accompanied the Statute of the
International Criminal Tribunal for the Former
Yugoslavia.
Finally, just on the areas where we might
particularly focus, there is a new and growing
emphasis, which we are all aware of, in the United
Nations peace and security operations on the role of
civilian police. Here too there is very real scope to
consider and to incorporate a gender perspective. It is
obvious that we need more sensitive and more
sophisticated resources for gathering evidence,
interviewing victims, counselling traumatized persons
and interacting with communities in post-conflict
situations. Recruitment and training should give
appropriate attention to involving women in all these
areas.
I said at the outset that I felt that this was an
important debate. It gives much-needed impetus to a
clear trend towards greater involvement of women in
managing conflict and in peace processes. Australia
hopes that it will result in a renewed determination on
the part of both the United Nations and its Member
States to take the practical steps necessary to make this
happen. Frankly, they are all within reach, but they
need a good push; not just from Angela King, not just
from Noeleen Heyzer and the United Nations
Development Fund for Women, whose thoughtful
statements today should have inspired everyone
present, but also from individual Member States and
from this Council in particular. I have not seen a draft
of the resolution that the Council may be planning to
adopt, but I hope it will be strong and, above all, that it
will be action-oriented and will pick up the practical
suggestions that have been put forward today by a
number of delegations, such as those listed by the
Permanent Representative of the Republic of Korea
and more recently by the Ambassador of New Zealand,
speaking on behalf of the South Pacific Forum
countries. The resolution should help us all not just to
talk the talk, but to walk the walk of women’s
involvement.

S/PV.4208 (Resumption 1)

Speaking of talk, there is a lot of talk in the
United Nations about “smart sanctions”. The phrase
has taken hold. Let us be smart in other ways by
factoring women deliberately and decisively into the
peace, security and conflict-prevention and conflictresolution activities of the United Nations. By doing
things differently, we can do them better.
The President: I thank the representative of
Australia for her kind words addressed to my
delegation.
The next speaker inscribed on my list is the
representative of Croatia. I invite her to take a seat at
the Council table and to make her statement.
Ms. Gr……iƒƒ Poliƒƒ (Croatia): It is my pleasure to
thank you, Mr. President, for organizing this open
debate on women and peace and security. Indeed, Sir,
you should be commended for using your presidency to
bring to the spotlight the issue that often lies at the core
of the success or failure of domestic, regional and
international efforts directed at conflict prevention,
peacemaking, peacekeeping and peace-building,
including
post-conflict
reconciliation
and
reconstruction. In view of its participation last May in
the adoption of the historic Windhoek Declaration and
the Namibia Plan of Action on Mainstreaming a
Gender Perspective in Multidimensional Peace Support
Operations, Namibia’s leadership on this issue comes
as no surprise. Rather, I see it as a natural extension of
your country’s well-deserved reputation for fostering
gender equality.
Also allow me to join others in welcoming this
morning’s excellent presentations by Ms. King and Ms.
Heyzer. The enthusiastic response from the gallery is
proof that they do make a difference.
The principles of gender equality and
mainstreaming of gender perspective in all dimensions
of societal interaction lie at the core of democratic
societies. Without active support for these principles,
no society, no institution, including the United Nations,
can hope to master the policies of inclusion in general
and in the area of peace and security in particular. The
maintenance of peace and security requires a
contribution not by some or half of the world’s
population, but by all. Equally important, if such a
contribution is skewed and reflects either only men’s or
only women’s masculine or feminine perspectives, it
remains seriously impaired. Likewise, if we were, for
example, to direct our attention predominantly or

exclusively to the impact of conflict and armed conflict
on women and girls alone, we would be doing a
disservice to the required comprehensive approach to
the overall impact of such conflicts. Although that
concern remains highly theoretical for the time being,
it is from this fundamental premise that the Croatian
delegation would like to share its views during today’s
debate.
At the outset, we would like to recognize the
evolving body of policy statements and other
contributions made already to today’s topic by the
Secretary-General, the Security Council, the General
Assembly, the Economic and Social Council, the
United Nations Development Fund for Women and
various other organizations and bodies within the
United Nations system. We would also like to
recognize a growing body of related actions taken by
the Security Council, such as on the protection of
civilians and children in armed conflicts, humanitarian
assistance to refugees and others in conflict situations,
post-conflict peace-building and the reintegration of
former combatants.
In the area of United Nations peace operations,
we would like to note the pioneering contributions
made by the Windhoek Declaration, the Namibia Plan
of Action and Ms. GraHa Machel’s review document on
the impact of armed conflict on children and women.
We also wish to highlight the final report of the
Beijing + 5 conference (A/S-23/10/Rev.l), the Brahimi
report of the Panel on United Nations Peace Operations
(S/2000/809) and the first follow-on implementation
report of the Secretary-General (A/55/502). We are
waiting to see the rest.
Nevertheless, so far precious little serious social
science research has focused on the issues addressed by
the documents I have mentioned, mainly for a lack of
recognition of their importance and, hence, of
institutional funding. In this regard, we hail the
accomplishments of such pioneers as Ms. Colleen
Lowe Morna of South Africa, Ms. Louise Olson of
Sweden, Professor Judith Hicks Stiehm of the United
States of America, Ms. Maggie Patterson of Canada
and Colonel Festus Aboagye of Ghana, to name just a
few. The staff members of the Department of
Peacekeeping Operations Lessons Learned Unit have
also made a contribution to the field and will, it is
hoped, continue to do so.

29

S/PV.4208 (Resumption 1)

So, what have we learned from their research? We
have learned that in recent conflicts — from El
Salvador to Bosnia and Herzegovina, and from East
Timor to Sierra Leone — women and girls are
overwhelmingly the principal victims of deliberate
rape, maiming, abduction and displacement. We are
told that women and children constitute an estimated
80 per cent of all internally displaced persons and
refugees. We have also learned that women and girls
are treated differently from men and boys as soldiers or
ex-soldiers, as prisoners or ex-prisoners, and as
survivors of rape and mutilation.
What can we do? The least we can do is impress
upon the Security Council to call upon parties to
conflicts to take special measures to protect this
vulnerable population. Of course, within its
prerogatives of determining mandates for peace
operations the Security Council can do much more. It
can request that special mechanisms be established for
reporting on all forms of sexual violence and
exploitation of women and can provide adequate
resources for the institutionalization of monitoring and
enforcement mechanisms for peacekeeping personnel.
Next, the Security Council can, and should,
require that all mission staff receive pre-deployment or
early post-deployment training in gender sensitivity
and mainstreaming. Also, it can ensure that planning
for disarmament, demobilization and reintegration
activities, all mine-related activities and public
information outreach campaigns takes into account the
different needs and different priorities of men and
women.
Last but not least, the Security Council must do
its utmost to ensure the implementation of existing
international humanitarian and human rights law. I
wish to recall that it was only after the diabolic record
in Bosnia and Herzegovina that rape was recognized as
a war crime, and in some instances as a crime against
humanity; and that only recently have such crimes as
forced pregnancy, detention with intent to impregnate,
and sterilization been sanctioned by article 16 of the
Statute of the International Criminal Court.
In the post-conflict period, there is also ample
space to support local women’s peace-building
activities and to strengthen their precarious economic
situation — including their access to jobs in weak
economies with high unemployment rates — and their

30

access to counselling and human rights expertise, to
name a few concerns.
Most importantly, if the Security Council were to
require the mandatory participation of women in all the
implementation mechanisms of peace settlement with a
view to their sustained participation in the political,
economic and social life in the future, it would
drastically increase the prospects for sustainable peace.
Needless to say, the same approach applies to conflict
prevention, mediation and resolution, where women
must be adequately represented at all levels of the
policy-making and decision-making process.
Of special importance in this regard are the
contributions made in United Nations field operations.
The efforts and accomplishments of women staff
members of such multidimensional peace operations as
the United Nations Administration for Eastern
Slavonia, Baranja and Western Sirmium (UNTAES),
the United Nations Transitional Administration in East
Timor (UNTAET) and, especially, the United Nations
Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK)
are absolutely precious because they were instrumental
in both conceiving and implementing creative
approaches to gender inclusion policies within the host
environment, and in gender mainstreaming within the
peace operation. As always, the support of the
respective special representatives of the SecretaryGeneral and the United Nations Headquarters figured
prominently in their prospects for success or failure.
Although in some cases today, and certainly in a
perfect world of tomorrow, a special representative’s
gender should not, and would not, matter, we must
recognize the fact that so far very few women have
served as personal envoys, representatives or special
representatives of the Secretary-General. In fact, unless
I am mistaken, today we have no Dame Margarets and
no Elizabeth Rehns; no woman is currently heading a
United Nations peace operation or serving as a special
envoy or special representative of the SecretaryGeneral. Some argue that perhaps no qualified women
exist for such posts or other senior posts; others point
to an informal roster that suggests otherwise. During
her United Nations press conference last June, Mrs.
Elizabeth Rehn advanced the following bold proposal:
when Member States are submitting candidatures for
senior United Nations posts they should always present
the Secretary-General with two equally qualified
candidates, a man and a woman.

S/PV.4208 (Resumption 1)

The Security Council has in the past called for
women to play an equal part in the maintenance of
peace and security; so did the Secretary-General’s
strategic plan of action. Arguably, more can be done at
the international level in concrete practical terms, but
the issue also clearly rests with the Member States and
their domestic policies. Hence, perhaps a comparative
survey of State practices on a set of issues and topics
addressed in today’s debate would be a useful step
towards institutionalizing reporting mechanisms within
various areas of women’s participation and gender
mainstreaming in peace and security matters.
The President: I thank the representative of
Croatia for the kind words addressed to my country.
The next speaker inscribed on my list is the
representative of Belarus. I invite him to take a seat at
the Council table and to make his statement.
Mr. Ling (Belarus) (spoke in Russian): The
delegation of the Republic of Belarus would like to
congratulate you, Sir, the representative of Namibia, on
presiding over this meeting of the Security Council.
Namibia’s contribution to the work of the United
Nations this year is indeed greatly appreciated.
The item on our agenda today is rather unusual,
but we deeply believe that it touches on the most
sensitive aspects of the entire contemporary system of
peacekeeping and peace-building in the United
Nations. We are happy to see that the Security Council
is not beginning its consideration of this important item
from scratch. The Council has had very important
debates on its role in the maintenance of international
peace and security, in disarmament and reintegration of
former combatants, and in the area of children in armed
conflict — all of which provided a sound basis for our
consideration today of women within the scope of the
Council’s powers and responsibilities in the
maintenance of international peace and security.
The Republic of Belarus appreciates the work
done in the General Assembly on gender equality and
the advancement of women and in involving women
more widely in the political, economic and social
arenas of life.
We believe that there is a very close link between
those endeavours and the work of the Security Council,

the principal organ responsible for the maintenance of
international peace and security, as it considers the socalled women’s issue in the context of armed
conflicts — which directly involve women and from
which they suffer more than anybody else.
The Security Council statement issued on
International Women’s Day this year stressed that
women’s interests had to be fully taken into account
and that women had to enabled to participate in the
prevention and resolution of conflicts and crises. We
believe that it is important for the Council to take the
proper action to protect women, who constitute the
most vulnerable group within the civilian population.
That is no easy matter in today’s conflicts, which are
primarily internal conflicts and which involve a wide
range of political, socio-economic, cultural and other
social issues.
Hence, it is very important to ensure that Council
resolutions and peacekeeping mandates contain
specific provisions relating to the provision of
protection and assistance to girls and women. It is also
very important that there be a reliable mechanism to
ensure that all those who violates the norms of
humanitarian law are held to account.
Belarus believes that United Nations activities on
gender issues have been of particular significance this
year. They have included the June special session of
the General Assembly devoted to women’s issues, as
well as today’s Security Council deliberations.
Together, these will define the future approach to the
Organization’s consideration of women’s issues to
ensure peace and security.
The Republic of Belarus attaches great
importance to gender issues, and is fully determined to
make its contribution to those endeavours.
The President: I thank the representative of
Belarus for the kind words he addressed to my country.
A number of speakers remain on my list. In view
of the lateness of the hour, and with the concurrence of
the members of the Security Council, I intend to
suspend the meeting now, and to resume it tomorrow,
Wednesday, 25 October 2000, at 10.30 a.m.
The meeting was suspended at 6.25 p.m.

31
