S/2016/92

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
29 January 2016
Original: English

Report of the Secretary-General on the threat posed by ISIL
(Da’esh) to international peace and security and the range
of United Nations efforts in support of Member States in
countering the threat
I. Introduction
1.
The present report is submitted pursuant to paragraph 97 of Security Council
resolution 2253 (2015), in which the Council requested the Secretary-General to
provide an initial strategic-level report that demonstrates and reflects the gravity of
the threat posed to international peace and security by Islamic State in Iraq and the
Levant (ISIL, also known as Da’esh) and associated individual s, groups,
undertakings and entities, including foreign terrorist fighters, provides information
on the sources of financing of such individuals, groups, undertakings and entities,
including through illicit trade in oil, antiquities and other natural resou rces, as well
as their planning and facilitation of attacks, and reflects the range of United Nations
efforts in support of Member States in countering this threat. 1
2.
Security Council resolution 2253 (2015) was adopted at the meeting of the
Council on 17 December 2015, which included the participation of Ministers of
Finance from around the world. In adopting the resolution, the Council expressed its
determination to address the threat posed to international peace and security by the
groups and individuals and the importance of cutting off their access to funds,
including the illicit trade in oil, antiquities and other natural resources, as well as
their planning and facilitation of attacks. In the resolution, the Council decided that
such groups and individuals will be subject to the measures imposed by Security
Council resolution 2161 (2014); that the former Security Council Committee
pursuant to resolutions 1267 (1999) and 1989 (2011) concerning Al -Qaida and
associated individuals and entities will be known as the Security Council Committee
pursuant to resolutions 1267 (1999), 1989 (2011) and 2253 (2015) concerning
Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (Da’esh), Al-Qaida and associated individuals,
groups, undertakings and entities; and that the Al-Qaida Sanctions List will be
known as the ISIL (Da’esh) and Al-Qaida Sanctions List.
3.
The report also contains recommendations on strengthening the capacities of
Member States to mitigate the threat posed by ISIL, as well as ways in which the
__________________
1

16-01296 (E)

The Security Council has issued five presidential statements and adopted 21 resolutions related
to ISIL and its affiliates since July 2014.

030216

*1601296*

S/2016/92

United Nations can support those efforts. As requested by the Security Council, the
report has been prepared with the input of the Counter-Terrorism Committee
Executive Directorate, in close collaboration with the Analytical Support and
Sanctions Monitoring Team established pursuant to Security Council resolution
1526 (2004) concerning Al-Qaida and the Taliban and associated individuals and
entities of the Security Council Committee pursuant to resolutions 1267 (1999),
1989 (2011) and 2253 (2015), the Counter-Terrorism Implementation Task Force
and other relevant United Nations actors and international organizations.
Information has also been provided by some Member States.

II. The gravity of the threat posed by ISIL and associated
groups and entities
A.

The threat
4.
The emergence of ISIL has been facilitated by the protracted conflicts in Iraq
and the Syrian Arab Republic and the resulting political and security instability, as
well as by the weakening of State institutions and the inability of the two States to
exercise effective control over their territories and borders. In less than two years,
ISIL has captured large swathes of territory in both Iraq and the Syrian Arab
Republic, which it administers through a sophisticated, quasi -bureaucratic revenuegenerating structure that is sufficiently flexible and diversified to compensate for
declines in income from single revenue streams. ISIL has also benefited from its
relationship with individuals and groups involved in transnational organized crime.
It uses its financial resources to support ongoing military campaigns, administer its
territories and fund the expansion of the conflict beyond Iraq and the Syrian Arab
Republic, and it has developed an extremely effective and sophisticated
communications strategy to ensure that its distorted vision of the world resonates
with a small but growing number of disaffected individuals who are disengaged
from, or no longer identify with, the core values of their societies.
5.
Despite the efforts of the international community to c ounter ISIL through
military, financial and border-security measures (which have recently inflicted
substantial losses), ISIL continues to maintain its presence in Iraq and the Syrian
Arab Republic. It is also expanding the scope of its operations to other regions. The
terrorist attacks carried out in the final months of 2015 demonstrate that it is capable
of committing attacks on civilian targets outside the territories under its control. The
extent of its reach was notably demonstrated by the suicide bomb ings in Beirut on
12 November 2015, the coordinated attacks in Paris on 13 November 2015 and the
attacks in Jakarta by an ISIL affiliate on 14 January 2016, which closely resembled
the Paris attacks.
6.
The recent expansion of the ISIL sphere of influence across West and North
Africa, the Middle East and South and South-East Asia demonstrates the speed and
scale at which the gravity of the threat has evolved in just 18 months. The complexity
of the recent attacks and the level of planning, coordination and sophistication
involved raise concerns about its future evolution. Moreover, other terrorist groups,
including the Islamic Youth Shura Council and Islamic State of Iraq and the Levant Libya Province (Derna) in Libya, the Mujahideen of Kairouan and Jund al -Khilafah
in Tunisia, the Islamic Movement of Uzbekistan, Tehreek-e-Khilafat in Pakistan and

2/23

16-01296

S/2016/92

Ansar al-Khilafah in the Philippines, are sufficiently attracted by its underlying
ideology to pledge allegiance to its so-called caliphate and self-proclaimed caliph.
ISIL has also benefited from the arrival of a steady stream of foreign terrorist
fighters, who continue to leave their communities to replenish its ranks. The return of
these fighters from the battlefields of Iraq and the Syrian Arab Republic and other
conflict zones is a further major concern, as returnees can extend the presence of ISIL
to their States of origin and use their skills and combat experience to recruit
additional sympathizers, establish terrorist networks and commit terrorist acts.
1.

ISIL outside Iraq and the Syrian Arab Republic
7.
The growing threat posed by ISIL to international peace and security is
reflected in its strategy of global expansion, the development of which may reflect a
reaction to recent territorial losses inflicted in Iraq and the Syrian Arab Republic by
international military efforts. As of 15 December 2015, 34 groups from all around
the world had reportedly pledged allegiance to ISIL. Moreover, in view of its
territorial claims of more “provinces”, it is expected t hat ISIL affiliates will increase
in number and that its membership will grow in 2016. This is a matter of
considerable concern, since these groups appear to be emulating ISIL’s tactics and
carrying out attacks on its behalf.
8.
In 2016 and beyond, Member States should prepare for a further increase in
the number of foreign terrorist fighters travelling to other States on the instructions
of ISIL. Many groups and individuals have pledged allegiance to Abu Bakr
al-Baghdadi and the proclaimed “caliphate” since 2014, although only its affiliates
in Libya and Afghanistan currently control territory of any significance. The ISIL
presence in Libya is the affiliate that has received the greatest amount of attention,
including support and guidance from the ISIL core. 2 In Afghanistan and Pakistan,
ISIL continues to develop a network of contacts and sympathizers who carry out
attacks in its name. On 13 January 2016, the ISIL group “Khorasan province”,
which operates in Pakistan and Afghanistan, issued a statement clai ming credit for
an attack on the Pakistani Consulate in Jalalabad, Afghanistan.

2.

Grave human rights violations
9.
ISIL continues to perpetrate appalling human rights abuses against populations
under its control. 3 Executions, torture, amputations, lashings, ethno-sectarian attacks
and floggings in public places against “infidels” offer sobering testimony to the
degree of barbarity to which it is prepared to descend to achieve its goals. ISIL
systematically targets communities and members of communities who refuse to
subscribe to its extremist ideology, including Christians, Yezidis, Shia and Sunnis.
Since the emergence of ISIL, sexual slavery has been imposed upon women and
girls as an instrument of terror to humiliate and subjugate entire communities.
Sexual violence in conflict, when used or commissioned as a method or tactic of
war or as part of a widespread or systematic attack against civilian populations, can
significantly exacerbate and prolong situations of armed conflict and may impede
the restoration of international peace and security. Against this backdrop, the sexual
and gender-based violence used as a tactic of terrorism by ISIL has become part of

__________________
2
3

16-01296

See S/2015/891.
See A/HRC/30/48 and Corr.1, sect. IV. A and B (http://www.ohchr.org/EN/HRBodies/HRC/
IICISyria/Pages/Documentation.aspx).

3/23

S/2016/92

its strategy for controlling territory, dehumanizing victims and recruiting new
supporters. According to the Special Representative on Sexual Violence in Conflict,
extremist groups like ISIL view female bodies as vessels for producing a new
generation that can be raised in their own image, according to their radical ideology,
and control over women’s sexuality and reproduction is integral to the nationbuilding aspirations of ISIL and its affiliates. 4 The nexus between sexual violence
and violent extremism is becoming increasingly evident, and combatting extremist
groups is an essential component of the fight against conflict-related sexual
violence. In its resolution 2242 (2015), the Security Council stressed the increasing
need to ensure that the protection and empowerment of women is a central
consideration of strategies to counter terrorism and violent extremism.
10. Thousands of children have also become victims, perpetrators and witnesses of
ISIL’s atrocities. The group is systematically indoctrinating and grooming children
as young as five years old to be future militants. The United Nations Assi stance
Mission for Iraq (UNAMI) and the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Human Rights (OHCHR) continue to receive reports that ISIL
has been forcibly recruiting and using children in military operations. 5 Several
videos posted on social media purportedly show recruitment and training of children
in ISIL camps in Iraq and the Syrian Arab Republic. The systemic recruitment and
abuse of children by ISIL and the reported emergence of youth training camps in
several regions are cause for grave concern.
3.

Humanitarian crisis
11. The international community faces a humanitarian crisis of unprecedented
proportions. The Syrian conflict, the largest and most complex of the current
humanitarian emergencies, has become an international crisis. In t he Syrian Arab
Republic alone, around 12 million people (including more than 4 million people
who have sought refuge in neighbouring States) have been forced to flee their
homes, and more than 13.5 million are in need of humanitarian assistance. 6 The
emergence of ISIL in Iraq and the Syrian Arab Republic has further exacerbated the
humanitarian crisis. With no political solution in sight, and military confrontation
continuing, the number of people affected by internal conflict in both countries is
likely to increase in 2016. The presence of significant displaced populations also
places a significant strain on the resources of States neighbouring the conflict zones.

4.

Destruction and looting of cultural sites and artefacts
12. The large-scale, systematic destruction and looting of cultural sites that is also
part of the ISIL strategy highlights the strong connection between the cultural,
humanitarian and security dimensions of conflicts and terrorism. This has been
recognized in numerous United Nations statements and declarations, including by

__________________
4

See Zainab Bangura, “Faith in Islam & Faith in Women: Why Gender Justice is Key to an Islam
Without Extremes”, International Crisis Group, 2015 (available from: https://medium.com/the future-of-conflict/faith-in-islam-faith-in-women-why-gender-justice-is-key-to-an-islam-withoutextremes-8920277ef674#.rqlzfj3mx).
5
See report on the Protection of Civilians in the Armed Conflict in Iraq: 11 December 201430 April 2015 (available from: http://www.ohchr.org/Documents/Countries/IQ/UNAMI_
OHCHR_4th_POCReport-11Dec2014-30April2015.pdf).
6
Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs, Syrian Arab Republic
(http://www.unocha.org/syria).

4/23

16-01296

S/2016/92

the General Assembly in its resolution 69/281, entitled “Saving the cultural heritage
of Iraq”, and notably by the Security Council in its resolution 2199 (2015), by
which the Council established a ban on trade in antiquities illegally removed from
Iraq since 6 August 1990 and from the Syrian Arab Republic since 15 March 2011
and which recognized illicit trafficking in antiquities as a potential source of
financing for terrorist organizations.
5.

Conclusion
13. ISIL represents an unprecedented threat to international peace and security. It
is able to adapt quickly to the changing environment and to persuade or inspire like minded terrorist groups in various regions of the world to facilita te and commit acts
of terrorism.
14. In view of the gravity of the threat, the international community must also be
adaptive in its responses, ensuring that they are consistent with the rule -of-law and
international human rights and humanitarian norms and standards. Member States
should adopt comprehensive approaches that incorporate security -led counterterrorism initiatives and preventive measures that address the drivers of violent
extremism leading to terrorism.

B.

Sources of financing for ISIL
15. ISIL’s rapid and effective mobilization of vast financial resources in the
service of recruitment and territorial expansion demonstrates the gravity of the
threat posed to international peace and security by terrorist organizations that use
techniques similar to those employed by transnational organized criminal groups,
constantly adapting their financing strategy to changing circumstances.
16. ISIL is the world’s wealthiest terrorist organization. Its funding sources have
been described in detail in a number of reports, including those of the CounterTerrorism Committee Executive Directorate, the Analytical Support and Sanctions
Monitoring Team and the Financial Action Task Force. Its funds derive mostly from
the exploitation of the natural and economic resources of the territories it occupies
(including oil fields and refineries and agricultural land), as well as from bank
robbery, extortion, confiscation of property, donations from foreign terrorist fighters
and the looting of antiquities.
17. Numerous reports, including reports of UNAMI, estimate the income generated
by ISIL from oil and oil products in 2015 to have been between $400 million and
$500 million. ISIL uses income from oil sales to buy supplies, including weaponry,
military equipment and ammunition. As a result of the international air strikes on oil
refineries and tanks, the blocking of smuggling routes and the sale and purchase of
oil, it is expected that ISIL’s oil income, both in total and as a proportion of its
overall earnings, will gradually diminish in 2016. Other resources, including gas and
phosphate sites, have also been subject to airstrikes. Moreover, further exploitation
of existing resources would require expertise and heavy investment, which may not
be readily available. However, ISIL’s degree of diversification is such that dwindling
revenue streams can be quickly replaced by others. Data and imagery provided by
Member States of potential routes of illicit trade in oil and oil products by ISIL
cannot be independently verified by the United Nations. Moreover, the differences in
the materials provided point to the difficulty in establishing exact routes and

16-01296

5/23

S/2016/92

distribution networks, given the diversification and flexibility adopted by ISIL, and
underscoring the fact that close coordination and cooperation among Member States
is imperative. Such high-level coordination and cooperation was demonstrated by the
passage of Security Council resolution 2253 (2015).
18. Over the past year, “taxing” and confiscation appear to have become another
significant revenue source. ISIL has developed a sophisticated system for the
confiscation of goods and property, including from banks (cash taken from 90
branches located in the Iraqi provinces under its control totalled $1 billion
($675 million from banks in Mosul alone), according to UNAMI). ISIL also
confiscates the homes of officials and others who leave the territory and sells them in
local markets, providing discounts to its members. ISIL also taxes economic activity
by extorting the estimated 8 million people living in territories under its control. It
attempts to legitimize this system by calling the “tax” a “religious tax” or “ zakat”.
The tax amounts to at least 2.5 per cent of the capital earned from businesses, goods
and agricultural products, including wheat, barley, cotton and livestock; from
services of contractors and traders in Iraq’s western and northern provinces and from
trucks entering the territories under ISIL control. According to UNAMI, the tax on
trucks generates around $900 million per year. In some cases the group extorts up to
10 per cent, on the grounds that “it is a nation in time of war”.
19. The Iraqi Government recently decided to cut off salary payments to workers
in ISIL-controlled territory, with the aim of reducing opportunities for such
“taxation”. However, it appears that remittances from relatives abroad are
transferred using local “hawala”-type services that are very difficult to control. In
the longer term, however, this taxation system will become more difficult to sustain.
According to the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations (FAO),
this is especially true in the agricultural sector, where the yield from wheat and
barley crops is decreasing in ISIL-controlled territory due to poor seed quality.
20. Like transnational organized criminal groups, ISIL relies on laundering and
smuggling techniques and smuggling networks to circumvent the international
embargo. ISIL sells oil and agricultural products at discount prices using established
historical smuggling routes in and out of Iraq and the Syrian Arab Republic. Once
these goods have reached the countries of destination, it is very difficult to track
their origin, particularly oil products. Convoys bring in basic food and raw materials
for the population, and illicit merchandise is concealed within such convoys as they
leave ISIL-controlled territory. ISIL imposes “taxes” and fees on anyone living in
the territories under its control.
21. Numerous Iraqi and Syrian archaeological sites are under the close control of
ISIL, which imposes taxes on the looters, based on a pre-appraisal of the value of
what is taken, and it also grants licences for excavation. As reported by the United
Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization (UNESCO), the A merican
Schools of Oriental Research estimates that around 25 per cent of archaeological sites
in the Syrian Arab Republic (including over 21 per cent in ISIL -controlled territories)
have been affected by the looting. The Syrian Arab Republic has seized, o r obtained
the restitution, of more than 6,000 artefacts (including 1,000 from Lebanon) over the
past four years. UNESCO notes that, in view of the scale of the looting and its
significant economic value, it is likely that many items are being stored by cr iminal
networks. It is to be expected that, once the attention diminishes, criminal networks
will begin to introduce additional laundered items into the market. According to

6/23

16-01296

S/2016/92

preliminary information received by UNESCO from its member States, many small
pieces, such as coins and statuettes, are generally smuggled and put up for sale on
Internet platforms. It is therefore essential that police, customs and art market
officials take the strongest possible measures to combat illicit trafficking in such
items. UNESCO has also noted the vital importance of determining where and with
whom such artefacts are stored and of identifying the smuggling routes.
22. In addition to the above revenue sources, ISIL continues to benefit from
external donations and ransom payments by families of hostages, particularly from
the Yazidi community. UNAMI estimates that these payments amounted to between
$35 million to $45 million in 2014. It is believed that $850,000 was paid in January
2015 for the release of 200 Iraqi Yazidis. ISIL has used sexual violence to mobilize
resources and fund its operations, including the ransoming and sale of women and
girls through human trafficking and slave markets. It also receives voluntary
payments from those seeking to free foreign terrorists fighters from the conflict
zones. According to the Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive Directorate and
the Analytical Support and Sanctions Monitoring Team, revenue from foreign
terrorist fighters represents another significant source of funding. Wire transf ers,
credit card withdrawals from the accounts of known foreign terrorist fighters and
money transfers reveal a constant flow of funds in and out of ISIL -controlled
territories. Further research is needed to better understand the financial networks
operating in border cities, including the role of intermediaries.
23. In view of the considerable pressure being exerted by the international
community, it is likely that ISIL will attempt to identify other funding sources.
There is a need to achieve a better understanding of the financial mechanisms used
by ISIL affiliates and by groups that have pledged allegiance to ISIL.
24. The Financial Action Task Force notes that ISIL and its affiliates continue to
make extensive use of the Internet and social media to rai se funds. Misuse of these
technologies in a coordinated manner can generate significant funds, which are
difficult to detect without the support of the Internet site providers. This is an area
of particular concern, as it could enable foreign terrorist fig hters returning from Iraq
or the Syrian Arab Republic or local sympathizers to generate sufficient funding for
recruitment and the planning of terrorist attacks around the world.

C.

Foreign terrorist fighters joining ISIL and associated groups
and entities

1.

Recruitment
25. According to the Analytical Support and Sanctions Monitoring Team and other
sources, the attraction of ISIL to potential recruits has risen to an unprecedented
level. It is estimated that around 30,000 foreign terrorist fighters, coming from over
100 Member States, are actively engaged in the activities of Al -Qaida, ISIL and
associated groups. 7 This phenomenon clearly demands not only global and national
solutions, but also urgent action at the local level. In view of the current situation on
the ground, it is unclear whether the recent dramatic rate of growth in the number of
foreign terrorist fighters will be sustained over the long term. It is also unclear
whether the final destinations of most of the fighters will continue to b e Iraq and the

__________________
7

16-01296

S/2015/975, para. 78.

7/23

S/2016/92

Syrian Arab Republic since ISIL has been encouraging potential fighters to travel to
States outside the Middle East.
26. In both developed and developing States, significant numbers of young people
are seriously considering travelling to areas where their personal security would be
at great risk. The departure of so many young people to conflict zones has a
profoundly destabilizing effect on their communities and, above all, on their
families. In order to attract individuals to its cause, ISIL exploits socioeconomic
grievances and feelings of alienation, marginalization, discrimination or
victimization, precipitated by, among other things, a perceived or real lack of good
governance, inequality, injustice and lack of opportunity. It pretends t o offer
potential recruits the opportunity to achieve “social status”, kinship, a sense of
identity and belonging, fulfilment of a sense of religious duty and a purpose. Its
ideology is predicated on a perverted interpretation of Islam that also exploits
historical grievances (offering an opportunity not only to rebel against the
corruption of the current political order, but also to eradicate the “artificial” border
between Iraq and the Syrian Arab Republic).
27. The challenges faced by those seeking to identify potential foreign terrorist
fighters and prevent their travel are exacerbated by the absence of a clear
“personality type” that is more prone than others to engage in terrorist activities.
Preliminary studies 8 have shown that foreign terrorist fighters are motivated by a
number of, social, economic and geopolitical conditions, combined with individual
circumstances that appear at a particular moment in time and make individuals
vulnerable to recruitment or engagement in violent extremism and terroris m. This
appears to be the case for recruits located both inside and outside territories where
ISIL and its affiliates have a large presence. The journey of each individual fighter
into terrorist activity involves a unique combination of factors that differ in order of
magnitude, depending on the local context.
28. According to the Special Representative on Sexual Violence in Conflict, ISIL’s
recruitment messaging also includes the promise of access to women for young,
single, economically marginalized men who seek status, power and sexual access
not available in socially conservative contexts. ISIL also has a large team of
dedicated “online groomers” whose job it is to identify individuals who express an
interest in the group on online forums. The grooming o f would-be sympathizers for
terrorist activity locally or for travel to ISIL -held territory is based on information
about the individual’s particular social and personal context.
29. Terrorist recruitment is not the exclusive preserve of ISIL recruiters. T here is
often an intimate and personal element. Studies on European foreign terrorist
fighters 8 show that peer pressure or support plays an active part in the final stages of
radicalization, and that the role of family members, especially mothers, could be
particularly relevant in countering such pressure.
2.

Use of the Internet and social media as a promotional and recruitment tool
30. The threat posed by ISIL is made even greater by the group’s growing
technological sophistication. ISIL increasingly turns to the Internet and social media

__________________
8

8/23

See Sara Zeiger and Anne Aly, eds., “Countering Violent Extremism: Developing an Evidence base for Policy and Practice”, Hedayah and Curtin University, 2015 (available from:
http://www.hedayah.ae/pdf/cve-edited-volume.pdf).

16-01296

S/2016/92

to disseminate its messages to potential recruits. It appears that ISIL has been able,
through information and communications technologies (ICT) in general, and social
media tools in particular, to establish a low-cost and powerful system to broadcast its
propaganda, identify potential recruits and allocate human resources to persuade
targeted individuals to join its ranks. This has fuelled the growth in the number of
foreign terrorist fighters travelling to Iraq and the Syrian Arab Republic. Prosecutors
and law enforcement officials in many affected States increasingly report that
foreign terrorist fighters and would-be fighters, and terrorists acting alone or in small
cells, but without formal links to ISIL, consume its propaganda online and interact
online with its members and sympathizers. 9 Following action by Twitter to close
down thousands of these accounts, ISIL has migrated to other social media tools,
such as Telegram messenger. 10 When Telegram, in turn, begins to close down ISILrelated channels, ISIL and its support base will likely migrate to new platforms.
31. ISIL has also demonstrated the capacity to tailor its online messaging to its
audience. Over the past two years, videos of ISIL have shown: acts of war (3 0 per
cent); interviews with mujahideen (25 per cent); images showing ISIL as a
functioning and utopic “State” (18 per cent); and executions (15 per cent). 11 Purely
religious themes are less common. Videos are often well edited and inspired by
action movies and videogames. This approach seeks to attract not only young men
looking for action, but also professionals such as doctors, engineers, ICT specialists
and women and girls. ISIL’s branding and marketing campaigns are accompanied by
individualized radicalization and recruitment campaigns conducted by well-trained
groomers using live chat applications, videoconferencing and other ICT tools.
32. It has been shown that ICT plays a crucial role in the travel preparations of
foreign terrorist fighters to join ISIL and its affiliates, the training and sharing of
“effective practices” and the planning of attacks. ISIL online forums discuss best
ways to avoid detection while crossing borders by using routes that will not raise
suspicion and through States perceived as having inadequate border controls. The
use of ICT to demonstrate how to build improvised explosive devices is also well
documented. This matter has been raised by the Security Council in its resolutions
2161 (2014) and 2178 (2014) and could be exploited by ISIL and its affiliates.
Prosecutors and law enforcement officers have expressed their concerns about the
routine use of encryption technologies by ISIL terrorists. ISIL -related forums on the
“dark web” regularly inform their members about the most effective encryption
tools and recommend the adoption of new products when ICT solutions are
considered to be compromised.
33. A further challenge is the complexity of the global ICT framework, which
raises several difficult jurisdictional issues in terms of the applicability of domestic
laws and the powers of States to enforce them. Private corporations must find ways
to deal with conflicting domestic laws in their international operations. Facebook,
__________________
9

In the United States of America, almost 80 per cent of aspiring foreign terrorist fighters have
downloaded extremist propaganda, promoted it online or engaged with other extremists online.
10
In the fall of 2015, Telegram had channels in Arabic, Bosnian, English, French, German,
Indonesian and Turkish, among other languages, and had up to 10,000 followers each.
11
Assessment of the International Observatory for Terrorism Studies, special meeting of the
Counter-Terrorism Committee with Member States and relevant international and regional
organizations on “Preventing terrorists from exploiting the Internet and social media to recruit
terrorists and incite terrorist acts, while respecting human rights and fundamental freedoms”,
16 and 17 December 2015.

16-01296

9/23

S/2016/92

for example, has established guidelines for cooperation with law enforcement
agencies worldwide, including for the preservation of data and emergency requests.
Many private corporations already enforce their own terms of use and can either
remove ISIL content or terminate the accounts of users violating those ter ms. Such
measures are taken by corporations in the context of terrorist activities such as
recruitment and incitement to terrorism. Most large corporations proactively and
voluntarily moderate content uploaded by their users or remove content that is
contrary to their terms and conditions. 12
34. The online sale of Iraqi and Syrian antiquities continues despite the worldwide
prohibition on their trade, as set forth in Security Council resolution 2199 (2015).
Illegitimate sellers of such antiquities, who may have direct or indirect links with
ISIL, use social media platforms to find customers for illicitly obtained and
exported artefacts. UNESCO has been raising awareness of this phenomenon for a
decade. 13 The global ICT community should take the necessary countermeasures,
following established good practices. 14

D.

Travel of foreign terrorist fighters
35. Foreign terrorist fighters from many States continue to reach Iraq and the
Syrian Arab Republic through neighbouring countries. In some instances, this is
facilitated by linguistic similarities and the lack of visa requirements. ISIL has
shown itself to be effective in identifying and circumventing countermeasures put in
place by Member States. It has also proven adept at informing potential foreign
terrorist fighters of any vulnerabilities, using the Internet and social media. Even if
one State detects a vulnerability that facilitates the cross -border movement of
foreign terrorist fighters, the same vulnerability may be easily exploited by ISIL in a
neighbouring State. The international community must therefore develop a more
effective way to determine which vulnerabilities are being exploited by ISIL and to
share this information with other States that are adversely affected by such measures
so that collective responses can be rapidly implemented.
36. ISIL has recently issued Internet guidelines to help facilitate the travel of
foreign terrorist fighters to Iraq and the Syrian Arab Republic. Those guidelines
clearly indicate ISIL’s awareness of the techniques commonly used by Member
States to identify foreign terrorist fighters, as well as systemic shortfalls in existing
measures to track their travel patterns. It is also evident that ISIL is well aware of
the difficulty of identifying foreign terrorist fighters prior to their departure. Many
potential fighters are not persons of interest to law enforcement officials in their
States of origin or residence and are therefore not subject to monitoring. The ISIL
guidelines also include detailed information about the most easily penetrable travel
routes, those to avoid because of stepped-up controls and the best modes of travel to
be used to reach territories under its control. Member States have reported to the
Analytical Support and Sanctions Monitoring Team that foreign terrorist fighters

__________________
12

YouTube has removed 14 million videos over the past two years; Facebook receives and reviews
1 million user notifications per week about violation of its terms of use (not only for terrorist related postings); and Twitter has closed around 2,000 ISIL -related accounts in recent months.
13
See http://www.unesco.org/new/fileadmin/MULTIMEDIA/HQ/CLT/pdf/basic -actions-culturalobjects-for-sale_en.pdf.
14
See, for example, http://www.art-law.org/archives/conferencedu17112008/memorandumfr171108.pdf.

10/23

16-01296

S/2016/92

travel to conflict zones in Iraq and the Syrian Arab Republic by air, maritime and
land routes through European and neighbouring States. 15
37. ISIL has also exhibited a growing interest in, and capacity for, launching
attacks outside the territory it controls. These attacks are carried out not only by
home-grown terrorists, but also by individuals who have received training abroad,
including in ISIL-held territories. This demonstrates the urgent need for Member
States not only to ensure that foreign terrorist fighters do not travel from their
country of origin to ISIL-held territories, but also to curtail the flow of such fighters
from ISIL-held territories to third States where they can facilitate terrorist attacks.
Concerns have been raised about the potential for foreign terrorist fighters to use the
massive inflow of asylum seekers into Europe as a means of transporting its
operatives into Europe.
38. With regard to refugees entering third States through the resettlement schemes
organized by the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees
(UNHCR), it is highly unlikely that ISIL will attempt to take advantage of these
programmes to move terrorists abroad. Given the extensive screening measures and
background checks adopted by most States accepting refugees for resettlement, and
the lengthy waiting periods associated with these checks, resettlement would not
appear to be an attractive avenue.

E.

Planning and facilitation of attacks by ISIL
39. ISIL’s dissemination of propaganda through the use of ICT forms part of its
military strategy to destabilize States outside Iraq and the Syrian Arab Republic by
provoking a confrontation between “believers” and “apostates”. Since its acquisition
of territory in 2014, it has changed its tactics, notably during the second half of
2015 when it began to expand the geographical scope of its attacks. This led to a
series of attacks perpetrated by ISIL sympathizers acting alone or in small cells
(including attacks at: a museum in Brussels; a café in Sydney, Australia; a museum
and resort in Tunisia; a train bound for Paris; and the San Bernardino County
Department of Public Health). The main characteristic of these attacks was their low
level of complexity.
40. Recent attacks, including the attacks in Paris and Djakarta, reflect a significant
shift towards large-scale operations perpetrated outside the Middle East. It is very
likely that attacks by terrorists acting alone will also continue. The November 2015
attacks in Paris, in particular, bore the hallmarks of a classic Al -Qaida attack: longterm preparation, multiple targets, several planned waves of attacks and the
involvement of a coordinated multi-cell structure directed on the ground by an
operational leader and led by planners located in the Syrian Arab Republic and
facilitators located outside France. The combination of home -grown small cells and
terrorists who travel back and forth from Iraq and the Syrian Arab Republic
represents a new and complex challenge. Evidence gathered since January 2015
reflects the existence of effective operational connections between ISIL and its
militants abroad. These attacks also point to the existence of distinct capacities to:
identify large-scale targets (including restaurants, sport stadiums, tourism
infrastructure and concert halls); advise on evasive travel patterns; organize

__________________
15

16-01296

See S/2015/358.

11/23

S/2016/92

logistical support; provide training in the use of communications, weapons and
explosives; remotely manage a roster of potential attackers; and cal l upon a global
network of sympathizers to facilitate such operations.
41. The ability of ISIL and its affiliates and its self -proclaimed members and
adherents to communicate internationally by means of sophisticated technologies,
including mobile telephones and encrypted tools, to transfer funds, to provide
logistical support (for example by renting apartments and cars, purchasing weapons
and constructing explosive vests), and to use evasive travel patterns in preparing
attacks demonstrate their capacity to mount operations outside the territories under
their control.
42. ISIL’s shift towards the use of suicide attackers outside areas under its direct
control represents a significant increase in the gravity of the threat it poses to
international peace and security. Even though these attacks do not rely on the use of
sophisticated weapons (relying essentially on automatic rifles and explosive vests),
their effectiveness is reflected in the very real death tolls and the sense of instability
and insecurity instilled into civilian populations. There are indications that ISIL may
be seeking to develop a long-term capacity to use more sophisticated weapons,
including chemical and biological weapons, in such attacks.
43. A further significant concern is the growing capacity of terrorist groups to
recruit assailants from a roster of foreign terrorist fighters selected and trained
specifically to carry out such attacks. These individuals may have known one another
for several years, been detained in the same prisons, travelled to the Syrian Arab
Republic together, speak the same language and/or belong to the same country of
origin or community. This ensures cohesion and increases their chances of success.
44. The complex nature of many recent attacks suggests that ISIL militants are
adapting to the law enforcement and security measures taken against them. Against
this backdrop, judicial authorities, law enforcement and security agencies are often
at a disadvantage in cases that involve terrorists who act alone or wh o are more
insulated from detection. This is especially true for law enforcement and intelligence
agencies that rely on human intelligence sources. Empirical evidence suggests that,
in general, while there are people who know about an offender’s grievance, extremist
ideology, views and/or intent to engage in violence in the lead -up to most lone-actor
terrorist events, they do not report such information to the relevant authorities.
Consequently, opportunities to identify a perpetrator or obtain information in
advance of an attack are reduced.

F.

Returnees
45. The threat posed by foreign terrorist fighters for ISIL returning from the
battlefields of Iraq and the Syrian Arab Republic and other conflict zones is another
major concern for many States of origin. In general, returnees serve to extend the
presence of ISIL into other States and to set up networks for future attacks, planning
and facilitation. 16 It is currently unclear how many foreign terrorist fighters serving
ISIL are likely to return to their home States (rather than remaining in conflict zones
or travelling to third States) and how likely they are to engage in terrorism upon
their return. However, as they become disillusioned, there is a high probability that

__________________
16

12/23

See S/2014/815, para. 27.

16-01296

S/2016/92

many will return to their home States. Empirical evidence suggests, however, that
even though very few ISIL foreign terrorist fighters appear to engage in terrorist
activity after their return, attacks carried out by trained foreign terrorist fighters are
more likely to be successful and lethal. 17 It should also be noted that returnees are a
potentially valuable source of information, and that they may use their experience to
persuade others not to become involved in terrorism, including through effective
counter-messaging campaigns.

III. The range of United Nations efforts in supporting the efforts
of Member States to counter the threat of ISIL
46. The primary responsibility for countering the threat of ISIL lies with Member
States. However, the United Nations and other internationa l organizations, which
have a critical role to play in supporting their efforts, have already taken a number
of measures, including conducting assessments of the threat, and of the capacity of
States to counter it, formulating recommendations for addressin g identified
shortcomings and developing and implementing capacity-building programmes.
However, in view of the increased gravity of the threat posed by ISIL, the United
Nations and other international organizations must adopt a more comprehensive,
concerted and coordinated approach.
47. The Analytical Support and Sanctions Monitoring Team has produced a series of
reports assessing the global threat posed by foreign terrorist fighters, the threat from
ISIL and the Al-Nusrah front, including to the Middle East region, and the terrorism
threat in Libya and Afghanistan posed by ISIL and other terrorist groups. The
Monitoring Team has made a number of recommendations for mitigating the threat. 18
48. The Counter-Terrorism Committee has conducted an assessment of the ability
of Member States to stem the flow of foreign terrorist fighters, focusing on the
States most affected, and has provided Member States with recommendations on
ways to address the gaps identified in its assessments. 19 The Counter-Terrorism
Committee recently held an open briefing in New York on “The role of women in
countering terrorism and violent extremism”, a special meeting in Madrid on
“Stemming the flow of foreign terrorist fighters”, and a special meeting in New
York on “Preventing terrorists from exploiting the Internet and social media to
recruit terrorists and incite terrorist acts, while respecting human rights and
fundamental freedoms”. The special meeting in Madrid resulted in a set of guiding
principles for detecting, intervening against and preventing the incitement and
facilitation of foreign terrorist fighters; preventing their travel; criminalizing and
prosecuting them; cooperating internationally; and rehabilitating and reintegrating
returning foreign terrorist fighters. 20
__________________
17

The “blowback rate” (the proportion of outgoing fighters who return and plot attacks against
their home country or region) from the Syrian Arab Republic is very low. However, it is likely
that the risk will gradually increase as the number of outgoing foreign terrorist fighters grows.
See Thomas Hegghammer and Petter Nesser, “Assessing the Islamic State’s Commitment to
Attacking the West”, Perspectives on Terrorism, vol. 9, No. 4 (August 2015).
18
S/2014/815, S/2015/358 and S/2015/891.
19
S/2015/123, S/2015/338, S/2015/377, S/2015/683 and S/2015/975.
20
S/2015/939.

16-01296

13/23

S/2016/92

49. Following the establishment of an ad hoc inter-agency working group on
foreign terrorist fighters by the Counter-Terrorism Implementation Task Force, a
capacity-building implementation plan for countering the flow of foreign terrorist
fighters was developed in close consultation with the Counter-Terrorism Committee
Executive Directorate and the Analytical Support and Sanctions Monitoring Team .
The development of this plan was called for by the Security Council in its
presidential statement of 29 May 2015 (S/PRST/2015/11).
50. The plan sets out priority recommendations for addressing the capacity building assistance needs of the most affected Member States, based on the
assessment of the Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive Directorate, and
includes a prioritized list of capacity-building and technical assistance projects
submitted by entities of the Counter-Terrorism Implementation Task Force, to be
implemented over the next 24 months. It represents the first atte mpt to develop a
more concerted, coherent approach to capacity-building.

A.

Countering the financing of ISIL
51. The Global Programme Against Money Laundering of the United Nations
Office on Drugs and Crime has collated good practices in disrupting th e financing
of terrorist and organized criminal groups. According to the Global Programme, a
“Financial Disruption Workbook”, produced and used for operations in Afghanistan,
has reduced the Taliban’s annual budget in Southern Afghanistan by over a third.
UNODC also plans to launch an initiative on enhancing the operational capability of
countries in the Middle East and North Africa to counter terrorism financing in the
context of foreign direct fighters.
52. The Organized Crime and Illicit Trafficking Branch of the United Nations
Office on Drugs and Crime recently launched a new global programme, entitled
Building Effective Networks against Transnational Organized Crime, which aims to
strengthen interregional criminal intelligence exchange and international
cooperation on transnational organized crime and terrorism. This will be achieved
through the “Networking the Networks” initiative, which has established a network
between existing international and regional law enforcement centres and entities to
promote criminal intelligence exchange and multilateral operations targeting
organized crime. The second focus area is the establishment of a network of law
enforcement training institutions to promote professional training. The third key
area will be strengthening capacity to conduct financial investigations.
53. In order to counter the looting and illicit trafficking of cultural property during
conflict, UNESCO will further strengthen its cooperation with the International
Criminal Police Organization (INTERPOL), the World Customs Organization,
the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime, the International Institute for the
Unification of Private Law, national specialized police and customs units, the
International Council of Museums and other key partners, suc h as museums and art
market operators, for the tracking, authentication, seizure, conservation and
restitution of stolen and illegally exported objects.
54. INTERPOL has launched a programme, with the support of the European
Union and in collaboration with the Common Markets of East and Southern Africa,
to develop capacities to prevent criminals and terrorists from exploiting financial
institutions. The programme will enhance cooperation between financial

14/23

16-01296

S/2016/92

intelligence units, law enforcement officers and cri minal-justice officials in
prosecuting those who engage in money-laundering and terrorist financing, whether
through the formal banking system or through hawala-type services.

B.

Criminal-justice responses to the terrorist threat
55. Several United Nations entities are actively engaged in supporting the efforts of
Member States to provide an effective criminal-justice response to the threat posed by
ISIL. The recently established Working Group on Legal and Criminal Justice
Responses to Terrorism of the Counter-Terrorism Implementation Task Force brings
together the main United Nations bodies dealing with this issue. United Nations
entities are devoting considerable effort to identifying specific good practices and
assisting Member States to criminalize, investigate, prosecute and adjudicate
terrorists, including foreign terrorist fighters. They are also supporting the efforts of
States to develop prosecution, rehabilitation and reintegration strategies for returnees.
The Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive Directorate assists the CounterTerrorism Committee to monitor States’ implementation of the criminal -justice
requirements of the relevant Security Council resolutions and facilitates related
technical assistance activities, in cooperation with United Nations and international
and regional partners. The Terrorism Prevention Branch, for example, has launched a
five-year initiative on criminal-justice responses to foreign terrorist fighters for
countries in the Middle East, North Africa and the Balkans, in cooperation with the
Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive Directorate, the Parliamentary Assembly of
the Mediterranean and the International Institute for Justice and the Rule of Law.

C.

Preventing and disrupting travel by foreign terrorist fighters
56. The United Nations Counter-Terrorism Centre, acting in close cooperation
with the Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive Directorate and several other
partners (including the International Air Transport Association (IATA), the
International Civil Aviation Organization (ICAO), INTERPOL, the International
Organization for Migration, the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime and the
World Customs Organization), has developed a project to raise awareness of and
gather information about the challenges faced by the most affected Member States
in implementing advance passenger information systems. It will conduct the first
in-depth study on this topic during the first quarter of 2016. The United Nations
Office on Drugs and Crime is extending its Airport Communic ation Project to the
Middle East and North Africa region, with a view to strengthening law enforcement
capacities at international airports to detect and interdict suspicious travellers,
including foreign terrorist fighters.
57. INTERPOL continues to develop its global database on foreign terrorist
fighters and to help Member States to intensify and accelerate the exchange of
information. It will further exploit data on foreign terrorist fighters and produce, on
demand, more analytical reports, with a view to identifying new routes, travel
patterns or evasive tactics they are using in travelling to and from conflict zones.
INTERPOL will continue to work with its member States to update and strengthen
its databases and will extend its system of Special Notice s and databases (including
the foreign terrorist fighter database) to frontline immigration and border control
officials. INTERPOL is also assisting its members in the development of a “layered

16-01296

15/23

S/2016/92

system” of screening to apprehend foreign terrorist fighters w ho successfully evade
border checks.

D.

Countering recruitment and preventing/countering
violent extremism
58. On 15 January 2016, I presented the Plan of Action to Prevent Violent
Extremism to the General Assembly. 21 The Plan, which takes a practical and
comprehensive approach to addressing the drivers of violent extremism, includes
more than 70 recommendations for concerted action at the global, regional and
national levels, based on five key priorities: (a) prevention; (b) principled leadership
and effective institutions; (c) promoting human rights; (d) an all-out approach; (e) and
United Nations engagement. The Assembly will hold a formal debate on the Plan in
the coming months and an international conference, to be co-organized by
Switzerland and the United Nations, will be held in April 2016. The General
Assembly’s fifth review of the United Nations Global Counter -Terrorism Strategy, to
be held in June 2016, will offer a further opportunity for Member States and the
United Nations system to consider the recommendations contained in the Plan of
Action.
59. The Counter-Terrorism Committee and the Counter-Terrorism Committee
Executive Directorate continue to facilitate regional and national workshops on
developing comprehensive approaches to countering incitement to commit terrorist
acts and violent extremism, in accordance with Security Council resolutions 1624
(2005) and 2178 (2014), including workshops held in Kenya and Tunisia in 2015.
The workshops have served to develop the concept of strategic partnerships in this
area between a broad range of Government ministries and non -governmental actors,
including community and religious leaders, civil society organizations, and
women’s and youth groups.
60. The United Nations Counter-Terrorism Centre has developed a project aimed
at enhancing the understanding of foreign terrorist fighters in the Syrian Arab
Republic, including the motivation of individuals joining extremist groups in Iraq
and the Syrian Arab Republic, understanding key influences on thei r thinking and
gaining insight into the reasons why they return to their home States. The project,
which will be completed in 2016, is intended to support States in developing
policies to dissuade potential foreign terrorist fighters from travelling, provi de
material for strategic communications and assist in the design of effective
rehabilitation and reintegration programmes.
61. The United Nations Entity for Gender Equality and the Empowerment of
Women (UN-Women), acting in close consultation with the Counter-Terrorist
Committee Executive Directorate, is developing a global research programme on the
drivers of recruitment, particularly the recruitment of women, to ISIL and other
terrorist groups. The programme will also strengthen the capacity of women’s civil
society groups to engage in preventing extremist violence and ensure that women
and girls in areas impacted by violence have access to comprehensive and integrated
strategies. Within the framework of the United Nations Integrated Strategy for the

__________________
21

16/23

A/70/674.

16-01296

S/2016/92

Sahel, UN-Women will support a number of initiatives, in partnership with relevant
United Nations agencies, to politically and economically empower rural women.
62. The United Nations Interregional Crime and Justice Research Institute
(UNICRI) is gathering a series of lessons learned and promising practices and
conducting table-top exercises to engage Member States in the development of
action plans to counter violent extremism and address the challenges posed by
returning foreign terrorist fighters. These activities will be implemented at the
regional level to encourage the sharing of experiences and knowledge. UNICRI is
also developing a programme for foreign terrorist fighters who are detained and/or
imprisoned upon their return.

E.

Disrupting the planning and facilitation of attacks by ISIL
63. INTERPOL has developed a project, code-named “Watchmaker”, to analyse
and disseminate information, including biometrics, collected on improvised
explosive devices worldwide. It will continue to work with the Ana lytical Support
and Sanctions Monitoring Team and other United Nations partners to identify the
networks responsible for building these devices, to develop the capacity of Member
States to prevent attacks using improvised explosive devices and to investiga te the
individuals responsible for such attacks. Joint INTERPOL -Security Council Special
Notices will continue to be an important global counter -terrorism tool and
INTERPOL will continue to work with the Analytical Support and Sanctions
Monitoring Team to strengthen the Special Notices, including through the inclusion
of biometrics.

IV. Strategic responses
64. The resolution of ongoing conflicts, including the Syrian conflict, would have
a direct impact on the driving forces behind the recruitment of foreign terrorist
fighters by ISIL. The responses of Member States and the United Nations must
therefore be strategic and consistent in addressing the underlying political and
socioeconomic causes of both the Syrian conflict and the recruitment of foreign
terrorist fighters and in ensuring justice and accountability for human rights
violations. The response should be multifaceted and focus on short -, medium- and
long-term objectives.
65. In order to address the grave threat posed by ISIL, including the infl ux of
foreign terrorist fighters to Iraq and the Syrian Arab Republic and ISIL’s extensive
financing activities, it is essential to identify a political resolution to the Syrian
conflict. This process will require sustained and determined international
commitment and effective implementation of Security Council resolution 2254
(2015), which sets out a path towards formal intra-Syrian negotiations on a political
transition process pursuant to the 2012 Geneva communiqué and a parallel
nationwide ceasefire. It will also require that all States expeditiously implement
Council resolutions 2178 (2104), 2199 (2015) and 2253 (2015). The process should
also address the grievances exploited by ISIL to gain support for its presence from
among certain local communities.

16-01296

17/23

S/2016/92

66. A strategic, rule-of-law-based approach to reducing the number of foreign
terrorist fighters while continuing to choke off ISIL’s funding could help advance
the implementation of the relevant Security Council resolutions, including those that
seek to achieve sustainable peace through the inclusion in international political
processes of local actors (for example, women and youth) with an intimate
understanding of the conflict’s dynamics.

V. Recommendations
67. The following recommendations are submitted for the consideration of
Member States and the entities of the United Nations system.

A.

Strengthening the capacities of Member States

1.

Countering the financing of terrorism
68. Member States are encouraged to take action to counter the fi nancing of
terrorism as set out below:
(a) ISIL’s rapid and effective mobilization of vast financial resources
reaffirms the urgent need to strengthen measures to prevent and disrupt terrorist
financing in all regions of the world. In order to implement e ffective policies to
counter terrorist financing, we must understand the nature of ISIL financing as it
evolves. I therefore call on Member States to take steps to monitor and address the
threat and to share information on an ongoing basis with the relevan t international
assessment bodies, including the Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive
Directorate, the Analytical Support and Sanctions Monitoring Team, the Financial
Action Task Force and regional bodies styled after the Task Force, so that they can
understand the gravity of the threat and formulate effective global and regional
responses;
(b) I also call on Member States to implement fully, and with renewed
urgency, the sanctions regime introduced by the Security Council in its resolutions
1267 (1999), 1989 (2011) and 2253 (2015). In accordance with the latter resolution,
Member States should continue to propose names of individuals, groups,
undertakings and entities participating by any means in the financing or support of
the activities of ISIL, Al-Qaida and associated individuals, groups, undertakings and
entities for inclusion on the ISIL (Da’esh) and Al-Qaida Sanctions List. In
accordance with resolution 1373 (2001), States should also freeze terrorists’ assets
without delay, as a preventive measure to disrupt terrorist activity, rather than
relying upon the provisions of national criminal law;
(c) Even though terrorism and transnational organized crime are distinct
phenomena, Member States are encouraged not to rely exclusively on the
international counter-terrorism instruments in countering terrorism financing. They
may call on other relevant international instruments, including the United Nations
Convention against Transnational Organized Crime of 2001 and its Protocols, the
United Nations Convention against Corruption of 2004 and the relevant conventions
on drugs. All these tools can and should be utilized to facilitate effective
international and regional cooperation;

18/23

16-01296

S/2016/92

(d) I urge Member States to take immediate steps to strengthen their
relationships with the private sector in countering the financing of terrorism by
ISIL, including financial institutions (banks, money-value businesses of all types
and other financial businesses and professions), the antiquities sector, and Internet
service providers. Member States should partner with the relevant international
institutions and the private sector to ensure the coherence and effectiveness of
counter-financing of terrorism initiatives to prevent ISIL and its affiliates from
accessing the international financial system;
(e) The timely exchange and use of financial intelligence are crucial, not just
in the investigation of terrorist attacks, including those committed by ISIL, but also
in disrupting the planning and facilitation of attacks. Member States should
prioritize the active sharing of financial information (domestically, regionally and
internationally) and adopt a holistic, whole-of-Government approach to the
exchange of financial information by all relevant institutions. The gathering and use
of financial intelligence, as with any other form of intelligence gathering, should be
carefully regulated by law so as not to unduly infringe upon human rights,
particularly the right to privacy;
(f) Lastly, Member States should ensure that they have the capacity to
counter ISIL financing in a manner commensurate with the gravity of the threat in
order to ensure that illicit financial flows to ISIL are effectively cut off.
2.

Countering the recruitment through and the use of the Internet in countering
radicalization and violent extremism
69. Member States are encouraged to take action to counter the recruitment
through and the use of the Internet in countering radicalization and violent
extremism as set out below:
(a) The Plan of Action to Prevent Violent Extremism includes
recommendations for action to be taken at the global, regional and national levels to
address the drivers of violent extremism. Implementation of the Plan will help
promote comprehensive implementation of pillar I of the United Nations Global
Counter-Terrorism Strategy, on conditions conducive to the spread of terrorism and
thereby help prevent recruitment by ISIL. I invite Governments to develop national
plans of action to prevent violent extremism and I particularly encourag e grass-roots
initiatives undertaken within this framework, including, in particular, those that
promote the inclusion of women and youth;
(b) It is essential to strengthen preventive and proactive action through
education. The education sector can play a critical role in countering the appeal of
ISIL by strengthening relevant education and training programmes, mainstreaming
the prevention of violent extremism through ministries of education and developing
guidelines and practices for teachers and other educators on identifying and
addressing violent extremism in formal and non-formal settings;
(c) I also encourage Member States to establish effective diversion
programmes for youth to reduce their susceptibility to recruitment and abuse by
ISIL and its affiliates. Member States with high migrant populations from areas of
conflict should develop inclusion activities targeted at children and youth;
(d) I urge Member States to adopt effective strategies to counter the threat of
online radicalization by ISIL. This will require that Governments take action in

16-01296

19/23

S/2016/92

addition to legislative and law enforcement measures, including engaging with
communities and industry. In order for such campaigns to be effective, the private
sector should be an active participant;
(e) I urge Member States to review their domestic legal frameworks to
strengthen their capacities to bring to justice alleged perpetrators for criminal use of
ICT in support of ISIL, in compliance with international human rights law.
3.

Preventing and disrupting the travel by foreign terrorist fighters
70. Member States are encouraged to take action to prevent and disrupt the travel
of foreign terrorist fighters as set out below:
(a) It is essential that Member States criminalize travel by foreign terroris t
fighters, in accordance with the relevant resolutions of the Security Council, and to
take measures to strengthen their border-management regimes in order to address
the most serious vulnerabilities exploited by ISIL to facilitate the movement of
foreign terrorist fighters to and from territories under its control. This urgent need
has recently been reaffirmed by instances in which high -profile terrorists have
succeeded in travelling undetected;
(b) I call on Member States to ensure direct access by immigration officers
to all relevant INTERPOL databases available through its I -24/7 global police
communications system, including Special Notices, nominal data, the Stolen and
Lost Travel Documents database, and the Foreign Terrorist Fighters database;
(c) I call on Member States to assess the travel routes used by foreign
terrorist fighters on a continuous basis and to share their findings with a view to
introducing specific measures to detect and prevent such fighters from travelling to
join ISIL utilizing such routes. I urge Member States to designate dedicated and/or
clearly identified points of contact within relevant law enforcement, intelligence,
security and immigration departments, and their counterparts at airlines, so as to
facilitate the prompt exchange of passenger data on a 24/7 basis, with the aim of
disrupting travel by foreign terrorist fighters.

4.

Disrupting the capacity to plan and facilitate terrorist attacks in the name of ISIL
71. Member States are encouraged to take action to disrupt the capacity of
terrorists acting alone or in small cells to plan and facilitate terrorist attacks in the
name of ISIL as set out below:
(a) I call on Member States to employ the full range of human rights compliant tools at their disposal, from “soft” intervention measures to criminal justice measures, in order to thwart attacks by terrorists acting alone or in small cells
in the name of ISIL. Member States should strengthen cooperation and information sharing between intelligence and security agencies and the prosecution and develop a
proactive approach to the investigation of offences committed by foreign terrorist
fighters with a view to identifying them and preventing such attacks;
(b) Generating evidence against foreign terrorist fighters is a complex and
multifaceted task. Member States should consider reviewing national legislation to
ensure that evidence collected through special investigative techniques or from States
of destination, or evidence collected through ICT and social media, including through

20/23

16-01296

S/2016/92

electronic surveillance, may be admitted as evidence in cases connected to foreign
terrorist fighters acting for ISIL while respecting international human rights law;
(c) I encourage Member States to take steps to ensure effective inter -agency
coordination, including by developing multi-agency task forces and liaison officers,
in order to ensure a collective response to countering ISIL. Member States should
also consider establishing appropriate laws and mechanisms that allow for the
broadest possible international cooperation, including effective joint investigations,
the appointment of liaison officers, police-to-police cooperation, the establishment
of 24/7 networks for cooperation, the transfer of criminal proceedings and the
transfer of sentences.
5.

Treatment of foreign terrorist fighters returning to their countries of origin
72. Member States are encouraged to take action to address the treatment of
foreign terrorist fighters returning to their countries of origin as set out below:
(a) The employment of rigid prosecution policies and practices against
foreign terrorist fighters can be counterproductive to the implementation of
comprehensive strategies to combat their activities and to combat the violent
extremism that can lead to terrorism. Member States should also consider
alternatives to incarceration, as well as reintegration and possible rehabilitation of
ISIL returnees, prisoners and detainees;
(b) I urge Member States to ensure that their competent authorities apply a
case-by-case approach to ISIL returnees, based on risk assessment, the availability
of evidence and related factors and to develop and implement strategies t o address
specific categories of returnees, in particular minors, women, family members and
other potentially vulnerable individuals; providers of medical services and other
humanitarian needs; and disillusioned returnees who have committed less serious
offences;
(c) Returnees can be especially effective in counter-messaging campaigns,
due to their credibility based on personal experience in conflict zones. Member
States should consider promoting their active involvement in prevention
programmes, as appropriate.

6.

Protection of cultural heritage
73. Members States are encouraged to take action to protect cultural heritage as
set out below:
(a) I call on Member States to assist in strengthening the ability of affected
States to prevent and mitigate the loss of cultural heritage and diversity resulting
from the conflict in Iraq and the Syrian Arab Republic by developing institutional
and professional capacities for reinforced protection. I encourage Member States to
keep UNESCO and INTERPOL informed of all seized antiquities so that these
organizations can help ensure their safe return in accordance with Security Council
resolution 2199 (2015);
(b) I urge Member States to strengthen customs controls and to regulate the
art market by improving implementation of due diligence principles and
strengthening criminal investigations, with a view to detecting possible links to ISIL
in the seizure of Iraqi and Syrian antiquities within their territories .

16-01296

21/23

S/2016/92

B.

Strengthening the United Nations response

1.

Countering the financing of terrorism
74. As noted in my report of 21 May 2015 on the threat of terrorists benefiting
from transnational organized crime (S/2015/366), there is room to enhance the
United Nations response to the threat of terrorist financing and its links with
transnational organized crime as it pertains to countering ISIL and its affiliates. The
response of the Organization needs to be more systematic, comprehensive and
multidimensional, particularly at the field level, where United Nations peacekeeping
operations and special political missions are already confronting these challenges:
(a) In addition to the work already being undertaken by agencies such as the
Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive Directorate, INTERPOL, the United
Nations Counter-Terrorism Centre, UNESCO and the United Nations Office on
Drugs and Crime, more research and analytical work should be conducted on the
nexus between ISIL’s terrorist activities and transnational organized crime,
specifically on the way in which transnational organized crime funds ISIL’s terrorist
activities. Relevant United Nations entities with a field presence in areas of major
ISIL operations should strengthen their understanding of new security threats and
the way in which they are funded, and should report regularly to the relevant United
Nations counter-terrorism entities;
(b) I shall take steps to ensure that the United Nations prioritizes this crucial
cross-cutting issue and supports Member States that require and request technical
assistance in building capacities to counter the financing of terrorism. I shall
consider a number of options, including: the establishment of a system -wide
approach against transnational organized crime and terrorism financing, which will
ensure that tackling terrorist financing remains a strategic priority; that there is
strategic oversight, within the United Nations, of the links between transnational
organized crime and terrorism in order to ensure a coordinated and holistic response
from all relevant agencies; and that Member States have the capacity to tackle
financial crime, including terrorist financing.

2.

Countering recruitment through and the use of the Internet in countering
radicalization and violent extremism
75. The adoption of the “One-UN” approach, mobilizing all relevant United
Nations agencies, funds and programmes, both at Headquarters and in the field, will
enable the Organization to comprehensively support Member States in
implementing the Plan of Action to Prevent Violent Extremism:
(a) I intend to establish a high-level action group to prevent violent
extremism, under my direct leadership;
(b) The United Nations system must mobilize to engage a wide range of
actors, including women and youth, in developing strategies for countering
recruitment and radicalization to terrorism. Relevant United Nations entities,
including UN-Women, my Envoy on Youth and my Special Envoy for Youth
Refugees are committed to supporting the vision put forward by the Security
Council in its resolutions 2242 (2015) and 2250 (2015) on the role of women and
youth in contributing to international peace and security;

22/23

16-01296

S/2016/92

(c) More specifically, it is essential to ensure that relevant offices are
equipped with the dedicated expertise and other relevant and appropriate
structures/mechanisms required to specifically consider the gender dimension of
recruitment, radicalization, and the financing of the activities and operations of
terrorist groups, primarily ISIL. UN-Women and the Special Representative on
Sexual Violence in Conflict are ready to provide support in that regard. I invite
United Nations offices to support the efforts of Member States to develop new ICT
tools to facilitate cooperation between investigators and prosecutors involved in
terrorism cases;
(d) United Nations entities, including the United Nations Office on Drugs
and Crime and the United Nations Counter-Terrorism Centre, should support efforts
to strengthen the capacities of law enforcement agencies to use ICT to counter ISIL.
I invite all United Nations entities to work to empower civil society worldwide to
confront the narratives disseminated by ISIL through the Internet and social media.
3.

Preventing and disrupting travel by foreign terrorist fighters
76. The United Nations will take action to prevent and disrupt travel by foreign
terrorist fighters as set out below:
(a) I invite the Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive Directorate and
UNHCR to encourage border guards, intelligence services and immigration and
asylum authorities of the States concerned and other States located along travel
routes, as well as relevant international and regional organizations, to cooperate in
assisting in the early identification of terrorist suspects;
(b) I encourage the Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive Directorate, the
Counter-Terrorism Implementation Task Force and the United Nations Counter Terrorism Centre, together with IATA, ICAO, INTERPOL and the World Customs
Organization, to conduct a series of activities during 2016 and 2017 aimed at
encouraging Member States to require that airlines operating in their territories
provide advance passenger information to the appropriate national authorities in
order to detect the departure from their territories, or attempted entry i nto or transit
through their territories, of foreign terrorist fighters;
(c) I invite the Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive Directorate, in
cooperation with relevant Member States, to identify systemic and country -specific
capacity-building needs in stemming the travel of foreign terrorist fighters
attempting to join ISIL. High-priority needs identified within this framework should
be shared as a matter of urgency with the Counter-Terrorism Implementation Task
Force, the Global Counter-terrorism Forum, donor States and other entities tasked
with providing technical assistance to States.

4.

Protection of cultural heritage
77. In order to protect the cultural heritage of affected States, I urge the Security
Council to incorporate such protection into United Nations humanitarian action;
security strategies, including action to counter terrorism; and peacebuilding
processes.

16-01296

23/23
