S/2020/497

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
4 June 2020
Original: English

Letter dated 4 June 2020 from the President of the Security Council
addressed to the Secretary-General and the Permanent Representatives
of the members of the Security Council
[Original: English and French]
I have the honour to refer to Security Council resolution 2525 (2020), in
connection with the agenda item “Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan
and South Sudan”. Resolution 2525 (2020) was adopted on 3 June 2020 in accordance
with the voting procedure set out in the letter dated 27 March 2020 from the President
of the Security Council (S/2020/253), a procedure agreed upon in the light of the
extraordinary circumstances caused by the coronavirus disease pandemic.
Pursuant to that procedure, I enclose herewith copies of the following documents:
• My letter dated 2 June 2020, addressed to the Permanent Representatives
of the members of the Security Council members (see annex 1), putting to the
vote the draft resolution contained in document S/2020/486 (see enclosure to
annex 1).
• Letters received in reply from members of the Security Council, indicating
their national positions on the draft resolution (see annexes 2 to 16).
• Statements subsequently submitted by members of the Security Council,
providing their explanations of vote (see annexes 17 to 21).
The present letter and its annexes will be issued as a document of the
Security Council.
(Signed) Nicolas de Rivière
President of the Security Council

20-07478 (E) 100620 180620

*2007478*

S/2020/497

Annex 1
Letter dated 2 June 2020 from the President of the Security Council
addressed to the Permanent Representatives of the members of the
Security Council
[Original: English and French]
In accordance with the procedure agreed upon by the members of the Security
Council during the current extraordinary circumstances caused by the coronavirus
disease pandemic, and as set out in the letter dated 27 March 2020 from the President
of the Security Council addressed to the members of the Council (S/2020/253), I
would like to draw your attention to the following:
The members of the Council have discussed a draft resolution, submitted
by Germany and the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, in
connection with the agenda item “Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan
and South Sudan”. That draft resolution, has been put in blue.
In my capacity as President of the Council, I hereby put the above-mentioned
draft resolution to a vote. The non-extendable 24-hour voting period for this draft
resolution will begin at 7 p.m. on Tuesday, 2 June 2020. The non-extendable 24-hour
voting period will expire at 7 p.m. on Wednesday, 3 June 2020.
Please submit your vote (in favour, against or abstain) on the draft resolution, as
well as your possible explanation of vote, by sending a letter signed by the Permanent
Representative or Chargé d’affaires a.i. within the non-extendable 24-hour voting
period set out above to the Director of the Security Council Affairs Division in the
United Nations Secretariat (egian@un.org).
It is my intention to circulate a letter listing the outcome of the vote within
three hours of the conclusion of the 24-hour voting period. I also intend to convene
a video-teleconference of the Security Council to announce the outcome of the
vote shortly after the conclusion of the voting period, on the morning of Thursday,
4 June 2020.
(Signed) Nicolas de Rivière
President of the Security Council
Ambassador
Permanent Representative of France to the United Nations

2/26

20-07478

S/2020/497

Enclosure

S/2020/486

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional
2 June 2020
Original: English

Germany and United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern
Ireland: draft resolution
The Security Council,
Reaffirming all its previous resolutions and presidential statements concerning
the situation in Sudan,
Reaffirming its strong commitment to the sovereignty, unity, independence,
and territorial integrity of Sudan,
Reaffirming the primary responsibility of the Government of Sudan to protect
civilians across its territory and recognising improvements in security conditions
in Darfur, acknowledging in this regard the Government of Sudan’s National Plan
for Civilian Protection (S/2020/429) and the weapons-collection programme, while
expressing concern that the security situation in some regions of Darfur remains
precarious, and underscoring the need to protect peacebuilding gains in Darfur, avoid
a relapse into conflict and mitigate the risks for the population posed inter alia by
threats against civilians in Darfur, inter-communal violence, human rights violations
and abuses, violations of international humanitarian law and continued displacement,
Underscoring that it is imperative that the withdrawal of the African UnionUnited Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur (UNAMID) should take into account
the progress made in the peace process, and supporting the African Union Peace and
Security Council’s call for extreme caution in the withdrawal of UNAMID,
Recognising the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on UNAMID’s drawdown,
Taking note of the Special Report of the Chairperson of the African Union
Commission and the Secretary-General of the United Nations (S/2020/202),
Taking note of the of the African Union Peace and Security Council’s
Communiqué of 3 March 2020 (PSC/PR/COMM.(CMXIII)) and 27 May 2020
(PS/PR/COMM.(CMXXVII)),
Determining that the situation in Darfur constitutes a threat to international
peace and security,
Acting under Chapter VII of the United Nations Charter,
1. Decides to extend the mandate of the African Union-United Nations
Hybrid Operation in Darfur (UNAMID) as contained in resolution 2495 (2019) until

20-074783/26

S/2020/497

31 December 2020, and further decides that UNAMID shall maintain its current
troop and police ceiling during this period;
2. Expresses its intention to decide by 31 December 2020, taking into account
the findings of the Special Report requested in paragraph 11 of this resolution,
courses of action regarding the responsible drawdown and exit of UNAMID in line
with paragraph 1 of this resolution;
3. Decides that UNAMID’s strategic priority shall be protection of civilians
as set out in paragraph 3 (iii) of resolution 2495 (2019), to be implemented including
by supporting the Government of Sudan’s capacity to protect civilians, and by
preserving the requisite capacity, particularly in Jebel Marra;
4. Underscores that UNAMID shall retain its responsibility for the protection
of civilians in Darfur in line with paragraph 3 of this resolution and without prejudice
to the primary responsibility of the Government of Sudan, and reiterates that the
modalities and timeline for the transition of responsibility from UNAMID to the
United Nations Integrated Transition Assistance Mission in Sudan (UNITAMS) for
unarmed civilian protection activities, in line with UNITAMS strategic objectives,
will be determined by the UNITAMS-UNAMID transition coordination mechanism,
as appropriate and in line with paragraph 5 of this resolution;
5. Reiterates its request to the Secretary-General to continue transition
planning and management in accordance with the established policies, directives
and best practices in order to ensure that the eventual transition from UNAMID to
UNITAMS is phased, sequenced and efficient, and further reiterates its requests, in
this regard, that UNAMID and UNITAMS establish a coordination mechanism to
determine the modalities and timelines for the transition of responsibilities where the
two missions have common strategic objectives and priorities in Darfur and in order
to ensure close coordination and cooperation, information and analysis sharing, to
maximise synergies, leverage resources and prevent the duplication of efforts;
6. Requests UNAMID to ensure that team sites and assets are handed over
in line with general United Nations practices and financial regulations, taking all
practical steps and precautions to ensure the assets are safely transferred to the
control of the designated entity, and calls upon UNAMID and the Government
of Sudan to finalise swiftly a revised framework agreement which ensures the
principle of civilian end-use and the security and physical integrity of the handedover UNAMID team sites and assets that will not be used by UNITAMS and its
integrated United Nations Country Team partners;
7. Calls upon the Government of Sudan to swiftly conclude its ongoing
investigations into recent looting of previously handed-over UNAMID team sites,
and further calls upon the Government of Sudan to continue to hold accountable
individuals who participated in such looting incidents;
8. Requests UNAMID to provide support, within its mandate and capacities
and existing resources, to Sudan in its efforts to contain the spread of COVID-19,
in particular to facilitate and support unhindered humanitarian access, including to
internally displaced persons and refugee camps, further requests UNAMID, member
states and the Government of Sudan to take all appropriate steps to protect the safety,
security and health of all UNAMID personnel, in line with resolution 2518 (2020),
including by allowing medical evacuations, while maintaining the continuity of
operations, and to take further steps towards the provision of training for UNAMID
personnel on issues related to preventing the spread of COVID-19;
9. Welcomes the initiatives undertaken by the Secretary-General to
standardize a culture of performance in United Nations peacekeeping, recalls its
4/26

20-07478

S/2020/497

requests in resolution 2378 (2017) and resolution 2436 (2018) that the SecretaryGeneral ensure that performance data related to the effectiveness of peacekeeping
operations is used to improve mission operations, including decisions such as
those regarding deployment, remediation, repatriation and incentives, reaffirms its
support for the development of a comprehensive and integrated performance policy
framework that identifies clear standards of performance for evaluating all United
Nations civilian and uniformed personnel working in and supporting peacekeeping
operations that facilitates effective and full implementation of mandates, and
includes comprehensive and objective methodologies based on clear and welldefined benchmarks to ensure accountability for underperformance and incentives
and recognition for outstanding performance, calls on the United Nations to apply
this framework to UNAMID as described in resolution 2436 (2018), in particular
by investigating and taking immediate action following significant performance
failures to implement the protection of civilians strategy, to include the rotation,
repatriation, replacement or dismissal of the under-performing UNAMID uniformed
or civilian personnel, including mission leadership and mission support personnel,
consistent with resolution 2436 (2018), and notes the efforts of the SecretaryGeneral to develop a comprehensive performance assessment system and requests
the Secretary-General and the troop and police contributing countries to seek to
increase the number of women in UNAMID, as well as to ensure the full, effective
and meaningful participation of women in all aspects of operations;
10. Requests the Secretary-General to provide the Security Council with an
update on the implementation of UNAMID’s mandate every 90 days as an annex to
the regular reporting requested on UNITAMS;
11. Request the Secretary-General and the Chairperson of the African Union
Commission to provide the Security Council with a Special Report no later than
31 October 2020, which includes an assessment of the situation on the ground,
including the impact of the peace process on the security situation in Darfur,
the capacity of the Government of Sudan, including the SPF, to protect civilians
in line with the strategy outlined in the Government of Sudan’s letter addressed
to the President of the Security Council dated 21 May 2020 (S/2020/429), and
recommendations on the appropriate course of action regarding the drawdown of
UNAMID, taking into account the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic;
12. Decides to remain actively seized of the matter.

20-074785/26

S/2020/497

Annex 2
Letter dated 3 June from the Permanent Representative of
Belgium to the United Nations addressed to the President of the
Security Council
I refer to the letter dated 2 June from the President of the Security Council
relating to the draft resolution on the African Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation
in Darfur (S/2020/486).
In accordance with the procedure set forth for the adoption of resolutions under
the current extraordinary circumstance caused by the coronavirus disease pandemic,
I am pleased to indicate that Belgium votes in favour of the draft resolution. At this
stage, my delegation does not intend to deliver an explanation of vote
(Signed) Marc Pecsteen de Buytswerve
Ambassador
Permanent Representative of Belgium to the United Nations

6/26

20-07478

S/2020/497

Annex 3
Letter dated 3 June 2020 from the Permanent Representative of
China to the United Nations addressed to the President of the
Security Council
I would like to thank you, Mr. President, and your team for the strong support
in facilitating the voting procedure.
Please be kindly informed that China will vote in favour on the draft resolution
(S/2020/486), submitted by Germany and the United Kingdom, regarding the
withdrawal arrangements of the African Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation
in Darfur.
(Signed) Zhang Jun
Ambassador
Permanent Representative of China
to the United Nations

20-074787/26

S/2020/497

Annex 4
Letter dated 2 June 2020 from the Special Envoy to the
Security Council of the Dominican Republic addressed to the
President of the Security Council
I refer to your letter dated 2 June 2020, regarding draft resolution S/2020/486,
on the extension of the mandate of the African Union-United Nations Hybrid
Operation in Darfur.
Upon instructions from my Government, the delegation of the Dominican
Republic votes in favour of the above-mentioned draft resolution.
(Signed) José Singer Weisinger
Ambassador
Special Envoy to the Security Council of the Dominican Republic

8/26

20-07478

S/2020/497

Annex 5
Letter dated 3 June 2020 from the Permanent Representative of
Estonia to the United Nations addressed to the President of the
Security Council
I have the honour to inform you, Sir, in accordance with the relevant
provisions of the United Nations Charter, that my delegation votes in favour of the
draft resolution regarding the African Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in
Darfur (S/2020/486).
(Signed) Sven Jürgenson
Ambassador
Permanent Representative of Estonia to the United Nations

20-074789/26

S/2020/497

Annex 6
Letter dated 3 June 2020 from the Permanent Representative of
France to the United Nations addressed to the President of the
Security Council
[Original: French]
I refer to the letter dated 2 June 2020 from the President of the Security Council,
calling on the members of the Council to vote on the draft resolution, submitted by
Germany and the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, relating to
the extension of the mandate of the African Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation
in Darfur, put in blue under the symbol S/2020/486. France votes in favour.
(Signed) Nicolas de Rivière
Ambassador
Permanent Representative of France to the United Nations

10/26

20-07478

S/2020/497

Annex 7
Letter dated 3 June 2020 from the Deputy Permanent Representative
of Germany to the United Nations addressed to the President of the
Security Council
It is my honour, Sir, to write to you in response to your letter dated 2 June
2020, initiating a written voting procedure, in line with the agreement reached
among members of the Security Council.
The vote of the Federal Republic of Germany on the draft resolution submitted
by Germany and the United Kingdom regarding the mandate of the African UnionUnited Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur, as contained in document S/2020/486,
is as follows.
The Federal Republic
above-mentioned resolution.

of

Germany

votes

in

favour

of

the

(Signed) Juergen Schulz
Ambassador
Deputy Permanent Representative of Germany to the United Nations

20-0747811/26

S/2020/497

Annex 8
Letter dated 2 June 2020 from the Permanent Representative of
Indonesia to the United Nations addressed to the President of the
Security Council
I am writing in reference to the letter dated 2 June 2020 from the Permanent
Representative of France to the United Nations, in his capacity as President of the
Security Council, regarding the draft resolution in connection with the agenda item
“Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan” (S/2020/486).
I hereby indicate that Indonesia votes in favour of said resolution.
(Signed) Dian Triansyah Djani
Ambassador
Permanent Representative of Indonesia
to the United Nations

12/26

20-07478

S/2020/497

Annex 9
Letter dated 2 June 2020 from the Permanent Representative of
the Niger to the United Nations addressed to the President of the
Security Council
I am writing in response to the letter dated 2 June 2020 from the President
of the Security Council, calling on the members of the Council to vote on the draft
resolution submitted by Germany and the United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland under the item “Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and
South Sudan” (S/2020/486).
In accordance with the agreed temporary procedures for the adoption of
resolutions during the coronavirus disease pandemic restrictions, I have the honour
to indicate that the Republic of the Niger votes in favour of said draft resolution.
(Signed) Abdou Abarry
Ambassador
Permanent Representative of the Niger to the United Nations

20-0747813/26

S/2020/497

Annex 10
Letter dated 3 June 2020 from the Permanent Representative of the
Russian Federation to the United Nations addressed to the President
of the Security Council
I have the honour, Sir, to acknowledge receipt of your letter dated 2 June 2020,
on the beginning of the voting procedure for the draft resolution in connection with
the agenda item “Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan”
(S/2020/486).
In accordance with the procedure for the adoption of resolutions of the Security
Council being in place for the duration of the restrictions on movement in New York
due to the coronavirus disease pandemic outlined in a letter dated 27 March 2020
from the President of the Security Council (S/2020/253), I have the honour to inform
you, Sir, that the Russian Federation votes in favour of the draft resolution contained
in document S/2020/486.
(Signed) Vassily Nebenzia
Ambassador
Permanent Representative of the Russian Federation to the United Nations

14/26

20-07478

S/2020/497

Annex 11
Letter dated 3 June 2020 from the Permanent Representative of
Saint Vincent and the Grenadines to the United Nations addressed
to the President of the Security Council
I have the honour to refer to the draft resolution (S/2020/486), submitted
by Germany and the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, in
connection with the agenda item “Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan
and South Sudan”.
In that respect, I wish to inform you that Saint Vincent and the Grenadines
votes in favour of the above-mentioned draft resolution.
(Signed) Inga Rhonda King
Ambassador
Permanent Representative of Saint Vincent and the Grenadines
to the United Nations

20-0747815/26

S/2020/497

Annex 12
Letter dated 3 June 2020 from the Permanent Representative of
South Africa to the United Nations addressed to the President of
the Security Council
I refer to your letter dated 2 June 2020, regarding the Security Council
draft resolution on the African Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur,
contained in document S/2020/486.
The delegation of the Republic of South Africa votes in favour of the abovementioned draft resolution.
(Signed) Jerry Matthews Matjila
Ambassador
Permanent Representative of South Africa
to the United Nations

16/26

20-07478

S/2020/497

Annex 13
Letter dated 3 June 2020 from the Permanent Representative of
Tunisia to the United Nations addressed to the President of the
Security Council
With reference to the letter dated 2 June 2020 from the Permanent Representative
of France, in his capacity as President of the Security Council, regarding the draft
resolution in connection with the agenda item “Reports of the Secretary-General
on the Sudan and South Sudan”, submitted by Germany and the United Kingdom of
Great Britain and Northern Ireland in document S/2020/486, I would like to inform
you, Sir, that Tunisia votes in favour of that draft resolution.
(Signed) Kais Kabtani
Ambassador
Permanent Representative of Tunisia to the United Nations

20-0747817/26

S/2020/497

Annex 14
Letter dated 3 June 2020 from the Chargé d’affaires of the
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland to the
United Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council
With reference to the letter dated 2 June 2020 from the President of the Security
Council, the United Kingdom votes in favour of the draft resolution (S/2020/486) in
connection with the agenda item “Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan
and South Sudan”.

(Signed) Jonathan Allen
Ambassador
Chargé d’affaires of the United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland to the United Nations

18/26

20-07478

S/2020/497

Annex 15
Letter dated 3 June 2020 from the Permanent Representative of the
United States of America to the United Nations addressed to the
President of the Security Council
On the draft resolution submitted by Germany and the United Kingdom of
Great Britain and Northern Ireland in connection with the agenda item “Reports
of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan” (S/2020/486), the United
States of America votes in favour.
(Signed) Kelly Craft
Ambassador
Permanent Representative of the United States of America
to the United Nations

20-0747819/26

S/2020/497

Annex 16
Letter dated 3 June 2020 from the Permanent Representative of
Viet Nam to the United Nations addressed to the President of the
Security Council
In reference to the letter of the President of the Security Council dated 2 June
2020, relating to the draft resolution in connection with the agenda item “Reports
of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan”, submitted by Germany
and the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, as contained in
document S/2020/486;
In accordance with the understanding and procedure for the consideration
of draft resolutions, agreed upon by the members of the Security Council during
the extraordinary circumstances caused by the coronavirus disease pandemic, as
reflected in the letter dated 7 May 2020 by the President of the Security Council on
the working methods of the Council for the month of May;
I would like to hereby inform you, Sir, that Viet Nam has decided to vote
in favour of the above-mentioned draft resolution and does not intend to make a
statement at this stage.
(Signed) Dang Dinh Quy
Ambassador
Permanent Representative of Viet Nam to the United Nations

20/26

20-07478

S/2020/497

Annex 17
Statement by the Permanent Representative of Estonia to the
United Nations, Sven Jürgenson
I would like to begin by thanking the penholders, the United Kingdom and
Germany, for facilitating the negotiations that produced the resolution the Security
Council is adopting today (resolution 2525 (2020). We would also like reiterate our
support for the Sudan as it strives to lead a successful transition to democracy, bring
peace to the country and oversee its economy’s recovery. Additionally, we would
like to express our solidarity with the Sudan as it fights the coronavirus disease
(COVID-19) pandemic.
We welcome the extension of the African Union-United Nations Hybrid
Operation in Darfur (UNAMID) until the end of 2020, which was also recommended
by the African Union Peace and Security Council. That was a logical step, for a
combination of reasons.
First, we have heard both the calls from the ground and the expressions of fear
that people have with respect to the withdrawal of UNAMID, and it is important to
respond to them. The transition from UNAMID to the Sudan in terms of the protection
of civilians should be smooth and gradual and it should not leave any security
vacuums that would threaten civilian lives. In this regard, we welcome the Sudan’s
plan to provide protection for civilians, which was communicated to the Security
Council last month. We hope that UNAMID and the United Nations Integrated
Transition Assistance Mission in Sudan will be seen as useful allies in building the
capacities necessary to assume the full responsibility of protecting civilians.
Secondly, as we are approaching the end of UNAMID, it is crucially important
that the withdrawal be done in a responsible manner, so as to ensure that any of the
gains secured since the start of the Operation, in 2007, will not be lost.
Thirdly, there are certain realities, such as the ongoing COVID-19 pandemic
and the rainy season, that have to be taken into account when planning for the
withdrawal of UNAMID.
Furthermore, as the realities evolve on the ground, we expect to take a decision
on the future of UNAMID. We are looking forward to working with the transitional
authorities of the Sudan on the future course of action.
Finally, we would like to express our thanks and support for UNAMID, which
has been helping to bring peace and security to the people in Darfur.

20-0747821/26

S/2020/497

Annex 18
Statement by the Deputy Permanent Representative of Germany to
the United Nations, Juergen Schulz
Today is a good day for the Security Council. We have collectively answered
the Sudan’s call to support its political transition from an authoritarian regime to
an inclusive and representative government. But more importantly, we hope that
this day marks the beginning of even stronger and more coherent support by the
United Nations for the Sudan’s transition — support that delivers concrete benefits
and helps to fulfil the aspirations of the Sudanese people for a peaceful, stable,
democratic and prosperous future.
The new United Nations Mission that the Security Council has established
today (resolution 2524 (2020)) offers a broad support package, based on the requests
of the Government of the Sudan.
The United Nations Integrated Transition Assistance Mission in Sudan
(UNITAMS) will work to achieve four strategic objectives: political transition,
democratic governance and protection, and promotion of human rights; peace
processes and implementation of future peace agreements; peacebuilding,
civilian protection and the rule of law, in particular in Darfur and the Two Areas;
and mobilization of economic and development assistance and coordination of
humanitarian assistance.
Let us be realistic — all of these tasks are enormous, and the United Nations
Mission cannot deliver on those objectives alone. It is an assistance mission. The
Sudanese Government and all Sudanese stakeholders need to work together. The
United Nations should and will be there to support, advise and assist.
There are some areas where we will need to have a broader international
support package. This is true in the area of economic recovery and development,
which is why Germany is partnering with the Sudan, the European Union and the
United Nations to host a virtual high-level partnership conference on 25 June from
Berlin. With this conference we want to send a strong signal of joint support for
a successful democratic transition. In addition, we aim at mobilizing financial
resources from international partners to assist the urgently required reform process
in the Sudan.
Let us also be frank about some other areas where the Mission will have to
work in close coordination and complementarity with others, namely, peacebuilding,
strengthening accountability and rule of law institutions, and protecting human
rights, especially in the conflict-affected regions of the Sudan. Although UNITAMS
has a clear mandate for these tasks, it is not a peacekeeping operation, and as much
as Germany supports a transition from peacekeeping to peacebuilding, concerns
about the protection of civilians in Darfur, which merit a peacekeeping response,
remain. This is why it is important that the Council has also extended the mandate of
the African Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur (UNAMID) until the
end of this year (resolution 2525 (2020)) and has asked the United Nations and the
African Union to provide the Council with an analysis of the situation on the ground
before any decision on the future of UNAMID is made.
Today is also a good day because it ushers in a new era of partnerships — in
particular a partnership between the new Sudan and the Security Council — which
should be built on trust and not on confrontation, as was sometimes the case with
the former regime. We value the open and frank discussion with our partners in the
Sudan about this new mandate.

22/26

20-07478

S/2020/497

Partnership is also relevant when it comes to the role of the African Union.
Germany very much welcomes the intention of the African Union to continue to
assist the Sudan on its path of political transition.
We would like to thank all partners in the Council for their support during
negotiations that have led to the unanimous adoption of the two resolutions. It would
be remiss of me not to thank our fellow penholder, the United Kingdom, for the
truly outstanding collaboration we had throughout the long months of preparing this
mandate, and we offer a special thanks to the United Kingdom’s team in New York.

20-0747823/26

S/2020/497

Annex 19
Statement by the Permanent Representative of Indonesia to the
United Nations, Dian Triansyah Djani
Indonesia welcomes today’s adoption of resolution 2525 (2020), on the African
Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur (UNAMID).
We commend both penholders’ efforts in facilitating the negotiations and
their commitment to championing consensus amid the challenging circumstances
resulting from the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic.
Indonesia believes that a responsible drawdown of UNAMID is closely
linked to the Sudan’s overall journey towards peace and stability. With this in mind,
Indonesia voted in favour of the resolution.
As UNAMID’s drawdown has coincided with an unprecedented global
pandemic, we need to adjust the drawdown plan to ensure that its execution is
smooth and responsible. We welcome the new deadline and look forward to hearing
the Secretary-General’s assessment on progress in the drawdown.
In the meantime, UNAMID needs to continue to play its protection-ofcivilian role in Darfur and support the Government of the Sudan in responding to
the COVID-19 pandemic. These efforts should be undertaken while ensuring the
safety, security and health of all peacekeepers and workers serving under UNAMID.
Finally, Indonesia hopes that, with resolution 2525 (2020), the responsible
drawdown of UNAMID will smoothen the Sudan’s transition into a new chapter in
its journey towards peace and prosperity.

24/26

20-07478

S/2020/497

Annex 20
Statement by the Chargé d’affaires of the United Kingdom of Great
Britain and Northern Ireland to the United Nations, Jonathan Allen
The United Kingdom welcomes the adoption of resolutions 2524 (2020) and
2525 (2020).
The establishment of the United Nations Integrated Transition Assistance
Mission in Sudan (UNITAMS) marks the opening of a new chapter in the Sudan’s
relationship with the United Nations, the Security Council and the broader
international community. Through the adoption of resolution 2524 (2020), the
Security Council has responded directly to the Government of the Sudan’s request
for support. UNITAMS will support the Sudan in a broad range of priorities for the
transitional period, from the implementation of the Constitutional Document to the
peace process, peacebuilding and the promotion and protection of human rights.
In seeking this support from the United Nations, the Government of the Sudan has
demonstrated its commitment to realizing the aspirations of the Sudanese people for
a more stable, peaceful, democratic and prosperous future.
The African Union’s role will continue to be critical. We welcome our
partnership with it and the strong commitment it has made to providing continued
support to the political transition in the Sudan.
The United Kingdom calls upon the Government of the Sudan and all
Sudanese stakeholders to seize the opportunity created by this new chapter to
make the aspirations of the Sudanese people a reality. Success will ultimately
be achieved through unwavering commitments from the Government and all
Sudanese stakeholders.
The Security Council has made the responsible decision to extend the
presence of the African Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur
(UNAMID) until 31 December 2020 through the adoption of resolution 2525 (2020).
The extension of UNAMID was necessary in the light of the challenges faced by
the Sudan and the wider international community that were brought about by the
coronavirus-disease pandemic.
We commend the Government of the Sudan’s commitment to assuming full
responsibility for the protection of civilians. The ongoing peace process offers the
best chance in the history of the Darfur conflict for sustainable peace. However, at
present, challenges remain in Darfur, and civilians remain particularly vulnerable.
Accordingly, while the Government builds its own capacity to protect civilians
and the peace process remains ongoing, UNAMID will continue to be mandated to
protect civilians in Darfur.
The United Kingdom thanks Germany, our fellow penholder on these two
resolutions, for its tireless work and professionalism. The United Kingdom would
also like to express its sincere thanks to the other members of the Security Council
for their constructive engagement throughout the negotiations.
Last year, the people of the Sudan made their stand for freedom and for a
better future. The United Kingdom stood with them then, and we stand with them
now in partnership, as we adopt these historic resolutions and look to the opening
of a new chapter in the Sudan’s relationship with the United Nations and the
international community.

20-0747825/26

S/2020/497

Annex 21
Statement by the Permanent Mission of the United States of America
to the United Nations
The United States thanks Germany and the United Kingdom for their
leadership in steering the negotiations on the African Union-United Nations Hybrid
Operation in Darfur (UNAMID) and the United Nations Integrated Transition
Assistance Mission in Sudan (UNITAMS) under difficult circumstances.
Today marks a new day for the Sudan and the international community. With
the establishment of UNITAMS, the Security Council stands shoulder to shoulder
with the people of the Sudan, who, just a little over a year ago, stood up to insist
on fundamental freedoms. We are confident that UNITAMS will provide valuable
support to the Sudanese Government and, more importantly, the Sudanese people,
so that they can build the long-term peace and stability they so richly deserve. Given
the vital role women continue to play in the Sudan’s transition, we look forward in
particular to the steps UNITAMS will take to empower women to participate in
political dialogue.
The United States also welcomes the extension of UNAMID to 31 December.
The mandate reiterates that UNAMID’s core task during this period is to protect
civilians. We expect UNAMID to continue to build the capacity of Sudanese security
agencies to protect civilians in Darfur in line with the Government’s recently
released protection-of-civilians plan. We look forward to learning more about the
plan’s implementation and seeing the Sudan fulfil its responsibilities in Darfur and
throughout the country. We also expect UNAMID and UNITAMS to maintain their
political support for the Juba peace process
With respect to the climate-change language in resolution 2524 (2020),
we note that on 4 November 2019, the United States submitted its notification of
withdrawal from the Paris Agreement. The climate-change language is therefore
without prejudice to United States positions. We affirm our support for promoting
economic growth and improving energy security while protecting the environment.
Beyond UNITAMS, the United States also wishes to note our concern with the
proliferation of climate-change language in Security Council products, particularly
those products that do not directly pertain to climate. We believe that these products
should focus on the important work of maintaining international peace and security
rather than attempting to catalogue every single factor or selectively focusing on
factors that may affect this work.

26/26

20-07478
