S/2000/1164

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
7 December 2000
Original: English

Letter dated 7 December 2000 from the Secretary-General
addressed to the President of the Security Council
I have the honour to convey the attached communication, dated 4 December
2000, which I have received from the Secretary-General of the North Atlantic Treaty
Organization.
I should be grateful if you would bring it to the attention of the members of the
Security Council.
(Signed) Kofi A. Annan

00-78751 (E)

071200

*0078751*

S/2000/1164

Annex
Letter dated 4 December 2000 from the Secretary-General of
the North Atlantic Treaty Organization addressed to the
Secretary-General
In accordance with Security Council resolution 1088 (1996), I attach the
monthly report on Stabilization Force operations. I would appreciate your making
this report available to the Security Council.
(Signed) George Robertson

2

S/2000/1164

Enclosure
Monthly report to the Security Council on the operations of the
Stabilization Force
1.
Over the reporting period (13 October-12 November), there were
approximately 23,500 troops deployed in Bosnia and Herzegovina and Croatia, with
contributions from all the NATO allies and from 15 non-NATO countries.
Stabilization Force (SFOR) troops continued to conduct reconnaissance and
surveillance operations by means of ground and air patrols. Other operations
included area security, monitoring the border with the Federal Republic of
Yugoslavia, monitoring the Entity Armed Forces (EAF), conducting weapons
storage site inspections, providing support to the international organizations in
theatre and collecting weapons and ammunition in the framework of Operation
Harvest.
2.
Elections in Bosnia and Herzegovina took place peacefully on 11
November. SFOR maintained a safe and secure environment and assisted the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE) in its supervision of
the elections by providing intelligence support, a rapid response capability, an
enhanced security environment, limited equipment support, an exchange of liaison
officers and 24-hour joint operational centre staffing, both at SFOR and at OSCE.
3.
SFOR troops continued to monitor compliance with the provisions of
Security Council resolution 1160 (1998), which prohibits the transport of weapons
into the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia, by providing an intensified presence on the
ground. No violations were reported.
Cooperation and compliance by the parties
4.
The situation in theatre remained calm and stable throughout the
reporting period, with the entities in substantial compliance with the military
provisions of the Peace Agreement.
5.
On 10 October, SFOR supported the United Nations International Police
Task Force (IPTF) in inspecting buildings belonging to the local police in Livno,
Glamoc, Kupres and Tomislavgrad (Multi-National Division (MND) South West).
During the inspections, a number of weapons were confiscated, along with
explosives, communications equipment and anti-personnel mines.
6.
On 19 October, approximately 800 Bosnian Serb students held a
demonstration in Brcko (MND North) and marched on the OSCE building there,
demanding segregated schools and increased police protection for Serbs. During the
demonstration, stones were thrown at SFOR troops, and around a dozen buildings
were vandalized. Fifteen protestors were arrested during the demonstration, which
ended in the early afternoon.
7.
On 25 October, a weapons cache, consisting of 1,400 cases, each
containing 1,000 rounds of 7.62 ammunition, was discovered near Vlasenica in
MND North. The ammunition is thought to have lain there undisturbed since the
1992-1995 war.
8.
Over the period, SFOR troops conducted 69 weapons storage site
inspections. No violations were reported.

3

S/2000/1164

9.
SFOR troops monitored 640 training and movement activities: 347
Bosnian Serb; 124 Bosniac; 44 Bosnian Croat; and 125 Federation.
10. To date in 2000, approximately 736,041 square metres of land have been
cleared of mines and unexploded ordnance. There are currently 46 EAF de-mining
teams in operation.
Cooperation with international organizations
11. Within capabilities and in accordance with its mandate, SFOR continues
to provide assistance to the international organizations in theatre, including the
United Nations Mission in Bosnia and Herzegovina, the IPTF, the International
Criminal Tribunal for the former Yugoslavia (ICTY), the Office of the High
Representative (OHR), OSCE and the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR).
12. SFOR continues to support OHR in its efforts to establish common
institutions in Bosnia and Herzegovina. At its 14 October meeting, the Standing
Committee on Military Matters (SCMM) failed to achieve progress on the
establishment of an enhanced SCMM staff. The High Representative has since
written to the Entity Authorities to press for early action in this respect. On 26
October, further discussions took place in the Joint Military Committee on the topic
of EAF restructuring.
13. SFOR continues to work with UNHCR to facilitate the return of
displaced persons and refugees and is heavily involved in the overall planning of
returns within the Reconstruction and Returns Task Force. SFOR is also supporting
the sustainability of resettlement sites for displaced persons and refugees over the
winter period.
Outlook
14. Isolated acts of violence are likely to continue, especially in connection
with the return of refugees and displaced persons.

4
