S/PV.8900

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-sixth year

8900th meeting

Tuesday, 9 November 2021, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. López Obrador/Mr. Gómez Robledo Verduzco . . . . . .

(Mexico)

Members:

China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Estonia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
India . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ireland. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kenya. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Niger. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Norway . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Saint Vincent and the Grenadines. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Tunisia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Viet Nam . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Zhang Jun
Ms. Liimets
Mr. De Rivière
Mr. Singh
Ms. Byrne Nason
Mr. Kimani
Mr. Maman Sani
Ms. Juul
Mr. Nebenzia
Ms. King
Mr. Ladeb
Mr. Kariuki
Mrs. Thomas-Greenfield
Mr. Dang

Agenda
Maintenance of international peace and security
Exclusion, inequality and conflict
Letter dated 15 October 2021 from the Permanent Representative of Mexico to
the United Nations addressed to the Secretary-General (S/2021/883)

In accordance with the procedure set out in the letter by the President of the Security
Council addressed to Permanent Representatives of Security Council members dated 7 May
2020 (S/2020/372), which was agreed in light of the extraordinary circumstances caused by
the COVID-19 pandemic, this official record of the Security Council will be supplemented
by a compilation of annexes (S/2021/935) containing the statements submitted by interested
non-members of the Council.

21-32681 (E)
*2132681*

S/PV.8900

Maintenance of international peace and security

The meeting was called to order at 10.05 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Maintenance of international peace and security
Exclusion, inequality and conflicts
Letter dated 15 October 2021 from the
Permanent Representative of Mexico
to the United Nations addressed to the
Secretary-General (S/2021/883)
The President (spoke in Spanish): I would like
to warmly welcome the Secretary-General, ministers
and other high-level representatives present at today’s
meeting. Their participation is an affirmation of the
importance of the subject matter under discussion.
In accordance with rule 37 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the
representatives of Albania, Argentina, Azerbaijan,
Bangladesh, Chile, Cuba, Denmark, Dominican
Republic, Ecuador, Guatemala, Indonesia, the Islamic
Republic of Iran, Japan, Lebanon, Liechtenstein,
Malaysia, Malta, Morocco, the Netherlands, Peru,
Portugal, Qatar, Slovakia, South Africa, Switzerland,
the United Arab Emirates and the Bolivarian Republic
of Venezuela, and anyone who decides to do so, to
participate in this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite Ms. Lourdes
Tibán Guala, indigenous affairs expert, to participate
in this meeting.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I wish to draw the attention of Council members
to document S/2021/883, which contains the text of
a letter dated 15 October 2021 from the Permanent
Representative of Mexico to the United Nations
addressed to the Secretary-General, transmitting a
concept note on the item under consideration.
I now give the floor to the Secretary-General.
The Secretary-General (spoke in Spanish): I thank
the Government of Mexico for convening today’s debate
on an issue that is at the heart of so many challenges
facing the Security Council.
2/27

09/11/2021

The coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic has
increased hardship and inequality for the poorest and
most vulnerable people. Some 120 million additional
people have fallen into poverty. Hunger and famine
stalk millions of people around the world. We are facing
the biggest global recession since the Second World
War. Billions of people lack the necessary safety nets
to cope with difficulties in terms of social protection,
health care and labour protection. The inhabitants of
the richest countries are receiving their third dose of the
vaccine against COVID-19, while only 5 per cent of the
population of Africa are fully vaccinated. Even before
the pandemic, the world’s billionaires accumulated
more wealth than 60 per cent of the world’s population,
and that gap has widened considerably.
At the same time, an asymmetric recovery is in the
works. While advanced economies are investing 28 per
cent of their gross domestic product (GDP) in economic
recovery, least developed countries are investing only
1.8 per cent — a much lower amount.
When discussing economic inequalities last year,
Mr. President, you reminded us of fictitious policies
based on the notion that if people at the top do well,
those who are at the bottom will also do well. As you
said on that occasion, “wealth is not contagious”.
Exclusion and inequalities of all kinds — economic,
social and cultural — have a devastating cost in terms
of security. In fact, rising inequalities are a factor in
growing instability, especially in areas where basic
services are lacking, such as health care, education,
security and justice, and where historical injustices,
inequalities and systematic oppression have come to
create endless cycles of poverty and unfavourable
conditions for entire generations.
(spoke in English)
Today we face the highest number of violent
conflicts since 1945. They are lasting longer and are
more complex. A dangerous sense of impunity is
taking hold — seen in the recent seizures of power
by force, including military coups. Human rights and
the rule of law are under assault — from Afghanistan,
where girls are once again being denied an education
and women denied their rightful place in society; to
Myanmar, where minorities are targeted, brutalized
and forced to flee; to Ethiopia, where a man-made
humanitarian crisis is unfolding before our eyes. These
and other tragedies are enflamed by COVID-19 and the
climate emergency. Humanitarian funding, assistance
21-32681

09/11/2021

Maintenance of international peace and security

and conflict management tools — the very kind that
the United Nations provides around the world — are
all under tremendous strain. Peace has never been
more urgent.
That is why conflict prevention is at the heart of my
proposed new agenda for peace, as part of the report
Our Common Agenda. The agenda calls on the global
community to work as one — in solidarity, as a human
family — to address the roots of violent conflicts; to
build and strengthen the bonds of trust between people
who inhabit the same borders and in the Governments
and institutions representing them; and for countries in
transition, to ensure that all groups are part of the peace
process, so that people can reject the voices of division
and instead lend their hands to the task of shaping a
better future for all.
Without inclusion, the puzzle of peace remains
incomplete, with many gaps to be filled. Today I should
like to outline a road map for inclusion, built around
four key pathways to fill these gaps: people, prevention,
gender and institutions.
First, we need to invest in the development of all
people, equally. Last year, military spending as a share
of GDP saw its largest annual increase since 2009. It
is now approaching $2 trillion annually. Imagine the
progress we could make — the peace we could build,
the conflicts we could prevent — if we dedicated even
a fraction of this to human development, equality and
inclusion, especially in countries affected by conflict
and crises, which have the least fiscal space to invest in
a sustainable, inclusive recovery for all.
My report Our Common Agenda calls for a
new social contract within all societies. This means
investing in universal health coverage, social protection
and safety nets accessible to all. It means education and
training for all people so they can envision and build
better, more prosperous futures. It means opening the
doors to civil and economic life to all, equally and
without discrimination. And it means ensuring access
to the COVID-19 vaccines for all.
Secondly, we need to strengthen our prevention
agenda on multiple fronts to address different types of
exclusion and inequalities. This includes more rigorous
monitoring of growing inequalities and perceptions
of them, including of gender and youth, to address
grievances early. It includes ensuring inclusion at every
step of the peace process, from local dialogue and

S/PV. 8900

conflict resolution to peace negotiations, transitions
and establishing national institutions.
That is why, through our country presence and
missions, the United Nations works to keep the lines
of dialogue open and flowing among State institutions,
civil society, communities and individuals at every
point. And throughout, we need to bring the entire
United Nations system and all partners around our
common cause of peace. The success of the 2030 Agenda
for Sustainable Development depends on solidarity as
we support Governments’ efforts to build development
for all and ensure that no one is left behind. Ending
inequalities and exclusion is a critical part of this and
a vital step towards giving every person a chance to
contribute to their country’s future.
Thirdly, we must recognize and prioritize the
crucial role of women in building peace. We can
draw a straight line between violence against and the
exclusion of women and civil oppression and violent
conflict — from rape and sexual slavery being used as
tools of war, to the thread of misogyny that runs through
violent extremist thought and to the exclusion of women
from positions of leadership and in peace processes.
That is why the United Nations continues to stand
up for the rights of women and girls around the world.
That includes in Afghanistan, where we continue
to work with the de facto authorities to keep girls in
school and ensure that women can fully participate in
civil and economic life.
Women are also at the centre of our conflict
prevention, peacemaking and peacebuilding efforts.
We are increasing the number of women peacekeepers.
We now have more women leading our field missions
than ever before, with parity among our heads or deputy
heads of missions. And 40 per cent of the Peacebuilding
Fund focuses on gender equality and women’s rights. We
know that more lasting and sustainable peace happens
when women lead and make decisions in mediation
and peace processes. We will continue building on this
important work in the years ahead.
(spoke in French)
Fourthly, we must build trust through inclusive
national institutions that represent the entire population
and whose action is rooted in human rights and the rule
of law. That requires justice that applies to everyone
equally, without favouring the rich or the powerful. It
requires building institutions capable of dealing with

21-326813/27

S/PV.8900

Maintenance of international peace and security

corruption and abuse of power, based on the principles
of integrity, transparency and accountability. It requires
policies and laws that specifically protect vulnerable
groups, including against all forms of discrimination.
Finally, it requires responsive and effective security
institutions and guarantors of the rule of law that take
into account the needs of each individual. Instead of
raising barriers, Governments and institutions need to
build trust and serve everyone, without distinction.
(spoke in English)
In every society, diversity of culture, religion and
ethnicity should be viewed as a powerful benefit, rather
than as a threat. This is essential in all countries, but
especially in those experiencing conflict. Without full
inclusion and equality, peace is a job half done, because
true, sustainable peace can be carried forward only by
people who are supported, who are included and valued
and who feel that they are truly part of their society and
have a stake in its future.
I welcome the Council’s continued support to help
every person, everywhere, lend their hands, hearts and
minds to the vital task of peace.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I thank the
Secretary-General for his profound briefing on the
issue before us.
I now give the floor to Ms. Tibán Guala.

09/11/2021

or disarmament, but rather are related to structural
changes in public policy at the economic, political,
social and cultural levels.
I will now refer to some issues that the Security
Council should monitor in the future. For while they
are not addressed as potential causes of war or conflict,
they could appear on the list of potential processes that
could jeopardize peace and security.
The first is social inequality. One of the causes
that can jeopardize international peace is the increase
in violence and criminality driven by groups of
vulnerable individuals to survive a crisis and dominate
a group of people. As a result of social inequality, we
see large gaps in poverty, a lack of economic progress,
malnutrition and infant mortality owing to a lack of
economic resources.
Another issue is social exclusion. In our scenario,
it would seem that there is only exclusion between
the State and indigenous peoples — an exclusion
of cultures. However, exclusion involves numerous
dimensions: homelessness, imprisonment, disabilities,
gender, mental illness, youth and drugs, prostitution,
Roma communities and immigration. If we want lasting
peace in the regions, States must pay close attention
to and take into account those exclusions. The best
example by Ecuador is the work it carried out in the
previous decade on disabilities as a State policy.

The Security Council, an organ that was born as a
post-war necessity, tries to act in time so that conflicts
do not become wars and endanger international peace.
Peacebuilding at the United Nations refers to initiatives
to help countries and regions to transition from war
to peace and to reduce the risk of the outbreak or
recurrence of conflicts, while strengthening national
capacities to manage conflict and laying the foundations
for sustainable peace and development.

Gender exclusion is another point that we must take
into account. Conflicts have devastating consequences,
such as widening the gap between women and men.
Women often have fewer resources at their disposal to
protect themselves and, together with their children,
often make up the majority of displaced and refugee
populations. In wars, tactics specifically targeting
women are employed, such as sexual violence, taking
away their children or using women as human shields.
The Security Council must assess States’ progress in
ensuring justice for violations of women’s rights and
that women participate directly in reforming laws and
public institutions with a view to reducing gender and
generational exclusion.

Indigenous peoples are familiar with issues
concerning peace and conflict in our respective States,
although they are not necessarily perceived as wars or
armed conflicts. But I believe it is important for the
Security Council to include historical conflicts that
States have not resolved, precisely because they do
not involve mechanisms of mediation between parties

It is significant that the international community
has recognized that women’s participation is essential
to achieving lasting peace. Women have shown
themselves to be agents of change and should have an
opportunity to work even more towards achieving that
goal, without neglecting the participation of indigenous
and Afrodescendant women, among other ethnic

Ms. Tibán Guala (spoke in Spanish): I would like
to begin by thanking the Government of Mexico for
having invited me. I would like to briefly express the
perspective of indigenous people on peace and security.

4/27

21-32681

09/11/2021

Maintenance of international peace and security

minorities who, because of their status, face a triple
exclusion for being women, indigenous and poor. In
that context, I suggest to the Security Council that it
assess and strengthen the recommendations set out in
resolution 1325 (2000), which urges the participation
of women in peacebuilding, better protection from
human rights violations and better access to justice and
anti-discrimination services for women.
Another issue that must be taken into account is
migration. It is not only a consequence but also a cause
that jeopardizes international peace. In the desperate
condition in which peace is impossible, migration is
an escape valve, which in some cases can have more
drastic consequences given that the displacement as
a result of a crisis leaves many families in a vacuum
because, in their new spaces, they face discrimination
and even xenophobia from the host society for
being migrants.
The criminalization of social struggle and the
prosecution of human rights defenders is another issue
that has emerged in this debate. Perhaps that is a new
issue on which the Security Council should focus. The
criminalization of social protest has become a tool of
persecution used by States against defenders of human
rights and the rights of nature, which sheds light on
the situations of exclusion of several sectors of the
population in decision-making between citizens and
the State.
Corruption is another essential issue that must not
be absent from our global debate. To a greater or lesser
degree, all States in the world are involved in corruption,
which is a burden that leads to enormous economic
losses. However, the most worrisome thing is that it
undermines confidence in institutions and endangers
economic and social development, something that
could jeopardize international peace in the long term.
With regard to disputes over natural resources,
it is said that the third world war will be fought over
natural resources and climate change. United Nations
studies show that over 40 per cent of the internal armed
conflicts of the past 60 years are linked to natural
resources. That could be a ticking time bomb that could
jeopardize the maintenance of international peace
and security.
In recent years, oil has been seen as the resource
that could trigger the third world war. However, the
ravages of climate change, the lack of political priority,
the impotence of Governments, inequalities and armed

S/PV. 8900

conflicts have now shifted our focus to water, land and
minerals. That, together with the eternal debate about
whether water should be a luxury good or a social good
accessible to all, could make water the focus of the
greatest geopolitical conflict of the twenty-first century.
And that may justify the fight against extractivism
that is being led by indigenous peoples in the region.
But for now the debate is focused on the economic
needs of States and the environmental protection of
indigenous peoples.
Lastly, instead of taking coercive measures or
imposing economic sanctions, as it is empowered to
do, the Security Council should provide incentives
and acknowledge Member States that are working
to reduce inequalities, exclusion and corruption and
avoid confrontations among civil society, citizens and
the State, which could endanger the maintenance of
international peace and security.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I thank Ms. Tibán
Guala for her briefing.
I shall now make a statement in my national
capacity as President of Mexico.
I have not come here to talk about security as a
synonym for military power or as a basis for the use
of force. Instead, my approach is based on what was
postulated by the man whom Pablo Neruda called
a titan of freedoms — President Franklin Delano
Roosevelt — when the United Nations was created: the
right to a life free from fear and free from want, which
remains the most solid foundation of security for all
societies and States.
The main obstacle to the exercise of that right
is corruption in all its expressions — transnational
powers, opulence and frivolity as a way of life for
the elite, the neoliberal model that socializes losses,
privatizes profits and encourages the plundering of
natural resources and the assets of peoples and nations.
It is corruption when the courts punish those who
do not have the funds to buy their innocence and protect
the rich and large business corporations that steal from
the treasury or do not pay taxes. It is corruption when
those who conceal and hide illicit funds in tax havens
go unpunished. It is also corruption when shareholders
and administrators of so-called vulture funds practice
usury, without even losing their respectability.
It would be hypocritical to ignore that the planet’s
main problem is corruption in all its dimensions:

21-326815/27

S/PV.8900

Maintenance of international peace and security

political, moral, economic, legal, fiscal and financial.
It would be foolish to omit that corruption is the main
cause of inequality, poverty, frustration, violence,
migration and serious social conflicts.
We are in decline because never before in the history
of the world has so much wealth been accumulated in
so few hands through the misuse of influence and at
the expense of the suffering of others, privatizing what
belongs to all or what should have no owner, doctoring
laws to legalize the immoral and distorting social values
to make the abominable look like acceptable business.
Take, for example, the distribution of the
coronavirus disease (COVID-19) vaccine. While
private pharmaceutical companies have sold 94 per cent
of the vaccines, the COVID-19 Vaccine Global Access
Facility mechanism, created by the United Nations for
poor countries, has distributed only 6 per cent — a
painful and utter failure.
That simple fact should lead us to admit the
obvious — in today’s world, generosity and a sense of
the common good are being displaced by selfishness
and private ambition; the spirit of cooperation is losing
ground to the profit motive and we are sliding from
civilization to barbarism, walking as if estranged from
ourselves, forgetting moral principles and turning our
backs on the suffering of humankind. If we are unable
to reverse those trends through concrete actions, we
will not be able to solve any of the other problems
afflicting the peoples of the world.
What are we doing in Mexico in that regard? We
have implemented a strategy of banishing corruption
and allocating all the money recovered towards the
welfare of the people, using the criterion of helping the
poor first for the good of all.
Prioritizing the poor also implies accepting that
peace is the result of justice and that no country can
succeed if marginalization and poverty persist or even
increase. We therefore maintain that the fundamental
way to live free from fear, risks and violence is to put
an end to unemployment, to encourage young people
to work and study and to avoid family disintegration,
social breakdown and the loss of cultural, moral and
spiritual values.
In Mexico, it may take time to bring peace to the
country, but the surest way to do so is to continue to
address the root causes. For example, providing young
people with study and work options can help prevent
6/27

09/11/2021

them from turning to crime. True victory over criminal
gangs will always consist in depriving them of their
breeding grounds and their reserve army.
That is the same approach we are using to deal with
migration. The primary thrust is not coercive measures
but rather those that integrate all people into study,
work, health and welfare in the places where they were
born or reside so that they are not forced to leave their
villages because of hunger or violence and that only
those who wish to do so emigrate. Migration should
be optional and not forced; it should be an individual
decision and not a demographic phenomenon.
Recently, I presented President Biden with a
new way of dealing with the migration phenomenon.
Without ignoring the need to manage the flow, prevent
disorder and guarantee human rights, I proposed
that he immediately apply in three sister nations two
programmes that we are successfully implementing in
Chiapas, a neighbouring Central American state.
Today we are planting 200,000 hectares of fruit and
timber trees there. That programme provides work for
80,000 planters. Likewise, 30,000 young people work
as apprentices in that south-eastern Mexican state,
receiving a minimum wage to train in workshops,
businesses and other productive and social activities.
If those two actions were immediately implemented
in Guatemala, Honduras and El Salvador, it would be
possible to ensure that some 330,000 people who are
currently at risk of emigrating for lack of work would
remain in their countries.
I think that those proposals should be implemented
by the United Nations in order to tackle the root causes
of problems in poor countries. The most important
institution of the international community must wake
up from its lethargy and break out of its routine. It must
reform itself and denounce and fight corruption in the
world. It must fight against the rampant inequality and
social unrest in the world with greater decisiveness,
depth, prominence and leadership.
Never in the history of this Organization has
anything truly substantive been done for the benefit of
the poor, but it is never too late to do justice. Today it
is time to act against marginalization by addressing the
causes, not just the consequences.
Accordingly, in the next few days, the Mexican
delegation will propose a global plan for fraternity
and well-being to the General Assembly. The aim is to
21-32681

09/11/2021

Maintenance of international peace and security

guarantee the right to a dignified life for 750 million
people who survive on less than $2 a day. Mexico’s
proposal to establish a world State of fraternity and
well-being can be financed through a fund from at least
three sources: the collection of an annual voluntary
contribution of 4 per cent of the wealth of the 1,000
richest people in the world; a similar contribution from
the 1,000 largest private corporations in terms of global
market value; and a contribution of 0.2 per cent of the
gross domestic product of each member of the Group of
20. If that income target were met, the fund could have
around $1 trillion at its disposal annually.

S/PV. 8900

“How selfish soever man may be supposed,
there are evidently some principles in his nature,
which interest him in the fortune of others, and
render their happiness necessary to him, though
he derives nothing from it except the pleasure of
seeing it.”
In other words, only by being good can we be happy.
Let us never forget that it is the collective duty
of nations to provide every child with the right to
food, health, education, work, social security, sport
and recreation.

In its annual review, the United Nations could set
aside a day to honour or award certificates of recognition
to individuals, corporations and Governments that
stand out for their humanitarian commitment to helping
to finance the global plan for fraternity and well-being.
The fund’s resources should reach the beneficiaries
directly, without any intermediary, because when
funds are given to civil society non-governmental
organizations or other types of bodies — I do not want
to generalize — in many cases those funds remain in
bureaucratic structures and are used to pay for luxurious
offices or consultants or are diverted and end up not
reaching the beneficiaries. I therefore reiterate that the
fund’s resources should reach the beneficiaries directly,
without any intermediary, through a personalized card
or electronic purse.

I conclude by recalling two patriots and liberators
of our America: José María Morelos y Pavón, servant
of the Mexican nation, who, a little more than two
centuries ago, called for poverty and wealth to be
moderated. Almost at the same time, Simón Bolívar
said that the most perfect system of Government is that
which produces the greatest degree of happiness, social
security and political stability.

The World Bank and the International Monetary
Fund could collaborate in creating the required
structure and, from next year, carry out a census of
the world’s poorest people. Once the target population
in each country has been defined, they could begin to
disburse the resources to provide allowances for the
elderly and children with disabilities, scholarships for
students and support for planters and young people who
work as apprentices in productive activities, as well as
delivering free vaccinations and medicines.

I call on the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Estonia.

I honestly do not believe that any of the permanent
members of the Security Council will oppose our
proposal, since it does not involve nuclear weapons
or military invasions or put the security of any State
at risk. On the contrary, it seeks to build stability and
peace through solidarity with those who most need our
support. I am sure that all of us, rich and poor, donors
and beneficiaries, will have a clearer conscience and
will live with greater moral strength. In that regard, I
recall what Adam Smith said:

It is an honour to be among the permanent and
non-permanent members of the Security Council,
which is the closest thing to a world Government and
can become the most effective body for combating
corruption and the noblest benefactor to the poor and
forgotten on Earth.
I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.
Ms. Liimets (Estonia): First, I would like to thank
the briefers, the Secretary-General and Ms. Lourdes
Tibán Guala, for their input at today’s meeting.
Conflict prevention should be a clear priority for all
of us. Therefore, we very much welcome today’s timely
debate on the underlying causes of conflicts, such as
violations of human rights, exclusion, inequality and
poverty. An increase in human rights violations has
often preceded the eruption of an acute conflict. What
we are witnessing today in Belarus is massive repression
against people and intensifying acts of transnational
repression. During the past few days, thousands of
migrants from third countries have gathered, with the
help of Belarusian authorities, along the Polish border,
including some trying to breach the border fence.
All
that
reflects
a
clear
pattern — the instrumentalization of human beings for
political purposes with the objective of destabilizing

21-326817/27

S/PV.8900

Maintenance of international peace and security

neighbouring countries and diverting attention from
its own increasing human rights violations. The tactic
of the Belarusian authorities is unacceptable. It has
become a threat to international peace and security.
We call on the Belarusian authorities to stop putting
people’s lives at risk.
Estonia strongly believes that an early focus on
enhancing the resilience of communities can prevent
the outbreak of conflict in the first place, as well as
any relapse in violence. That includes actively and
holistically addressing the root causes of instability,
such as underdevelopment, the effects of climate
change, poverty and the lack of education opportunities.
In addition, unhindered humanitarian access to
conflict areas — be it in Syria, Afghanistan, Tigray
or elsewhere — must be ensured. Humanitarian access
and the safety of humanitarian workers are an issue that
the Security Council can and should focus on in the
context of instability.
Development and peace are interlinked, as are the
protection of human rights and building sustainable
peace. Human rights must be at the centre of our
response to any conflict and conflict prevention. It
is naïve to think that it is possible to find a peaceful
solution to any conflict without broad representation
at the negotiating table. That concerns especially
women. Consciously and continuously working
towards achieving women’s full, equal and meaningful
participation in peace processes is key to long-lasting
peace and stability.
Exclusion and inequality, with respect to members
of all vulnerable and marginalized groups, is a risk
for peace and security. Human rights violations and
abuses can act as triggers of conflict and are always a
feature of it. Furthermore, the scale of climate-related
security risks cannot be underestimated, including
the gender dimension of climate change. Women and
girls are disproportionately affected by climate change.
Therefore, it is important to empower them. That is the
only way to build resilient communities for everyone.
The importance of the rule of law is one more aspect
that I would like to underline in the context of conflict
prevention. The rule of law and development are strongly
interrelated and mutually reinforcing. Open and just
societies, supported by strong, accountable institutions
that respect the rule of law, provide a predictable
environment for the population. It helps create
sustainable livelihoods and decrease levels of poverty,
8/27

09/11/2021

which often originate in exclusion, discrimination and
disempowerment. Weak governance, the poor rule
of law and weak judicial institutions are also one of
the primary reasons for the insufficient protection of
human rights.
In conclusion, I reiterate that Estonia will never
stop stressing the importance of good governance,
accountability,
compliance
with
international
humanitarian law and international human rights
law and respect for the rule of law, which all play
an indispensable role in addressing the root causes
of conflict around the world in a meaningful and
sustainable manner.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I call on the
Permanent Representative of the United States of
America and member of President Biden’s Cabinet.
Mrs. Thomas-Greenfield (United States of
America): I thank you, Mr. President, for chairing this
important debate on addressing inequality and poverty
and their relationship to conflict. I also thank SecretaryGeneral Guterres and Ms. Tibán Guala for sharing how
such challenges impact their work and for highlighting
their recommendations for how to overcome them.
Today’s debate sends a clear message from the
Security Council. Inequality, marginalization and
exclusion are issues of peace and security. They drive
instability, violence, conflict and mass migration. There
are more conflicts ongoing today than at any other
point since the end of the Cold War. These conflicts,
however, are not the same as the older ones. They are
more violent, they last longer, they are increasingly
regionalized and they involve more non-State actors.
The United States is laser-focused on stopping these
conflicts and mitigating suffering. To do that, we must
address the root causes of these crises. Otherwise, our
work is simply applying a Band-Aid to a gaping wound.
The root causes are old: stunted economic growth,
competition for scarce resources and hatred for those
different from ourselves. But they are exacerbated by
today’s modern challenges: the coronavirus disease
(COVID-19) pandemic, climate change and natural
resource degradation. All those sources of conflict and
contributors to instability represent forms of inequality,
marginalization and exclusion.
The COVID-19 pandemic and climate change, for
example, have affected every country, but, of course,
they have not affected us all equally. In order to address
21-32681

09/11/2021

Maintenance of international peace and security

S/PV. 8900

that, the United States is committed to being the
world’s arsenal of vaccines. We have pledged more than
1.1 billion doses and have already provided more than
230 million doses worldwide, with no strings attached,
because we know that not every country can afford to
produce or purchase the life-saving vaccines. It is also
why, at the general debate of the General Assembly (see
A/76/PV.3), President Biden announced that he would
work with Congress to once again double our public
international finance to $11.4 billion annually by 2024
to help developing countries tackle the climate crisis.

for building durable and peaceful societies. For those
reasons, the United States supports United Nations
missions with robust human rights mandates, gender
mainstreaming across mission activities and strong
coordination functions with humanitarian and
development organizations. Additionally, peacekeeping
missions need to promote the protection of civilians and
strengthen the democratic structures of governance and
the rule of law. That is how the root causes of conflict
are addressed. That is how the conditions for enduring
peace are built.

We also know that every single person is born with
the human rights outlined in the Universal Declaration
of Human Rights. That is what makes them universal.
But some continue to face exclusion and marginalization
because of factors that should be irrelevant — like who
they are, who they love, what group they were born into,
what religion they practice or the colour of their skin.
As President Biden reminds us every day, that is one
reason why human rights are at the centre of our foreign
policy. By promoting and protecting human rights and
fundamental freedoms, we are doing the right thing and
honouring our values. We are also practising preventive
diplomacy, strengthening resiliency and ensuring that
societies are less vulnerable to conflict.

For our part, the United States is working through
international and non-governmental organizations
partners to provide humanitarian assistance for those
impacted by those threats and stressors, including
refugees, internally displaced persons, asylum seekers
and those vulnerable migrants in countries around the
globe. However, no country can address inequality,
marginalization and exclusion alone. We must take on
those intertwined threats together. Our peacebuilding
solutions need to take an inclusive approach — one
that ensures development actors, human rights activists
and security experts are all talking to each other and
coordinating to build just, equal and durable societies.

In that way, all three of the United Nations
pillars — development, human rights and peace
and security — are mutually reinforcing. We must,
therefore, take an inclusive approach to peacebuilding
and conflict prevention. For example, development
promotes economic growth, which is often the biggest
challenge for post-conflict societies. Those thinking
through peacebuilding solutions must engage local
development actors early to determine the necessary
steps for improving stability and ensuring lasting peace.
Meanwhile, forms of inequality and exclusion
stunt economic growth. If economic disparity or the
threat of violence makes it too difficult for excluded
groups to survive and thrive, citizens will make the
difficult choice to leave their homelands for the hope
of a better future.
Similarly, if society excludes women from roles
in the workplace, the country loses out on half of the
workforce. That is a problem of development. It is a
problem of human rights and peace and security rolled
into one. Ensuring the meaningful empowerment,
participation and protection of women in all aspects of
the peace and security building process is necessary

We hope the Security Council is up to the task of
organizing those efforts, ensuring that our approach is
inclusive and addressing the root drivers of conflict so
that we can build a more peaceful and prosperous world.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now call on the
Minister of State for External Affairs of India.
Mr. Singh (India): Let me begin by congratulating
Mexico on assuming the presidency of the Security
Council during this month. I would also like to convey
best wishes and greetings from my Prime Minister to
the President of Mexico, His Excellency Mr. Andrés
Manuel López Obrador. India and Mexico have a
special relationship and it is indeed an honour for me to
represent my Prime Minister at today’s meeting.
I would like to thank His Excellency SecretaryGeneral António Guterres and the civil society
briefer, Lourdes Tibán Guala, who is an indigenous
affairs expert, for their insights on the topic of today’s
open debate.
During the past few decades, while inter-State
conflicts have decreased, intra-State conflicts have
attracted much higher level of attention from the
Council. However, those conflicts have several long-

21-326819/27

S/PV.8900

Maintenance of international peace and security

standing political, economic and social causes, which
require the attention not only of the Council but also
of other organs of the United Nations with specialized
roles in the areas of peacebuilding and socioeconomic
development. There is clearly much to be done to
help countries in intra-State conflicts to achieve
sustainable peace.
In that context, let me offer a few observations.
First, international efforts in the maintenance of
peace and security need to be inclusive. The process
of implementing a peace agreement must run along
with the provision of humanitarian and emergency
assistance, the resumption of economic activity and
the creation of political and administrative institutions
that improve governance and include all stakeholders,
particularly women and disadvantaged groups. We also
need to avoid politicizing humanitarian and development
assistance in conflict situations. Humanitarian action
must be primarily guided by the principles of humanity,
neutrality, impartiality and independence.
Secondly, the international community needs to
walk the talk by ensuring a predictable and enhanced
flow of resources to countries in the post-conflict phase.
Development assistance, in line with national priorities,
should go a long way towards sustainable peace.
Thirdly, it is important to actively support the postconflict reconstruction agenda, particularly in Africa.
In that regard, the Peacebuilding Commission’s efforts
should be strengthened. Those efforts should include
prioritizing the needs of the host State and coordinating
the role of international financial institutions, the
private sector and civil society organizations.
Fourthly, some regional and subregional
organizations have become more capable of addressing
conflict situations and member States have increasingly
reposed faith in their capacity to do so. That has brought
positive synergy to the actions of the United Nations
and the Security Council. The Security Council has the
responsibility to support that trend and encourage and
enable those regional and subregional organizations.
We believe that the existing framework of cooperation,
such as the joint United Nations-African Union
framework for an enhanced partnership in peace and
security needs to be implemented more proactively.
In that regard, initiatives, such as the African Union
Military Observer Mission in Somalia, the Joint Force
of the Group of Five for the Sahel and the Multinational
10/27

09/11/2021

Joint Task Force, need more robust support from the
Security Council and the international community.
Fifthly, the spread of terrorism, particularly
in those countries facing conflict, can reverse the
efforts of the international community. It is therefore
imperative that terrorism, in any form or manifestation,
be condemned and that those supporting it in any
manner be held responsible.
Exclusion, inequality and conflict are relevant to
the functioning of the Council as well. The persisting
exclusion and inequality in the membership of
the Security Council needs to be addressed. The
international structure for maintaining peace and
security and peacebuilding needs to be reformed.
Global power and the capacity to address problems
are much more dispersed today than they were 76
years ago. How long can the rightful voices of the
developing world, including Africa, be denied? We
are therefore convinced that reformed multilateralism,
with the reform of the Security Council at its core, is
crucial in order to deal with the complex challenges of
today’s world.
India has always strived to foster global solidarity
across the world with our development partnership
efforts, fully respecting national priorities and
ensuring that our assistance remains demand-driven
and contributes to employment generation and
capacity-building, without creating indebtedness. That
is particularly true for countries in a post-conflict
phase. Whether it is with our neighbours under our
Neighbourhood First policy, with African partners or
with other developing countries, India has remained
and will continue to be a source of strong support to
help them build back better and stronger.
Mr. Nebenzia (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We welcome your personal participation,
Mr. President, in today’s event. We thank the SecretaryGeneral for his informative briefing, and Ms. Lourdes
Tibán Guala for her insights.
We are grateful to Mexico for drawing attention to
the topic of today’s debate. It is indeed highly relevant
as the socioeconomic problems facing humankind have
worsened considerably and, due to the coronavirus
disease pandemic, have become urgent, exposing
our vulnerabilities.
Everywhere in the world, even in the wealthiest
countries and regions, the unequal distribution of
21-32681

09/11/2021

Maintenance of international peace and security

wealth leads to widening inequalities, both within
societies and at the international level. The situation is
even more dire in those States that have never ceased
to lag behind, are struggling with colonial pasts or are
unable to free themselves from the burden of debt. When
people lose hope in their ability to give their children
a better future, the result is often an exacerbation of
ethnic, religious and other tensions and struggles for
power and resources.
When dealing with country-specific issues, the
Security Council cannot ignore the root causes of
conflict, which can be very diverse. However, in the
Council’s deliberations on how to address those root
causes, we must focus on using the tools that we have
at our disposal, namely, good offices, mediation,
peacekeeping and special political missions. Of course,
the mandates of those missions can include specific
goals pertaining to early peacebuilding, capacitybuilding assistance for State institutions, including
law enforcement, and even quick-impact projects.
In addition, the provision of urgent humanitarian
assistance is invaluable in alleviating the suffering of
populations in need and thereby reducing the severity
of conflicts.
The role of the Peacebuilding Commission and
the Peacebuilding Fund is also particularly relevant
in periods of transition from conflict to stability.
However, given the major socioeconomic development
challenges that often exist in conflict and post-conflict
States, the support they provide will, in any case,
amount to no more than a Band-Aid approach. After
all, neither the Security Council nor the Peacebuilding
Commission possess the necessary tools to promote
sustainable independent economic models, the
transfer of technology, infrastructure reinforcement,
industrial and agricultural development, investment
in the education and health systems or job creation.
When we discuss the theoretical links between human
rights, development and peace and security, it is
necessary to be aware that development in and of itself
cannot ensure peace, and peace does not necessarily
guarantee development.
It is therefore important to not only consider the
interlinkages but also to understand the differences
between those processes, as well as the specific United
Nations organ or agency that is responsible for each of
those areas. It is that logic that informs our principled
position on the need to adhere to the principle of the
division of labour among the principal organs of the

S/PV. 8900

United Nations. The issues of sustainable development,
climate change and human rights must be addressed
first and foremost from dedicated platforms with
the necessary tools and expertise and with universal
or broad representation of States Members of the
Organization. I refer here primarily to the General
Assembly and the Economic and Social Council.
That same logic also lies behind our doubts
regarding a number of concepts proposed in the
Secretary-General’s new initiative, entitled Our
Common Agenda, where we see a tendency to blend
mandates and create structures that duplicate bodies
established under the Charter of the United Nations.
That is fraught with the potential to generally undermine
the effectiveness of our global Organization. The idea
of a so-called multi-stakeholder approach aimed at
gradually equalizing the status of Member States and
non-State actors in the United Nations also raises a
number of questions.
In that connection, we call for the careful
consideration of certain elements of the reform agenda
in an intergovernmental format. Moreover, we firmly
believe that the truly effective implementation of the
reform agenda can be achieved only on the basis of
consensus decisions. We note with regret the unjustified
haste with which it has been proposed to adopt decisions
in the General Assembly as soon as the day after
tomorrow without proper consultations, which clearly
runs counter to the goal of achieving consensus. We
do not believe that the Secretary-General’s intention
was to provoke divisions among Member States and
to impose the will and understanding of one group of
countries, however influential, on another.
We consider it extremely important that
international assistance to States in resolving problems
of any kind should be provided exclusively at their
request and in close coordination with the State itself,
taking into account national priorities and context,
including in the legal, historical, religious and cultural
fields. Each individual conflict situation requires
its own specific approach; there can be no automatic
formulas here. We oppose the introduction of certain
universal indicators of conflicts or crises that could
open the door to various abuses.
Decisions can be based only on the involvement
of, and dialogue with, recipient States. Any departure
from those principles, including interference in the
internal affairs of States, putting pressure on so-called

21-3268111/27

S/PV.8900

Maintenance of international peace and security

undesirable Governments under the pretext of assisting
them and humanitarian interventions in violation of
international law, are unacceptable and often the root
causes of the emergence or exacerbation of conflicts.
Not all States present in this Chamber today are
prepared to speak frankly in that regard. However, if
we do not call things by their proper names, the tragic
situations faced by a number of States, particularly in
the Middle East region, will happen again. No concept,
no matter how attractive, will be able to gloss over
that fact.
An even more pernicious practice is the use of
unlawful unilateral sanctions — or the threat of the use
of sanctions —or the refusal to provide development
assistance. These inhuman restrictions, especially
in the context of the coronavirus pandemic, limit
States’ ability to overcome the pandemic’s impacts
and undermine the efforts of legitimate Governments
to achieve the Sustainable Development Goals, which
exacerbates inequality at the intergovernmental level
and ultimately affects the well-being of innocent
people. The example of Syria, for whose cooperation
our American and European colleagues are prepared
to punish both companies and countries alike, vividly
demonstrates this trend and casts a shadow on any
humanistic discussions about the nexus between peace
and development. We call on all those involved to heed
the corresponding appeal of the Secretary-General and
stop this harmful practice.
In conclusion, I cannot fail to mention our Estonian
colleague’s finding nothing better to do than to use the
Security Council for yet another shaming of Belarus.
May I remind her that the refugees on the border with
Poland and Lithuania are seeking to get to Europe.
They are not seeking to stay there. Therefore, who is
creating the crisis by building fences with barbed wire
and concentrating military contingents at the border?
The countries of the European Union often call
for full respect for the principles of international
humanitarian law, but when it comes time to abiding
by it, they shift the responsibility to others. I would
therefore like to ask a question: What is this failed Minsk
policy in the Middle East that has led to the appearance
of Syrian refugees on the borders with Poland and
Lithuania? When the same thing was happening on the
borders of other countries in the European Union (EU)
or when refugees were coming from other countries to
the EU, their words were indeed quite different, and
now they are threatening to introduce sanctions against
12/27

09/11/2021

whom and for what? It is simply because they do not
wish to accept the refugees that are seeking to come to
their countries within the European Union. It is time to
stop shifting the blame in this regard.
Ms. Juul (Norway): I thank the President for
honouring us with his presence in the Chamber today.
I extend my appreciation to Mexico for organizing
today’s debate and putting this important topic on the
Security Council’s agenda
I also thank the Secretary-General and Ms. Guala
for their insightful remarks. Today’s debate strongly
resonates with the Secretary-General’s report, Our
Common Agenda, which lays out how the lack of
trust, the absence of justice, deepening inequalities,
exclusion and marginalization can lead to, in particular,
instability, fragility and conflict. We agree with these
analyses and support moving this agenda forward,
including in the Security Council.
Protracted armed conflicts, worsening climate
change, systematic inequality and persistent poverty are
affecting the peace and security of a growing number
of people, and the coronavirus disease pandemic has
further endangered the most vulnerable populations,
compounding the root causes of conflict. To respond
effectively, we must strengthen efforts across the work
of the United Nations, from humanitarian assistance
to development to peacebuilding and human rights,
especially in order to tackle such complex issues as
exclusion, inequality and poverty as drivers of conflict.
For example, populations emerging from conflict
need sustained investment in reconciliation as well as
improved livelihoods, preparedness and resilience to
respond to future crises.
For this, Norway supports an integrated approach.
We are committed to the principle of the nexus, as
exemplified in the Grand Bargain, the comprehensive
refugee response framework and the reform of the
United Nations development system. Better and more
coordinating financing across the nexus is one way
to move beyond institutional silos and deliver results
together. Another way is by mobilizing grass-root
movements and civil society, including women’s
organizations. This is crucial to breaking cycles of
conflict and fostering sustainable solutions for people
where they live.
These issues also form an important part of
the United Nations preventive work, and, in this
respect, the Peacebuilding Commission (PBC) and
21-32681

09/11/2021

Maintenance of international peace and security

the Peacebuilding Fund are both important tools
for coherence. The PBC acts as a bridge among the
principal organs and relevant United Nations entities by
sharing advice and peacebuilding needs and priorities.
It is well placed to contribute to a holistic approach and
should be better utilized. We encourage the Security
Council to actively seek this view and support the PBC
in its work.
Inclusive societies are peaceful societies.
Development and peace gains are not sustainable if a
large part of a population is marginalized and if human
rights are not respected. We know that exclusion is a
driver of conflict, which is why promoting human rights
is one key component of both Norway’s foreign policy and
development policy. Women’s empowerment through
direct and meaningful participation is fundamental and
a well-proven way to build sustainable peace. Creating
a culture of public participation can also ease tension,
reduce frustration and build trust, as can accountable
institutions and competent, independent and impartial
judiciaries, which are essential to upholding the rule
of law and ensuring them that human rights and
fundamental freedoms are respected.
There is little hope of achieving peace and security
as long as underlying political conflicts remain
unresolved, especially those stemming from exclusion
and inequality. We must all give higher priority
towards promoting inclusive political settlements in
our peacebuilding and reconciliation efforts.
Mr. Zhang Jun (China) (spoke in Chinese) China
wishes to thank Mexico for its initiative to convene this
open debate and welcomes His Excellency President
López Obrador as he presides over today’s meeting.
In his briefing, Secretary-General Guterres
provided us with an insightful perspective and food for
thought for our discussion, for which I wish to thank
him. I also listened attentively to the statement made by
Ms. Lourdes Tibán Guala.
Equality as a value is an eternal pursuit of human
society. Regrettably, in this twenty-first century,
inequality between and within countries remains
ubiquitous and is often a major source of tension
and conflict. The prevalence of unilateralism and
hegemonism has perpetuated unfair and irrational
arrangements
within
the
global
governance
architecture, serving as the main drivers of inequality
in international relations. The coronavirus disease
(COVID-19) pandemic, climate change and the

S/PV. 8900

application of emerging technologies are also
exacerbating the challenges presented by the wealth gap
and the North-South divide, giving rise to new forms
of inequality. The international community, including
the Security Council, should pay close attention to this
issue, strengthen coordination in the context of peace
and security and respond collectively.
Achieving inclusive development for all is
the fundamental way to address inequality and
eliminate conflicts. The most salient manifestation of
inequality facing the world today is the yawning gap
in immunization between developed and developing
countries, which not only hinders the global pandemic
response, but also constitutes a grave injustice to the
people in developing countries. We call for vigorous
international cooperation on vaccines and for ensuring
that vaccines are accessible and affordable as a public
good to people all over the world.
China has been working hard towards that goal. So
far, China has provided more than 1.6 billion doses of
vaccine to more than 100 countries and international
organizations. We will provide more than 2 billion
doses overseas this year. China is the largest provider
of vaccines to the world.
In a post-COVID-19 era, development is the
foremost demand of people in all countries. A
people-centred approach is essential. While making the
cake bigger, the fruits of development should be shared
fairly so that all people can enjoy a better life.
In the era of globalization, the world’s long-term
development cannot be predicated on some countries
growing richer while others are mired in protracted
poverty and backwardness. It is only by fundamentally
eradicating development inequality, inadequacy and
imbalance and achieving the common development
of all countries that the world can strive towards a
better future. Practices, such as beggar-thy-neighbour
policies, the exportation of crises and making gains at
the expense of others will only destroy the foundation
of common development. Those practices are neither
ethical nor tenable.
Not long ago, Chinese President Xi Jinping put
forward a global development initiative. The core idea
of that is to uphold inclusiveness and benefits for all,
advocate building partnerships and leave not a single
country behind in global development. We should
place development front and centre in international
cooperation, continue to nurture an open world economy

21-3268113/27

S/PV.8900

Maintenance of international peace and security

and create the conditions for the full implementation of
the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development.
In order to promote and guarantee social equality,
durable and solid institutional arrangements are
essential. In the process of reconstruction, post-conflict
countries should be mindful of their own national
realities, build broad-based and inclusive political
architecture, improve the rule of law, ensure the equal
participation of all social groups and strata in national
governance, and let the people be the true masters of
their country.
History has shown us time and again that
undermining the principle of sovereign equality and
repeatedly interfering in the internal affairs of other
countries, imposing governance models on developing
countries and even pitting one faction against another
often lead to internal conflicts in those countries.
The disastrous fallout of power politics and military
intervention may become a hotbed of extremist
ideologies, playing into the hands of those preaching
hatred and inciting violence. That lesson must be
conscientiously learned.
We should promote and foster international
relations featuring mutual respect, fairness, justice
and win-win cooperation. It is imperative to uphold the
equality of nations large and small, practice genuine
multilateralism and unswervingly commit to the
purposes and principles of the Charter of the United
Nations so that all countries and peoples can partake in
peace, development and dignity and jointly shape the
future of humankind.
In that regard, the Security Council shoulders
important responsibilities and carries the universal
expectation of the international community. China
stands ready to work with all members of the Council
in an unremitting effort to build a better future.
Mr. Kimani (Kenya): I congratulate Your
Excellency, Mr. Andrés Manuel López Obrador,
President of the United Mexican States, on assuming the
presidency of the Security Council and for convening
this important debate. I also thank His Excellency the
Secretary-General and Ms. Lourdes Tibán Guala for
their insightful briefings.
Your choice, Mr. President, of topic of today is
strongly linked to the debate on diversity, State-building
and the search for peace (see S/PV.8877), which was
presided over by President Uhuru Kenyatta almost
14/27

09/11/2021

exactly a month ago. They have in common an urgency
in calling the world’s attention to the risks to peace and
security that arise from the State’s inability to prevent
and address conflicts defined by race, ethnicity,
religious affiliation, gender and other markers of
identity before they escalate into violence.
We embrace your profound recognition of the
disfiguring, demoralizing and destructive inequalities
and exclusions in the global multilateral and economic
system and agree with your insight that, at its core, a
globalized corruption is one of the greatest risks to
peace and security.
Kenya is convinced that a key competence of the
State in its protection of national security is its legal,
administrative and operational capacity in responding
to underlying grievances on the basis of social and
cultural differences. That is a competence as important
to the wealthiest and most established democracies as it
is to countries in the active grip of war and terrorism.
In every part of the world, differences are being
weaponized, whether in the context of elections or
in demands for political or economic change. The
result is a fundamental challenge to stability and the
maintenance of peace and security. This is becoming
an underlying cause and driver of many protracted
conflicts, involving both State and non-State actors,
that have had serious security and humanitarian
consequences around the world.
This weaponization of difference is the basis of
radicalization conducive to terrorism. Everywhere it
breaks into hate speech and incitement to violence,
atrocities and war crimes are the result. It is leading
to the disruption of civic peace. It is eroding trust in
institutions and striking at the legitimacy that is a
necessary component of effective governance.
Protecting international peace and security will
require a Security Council and a United Nations and
regional organizations that actively encourage and
enable the effective management of diversity, in
compliance with international human rights law and the
Universal Declaration of Human Rights. I will suggest
four points that should underpin our efforts to address
exclusion, inequality and conflicts on the basis of race,
ethnicity, religious affiliation and other differences.
First, Excellency, we embrace your powerful point
on the need to challenge the corruption that is endemic
in the international system. It is the effects of that
21-32681

09/11/2021

Maintenance of international peace and security

corruption that lead to the poverty, inequalities and
exclusions that then become weaponized and turned
into the bases of violent conflict. Indeed, the major
affliction of the international multilateral system is
a symptom of this corruption that we see reflected in
double standards and ever-moving goalposts in the
service of an unjust hierarchy established to maintain
the most powerful and the wealthiest at the expense of
the weakest and the most vulnerable.
Secondly, the Security Council can contribute
to breaking the vicious cycles involving exclusion,
inequality and conflict by embedding within the United
Nations peacekeeping architecture capacity-building
mandates that deliver State institutions that promote
equality and harness diversity for sustained peace
and development.
Thirdly, the Security Council should make much
greater use of the advisory role of the Peacebuilding
Commission. The Commission, for its part, should come
to grips with the role that exclusion and the escalation
of identity-based conflicts and grievances play in the
ensuing violence.
Fourthly, civic and political speech is increasingly
mediated by technology. Between the right to free
speech of the speaker to the right of association of the
listener is a social-media algorithm built to profit from
the effects of how it directs and ranks that speech. The
result is a subtle but important challenge to free speech
and freedom of association.
These precious values must now contend with
echo chambers and fake news, misinformation and
disinformation at scale. Technology allows billions
to be targeted as individuals. It is changing politics
and will continue to do so in both positive ways and
extremely destructive ones.

S/PV. 8900

insert capabilities and tools that allow States and the
international community to be better protected against
conflicts driven by the politicization of racial, ethnic,
religious and other social and cultural differences,
as well as the economic differences that result
from corruption.
Mr. De Rivière (France) (spoke in French):
I welcome Mexico’s organization of this debate,
which recalls three essential conditions for lasting
peace: inclusion, the guarantee of human rights
and development.
First, with regard to inclusion, conflict resolution
requires political solutions that bring together all
the stakeholders. That is borne out time and again.
In Ethiopia, France is calling on the authorities to
launch an inclusive national dialogue without delay,
in accordance with their commitments. In the Central
African Republic, the ceasefire must allow for an
immediate end to the violence and make way for
inclusive dialogue.
Peacekeeping operations must combat exclusion,
particularly through community violence reduction
programmes. Disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration initiatives for ex-combatants should
facilitate inclusion. The participation of all citizens in
transparent and credible electoral processes is essential.
In Mali, for example, we call on the authorities to
honour their commitments and to organize elections
in order to end the transition. In Haiti, all political
actors must build the consensus necessary to put in
place an inclusive Government capable of ensuring
peaceful elections.

There are important conversations going on,
particularly in the global North on the regulation of such
technologies, but the global South is not sufficiently
included. We must increase the engagement among
States, technology companies and the United Nations.
Positive collaboration will enable the development and
deployment of early-warning tools to be used within
peace operations and country teams in order to detect
escalation trends and facilitate pre-emptive measures
in the name of peace.

Secondly, in order to tackle the root causes of
conflict, we must guarantee human rights and respond
to humanitarian needs. The protection of fundamental
freedoms and the rule of law is the sine qua non for
lasting peace. Acts of violence, intolerance and
discrimination must not go unpunished. We must
continue to prioritize the protection of women, children,
minorities and the most vulnerable. In the Middle East,
progress in the fight against Da’esh has not eliminated
the threat to women and religious minorities. In
Burma, the root causes of the Rohingya crisis persist;
the recommendations of the Advisory Commission on
Rakhine State, in particular those on citizenship and
equal rights, must be implemented.

In conclusion, Kenya looks forward to continued
conversations on how the Security Council can help

With the Generation Equality Forum, France and
Mexico have secured commitments and resources for

21-3268115/27

S/PV.8900

Maintenance of international peace and security

the women and peace and security agenda, but that
must translate into concrete progress on the ground.
In Afghanistan, France demands respect for the rights
of women and girls, as those rights are already being
violated by the Taliban.
Responding to humanitarian needs is crucial. We
must protect civilians and ensure humanitarian access.
In Syria, all parties, especially the Syrian regime, must
respect international humanitarian law.
Finally, peacebuilding efforts must ensure
sustainable development for the people. Poverty,
growing socioeconomic inequalities as well as
pandemics and environmental degradation call for
multilateral responses. The new social contract
promoted by the Secretary-General’s Our Common
Agenda reflects the increased need for cooperation and
solidarity. That is how we will also be able to make
progress in the implementation of the 2030 Agenda for
Sustainable Development.
France is doing its part by increasing its official
development assistance to 0.55 per cent of its gross
national income by next year. That aid will focus on
19 priority countries, particularly in Africa, in order
to protect global public goods, in particular climate,
biodiversity and health, and to promote the levers of
development, namely, education and equality. In order
to boost global vaccination against the coronavirus
disease (COVID-19) pandemic, France donated
67 million doses, including 64 million doses through the
COVID-19 Vaccine Global Access Facility mechanism.
Those vaccines are currently benefiting more than 52
countries, including about 30 in Africa. Those efforts
will continue.
The United Nations system as a whole must be a
vehicle for inclusion and development. In parallel with
the work of agencies on the ground, the Peacebuilding
Commission and the Peacebuilding Fund, to which
France quadrupled its contribution in 2021, must
prevent the emergence or resurgence of conflicts. Their
efforts must prioritize young people by supporting the
implementation and promotion of the youth, peace and
security agenda. Let us give young people the means
to participate in building lasting peace, starting today.
Mr. Ladeb (Tunisia) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I would like to thank Mexico for convening
this important debate, and to welcome His Excellency
President Andrés Manuel López Obrador and thank
him for his statement and for presiding over our
16/27

09/11/2021

meeting. I also thank Secretary-General António
Guterres for his valuable briefing. I thank as well civil
society representative Ms. Lourdes Tibán Guala for
her briefing.
Experience has shown that sustained peace and
security cannot be achieved by simply ending violence
and conflict. Realizing peacebuilding, promoting
stability and establishing security is a long-term process
that requires addressing the root causes that lead to
conflict, at the forefront of which are the phenomena of
exclusion, marginalization and inequality.
Peace is therefore unsustainable unless it is based
on a comprehensive approach that incorporates an
expanded concept of security and stability, in addition
to an expanded base that includes all phases of conflict
resolution and prevention, political reconciliation and
peacebuilding with the need to involve all the parties
concerned and all segments of society, particularly
women and youth. We must also address the factors
that fuel violent conflict, including causes of new crises
and conflicts.
The nature of conflicts has changed. Most conflicts
have become internal and more complex. The role of
non-State actors, in particular terrorist organizations,
armed groups and organized criminal gangs, has
increased. They exploit the phenomena of exclusion and
marginalization to fuel conflicts and crises and attract
marginalized groups while undermining the process of
achieving security, peace and stability. Among the most
important factors of marginalization and exclusion
are identity-related issues, including racial, religious
and gender identities, as well as those related to the
economic and development dimensions.
In that context, we reiterate Tunisia’s appreciation
for a view within the Council of the necessary approach
to promoting international peace and security, in
particular the adoption of the women and peace and
security and youth, peace and security agendas. We also
emphasize the need to focus more on the development,
human rights and climate change dimensions as
necessary components for achieving peace and
security, particularly through a participatory approach
that ensures the participation of all sectors in all phases
of achieving and building peace.
Such an approach will increase the resilience of
communities and their cohesion and will protect them
against fragmentation and division based on exclusion
and marginalization. It will also increase the capacity
21-32681

09/11/2021

Maintenance of international peace and security

of communities to address all challenges and threats to
security and stability
In that regard, we underscore the importance of
Sustainable Development Goal 16 of the 2030 Agenda
for Sustainable Development to the achievement
of sustainable peace by promoting solidarity,
strengthening the credibility of Governments and
building their capacities to contain and manage
differences and diversity, promote dialogue and
equality while focusing on common values and destiny,
legal identity of all members of the society, leading to
a tangible change in people’s lives. Peace and security
cannot be achieved without sustainable development.
Accordingly, development cannot be achieved without
peace. Realizing justice for all and combating exclusion
and inequality are necessary empowering factors for
the attainment of more stable and sustained societies.
Reports indicate the proliferation of crises and
conflicts in many regions of the world, in particular in
the Middle East and the African continent. Humanitarian
needs have reached their highest level since the Second
World War. The number of people threatened by famine
has increased, and extreme poverty has expanded.
Those factors all lead to marginalization, inequality
and deprivation. We therefore reiterate the need to
step up cooperation so as to resolve existing conflicts
and address all their security, social and humanitarian
repercussions.
We also emphasize the need to promote monitoring
and early-warning plans and mechanisms to prevent
crises and address their causes by strengthening
coordination among United Nations missions and
Resident Coordinators, as well as Governments and
civil society.
The coronavirus disease pandemic has exacerbated
the global situation, with its effects at various levels.
It has contributed to widening gaps among and within
States. We therefore reiterate the need to intensify
international cooperation and human solidarity in
order to mitigate such effects. The recovery stage must
include all peoples and States without exception, in
particular developing and least developed countries.
The pandemic has had an unprecedented impact on
human rights, equality and development across the
world. It has led to a global recession and exhausted
resources of Governments and societies, pushing
millions into poverty and hampering the right to health
and education. It has also worsened marginalization

S/PV. 8900

and exclusion of vulnerable and weak communities.
If unaddressed, such effects will undermine our gains
in several areas, threatening international peace and
security in the long term.
In conclusion, we express our support for the
Secretary-General’s Our Common Agenda and his
call to increase efforts to break the cycle of poverty,
exclusion discrimination and conflict while avoiding
the compounded impact of sustained emergencies,
which drain resources of many countries worldwide,
especially in the African continent. In that context, we
recall the high-level debate convened by Tunisia during
its presidency of the Security Council in January on
the challenges of maintaining peace and security in
fragile contexts (see S/2021/24). In that regard, we
reiterate Tunisia’s firm commitment to continuing its
active contribution in the service of international peace
and security.
Mr. Kariuki (United Kingdom): I thank you,
Mr. President, for bringing this important discussion
to the Security Council. I also thank the SecretaryGeneral and Ms. Tibán Guala for their briefings.
Systemic inequality and exclusion are often
significant drivers of insecurity and protracted internal
conflicts. Addressing those elements is critical to
building sustainable peace. The crisis in Ethiopia will
be resolved only through an inclusive dialogue. True
stability in Afghanistan will be possible only with the
full, equal and meaningful participation of women
and girls.
As the Secretary-General has said, development
is the best form of prevention. But development done
poorly is not the master key to unlocking all problems. To
be effective and sustainable, it needs to simultaneously
address the root causes of conflicts, including social,
economic and political exclusion.
Inclusive governance through democratic elections
is critical to allowing societies to manage challenges
peacefully. Human rights play a key role in creating
resilient societies. Human rights violations alert us to
rising conflict and atrocity risks.
I will make three brief points that are particularly
relevant to the Security Council.
First, we can do more to promote coherent
international assistance that better protects and
reinforces peace, development and human rights gains.
Peace needs to be nationally owned and nurtured. States

21-3268117/27

S/PV.8900

Maintenance of international peace and security

have a responsibility under the Charter of the United
Nations to meet their commitments and demonstrate
the political will to resolve threats to peace.
However, the Security Council can work more
actively to break down the silos that impede prevention
efforts. It means advocating for more coordinated
and conflict-sensitive United Nations assistance and
supporting better analysis and early warning so that
risks can be addressed before the Council is compelled
to take action. The United Kingdom supports the
flexible deployment of tools available to the United
Nations to assist countries with nationally driven
solutions to their peacebuilding challenges, including
the Peacebuilding Commission.
Secondly, in peacekeeping and special political
missions, the Council should ensure that United Nations
peace operations have a more holistic understanding of
the drivers of conflict and that they better coordinate
with local, national, regional and international
peacebuilding actors. The voices of civil society can
lend critical insights for the Council’s consideration, as
demonstrated by Ms. Tibán Guala’s testimony today.
Thirdly, and lastly, when conflicts escalate, the
Council should not side-step its responsibility. When
inequality and exclusion transform into atrocities
that breach agreed international norms and threaten
international peace and security, we have an obligation
to act and prevent further humanitarian crises.
It is in all our interests that countries and their
people be empowered to foster equitable, inclusive and
open societies.
Ms. King (Saint Vincent and the Grenadines): At the
outset, let me commend the delegation of Mexico — our
brothers and sisters by virtue of the shared histories,
identities and possibilities of our Americas — for
convening today’s open debate. I thank you, President
López Obrador, for a most memorable statement earlier.
I also thank the briefers for their remarks.
The linkages among inequality, exclusion and
conflict have long been established. Security risks are
often materialized amid striking disparities that stoke
social divisions, obstruct social mediation and expose
the foundations on which peaceful societies are erected.
In fragile contexts, where socioeconomic and political
marginalization and the human hardships occasioned
by underdevelopment are most pronounced, such
inequalities foment disputes that, all too frequently,
18/27

09/11/2021

metamorphose into violent conflict. They also create
fertile breeding ground for extremist ideologies,
terrorist activity and transnational organized crime,
all of which serve to undermine State sovereignty,
circumvent territorial integrity and erode the prospects
for lasting peace and development.
Greater efforts are clearly needed in terms of
both political will and developmental initiatives to
repair social fractures, strengthen institutions and
bolster national ownership of peace processes. That
is the most effective means of advancing the pacific
settlement of conflicts. Indeed, as many States in
post-conflict situations could attest, only when social
fabrics are mended, public trust is restored and national
processes of political dialogue, consensus-building
and reconciliation are earnestly pursued, will the deep
fissures that breed unrest and instability be finally and
conclusively repaired.
It is unfortunate, to say the least, that, during this
age of scientific advancement and the global expansion
of individual freedoms, so many structural disparities
exist across our societies and among our respective
nations. This unbalanced global development, which
manifests itself in severe health, economic, social and
security challenges, represents a moral blemish in the
face of the multilateral order. Undoubtedly, against the
stark backdrop of the coronavirus disease (COVID-19)
pandemic, the growing climate crisis and protracted
conflicts, all of which disproportionately and unfairly
affect developing countries, the time is upon us to
fashion a fairer and more inclusive multilateralism.
All organs and specialized agencies of the United
Nations must work more closely together, with the
support of Member States, regional and subregional
organizations and the international financial
institutions, to advance practical and people-centred
solutions across the peace and security-developmenthumanitarian nexus. Developed countries should scale
up their overseas development assistance commitments,
and counterproductive measures, in particular
unilateral sanctions, spurious blacklists and other
forms of economic sabotage, should be withdrawn. We
cannot successfully tackle exclusion within countries
as long as such exclusionary and discriminatory
practices are maintained by some members of the
international community.
No thesis of exclusion, inequality and conflict, in
the academic world or our practical diplomatic affairs,
21-32681

09/11/2021

Maintenance of international peace and security

would be complete without due consideration to the
ignoble roles of past empires and some present-day
Powers. Reparatory justice for the historical abuses
of chattel slavery and native genocide, from which
lasting legacies of underdevelopment and inequality
have emerged, remain an urgent priority. In our
deliberations as the Council, we must always bear in
mind the legitimate voices and perspectives of the
disempowered — stateless persons, refugees, internally
displaced people, the indigenous, other ethnic and
religious minorities, women, girls and those who suffer
the worst effects of COVID-19, climate change and
environmental degradation, including small island
developing States.
The peoples of Haiti, the Sahel and the Lake Chad
basin region, as do those elsewhere, deserve a more
just and equitable social and political order in which
the fruits of human ingenuity, including COVID-19
vaccines, are made readily available to all. During
the pivotal decade of action to achieve the Sustainable
Development Goals, let us work together to deliver
peace, security and prosperity to all humankind,
without exception or exclusion.
In conclusion, I echo your profound words,
Mr. President: only by being good can we be happy.
Mr. Dang (Viet Nam): Let me start by thanking
the Secretary-General for his insightful remarks, and
Ms. Tibán Guala for sharing her thoughts. We also
thank the Mexican presidency for convening this
very important open debate. We sincerely thank you,
Mr. President, for your insightful remarks and for
presiding over this debate.
In many conflict situations, it has been shown
that inequalities and exclusion can drive or exacerbate
the underlying root causes of armed conflicts. Social
and economic inequalities and political divides, both
within and among countries, can cause grievances, fuel
tension and create a tinderbox for violence and conflict.
They are further compounded by other stressors, such
as chronic poverty, the lack of economic development,
food and water insecurity, climate change and,
currently, the coronavirus disease pandemic.
They add complications to serious threats and
challenges that the international community has
continued to face as a result of power politics, unilateral
coercion, impositions and violations of international
law that have acted as systematic drivers of tension,
conflicts and confrontations. Furthermore, we all know

S/PV. 8900

that very few conflicts end simply with the signing
of a peace agreement. In the aftermath of conflicts,
damage to infrastructure, the deprivation of essential
services and the lack of development opportunities can
jeopardize reconstruction and development efforts.
On several occasions, the Security Council has
recognized the interlinkages between peace and
sustainable development. Therefore, it is essential
to address not only the symptoms and consequences,
but also the underlying root causes of conflict as a
preventive measure in order to preserve and sustain
hard-won peace and development gains. In that regard,
I would like to highlight four points.
First, as the primary guardian of international
peace and security, the Security Council must continue
to uphold the Charter of the United Nations, including
its purposes and principles, and an international order
based on international law, which is the indispensable
foundation for a more peaceful, prosperous and just
world where States coexist peacefully.
Secondly, a coordinated approach requires the
Security Council to work together with other entities
in the United Nations system, including the Economic
and Social Council, the United Nations country teams
and other development partners, in accordance with
their respective mandates. We also highly value the
advisory role of the Peacebuilding Commission. In that
connection, regional organizations, in accordance with
Chapter VIII of the Charter, can play a complementary
role in maintaining international peace and security.
In our region, the Association of Southeast Asian
Nations has affirmed its centrality in the regional
security architecture, for example, in preventing
and resolving conflicts and addressing regional and
international issues.
Thirdly, the implementation of the 2030 Agenda
for Sustainable Development continues to be our
utmost priority. More innovative financing to address
inequality and support sustainable development should
be considered. In post-conflict situations, sustainable
development is crucial for national reconciliation. That
is the first-hand experience that my country can share,
having gone through its own course of reconstruction,
recovery and development from a war-torn and
underdeveloped nation to a middle-income country.
Fourthly, in capacity-building, there is no
one-size-fits-all approach. Assistance to States must
respect State sovereignty and be based on national

21-3268119/27

S/PV.8900

Maintenance of international peace and security

strategies, plans and priorities, while taking into full
consideration cultural and historical perspectives
and ensuring national ownership. Such an approach,
premised on national specificities and needs, also
allows us to focus on the groups most vulnerable to
inequalities and exclusion in specific contexts.
Given our national experiences and history, Viet
Nam values and remains committed to being a reliable
partner for sustainable peace and development.
Ms. Byrne Nason (Ireland): I would like to thank
Mexico and you personally, President López Obrador,
for being with us today and for bringing this important
item to the Council.
I would also like to thank the Secretary-General
for his insightful briefing. I thank, in particular,
Ms. Lourdes Tibán Guala for the powerful messages
she gave us at the beginning of the meeting. We listened
attentively to those messages.
Ireland’s own President, Michael D. Higgins,
in his recent statement celebrating 200 years of
Mexican independence, noted the striking parallels
in the histories of Mexico and Ireland, which include
colonization, emigration, poverty and exclusion. Those
are features that mark both of our histories but also unite
Irish and Mexican people. They also form a particularly
relevant backdrop for our discussion here today.
Let us admit that today the Security Council does
not effectively address the root causes of conflict.
Today’s debate and your own thoughtful statement,
Mr. President, highlight the gaps and the urgent critical
need to further the preventive agenda of the Council
and ensure that, as the Security Council, we avoid
the struggle under way now to move beyond simply
reacting to crises.
The value Ireland places on that issue is reflected
in how we approach our role at this table. It is reflected
in how we approach our work on climate and security,
conflict and hunger, women and peace and security,
human rights and peacekeeping. We believe that the
Council must take those issues into the heart of our
agenda to ensure effective prevention and transitions
to peace, particularly in contexts where we move from
peacekeeping to peacebuilding.
In our view, it is not just the right thing to do, but
the smart thing to do. We know that on average, early
preventive action to avert war and mass atrocities can
cost as much as 60 times less than late response and
20/27

09/11/2021

military intervention. Daily, at this very table, we deal
with the result of the Security Council doing too little,
too late. Whether in relation to climate-related risks,
the collapse of food systems, endemic corruption,
which you, Mr. President, highlighted in your remarks,
exclusionary politics or the human rights and protection
landscape, we truly need to recognize what is now
increasingly so obvious — non-traditional challenges
are increasingly and rapidly impacting not just peace
and security; they are also a drag on our capacity to
address those challenges.
As others have said today, the adverse effects of
climate change are being felt across the globe, from
the Sahel to small island developing States. It leads
to sea level rise, displacement and competition over
resources, thereby contributing to instability and
increasing tensions.
As we discussed here just last month, under
Kenya’s presidency, the Great Lakes region is facing a
host of complex and interlinked crises (see S/PV.8884),
including persistent violence and insecurity, illegal
exploitation and trade of natural resources, a cycle of
conflict and hunger, staggeringly high levels of food
insecurity and malnutrition, as well as extreme poverty,
exclusion and inequality. Failing to address those issues
is nothing less than an abdication of our responsibility.
Ireland believes that a coordinated and partnershipbased approach across the humanitarian-developmentpeace nexus will enable us to anticipate and respond
to emerging threats before they lead to conflicts on
our agenda. It can help us to extinguish the sparks that
might otherwise become flames. It can also help us hold
ourselves to account against the humanitarian principles
of humanity, neutrality, impartiality and independence.
We have also seen in countries, such as Timor-Leste,
a positive example of how suitable anticipatory actions,
early response and inclusive political engagement
can generate robust peace. As is often stated, there is
no peace without development and no development
without peace.
We should be under no illusion that the glaring
examples of poverty, exclusion and inequality we
see around us, exacerbated by the coronavirus
disease pandemic and ever-increasing climate risks
are not contributing to international insecurity. The
exclusion of women, too, in peacebuilding contexts is
deeply damaging. The evidence shows that women’s
participation in peace processes leads to better
21-32681

09/11/2021

Maintenance of international peace and security

outcomes in the substance and quality of peace
agreements, as well as their durability. As the Council
has heard before, in all peace and political processes
that the United Nations leads or co-leads, women’s
participation must be full, equal and meaningful. We
know that well in Ireland from our own experience.
Other speakers have reminded us of the alarming
array of humanitarian crises and human rights violations
in conflict settings on our agenda today. It is a grim
reminder that the Security Council is not effectively
addressing the root causes of conflict. In the past
month alone, in the Chamber, we have discussed acute
humanitarian emergencies in Ethiopia, Afghanistan,
Syria, Yemen, Mali and beyond.
In order to remain credible — I would argue in order
to meet our responsibilities — the Council must work
better with other parts of the United Nations system,
notably the Peacebuilding Commission, the General
Assembly and the Human Rights Council. We must
continue to provide platforms and listen to civilians,
such as Lourdes Tibán Guala, earlier today, who have
an amplified voice, in the Council, and show us that the
Council can meet its responsibility to strive to protect
those who are most affected by its work.
As our President noted in his recent message to you,
President López Obrador, Ireland shares with Mexico a
common wish to
“advance the role of women in peace processes,
advocate for the peaceful settlement of disputes,
ensure respect for the rule of law and promote the
protection of vulnerable groups and civilians in
armed conflict”.
I am therefore grateful to you, Mr. President, that
today’s open debate today allows for a refreshing
and, at times, provocative discussion that reflects our
shared aspirations.
Mr. Maman Sani (Niger) (spoke in French):
First of all, allow me to thank you, Mr. President, for
convening today’s important high-level debate on the
issues of exclusion, inequality and armed conflicts.
This meeting is most timely, given that many analyses
have shown that exclusion and inequality lead to social
unrest. Therefore, a judicious treatment of those factors
remains the best way to avoid the societal crises that
often lead to armed conflicts.

S/PV. 8900

I would like to thank Secretary-General António
Guterres and Ms. Lourdes Tibán Guala, expert on
indigenous affairs, for their enlightening briefings.
The debate on the causes of conflict is increasingly
linking social exclusion to violent conflict, hence why
Governments need to put appropriate policies in place to
reduce exclusion and inequality between communities
within their nations and, in doing so, create a sense of
belonging for every citizen.
With the advent of the coronavirus disease
(COVID-19) pandemic, those inequalities have been
exacerbated. While the low rate of infection in the Sahel
region is to be welcomed, the severe economic crisis
caused by lockdown measures and other responses to the
pandemic have unfortunately exacerbated pre-existing
social inequalities and exclusion. While already facing
cash-flow pressures due to heavy yet necessary security
investments, our States are now facing declining tax
revenues, a large budget deficit, the deterioration of
basic social sectors and rising unemployment — all of
which would reverse the hard-won economic gains of
recent years.
In addition, we are also dealing with the climate
crisis. Despite being responsible for less than 1 per
cent of total emissions, the Sahel is one of the regions
of the world most affected by the consequences of
climate change.
The combination of those factors, as we all
know, has resulted in increased social inequalities,
disproportionately affecting women, young people and
rural and insecure communities. Therefore, in order to
address those governance challenges, it is imperative
now more so than ever to create a new social contract
that meets citizens’ needs and integrates the work of the
United Nations through the interdependent pillars of our
work, namely, peace, development and human rights.
With that in mind, allow me to make a few
suggestions as to how the Security Council might
approach the issue.
First, there is now a need for a coherent and
integrated approach to better integrate the 2030
Agenda for Sustainable Development into our various
development and peacebuilding policies and strategies.
In that respect, the United Nations must support the
actions of Governments of countries in situations of
fragility, as well as local actors and subregional and
regional organizations.

21-3268121/27

S/PV.8900

Maintenance of international peace and security

09/11/2021

Secondly, we must invest in capacity development
and the strengthening of national institutions. In
order to do so, fairer and more inclusive governance
is required, as is the development of regulatory, legal
and policy frameworks and social institutions that
reduce inequalities in all areas of public, economic and
political life.

I wish to remind all speakers to limit their
statements to no more than four minutes in order to
enable the Council to carry out its work expeditiously.
Flashing lights on the collars of the microphones will
prompt speakers to bring their remarks to a close after
four minutes.

Thirdly, as we have mentioned on many occasions,
the time has come to reform the global governance
system, including the United Nations and the Security
Council, so as to strengthen its role and equip it to
adequately fulfil its tasks. The COVID-19 pandemic has
shown us the inadequacies of our current governance
system, the tools of which are no longer adapted to
meet new and emerging challenges.

Mr. Rodríguez Cuadros (Peru) (spoke in Spanish):
At the outset, I would like to congratulate the Mexican
Government on its presidency of the Security Council.
In particular, I would like to congratulate President
Andrés Manuel López Obrador for taking the initiative
to convene this meeting, which gives us the opportunity
to jointly assess exclusion, inequality and poverty as
structural causes of conflict and their structural links
to peace.

In conclusion, and while the twenty-sixth
Conference of the Parties to the United Nations
Framework Convention on Climate Change is being
held, my delegation would like to stress the importance
of the debate on climate change and its multifaceted
effects, particularly on the stability of countries in
conflict situations. We call on those countries that are
major emitters to meet their commitments to finance
resilience and adaptation. It is equally important and
high time that the security risks of climate change
were effectively integrated into stabilization and
peacekeeping operations.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I shall now make
a further statement in my capacity as the representative
of Mexico.
I would like to thank all 15 members of the Security
Council for allowing me to preside over this meeting
and agreeing to debate the topic of corruption and
inequality. I also thank the representatives of the other
Member States participating today.
By way of summarizing the debate, I would like to
make it clear that corruption is the principal cause of
socioeconomic inequality. Furthermore, peace is borne
of justice. It is my hope that, once our global initiative
for fraternity and well-being is announced, it will be
met with great support.
On behalf of the Government that I represent and
the people of Mexico, I wish to express my warmest
greetings to all Governments and peoples of the world.
I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.
22/27

I now give the floor to the representative of Peru.

Peace is not just the control or suppression of conflict
and the threat and use of force — it is essentially a form
of social coexistence. It is based on the recognition of
the human dignity of all and therefore on a societal
order founded on social cohesion, a fair distribution of
wealth, access to opportunities for all, equal relations
and the absence of discrimination and exclusion.
The current in-transition international system,
characterized by instability and inequality between
nations and between social sectors within States,
requires a new global governance system that builds
peace from a multidimensional structural perspective.
The
coronavirus
disease
pandemic
has
dramatically, clearly and no less realistically revealed
the social fractures of today’s world. It has shown the
inadequacy of the market to generate both progress in
equality and wealth and its fair distribution. On the
contrary, the pandemic has shown that the appearance
of growth without inclusion concealed enormous social
inequalities in access to power and income, not just in
developing countries, but also in the most industrialized
nations with the highest income levels; gaps in
health systems and social protection, environmental
degradation and the climate crisis that is currently
being debated in Glasgow. Between immobility and
ambitions far removed from the demands of climate
urgency, inequality in access to decent and dignified
work and gender inequalities have deepened with the
economic crisis that produced the most recessionary
pandemic since the Second World War. Entire regions,
including Latin America, which had made substantial
progress in the fight against poverty and extreme
21-32681

09/11/2021

Maintenance of international peace and security

S/PV. 8900

poverty, have fallen years behind in terms of achieving
their development goals. Social and national cohesion
has been severely affected, creating conditions for the
exacerbation of conflicts, including migration crises.

The United Arab Emirates would like to draw
attention to four areas that are crucial for addressing
exclusion, inequality and poverty in the prevention and
resolution of conflicts.

The crisis of inequality is the crisis of our time. I
believe that the demand for peace based on the people’s
living conditions reflects the mood and the hope of
millions of citizens around the world who aspire to
seeing political leaders committed to representing
their individual and collective interests and to putting
people’s daily lives, the overcoming of shortfalls
and the realization of their aspirations on the world
peace agenda.

First, Governments have the primary responsibility
to provide educational and economic opportunities for
all. Such Government-led action can prevent widening
inequality gaps and, in turn, address the long-standing
drivers of conflict. To that end, it is critical to ensure the
inclusion and engagement of women and youth in both
national strategies and measures to build resilience that
guarantees stable, prosperous and peaceful societies.

Peru underlines the importance of prioritizing, in
the context of multilateral governance, the convergence
of efforts aimed at preventing the emergence of threats
to international peace and security through appropriate
management of structural causes of conflict. We
must not restrict peacekeeping to the indispensable
and imperative agendas of pacification, stabilization
and the construction of a post-conflict institutional
order: it is also crucial to address problems of human
development and the realization of people’s economic
and social rights. The no-conflict agenda must go hand
in hand with the inclusive-social-development agenda
and provide marginalized, vulnerable and excluded
sectors with access to decision-making about their own
lives. Peace must be inclusive; it is a right that belongs
to everyone.

Secondly, the Council must ensure that strategies
and mandates of peace operations are designed
for — and with — local communities from the
outset. Mandates should include perspectives from a
broad range of local grass-roots actors, particularly
women and youth leaders, to directly incorporate and
address their needs and eliminate risks of exclusion or
discrimination. We recognize the importance of the
Peacebuilding Commission and the significant value
its recommendations can add to the Council’s work.
Inclusion of these different perspectives can deliver
durable, nationally owned solutions to tackle deeply
rooted challenges. This is a key element of successful
and sustainable conflict prevention, peacekeeping and
peacebuilding.

Mr. Abushahab (United Arab Emirates): At the
outset, the United Arab Emirates would like to thank
Mexico for organizing today’s meeting. We would also
like to thank President Andrés Manuel López Obrador
for presiding over this debate. We also extend our
thanks to Secretary-General António Guterres and
Ms. Lourdes Tibán Guala for their important briefings.

Thirdly, developing strategies that embed a rule-oflaw approach in conflict and post-conflict settings
will guarantee long-term stability, but that requires a
coordinated response. As United Nations peacekeeping
and special political missions work on the ground with
various communities, it is equally as important for
them to build local capacity to uphold and strengthen
the rule of law. By providing advice, training and
technical support, missions can create the necessary
conditions to re-establish the rule of law, and in turn,
protect civilians, pave the way to peacebuilding and
reconstruct communities.

Addressing the root causes of conflict, particularly
those that exacerbate discrimination and widen
inequality gaps within societies, has proven to be one of
the most effective ways to maintain international peace
and security. That has become even more apparent with
the impact of the coronavirus disease pandemic, which
continues to highlight exclusion within societies. It is
critical for the Security Council to bring these issues
to the forefront in order to focus on preventive action.

Finally, fighting corruption remains critical to
maintaining good governance and the rule of law.
Mechanisms like the United Nations Convention against
Corruption and its Abu Dhabi declaration of 2019
provide important obligations and commitments for
States parties, particularly with respect to regional and
international cooperation and exchanging information
related to corruption. We also encourage States to
support the important work of the United Nations

The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of the United Arab Emirates.

21-3268123/27

S/PV.8900

Maintenance of international peace and security

Office on Drugs and Crime (UNODC) in providing
technical assistance. Earlier this year, the United
Arab Emirates signed an agreement with UNODC to
establish a programme to support the implementation
of the Abu Dhabi declaration.
Beginning in January, the United Arab Emirates
upcoming Security Council term will be guided by the
pillars of advancing inclusion and building resilience.
We remain committed to driving these concepts
forward in our contribution to conflict prevention and
resolution.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Malta.
Mrs. Frazier (Malta): I begin by congratulating
Mexico on assuming the presidency of the Security
Council, and by thanking the Mexican delegation for
organizing today’s open debate on exclusion, inequality
and conflict.
Discussing the root causes of conflict and their
impacts on peace and security is of fundamental
importance for gaining a better understanding of any
given situation and for developing holistic and inclusive
solutions to emerging threats and complex conflicts.
Time and again, in different parts of the world, we have
seen the consequences of social exclusion, particularly
when entire groups of the population are denied the
right to exercise their rights and freedoms or are
prevented from engaging in the political process and
decision-making. Such conditions, especially when
combined, may provide fertile ground for violent
conflicts. Identifying these trends and addressing them
in a timely manner can therefore play an important part
in conflict prevention.
International peace and the promotion and
protection of human rights are both goals and processes
towards building more resilient, inclusive and peaceful
societies, for which the primary responsibility rests
with States. The women and peace and security agenda
demonstrates that ensuring the human rights of women
and girls is intrinsically linked to peacebuilding and
sustaining peace. We must create the conditions on the
ground that will be conducive to women’s and girls’
full, effective and meaningful participation.
The coronavirus disease pandemic has unleashed
devastating effects that continue to hamper the
Sustainable Development Goals globally, slowing
or reversing years of hard-earned economic growth
24/27

09/11/2021

and social progress. Many developing countries are
trapped in a vicious cycle of economic challenges, with
further stresses on their health-care systems. In a world
confronted with growing inequalities, environmental
threats and climate change, the international community
should continue to underpin its post-pandemic recovery
on the 2030 Agenda.
The impact of continued exclusion and inequality
on the maintenance of international peace and security
is magnified by the historically high humanitarian
needs in a number of contexts. Enhancing State capacity
to address humanitarian needs, while also ensuring
compliance with international humanitarian law and
its guiding principles, remains essential. Failure to
cater to the fundamental needs of civilian populations
in humanitarian crises only serves to increase poverty
levels and further entrenches sentiments of exclusion
and inequality. This reality should also underline the
relevance of the humanitarian-development-peace
nexus and the need to explore synergies between
humanitarian, development and peacebuilding entities.
Over the past few years, we have also seen an
increase in rhetoric aimed at dehumanizing ethnic,
religious and other vulnerable groups and minorities.
Such discourse, which exploits and deepens existing
fractures in society through the spreading of falsehoods
and misconceptions, has become even more apparent
with the advent of social media. The use of social
media to promote hate speech, racism, xenophobia
and intolerance should not be taken lightly. Efforts
must also be made to make sure that our citizens
have access to factual and accurate information. To
that end, we highlight once again the importance of
partnerships with civil society, the private sector and
social media companies.
Education is central in countering this phenomenon,
and that is why we will also focus on promoting the
importance of literacy if entrusted to serve on the
Security Council in 2023-2024. Literacy empowers
all members of society, including by providing youths
with the necessary tools to thrive and contribute to the
economic growth of their communities. It also allows
people to analyse information, question sources and
counter disinformation, making them less susceptible
to fall for the rhetoric of extremist groups.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of the Islamic Republic
of Iran.
21-32681

09/11/2021

Maintenance of international peace and security

Mr. Takht Ravanchi (Islamic Republic of Iran):
I congratulate Mexico on assuming the Council
presidency for this month and I thank you, Sir, for
organizing this open debate.
Issues such as exclusion and inequality can act as
potential drivers and aggravating factors for conflicts
and weaken opportunities to achieve lasting peace in
conflict-ridden countries. According to United Nations
reports, the provision of humanitarian needs in conflict
situations has been on the rise and is today at the
highest level.
Humanitarian assistance can treat the symptoms
but cannot cure the disease. Therefore, prevention is
always better than cure. In this context, the prevention
of conflicts is one of the main obligations set forth in
the Charter of the United Nations, and the primary
responsibility for this obligation has been assigned to
Member States. Tackling such challenges, which are
essentially internal matters of countries, requires an
integrated and holistic approach and should be dealt
with by the States concerned.
Nevertheless, the international community also
needs to be involved in addressing such challenges.
The international community and the United Nations
must assist conflict-affected countries, upon their
request, through the provision of tailored technical and
financial supports to address the root causes of conflicts
properly and more effectively. As stated in Sustainable
Development Goal 10, reducing poverty and inequality
and ensuring that no one is left behind is integral to
achieving the sustainable development. We highlight
the significant role of the United Nations in this regard.
For the effective prevention of conflicts, other
underlying causes — such as climate change, foreign
intervention and occupation, as well as the application
of unilateral acts — that lead to prolonged conflict
situations must also be considered and tackled. In this
context, the imposition of unilateral coercive measures,
such as illegal sanctions imposed by the United States
on the Iranian people, has serious consequences for
the well-being of all segments of the population. These
unlawful acts, which have caused severe shortages in
the basic needs of the people, especially medicines
and medical equipment needed for combating the
coronavirus disease, exacerbate economic harship.
Unilateral sanctions also prevent access of the affecting
countries to the financial and development resources

S/PV. 8900

necessary for their realization of the Sustainable
Development Goals.
The provision of technical and humanitarian
assistance to people in need in conflict and post-conflict
situations should in no way be politicized, conditional
or discriminatory. The constructive contribution of
the United Nations to preventing conflicts requires
coherence, sustained engagement and coordination
among the General Assembly, the Security Council
and the Economic and Social Council, consistent with
their mandates, as set out in the Charter of the United
Nations. In this context, we emphasize that the Security
Council must adhere to the purposes and principles of
the Charter of the United Nations and should focus its
efforts on any situation that is likely to endanger the
maintenance of international peace and security. Issues
with social and economic aspects, such as exclusion and
inequality, must be addressed by the competent organs
of the United Nations, namely, the General Assembly
and the Economic and Social Council.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Chile.
Mr. Skoknic Tapia (Chile) (spoke in Spanish): I
thank Mexico for its initiative to organize this debate
in the Security Council on exclusion, inequality and
conflict. I am also grateful to the President of Mexico
for being here to chair this meeting.
Chile is aware that the reflection on the link among
exclusion, inequity and the generation of conflicts has
been an important part of a series of discussions in
the multilateral sphere, particularly since the United
Nations Development Programme coined the concept
of “human security” in 1994.
We have seen how so-called traditional threats
to security have often been replaced by the threats
of a non-State and non-military nature. These are
challenges that no State can ignore and that are linked
to intra-national guerrillas and transnational dangers,
such as terrorism, organized crime, drug trafficking,
human trafficking, money-laundering and arms
trafficking, among others. Such threats also include
natural disasters, the spread of diseases and pandemics,
and the deterioration of the environment.
That is why, if we are to understand and face
these challenges, a multidimensional approach must
be adopted and the causes of exclusion, inequality
and conflict must be understood. History teaches that

21-3268125/27

S/PV.8900

Maintenance of international peace and security

these are due to socioeconomic, gender, ethnic, tribal,
religious or ideological tensions, lack of opportunities
and the immutable nature of the social structure, among
others. It is precisely in this Security Council that we
have witnessed how, at times, these local tensions have
quickly led to situations of regional or global concern.
Chile reiterates that any emphasis on and broad
conception of security must put the person and her or
his well-being at the centre of the concerns of States and
the community of nations. In that regard, early warnings
and conflict prevention are paramount. We note that
there are effective tools to that end and to consolidate
peace, strengthen democracy and the rule of law,
safeguard individual freedoms and, ultimately, build
more just societies. In this sense, Governments must
work with a sense of urgency to resolve and advance
issues such as social cohesion, education and probity,
which constitute basic elements of the institutional
strength and resilience capacity of a State, as well as of
its ability to protect against possible external threats.
It is essential to address all conflicts in their social
complexity and bearing in mind the three pillars of
the United Nations: international peace and security,
sustainable development, and unrestricted respect
for human rights. Chile calls for progress on the path
of peace and stability, fostering the construction of
inclusive and resilient societies, which is imperative
in a world convulsed by the effects of the coronavirus
disease pandemic. We are more aware than ever that that
can be achieved only through multilateral and bilateral
cooperation. Acting together will allow us to strengthen
the virtuous cycles between peace and development.
As a final reflection, I would like to point out that,
in Latin America, it is evident that we are part of a zone
of peace, with one of the lowest defence expenditures
in the world and free of nuclear weapons and traditional
warlike conflicts. However, it is a highly complex area,
with high crime rates and a significant development of
transnational organized crime. We must therefore do
our utmost, as societies, to mitigate and, ultimately,
eradicate these threats.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Malaysia.
Mr. Othman (Malaysia): Malaysia welcomes
today’s discussion as we continue to witness new and
re-emerging conflicts around the world. We hope that
our deliberations today will enable the Security Council
and relevant States to strengthen efforts towards the
26/27

09/11/2021

culture of prevention over the culture of reacting to
conflict. I wish to frame my intervention today in
two dimensions.
First, on the role of national Government, it is evident
that exclusion, inequality and conflict are inextricably
connected. Hence it is paramount for Member States to
spare no effort in identifying and addressing factors or
conditions that build inequality, exclusion and division
in their societies. That is particularly more challenging
in multicultural and multi-ethnic countries when
certain constituents of the society feel that they are
being marginalized or excluded.
Malaysia
also
believes
that
addressing
sociopolitical and socioeconomic fragility must be
a strategic priority for the national Government to
sustain peace and stability, which would, in turn,
allow conditions for sustainable development. If not
addressed comprehensively, it could lead to political
fragmentation, as well as social strife and, eventually,
armed conflict.
In order to cement peacebuilding and
nation-building efforts, inclusiveness must also go
hand-in-hand with other equally essential values and
principles, including tolerance and moderation. Efforts
must be made to advocate for unity in diversity and in
the strengthening of national integration and stability.
Malaysia supports the call to include a broad range
of actors in national peace and political transition
processes. In particular, we stress the importance of
gender inclusivity. The involvement of women in conflict
prevention and resolution, including in political and
social-economic participation, would promote stability
and reduce the risk of the re-emergence of conflict. In
addition, we underscore the critical role of youth in
these processes, particularly on social cohesion.
My second point is on the role of the international
community. While we stress that national ownership is
fundamental in ending conflict, ensuring sustainable
peace requires the strong support of the international
community. In that context, the Security Council is
well placed to play its pivotal role in supporting such
efforts, including through special political missions
and peacekeeping missions. We also believe that
the Security Council would continue to benefit from
its partnership with other United Nations organs,
including the Peacebuilding Commission, and
regional organizations.
21-32681

09/11/2021

Maintenance of international peace and security

S/PV. 8900

However, we wish to underscore the critical
importance for international partners to work closely
with local stakeholders. It is essential for international
actors to fully understand the local contexts and
specific societal dynamics in formulating strategies
for conflict prevention and peacebuilding efforts.
Without such understanding and proper contexts, our
actions and approaches may inadvertently contribute
to promoting or prolonging inequality and exclusion in
affected communities.

at the national and local levels in order to ensure equal
opportunity and human security for all segments of
society. Effective and impartial institutions in the
security and judicial sectors are indispensable for
ensuring the rule of law, combating impunity and
tackling corruption. Institutions to ensure equal access
to basic social services reduce grievances and mitigate
intercommunal tensions. Building the capacity of the
personnel in charge of managing the institutions is an
integral part of institution-building.

At the same time, Malaysia believes that it is
essential for the international community, including
the Security Council, to uphold the rule of law and
accountability through the full implementation of
Security Council resolutions.

Thirdly, the voices of women, youth and
marginalized groups must be heard. We will never be
able to achieve just, peaceful and inclusive societies
without their full, equal and meaningful participation.
We have to empower them and promote their critical role.

In conclusion, Malaysia stresses the importance
of promoting the principles of equality and inclusivity
for sustainable peace. The Security Council must lead
efforts to promote those principles and the holistic vision
of international security based on the interdependence
of the three pillars of the United Nations.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Japan.
Mr. Ishikane (Japan): I would like to express my
appreciation to Your Excellency, Mr. Andrés Manuel
López Obrador, President of Mexico, for convening this
open debate and giving us an opportunity to renew our
commitment to addressing the root causes of conflict,
namely, exclusion, inequality and poverty.
Today the world remains beset by multiple
conflicts. The scourge of conflicts is exacerbated by
the impacts of the coronavirus disease pandemic and
climate change. We must ask ourselves why we are
still far from achieving the aims of the Organization.
The international community still focuses heavily on
responding to conflicts, rather than on preventing them.
This approach is costing people their lives, livelihoods
and dignity. We must shift our focus to prevention and
effectively address the root causes of conflict. I would
like to make four points in that regard.
First, trust is key to building peaceful societies.
By trust I mean that people must have confidence both
in their Government and in each other. Systematic
exclusion and widening inequality fuel people’s
resentment against the Government, create tensions
between communities and aggravate human insecurity.
Secondly, in order to cultivate trust, it is essential
to build effective, accountable and inclusive institutions

Lastly, when it comes to the role of the United
Nations, a holistic and coordinated approach is
essential. Its interventions must be coherent across the
nexus of peace and security, development, humanitarian
issues and human rights. Such an approach should
extend beyond the United Nations system to build
partnerships with diverse international, regional and
national actors, with a view to promoting coordinated
and coherent actions.
We are encouraged to see the Security
Council actively incorporating human-security
perspectives — such as the protection of civilians, with
particular attention to vulnerable groups and gender
equality — in its resolutions for the renewal of mandates
of peacekeeping missions and special political missions.
That is particularly true in recent years.
The Peacebuilding Commission has also evolved
into an accelerator of those important efforts and a
platform for broad partnerships among various actors.
The Commission’s bottom-up approach, engaging
with local women and youth peacebuilders, provides
invaluable insights to its advice to the Council. The
Council should more actively seek the Commission’s
advice in order to ensure coherent system-wide efforts
and to better incorporate the local perspectives into
its work.
The President (spoke in Spanish): There are still
a number of speakers remaining on my list for this
meeting. Given the lateness of the hour, I intend, with
the concurrence of the members of the Council, to
suspend the meeting until 3 p.m.
The meeting was suspended at 1 p.m.

21-3268127/27
