VI.

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

May 1979, and recommended that the Assembly should
consider the adoption of a declaration on the subject,
Recalling also its resolution 35/ 199 of 15 December 1980,
in which it decided to establish an open-ended working
group for the purpose of concluding the elaboration of the
draft declaration on the human rights of individuals who are
not citizens of the country in which they live,
Having considered the report of the Working Group, 170
1. Takes note of the report of the Working Group and
of the fact that, although the Working Group has done useful
work, it has not had sufficient time to conclude its task;
2. Decides to establish, at its thirty-seventh session, an
open-ended working group for the purpose of concluding
the elaboration of the draft declaration on the human rights
of individuals who are not citizens of the country in which
they live;
3. Expresses the hope that a draft declaration on the
human rights of individuals who are not citizens of the
country in which they live will be adopted by the General
Assembly at its thirty-seventh session.
JO I st plenary meeting
16 December 1981

36/166.

Exchange of information on banned hazardous
chemicals and unsafe pharmaceutical products
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 34/173 of 17 December 1979, in
which it recognized the urgent need to take concrete measures to prevent adverse effects on health on a world-wide
basis,
Recalling also its resolution 35/ 186 of 15 December 1980,
in which it invited Member States to provide information
on measures they had taken on the exchange of information
on hazardous chemicals and unsafe pharmaceutical products that have been banned in their territories and requested
the Secretary-General, in co-operation with the United
Nations organs, organizations and bodies concerned, to submit a report to the General Assembly at its thirty-sixth session on the experience of Member States and the United
Nations organs, organizations and bodies concerned,
Conscious of the importance of the information system
on transnational corporations for the analysis of the activities
of these corporations in certain sectors of special social and
humanitarian interest to the countries in which operations
take place, particularly developing countries,
Taking into account that in resolution 35/186 it requested
the Commission on Transnational Corporations to study,
during its seventh session, ways and means within the information system on transnational corporations to improve
the exchange of information on those products with a view
to formulating appropriate recommendations,
Bearing in mind the importance of objective information
on banned hazardous chemicals and unsafe pharmaceutical
products,
A ware that the production and export of banned or
severely restricted hazardous substances-including pharmaceuticals, pesticides and industrial chemicals-endanger
public health and the environment,
l. Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General on
the exchange of information on banned hazardous chemicals
and unsafe pharmaceutical products; 171
2. Takes note also of the conclusions and recommendations in the report of the United Nations Centre on Trans110

171

AIC.3/36/1 I.
A/36/255.

193

national Corporations 17 -' which was submitted to the
Commission on Transnational Corporations at its seventh
sess10n;
3. Reiterates the need to intensify international cooperation in the search for the solution to problems arising
from the production and export of banned or severely restricted substances;
4. Urges Member States and other interested parties,
including transnational corporations, to co-operate more
fully in providing data on banned or severely restricted
substances to the appropriate organs, organizations and bodies of the United Nations system with responsibility for
information exchange in regard to such substances;
5. Calls upon the organs, organizations and other competent United Nations bodies involved in disseminating information on this subject to ensure that the documentation
they prepare is adequately suited to the needs of and clearly
understood by all those engaged in processing, handling,
dispensing or using all banned hazardous chemicals and
unsafe pharmaceutical products;
6. Requests the Secretary-General and the organs, organizations and other competent United Nations bodies to
provide, within the available resources, the necessary technical assistance to the developing countries, at their request,
to help them establish an adequate system for monitoring
the import of unsafe pharmaceutical products of doubtful
therapeutic value and banned hazardous chemicals, on the
one hand, and to train scientific personnel to handle these
problems, on the other;
7. / nvite s Member States to deal with this subject
through appropriate means, including possible legislation
at the national level, where they do not yet exist;
8. Once again requests the Secretary-General to consult
Member States on the existing information systems on
banned hazardous chemicals and unsafe pharmaceutical
products and to report to the General Assembly at its thirtyeighth session through the Economic and Social Council.
IOI st plenary meetinR
16 December /98/

36/167.

Draft Declaration on Social and Legal Principles relating to the Protection and Welfare
of Children, with Special Reference to Foster
Placement and Adoption Nationally and
Internationally

The General Assembly,
Recalling Economic and Social Council resolution 1981 /
18 of 6 May 198 J entitled ·•Draft declaration on social and
legal principles relating to adoption and foster placement
of children nationally and internationally", by which the
Council requested the General Assembly to consider at its
thirty-sixth session the draft Declaration annexed to that
resolution so that the further action proposed in Council
resolution 1979/28 of 9 May 1979 may proceed,
Bearing in mind the report of the Secretary-General 17 3 on
views of Member States on the text of the draft Declaration.
Convinced that the adoption of the draft Declaration will
promote the well-being of children with special needs,
I. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its
thirty-seventh session an item entitled "'Draft Declaration
on Social and Legal Principles relating to the Protection and
,,dfare of Children, with Special Reference to Foster Place-

172

EiC. I0190.

11

A/35/336.

'

General Assembly-Thirty-sixth Session

194

ment and Adoption Nationally and Internationally" with a
view to the possible allocation of the item to the Sixth
Committee;
2. Decides. in order that the further action proposed in
Economic and Social Council resolution 1979/28 may proceed, that appropriate measures should be taken at its thirtyseventh session to finalize the draft Declaration.

101st plenary meeting
16 December 1981

ANNEX
Draft Declaration on Social and Legal Principles relating to the Protection and Welfare of Children, with Special Reference to Fosler
Placement and Adoption Nationally and Internationally
A.

GENERAL FAMILY AND CHILD WELFARE

1. It is in the best interest of every nation to give a high priority to
family and child welfare as it plans for the use and further development
of national resources.
2. It is recognized that the best child welfare is good family welfare.
3. It is affirmed that the first priority for a child is to be cared for by
the biological parents. Other family members should be the first alternative
if the biological parents cannot provide care for the child.
4. When biological family care is unavailable or inappropriate. substitute family care should be considered.
5. It must be recognized that there are parents who cannot bring up
their own children and that the children's rights to security. affection and
continuing care should be of greatest importance.
6. Providers of service should have professional social work training
in family and child welfare.
B.

FOSTER PLACEMENl

7. Every child has a right to a family. Children who cannot remain
in their biological family should be placed in a foster family or adoption
in preference to institutions, unless. the child's particular needs can best
be met in a specialized facility.

8. Children for whom institutional care was formerly regarded as the
only option should be placed with families. both foster and adoptive.
9. Provision should be made for regulation of placement of children
outside of their biological family.
10. Foster family care should be a planned, temporary service as a
bridge to permanency for a child, which includes but is not limited to
restoration to the biological family or adoption.
11. Planning for the child in foster family care must involve the biological family, foster family and child, if appropriate, under the auspice,
of a competent authorized agency.
C.

ADOPTION

12. The primary purpose of adoption is to provide a permanent family
for a child who cannot be cared for by his/her biological family.
13. Adoption procedures should be flexible enough to meet the child's
needs in various situations.
14. In considering possible adoption placements. those responsible for
the child should select the most appropriate environment for the particular
child concerned.
15. Sufficient time and adequate counselling should be given to the
biological parents to enable them to reach a decision on their child's future,
recognizing that it is in the child's best interest to reach this decision as
early as possible.
16. Legislation and services should ensure that the child becomes an
integral part of the adoptive family.

20. When intercountry adoption is considered, policy and legislation
should be established to protect the children concerned.
21 . In each country, placements should be made through authorized
agencies competent to deal with intercountry adoption services and providing the same safeguards and standards as are applied in national
adoptions.
22. Proxy adoptions are not acceptable, in consideration of the child's
legal and social safet}
23. No adoption plan should be considered before it has been established that the child is legally free for adoption and the pertinent documents
necessary to complete the adoption are available. All necessary consents
must be in a form which is legally valid in both countries. It must be
definitely established that the child will be able to immigrate into the
country of the prospective adopters and can subsequently obtain their
nationality.
24. In intercountry adoption, legal validation of the adoption should
be assured in the countries involved.
25. The child should at all times have a name, a nationality and a legal
guardian.

36/168.

International Drug Abuse Control Strategy

The General Assembly,
Having received from the Economic and Social Council
the report containing the draft International Drug Abuse
Control Strategy 174 that was requested by the General Assembly in resolutions 32/ l 24 of 16 December 1977, 33/ 168
of 20 December 1978, 34/177 of 17 December 1979 and
35/195 of 15 December 1980,
Considering that the scourge of drug abuse continues to
spread and has reached epidemic proportions in many parts
of the world and that, as specified in the request for the
inclusion of the item entitled "International campaign
against traffic in drugs'' in the agenda of the thirty-sixth
session of the General Assembly, 175 it is necessary to adopt
scientific, technical and political measures commensurate
with the gravity of the problem,
Emphasizing the conclusion contained in paragraph 2 of
Commission on Narcotic Drugs resolution 1 (XXIX) of 11
February 1981 176 that, in order for any international action
in the field of drug abuse control to be successful, the full
and active co-operation and dedication of all countries must
be forthcoming,
Recognizing the urgent need for an effective, comprehensive, co-ordinated global strategy to prevent and control
drug trafficking, the illicit demand for drugs and drug abuse,
as well as for comprehensive, co-ordinated strategies at the
regional and national levels,
I. Adopts the International Drug Abuse Control Strategy and the basic five-year programme of action 177 dealt
with in Commission on Narcotic Drugs resolution I (XXIX)
which the Economic and Social Council, in its decision
1981 / I I 3 of 6 May 1981, decided to transmit to the General
Assembly;
2. Urges that the International Drug Abuse Control
Strategy and the programme of action be given priority by
all Governments and be implemented as quickly as possible
by the relevant bodies of the United Nations and other international organizations;

17. The need of adult adoptees to know about their background should
be recognized.
18. There should be recognition, in the law, of traditional adoption
within the family, to ensure the protection of the children and to assist the
family by counselling.
19. Governments should determine the adequacy of their national services for children and recognize those children whose needs are not being
met by existing services. For some of these children. intercountry adoption
may be considered as a suitable means of providing them with a family

1 4
'

See AIC.313617.

"'Official Records of the General Assembly, Thirty-sixth Session, Annexes, agenda item 129, document A/36/193.
"" See Official Records of the Economic and Social Council. /981.
Supplement No. 4 (E/llJRl/24). chap. XI. sect. A.
'" Ibid .. Supplement No. 4 (E/1981/24). annex II.
