S/PV.8361

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-third year

8361st meeting

Friday, 21 September 2018, 3.25 p.m.
New York

President:

Mrs. Haley. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(United States of America)

Members:

Bolivia (Plurinational State of). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Côte d’Ivoire . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Equatorial Guinea. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ethiopia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kazakhstan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kuwait. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Netherlands. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Peru. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Poland . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Sweden . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 

Mr. Llorentty Solíz
Mr. Wu Haitao
Mr. Ipo
Mr. Esono Mbengono
Mr. Amde
Mrs. Gueguen
Mr. Umarov
Mr. Alotaibi
Mrs. Gregoire Van Haaren
Mr. Meza-Cuadra
Ms. Wronecka
Mr. Safronkov
Mr. Skoog
Ms. Pierce

Agenda
The situation in the Middle East

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

18-29457 (E)
*1829457*

S/PV.8361

The situation in the Middle East

The meeting was called to order at 3.25 p.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in the Middle East
The President: In accordance with rule 37 of the
Council’s provisional rules of procedure, I invite the
representative of Yemen to participate in this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite Mr. Mark
Lowcock, Under-Secretary-General for Humanitarian
Affairs and Emergency Relief Coordinator, to
participate in this meeting.
The Security Council will now begin its consideration
of the item on its agenda.
I now give the floor to Mr. Lowcock.
Mr. Lowcock: The Security Council has asked
me to update it today on the humanitarian situation
in Yemen. In a word, it is bleak. We are losing the
fight against famine. The situation has deteriorated
in an alarming way in recent weeks. We may now be
approaching a tipping point, beyond which it will be
impossible to prevent massive loss of life as a result of
widespread famine across the country.
As the Council knows, Yemen has for some time
now been the world’s worst humanitarian crisis. Years
of very intense and protracted fighting all over the
country have destroyed infrastructure, wrecked public
services, displaced millions of people from their homes
and livelihoods, and have led to what is believed to
be the worst cholera outbreak the world has ever seen
ravage the country. All that, together with a dramatic
economic collapse in a country already among the
world’s poorest meant that, at the beginning of this
year, fully three quarters of Yemenis — 75 per cent,
that is, 22 million people — were in need of some kind
of humanitarian assistance or protection.
Many millions no longer have any regular source
of income, including the families of teachers, health
workers, water and sanitation workers and other public
servants who have not been paid a regular salary in two
years. Approximately 18 million people, including a
high proportion of Yemen’s children, are food insecure,
and more than 8 million of them are severely food
insecure, meaning they do not know where their next
2/17

21/09/2018

meal will come from. They need emergency food
assistance to survive.
Notwithstanding all that, the humanitarian situation
has been kept stable and the worst loss of life avoided so
far this year. That is because the world’s worst crisis has
attracted the world’s largest and one of the world’s most
effective humanitarian relief efforts. In the first half of
the year, humanitarian organizations supported under
the United Nations response plan provided assistance
to more than 8 million of the most vulnerable Yemenis.
The operation has been substantially scaled up and
broadened since last year. While food distribution
reached 3 million people a month last year, it has been
dramatically expanded: we aim to reach 8 million
people this month. A third wave of the cholera outbreak
has been kept at bay with intensified prevention
campaigns, repairing and chlorinating water networks
and vaccinating people in high-risk districts in Aden,
Al-Hudaydah and Ibb. Health facilities that would
have otherwise closed have remained open through an
incentive programme paid to health-care workers to
keep services going.
Running such a large-scale relief effort requires
an enormous operation on the ground. I want to pay
tribute to all the aid workers — thousands of them from
United Nations agencies, including UNICEF, the World
Food Programme, the World Health Organization
and others — as well as to the Red Cross and Red
Crescent organizations and countless international, and
especially national, civil society organizations. Most
of the aid workers are Yemenis helping other Yemenis,
often at considerable personal risk.
The relief effort would also be impossible without
the generous funding voluntarily provided by our
donors. I want to again thank the Kingdom of Saudi
Arabia, the United Arab Emirates, the State of Kuwait,
the United States and many European countries, which
together have committed about $2.6 billion, including
$2 billion through the 2018 Yemen humanitarian
response plan, to finance the operation.
I also want to note that the aid operation would not
be possible, given the intensity of the conflict, without
the deconfliction system run by the coalition authorities.
We notify the Evacuation and Humanitarian Operation
Cell in Riyadh of the operations of the aid agencies, and
that protects aid workers, to a large degree, from being
caught up in the fighting and helps the coalition to meet
its obligations under international humanitarian law.
18-29457

21/09/2018

The situation in the Middle East

But the issue I want to flag to the Council today
is that two recent developments threaten to overwhelm
the aid operation.
First, there is a marked economic deterioration,
symptomized by the depreciation of the Yemeni rial
by some 30 per cent in the last month or so. Because
almost all the food consumed in Yemen is imported, that
depreciation translates directly into a sharp increase in
the price of food for approximately 10 million Yemenis
who are food insecure but are not reached by the aid
operation. We are already seeing pockets of famine-like
conditions, including cases where people are eating
leaves because they have no other form of sustenance.
We estimate that an additional 3.5 million people
may soon be added to the 8 million already severely
food insecure.
Compounding that, the depreciation of the rial and
access problems are producing unprecedented increases
in the price of fuel. My team on the ground reported
yesterday that people are waiting in kilometre-long
queues at petrol stations. As petrol prices have doubled
just this week, transportation costs have gone up and
reaching a health facility or fleeing fighting when it
reaches one’s neighbourhood is becoming unaffordable
for many families without outside help.
Commercial imports of food and fuel have yet to
recover from last November’s blockade. Fuel imports
in September are only one third of what they were
in August. Commercial food imports dropped from
a registered 410,000 metric tons in May to 280,000
metric tons in August. That is a decrease of 30 per cent.
With the confidence of shipping companies already
very battered, as reflected in a 35 per cent drop in
clearance requests since the blockade, any further
shocks could add to the core humanitarian caseload
in a way that would simply overwhelm the capacity of
humanitarian organizations.
Secondly, the intensification of fighting in recent
weeks around Al-Hudaydah is choking the lifeline that
the aid operation and commercial markets rely on. The
combination of the ports of Al-Hudaydah and Saleef,
where most of Yemen’s food imports arrive, the access
roads from the ports to the large population centres in
the north and the west of the country and the facilities
in the city in which imported grain is milled before
onwards transportation is the essential, irreplaceable
infrastructure on which aid operations and commercial
imports rely.

S/PV. 8361

The main Al-Hudaydah-Sana’a road, which is the
principal artery used by commercial importers and
humanitarian organizations to move commodities
from the ports to people across the country, has been
cut off in recent days due to fighting. Other routes are
heavily damaged and transport times have increased,
and therefore the cost has risen for humanitarian
organizations and private companies.
The Red Sea Mills in Al-Hudaydah, which currently
holds 45,000 tons of grain imported by the World Food
Programme — enough to feed 3.5 million people for
a month — has recently been inaccessible because of
fighting in the local area. Armed groups have occupied
humanitarian facilities. Attacks against civilians and
humanitarian sites have resulted in dozens of deaths,
especially of children, and serious damage has been
caused to public health and water facilities and other
humanitarian assets.
Aid agencies, including the United Nations,
still have 600 staff in Al-Hudaydah. While we have,
since June, provided direct assistance to over half a
million people fleeing the fighting in the governorate,
aid activities, including life-saving immunization
campaigns, have been delayed or prevented.
It is far from clear that the recent intensification
of fighting is producing any winners. It is, though, all
too abundantly clear who the losers are — millions of
Yemeni civilians, most of them women and children,
whose lives are now right on the line. I know that some
people will want to talk about who is to blame for the
position we now face. That is, with respect, the wrong
question for today. The issue for today is who can do
something to head off the impending catastrophe. While
we will continue to push to scale up the humanitarian
response, humanitarian organizations simply cannot
look after the needs of all 29 million Yemenis. That
is untenable. We ask the Security Council for support
in three key areas to prevent a complete collapse
and to safeguard the lives of millions of the most
vulnerable people.
First, immediate measures are needed to stabilize
the economy and support the exchange rate. That
includes usable liquidity for the Central Bank and the
implementation of long-standing commitments to pay
key public-sector salaries across the whole country,
so that more people have the wherewithal to buy food
and keep alive the commercial markets, which, as
I have said, aid agencies cannot replace. It is, at the

18-294573/17

S/PV.8361

The situation in the Middle East

same time, essential to avoid any policy measures that
would damage the already paper-thin confidence of
commercial importers any further.
Secondly, everyone with a stake in this must
uphold their obligations to protect civilians and civilian
infrastructure and facilitate access to vulnerable
people. We have to keep all ports and main roads open,
functional and safe. No humanitarian site should be
used for military purposes. As I have said to members
of the Council, the lifeline through which the aid
operation runs now hangs by a thread.
Thirdly, we ask all parties to find practical solutions
to key issues, including the opening of an air bridge for
civilians to seek medical treatment outside Yemen for
diseases that are no longer treatable inside the country.
That would pave the way for the opening of the airport
in Sana’a.
Finally, the parties need to come to the negotiating
table and engage seriously with the efforts of the
Secretary-General’s Special Envoy on a positive path
towards peace.
The President: I thank Mr. Lowcock for his briefing.
I shall now give the floor to those members of the
Council who wish to make statements.
Ms. Pierce (United Kingdom): I thank you, Madam
President, for scheduling this important briefing today.
I thank Under-Secretary-General Mark Lowcock.
To pick up on one of his points, I also want to thank
him for everything that his workers are doing on the
ground, as well as all the other relevant United Nations
agencies. I was very struck by what he said with regard
to the large-scale nature of the relief effort, as well as
by the fact that Yemenis are helping Yemenis. I believe
that is important.
It was a very sobering briefing, following the others
that we have heard before. I was struck by his phrases
concerning lives on the line, how close we are to famine
and that we might even be losing the fight. That is
obviously extremely serious news. It is grave distress
inflicted upon the people of Yemen. We are following
the escalation of military fighting around Al-Hudaydah
very closely. I wanted to pick up on Mr. Lowcock’s
statement and highlight just four areas.
First, to reiterate once again — I think that
everyone on the Security Council has done this, but it
bears repeating — all parties to the conflict must do
4/17

21/09/2018

everything possible to protect civilians and civilian
infrastructure and demonstrate in practical terms their
commitment to upholding international humanitarian
law. I was extremely concerned to hear about armed
groups’ presence in humanitarian facilities. I believe
that the Council should demand that they leave. Those
facilities need to be maintained for the protection
of civilians. All parties have responsibilities under
international humanitarian law, and the Council looks
to them to discharge those responsibilities fully.
The second point concerns the flow of food, fuel
and medical supplies into and throughout Yemen. It is
critical that all parties facilitate that and that they work
with the Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian
Affairs (OCHA) and Mr. Lowcock’s partners on the
ground. It is also important that civilians can move
freely and safely so that those who can travel can get
out of harm’s way as necessary. We have been deeply
concerned about reports that military action is making
the Al-Hudaydah-Al-Hajjarah road unsafe. That
will hamper the flow of supplies from Al-Hudaydah
to northern Yemen. It is vital that onward supply
routes remain operational. I should like to echo what
Mr. Lowcock said: that cannot be done through
humanitarian assistance alone. We absolutely need the
commercial routes and supplies to be open and flowing.
That therefore means that the Al-Hudaydah and Saleef
ports need to remain open and that the mills and the
food storage facilities need to be protected so that the
food supply is safe.
I also wanted to join the Under-Secretary-General
in his remarks about urgent action on stabilizing the
economy. Since as recently as late July, the Yemeni
rial has depreciated more than 20 per cent. That has
halved the buying power of the people for food and
other staples in comparison with one year ago. That is
obviously increasing the vulnerability of families even
to meet basic needs. Humanitarian Aid, as we heard,
is overstretched, and even that is not enough because
there are 29 million Yemenis liable to need our help. We
therefore need to collectively think further about how
best the Council can help stabilize the humanitarian
situation by helping stabilize the economic situation, or
by dealing with the relevant United Nations and other
agencies and countries that can help in order to do that.
I would like to call on all sides to cooperate even more
intensely with OCHA and the United Nations agencies
on the ground to try and help steady the situation.
18-29457

21/09/2018

The situation in the Middle East

I should like to conclude on the same point on
which Mr. Lowcock ended by just reiterating the vital
and overriding importance of the political situation. I
will not recall the reasons for which the Geneva talks
did not take the steps that we wanted them to take. I
do not want to go into detail because I do not want to
complicate the work of Special Envoy Martin Griffiths,
who is now trying to reconvene political talks. I am
sure that our ministers who will be here next week
for the General Assembly will want to have many
discussions about Yemen on the margins of the highlevel week. I believe that that will be important. Lastly,
I call on all sides once again to get behind the process
that the Special Envoy is leading and urge them all to
find the flexibility that it will require for the sake of the
Yemeni people.
Mr. Alotaibi (Kuwait) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, we thank Mr. Mark Lowcock, Under-SecretaryGeneral for Humanitarian Affairs, for his briefing
to the Security Council on the latest developments
concerning the humanitarian situation in Yemen.
I will focus on two points in my statement: first, the
developments of the humanitarian situation in Yemen,
and, secondly, the political and security developments.
With regard to the developments of the humanitarian
situation in Yemen, we just heard Mr. Lowcock’s
briefing in which he provided troubling numbers
and statistics that demonstrate the deteriorating
humanitarian situation in Yemen, especially in
Al-Hudaydah. That situation unfortunately reached
unprecedented levels of daily suffering of the brotherly
Yemeni people, which has been exacerbated by the
activities of the Houthi groups who exploit routes used
for the delivery of humanitarian aid. Those groups
set up intensive military checkpoints clearly intended
hinder the delivery of humanitarian assistance to those
in need of it — people who are suffering cruelly from
the possibility of famine and ongoing epidemics.
In order to ensure humanitarian access, the
Yemeni Government forces, backed up by the alliance
to restore legitimacy, conducted targeted operations
that temporarily closed the main road between
Sana’a and Al-Hudaydah; communicated through the
Al-Riyadh Evacuation and Humanitarian Operations
Committee with the active international humanitarian
organizations in order to inform them about alternative
routes available for the delivery of humanitarian
assistance from Al-Hudaydah to Sana’a; and confirmed

S/PV. 8361

that the road would be reopened as soon as possible
after ensuring that it is de-mined and that checkpoints
are lifted, which have hindered the delivery of
humanitarian assistance and undermined international
efforts aimed at easing humanitarian suffering. The
latest of such efforts include the donor conference held
in April in Geneva on the situation in Yemen.
Concerning political and security developments,
today’s meeting is taking place to discuss the
deterioration of the humanitarian situation in Yemen,
which is the outcome of the stalemate in political
efforts to end the crisis, owing to the Houthis’ absence
during the 6 September round of consultations, which
were fully supported by the Security Council.
The pro-legitimacy coalition has stepped in at
various stages of the crisis to support and facilitate
a political solution in Yemen based on resolutions
of the international legitimacy. The latest of the
coalition’s actions include ceasing military operations
in Al-Hudaydah, supporting United Nations efforts
led by Mr. Martin Griffiths, and providing sufficient
time to resume the dialogue among Yemeni parties,
despite security challenges posed by the Houthis, as
they continue their practices that constitute a threat
to regional peace and security, through controlling
Al-Hudaydah port and threatening the safety of
international maritime navigation.
Those threats were confirmed by the letter addressed
on 17 September to the President of the Security
Council from the Chair of the Committee established
pursuant to resolution 2140 (2014), regarding sanctions
on Yemen. The letter underscored the conclusions of
the Committee’s Panel of Experts, reaffirming the
direct responsibility of the Houthis for the attack on
the oil tanker Abqaiq and another commercial ship
transporting wheat, while noting that if the attack on
the oil tanker had been successful, it would have caused
an environmental disaster with wide negative impact
on the transport of merchandise from and into Yemen.
That letter also reaffirmed that those attacks are a
violation of international humanitarian law and would
have a negative impact on the delivery of humanitarian
assistance. Given this unprecedentedly terrible
humanitarian situation, the Security Council must send
a message to the Yemeni parties, and especially the
Houthis, that emphasizes the following points.
First, attempts to consolidate gains and strengthen
personal interests rather than those of the Yemeni people

18-294575/17

S/PV.8361

The situation in the Middle East

by ignoring Council resolutions, in particular resolution
2216 (2015), and by continuing to refuse to participate
positively in the political process, are unacceptable.
Secondly, ballistic-missile attacks on neighbouring
States and threats to maritime commercial routes in
Bab Al-Mandab and the Red Sea are also unacceptable.
Thirdly, it is equally unacceptable to use civilians as
human shields, utilize civilian facilities and maritime
ports as bases for launching military attacks or
recruit children for military purposes, all of which are
considered war crimes punishable under international
law. Fourthly, it is vital to cooperate with the United
Nations to ensure the safe delivery and full distribution
of humanitarian assistance in every region of Yemen
and without targeting United Nations field personnel.
In conclusion, we reiterate our support for
Mr. Griffiths, the Special Envoy of the SecretaryGeneral, and the importance of stepping up efforts to
end the crisis in Yemen based on a political solution
that complies with the three political terms of
reference — the Gulf Cooperation Council Initiative
and its implementation mechanism, the outcome of
the National Dialogue Conference and the relevant
Security Council resolutions — in order to ensure
Yemen’s sovereignty and territorial integrity and
non-interference in its internal affairs.
Mr. Safronkov (Russian Federation) (spoke
in Russian): We thank the delegation of the United
Kingdom for having taken this initiative and the United
States delegation for convening today’s important
meeting so promptly. We are grateful to Mr. Lowcock
for his briefing on the humanitarian situation in Yemen,
which we found extremely alarming.
We have a long history of friendship with the people
of Yemen, and we deeply and sincerely sympathize
with them. While we note the courageous efforts of
the humanitarian workers there, we realize that the
only possible solutions to the problem are political
ones. Like our other colleagues on the Council, we are
worried about the escalation of violence in Yemen and
have expressed our position on the issue many times.
De-escalating the situation around Al-Hudaydah and
halting offensive operations should help Special Envoy
Griffiths succeed in his efforts. We call for restraint and
for refraining from relying on force. We do not believe
that one of the parties can extract greater flexibility
from the other through violent pressure. The history of
the conflict in Yemen shows that that approach does
not work.
6/17

21/09/2018

Mr. Lowcock quite rightly said just now that the
only losers in this conflict will be the people of Yemen,
who have endured unprecedented suffering and terrible
experiences, including a cholera epidemic — in the
twenty-first century. We must now all band together to
support the efforts of Special Envoy Griffiths, whom
we see as an objective and impartial mediator who
has held fruitful talks with the Yemeni Government’s
delegation in Geneva. Productive contact was also
made recently with representatives of Ansar Allah
in Sana’a and Muscat. We are certain that a way can
still be found to reach agreements, particularly on
establishing confidence-building measures. There is
a real chance of making progress on issues regarding
the exchange of prisoners, opening the Sana’a airport,
establishing international control at the port of
Al-Hudaydah and paying Government workers’ salaries
throughout Yemen.
We call on all the parties to the conflict in Yemen to
actively join Mr. Griffith’s mediation efforts. Unilateral
acts such as the missile strikes on Saudi Arabian
territory, which we condemn, cannot produce effective,
long-term results and can ultimately only widen the gulf
of misunderstanding and mistrust between the opposing
sides and undermine the prospects for restoring peace.
For our part, we will continue to support the Special
Envoy’s efforts through our contacts with all the parties
to the conflict in Yemen, and we urge our colleagues
to give him active assistance. We support a halt to
the violence throughout Yemen, which will enable
the country to focus on the political process and on
the urgent task of rebuilding its ruined infrastructure
immediately. Its economy lies in ruins, and any delay
threatens to make the country’s already dire situation
unredeemable. Russia will continue its humanitarian
assistance to the people of Yemen in both the north
and south.
In conclusion, we would like to stress that finding
solutions to the conflict in Yemen would contribute
significantly to stabilizing the situation throughout
the subregion. We want to remind the Council of our
proposal for launching a process for drafting a package
of security- and confidence-building measures in the
Persian Gulf, and ultimately throughout the Middle
East. Establishing this kind of architecture, which all
the key countries in the region, including the Gulf
States and Iran, should participate in, would not only
help to strengthen comprehensive and indivisible
security in that part of the world but also to resolve both
18-29457

21/09/2018

The situation in the Middle East

long-standing and new crises, including the Yemeni
conflict. Threats and confrontation must give way to
dialogue and cooperation, and cooperation on that basis
can enable us to settle the conflict quickly.
Ms. Wronecka (Poland): Let me begin by thanking
Mr. Mark Lowcock, Under-Secretary-General for
Humanitarian Affairs, for his very informative, though
alarming, briefing. I would also like to pay tribute to
the humanitarian workers engaged in Yemen and to
thank them for their devotion and commitment.
The Council’s last meeting on the situation in
Yemen (S/PV.8348) inspired cautious optimism. We
discussed the resumption of consultations with the
parties to the conflict and the prospects of bringing
them to the negotiating table, and we were united
in our message that the way forward is by finding a
political solution to this conflict. While we still firmly
believe this to be true, today, only 10 days later, we
are meeting here again, and yet again we have to
acknowledge the deteriorating situation on the ground
in Yemen and confront the grim reality of its severe
humanitarian crisis.
We are saddened to see the recent escalation of
violence in Al-Hudaydah governorate and the armed
clashes moving closer to Al-Hudaydah city every day.
The number of civilian casualties has risen significantly
since the beginning of September. As military action
continues to intensify around the port and city of
Al-Hudaydah, the deterioration of the humanitarian
crisis is not simply imminent — it is already happening,
and it is not going to stop unless the conflicting
parties immediately renounce violence and commit
to a cessation of hostilities. We must not forget that
Al-Hudaydah is a crucial lifeline for millions and the
main gateway for food and other supplies entering the
country. What happens in and around it therefore has
a major impact on the humanitarian situation in every
other governorate of Yemen. We call on all stakeholders
to work to ensure that all roads are accessible and all
ports, including Al-Hudaydah, Ras Isa and Saleef,
remain open and fully functional, so that humanitarian
aid can be delivered to the millions of people who need
it so desperately.
Unfortunately, we constantly face alarming reports
of the targeting of civilian infrastructure in Yemen.
Therefore, we strongly call on all the parties involved
in the conflict to respect the most basic principles
of international humanitarian law, such as those of

S/PV. 8361

distinction and proportionality, and to ensure the
protection of civilians.
Let me reaffirm our strong support for the efforts
of the Special Envoy aimed at relaunching an inclusive
peace process. We firmly believe that there can be only
a political solution to the conflict in Yemen. We call on
the parties to the conflict to cease violence and refrain
from taking actions that may lead to further suffering
of civilians and that may push the whole country into a
humanitarian disaster.
Mr. Meza-Cuadra (Peru) (spoke in Spanish):
We thank you, Madam President, for convening this
meeting, and Mr. Mark Lowcock for his enlightening,
albeit dark, briefing.
Peru regrets and notes with deep concern the
continuing conflict in Yemen, which has resulted in
the worst humanitarian crisis in the world and serious
violations of international law and international
humanitarian law. More than 11 million children are
in extremely vulnerable situations. In accordance with
the presidential statement on the protection of civilians
(S/PRST/2018/18) that we just adopted, we express
our rejection of the current escalation of violence in
and around Al-Hudaydah, and we must continue to
point out its grave consequences in terms of deaths,
wounded, displaced persons, extreme poverty, hunger
and malnutrition.
We lament that the timely warnings issued by the
United Nations and other humanitarian agencies about
the risks of escalation in Al-Hudaydah have not led
to effective preventive diplomacy, notwithstanding
the significant efforts made by Special Envoy Martin
Griffith with the Security Council’s support. It is clear
that his task is very complex and that we must continue
to support him.
We regret the absence of the Houthis and the
difficulties in making progress in Geneva. Nonetheless,
under no circumstances can that be interpreted as
justification for insisting on a non-existent military
solution to the conflict. On the contrary, we must step
up efforts to bring the parties to the negotiating table.
In that connection, we note that the promises of a
supposedly limited impact of an escalation of hostilities
in Al-Hudaydah are not credible. We must remember
that a defining feature of the conflict has been the
committing of atrocious crimes with impunity by all

18-294577/17

S/PV.8361

The situation in the Middle East

parties and with a clear disdain for their consequences
on the civilian population.
There are 22 million Yemenis living under
precarious conditions. The economic paralysis generated
by the conflict has hit them hard. Basic services have
become inaccessible. As has been pointed out, civil
servants, including teachers and medical personnel, are
no longer being paid. Hyperinflation and devaluation
are affecting the poorest.
In that context, Peru considers it indispensable
and urgent that all the parties involved in the conflict,
and especially those with the capacity to influence
them, including the Council, take action to achieve
a lasting ceasefire and bring the conflict back to the
negotiating table.
We stress the real possibilities of achieving an
inclusive political solution, which the Special Envoy
of the Secretary-General has been promoting, and we
stress the need to move forward in the process with
confidence-building measures among the parties.
For now, we stress the need to ensure the safety,
openness and full functioning of the ports, especially
that of Al-Hudaydah, as well as the city’s highways and
other access routes to the city, to provide essential goods.
We would also like to express our admiration and
support for the humanitarian workers deployed in the
country, who are carrying out their work under very
risky conditions, and we underscore the need to ensure
their safe and unrestricted access to the population.
Lastly, we cannot accept double standards. It is
imperative that the Council remain united and be
consistent with regard to its responsibility to protect
civilians in all humanitarian crises, wherever they
occur, in line with international law and international
humanitarian law.
Mr. Skoog (Sweden): I thank Mr. Mark Lowcock
for his sobering update today. He and all humanitarians
working tirelessly to alleviate suffering and save
lives have our full and wholehearted support.
He should be congratulated on an ambitious and
effective relief effort under what we understand to be
overwhelming circumstances.
The briefing today demonstrates the desperate
urgency of the humanitarian situation. The people of
Yemen are already suffering from the world’s largest
humanitarian disaster, and with the recent deteriorating
8/17

21/09/2018

security environment, the situation is getting worse by
the day. Civilian causalities are increasing, medical
facilities are no longer functioning, disease is spreading,
hunger is growing and the humanitarian space to reach
those in need is again shrinking.
The recent fighting on the main road between
Al-Hudaydah and Sana’a is now an urgent concern.
The disruption of that critical supply chain would have
disastrous humanitarian consequences. Hundreds of
thousands of people are at risk in Al-Hudaydah and
millions more in other governorates, if Al-Hudaydah
is cut off from the northern parts of the country. An
additional 1 million children in Yemen are now at risk
of descending into famine, bringing the total number of
children at risk to 5.2 million, as we have heard.
In the face of such a dramatic humanitarian
situation, the demands from the Security Council, as
agreed in the presidential statement adopted in March
(S/PRST/2018/5), needs to be repeated loud and clear.
First, steps need to be taken towards an urgent cessation
of hostilities in order to promote the political process
and, above all, protect the civilian population. Secondly,
safe and unhindered humanitarian access needs to be
ensured, including the full functioning of key ports
and roads. Humanitarian personnel must be allowed to
carry out their mission to save lives across the whole
country — unhindered and without risking their own
safety. Thirdly, respect for international humanitarian
law needs to be safeguarded, including the protection
of civilians, and medical and humanitarian personnel.
The three asks by Mr. Lowcock today — stabilize
the economy, protect civilians and ensure medical
assistance and evacuation — make perfect sense and
should be heeded.
After years of bloody conflict, it is evident that
there is no military solution to the crisis in Yemen.
Intensified diplomatic efforts are instead urgently
needed to find a peaceful solution. We commend the
Government of Yemen for its constructive approach in
those recent efforts, and we find it deeply regrettable
that the Houthis did now show up in Geneva and have
continued their military activities. But the temporary
setback in Geneva cannot be an excuse for a return to
violence. The recent escalation not only aggravates
the humanitarian situation, it also undermines the
prospects for a political process. All sides will lose.
We have again today been put on notice. It is
unbearably frustrating that this year, 2018, we are hearing
18-29457

21/09/2018

The situation in the Middle East

about massive famine and cholera outbreaks — fully
preventable things. We simply cannot sit idly by as the
lives of millions of innocent civilians are at risk. The
Security Council must remain actively engaged and
step up its efforts in support of Special Envoy Martin
Griffith and Mr. Lowcock. We must call in unison on
all parties — and repeat that call and remind them — to
engage in good faith in an inclusive United Nationsled political process without preconditions, but with
dedication, energy and serious commitment. The highlevel week, as the United Kingdom Ambassador said,
coming up now should be used as an opportunity in
that regard. The people of Yemen have already paid an
unacceptably high price for this senseless war.
Mrs. Gueguen (France) (spoke in French): I
thank the United Kingdom for taking the initiative to
convene this crucial meeting, which is being held at
a time when the humanitarian situation continues to
deteriorate under the circumstances that Mr. Lowcock
just eloquently described in detail.
I will address three points. First, I will refer to the
escalation of tensions in the governorate of Al-Hudaydah
since the beginning of September, specifically in recent
days, and the major humanitarian risks it poses. I
will then recall the need to do everything possible to
guarantee humanitarian access to Yemen and to ensure
respect for international humanitarian law. Finally, I
will come back to the imperative of a political solution,
which must be sought immediately. It alone will bring
about a lasting resolution of the crisis.

S/PV. 8361

also of meeting the needs of a hinterland that covers
most of the country, including Sana’a, where the
vast majority of Yemenis live. The roads between
Al-Hudaydah and Sana’a must be kept open to allow for
the delivery of food aid and to prevent the large-scale
malnutrition already affecting Yemen from becoming
an unprecedented famine. Today, owing to the fighting,
some of the reserves stored in Al-Hudaydah are already
completely inaccessible. It must be clearly said: the
conduct of military operations must in no way hinder
humanitarian access.
Finally — and this is my third point — the
humanitarian personnel who today risk their lives working
in extremely dangerous conditions must be protected. It
is crucial that the humanitarian actors, upon whom the
Yemeni population relies very heavily, can plan their
operations in advance and with the guarantee of being
protected from attacks.
Besides the situation in Al-Hudaydah, we must
respond collectively to the continuing deterioration of
the humanitarian situation in Yemen. Members have
without doubt seen the disturbing pictures of emaciated
children that have circulated on social networks and that
depict a troubling reality. Civilians are the first victims
of war and the consequent shortages. It is therefore
important to do everything possible to ensure their
protection. France reiterates its call to ensure full, safe
and unhindered humanitarian access to those in need.

First, we have reiterated many times that every
effort must be made to ensure that the ongoing military
confrontation in the Al-Hudaydah region spares the
civilian population, which has already been sorely
tested and includes many displaced persons. The
civilian infrastructure must also be protected and food
and power supplies ensured. While the rising tensions
could lead to new population displacements, civilians
seeking to flee the fighting must be able to move freely
and safely.

In addition, the humanitarian response of the
United Nations must make it possible to contain the
widespread cholera epidemic raging in the country. The
vaccination campaigns successfully launched in recent
months must be allowed to continue. The humanitarian
response must also make it possible to provide Yemeni
children with a future, while malnutrition makes them
very vulnerable. It is unacceptable that they starve.
Moreover, we reiterate that, in all situations of war,
everything must be done to protect children from
conflict, as required by Security Council resolutions.

Furthermore, as Mr. Lowcock recalled, it is
necessary to protect the umbilical cord that the port
of Al-Hudaydah represents for Yemen. More than
three quarters of the humanitarian aid and commercial
freight entering the country transits through the port
of Al-Hudaydah, which, like that of Saleef, should
remain open and fully operational. It is a matter not
only of supplying Al-Hudaydah and the region but

While the rial has fallen sharply, prices rise and
food staples are scarce, the Security Council, and
more broadly the entire international community,
must support the efforts of the international financial
institutions to find a solution to the economic crisis
facing the country. France stands ready to act in that
regard, building on the work of the humanitarian
meeting on Yemen held in Paris on 27 June.

18-294579/17

S/PV.8361

The situation in the Middle East

The collapse of the economy and the State structures
has in fact caused more deaths than the hostilities
themselves. Rebuilding the State structure in a war
economy is a tragic impasse that must be overcome.
That requires renewed efforts by all, as Mr. Lowcock
told us. I state emphatically: the protection of civilians,
free and unhindered access to humanitarian aid and the
protection of humanitarian and medical personnel are
not options; they are obligations under international
law for all the parties to the conflict.
In that context, it is absolutely essential to safeguard
every opportunity to renew dialogue and to build a
genuine political process based on confidence-building
measures between the parties. The meeting in Geneva
on 6 September may have been a missed opportunity.
However, that does not in any way mean the end of
efforts to advance the political process and should not
lead to increased tensions between the parties.
Let us remember that the military approach cannot
bring about a solution in Yemen. The war has gone
on for too long. We therefore call on all the parties
to continue to engage with the Special Envoy so as to
resume the path of dialogue as soon as possible and to
advance the political process, which is the only viable
way to put an end to the conflict in Yemen. United
Nations mediation alone can relaunch negotiations with
a view to an agreement on the management of the port of
Al-Hudaydah, a resumption of talks, a lasting cessation
of hostilities and the definition of the parameters of
a political solution for a durable, comprehensive and
inclusive agreement that restores peace in Yemen
and security in the Arabian peninsula and the Bab
Al-Mandab Strait.
Given the terrible humanitarian situation, which
has continued to deteriorate, France will remain fully
mobilized, particularly within the Council, to work
for concrete solutions that facilitate the delivery of
humanitarian aid and the political resolution of the
conflict. That is the only way to end the suffering of
the Yemeni population.
Mr. Esono Mbengono (Equatorial Guinea) (spoke
in Spanish): At the outset, allow me to thank the
delegation of the United Kingdom for having requested
the convening of this meeting. We would also like
to thank you, Madam President, for having granted
that request. We would also like to extend our thanks
to Under-Secretary-General Mark Lowcock for his
detailed and informative briefing.
10/17

21/09/2018

The Republic of Equatorial Guinea is deeply
troubled by the ongoing hostilities in Yemen and the
harm that they have caused to the population and to
the country’s infrastructure since the war began at the
end of the first quarter of 2015. It is unfortunate that,
to date, the city of Al-Hudaydah and its surroundings,
through which almost 70 per cent of the imports of food,
fuel and other essential supplies for the whole country
enter, continue to be the scene of fighting. To ease the
humanitarian crisis in the country, it is a priority to
achieve the security of that town so as to ensure the full
operation of its strategic port.
The vulnerability of the population continues to
be grounds for great concern, with 22.2 million people
needing some kind of humanitarian assistance or
protection. An estimated 17.8 million people lack food
security, 16 million lack access to safe drinking water
and sanitation and another 16.4 million lack access to
adequate health care according to a report prepared
by the Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian
Affairs. Added to that is the worrisome general
economic situation facing the country, as described by
Mr. Lowcock.
The human cost and the humanitarian impact of
the conflict are unjustifiable. My delegation condemns
the indiscriminate attacks that have recently taken
place in public areas, where the United Nations
country team documented and confirmed the deaths of
21 minors — 13 boys and 8 girls — and the mutilation
of 82 minors — 51 boys and 31 girls — as well as four
attacks on schools and an attack on a hospital.
Since 12 September, armed clashes on the main road
between Al-Hudaydah and Sana’a have impeded the
delivery of 45,000 metric tons of grain that the Red Sea
Mills could process to feed more than 3 million people
for a month. We appeal to the parties for an immediate
cessation of hostilities in order to facilitate the delivery
of that humanitarian assistance to the population.
Cholera is another problem that afflicts the Yemeni
population. We regret the announcement on Monday
of the death of nine people, including seven children.
We are concerned about the condition of the thousands
of cases recorded in the country, bearing in mind that
more than 2,000 people have died of the disease since
April of last year. However, we commend the efforts of
the Water, Sanitation and Hygiene for All programme
and other resources to control the outbreak.
18-29457

21/09/2018

The situation in the Middle East

The Republic of Equatorial Guinea encourages
all the parties to the conflict to support the efforts of
Mr. Martin Griffiths, who, since the meeting in Geneva
on 6 September, when he had an opportunity to talk
with the Government delegation, continues to set up
more separate meetings with the other groups in order
to find confidence-building measures to ensure future
negotiations between the warring parties, at which we
hope all the parties will be present without preconditions.
Finally, we acknowledge and support the efforts
made by the United Nations, and by the Council in
particular, to encourage the Yemeni parties to the
conflict to work together to end it. In that regard, I
call upon the international community, countries with
influence on the area and the Council to continue to
support the Yemeni people, who deserve a life of
dignity, to emerge from a war that has plunged the
country into a grave humanitarian crisis.
Mr. Llorentty Solíz (Plurinational State of Bolivia)
(spoke in Spanish): My delegation joins in the gratitude
expressed by several of our colleagues to the delegation
of the United Kingdom for requesting today’s meeting.
We also thank you, Madam President, for putting this
item on the agenda. And we thank Mr. Mark Lowcock
for his briefing. We listened attentively to the details of
the horrific effects of the war.
My delegation is deeply concern about the
increasing level of violence in Yemen, and in particular
about the stepped up bombing and air strikes resulting
from the military campaigns in the area surrounding the
city of Al-Hudaydah. Regrettably, such armed clashes
have extended beyond the port and have affected the
main road connecting the cities of Al-Hudaydah and
Sana’a, making it practically impossible to use that
route to transport goods and humanitarian assistance.
In addition, as Mr. Lowcock explained, they have
affected the Red Sea Mills silos.
Since the start of the conflict, the number of
civilian victims who have died or have been seriously
injured as a result of the clashes and attacks on civilian
areas and infrastructure has risen to more than 16,000.
That number could spike dangerously if the city of
Al-Hudaydah and its more than 600,000 residents are
trapped in the midst of a military campaign. Similarly,
effects could then be felt throughout the country as
ports that are vital to the survival of the Yemeni people
are compromised or rendered useless by the military
strife under way. We recall that more than 70 per cent

S/PV. 8361

of the imports that arrive in Yemen enter through the
port of Al-Hudaydah. Therefore, an attack on the city
or port would not only seriously affect the 22 million
people who currently need humanitarian assistance in
the country; the number of people who require urgent
assistance would become unsustainable. It is also
important to bear in mind that increased violence would
also lead to the displacement of entire families fleeing
the conflict and heading to the city of Al-Hudaydah for
shelter. A clear example of that situation was recorded
by the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner
for Refugees. On 14 September, it reported that
approximately 3,500 people had been displaced as a
result of clashes in districts adjacent to Al-Hudaydah.
Clearly, a military campaign in that city could cause a
major disaster.
Those acts of war serve only to undermine and
go against the efforts being carried out by the United
Nations and the Special Envoy of the Secretary-General
to resume dialogue to bring the parties together in the
quest for a negotiated solution to the conflict. Therefore,
the Council must emphatically reiterate to the parties
that compliance with its resolutions if obligarory,
in particular resolution 2216 (2015). All actors and
parties involved must therefore put an immediate end
to the violence, abandon any precondition to establish
dialogue and commit to starting a negotiation process
for a political solution that meets the demands and
aspirations of the Yemeni people, while respecting the
country’s sovereignty, independence and territorial
integrity. My delegation supports the process of
consultations and dialogue launched by the Special
Envoy, as an important initiative to foster a political
negotiation process that would allow for a peaceful
settlement to the situation in Yemen. We again call on
the actors and parties involved to join and contribute
constructively to the dialogue process.
It is also essential to remind the parties that attacks
or military campaigns that target civilians, public
spaces, housing or medical and educational facilities,
as well as missile launches and the deployment of
anti-personnel mines, are contrary to international law
and international humanitarian law. Such actions could
constitute war crimes and be investigated and punished
by the relevant international courts.
Finally, with a view to achieving a political solution
to the conflict in Yemen, my delegation reiterates its
full support for the efforts at mediation and dialogue

18-2945711/17

S/PV.8361

The situation in the Middle East

initiated and being carried out by the Special Envoy
vis-à-vis the parties.
Mrs. Gregoire Van Haaren (Netherlands): First,
let me thank Under-Secretary-General Mark Lowcock
for his sobering briefing today. I would also like to
thank the Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian
Affairs (OCHA) and the entire international community
for their ongoing efforts in Yemen to save lives on a
daily basis, under increasingly difficult circumstances.
We supported the urgent request for today’s briefing
because we have seen the situation in Yemen deteriorate
rapidly this week. We appreciate the fact that you,
Madam President, were able to accommodate the
request for today’s briefing at such short notice.
The images coming out of Yemen of starving
children on hospital beds put the international
community to shame. They compel us to speak out
and take action. With the fighting again flaring up
around Al-Hudaydah, an additional 1 million already
severely food-insecure children in Yemen risk falling
victim to famine. Behind those shocking numbers lies
the harsh reality of the daily lives of innocent Yemenis
in a man-made crisis waged at their expense. I will
address three issues here today: first, the increase of
access constraints around Al-Hudaydah; secondly, the
effects of the economy on the humanitarian situation
and, thirdly, the protection of civilians.
First, we are extremely concerned about
the consequences of this week’s clashes around
Al-Hudaydah on the already strained humanitarian
access to the millions of Yemenis in need. The main
road to Sana’a can no longer be used. I am concerned
to hear from Mr. Lowcock that alternative routes
are heavily damaged. Access to the Red Sea Mills
warehouse has been cut off and the port is under
threat now more than ever before. The shutdown of
Al-Hudaydah port operations or the disruption of its
supply chain to the heavily populated areas behind it
would be the tipping point for a full-blown famine.
The Council recognized the need to break the vicious
circle of armed conflict and food insecurity when it
unanimously adopted resolution 2417 (2018), on the
24 May. Now we must take that text to heart and ensure
that we prevent any further deterioration. I would like
to thank Mr. Lowcock for putting three concrete asks
on the table to address the situation. In that context,
we also call on OCHA to keep the Council informed
about the food security situation. The warring parties
and their supporters have a responsibility to keep the
12/17

21/09/2018

port open and fully functional and to ensure that the
desperately needed supplies reach Yemenis in need all
throughout the country.
My second point concerns another major driver of
the increasing food crisis: Yemen’s failing economy.
The recent devaluation of the Yemeni riyal to its lowest
point in history has severely hit the purchasing power
of the Yemeni population. That, together with rising
food prices and the non-payment of public-sector
salaries for more than two years, is proving to be a
lethal combination for ordinary Yemenis, including in
parts of the country that have been less affected by the
fighting. Experts warn that economic collapse has the
potential to kill even more Yemenis than the violence
underlying it. The parties need to come together and
address the issue with the utmost urgency.
Thirdly, we just adopted a presidential statement
on the protection of civilians (S/PRST/2018/18) The
words in that statement will be meaningless if we do
not insist on their full implementation in the crises on
the Council’s agenda. All parties need to comply with
their obligations under international humanitarian law
and address its violations. Ending impunity should be a
key ingredient in the solution to the conflict in Yemen.
The political transition in Yemen in early 2012 was a
positive example in the region in many ways, but if
it has taught us anything it is that postponing justice
only fosters further conflict and feeds the notion that
transgressions do not have consequences.
In conclusion, the drivers of famine in Yemen are
manifold. The immediate steps to be taken are clear. The
parties need to respect international humanitarian law,
keep the ports open, protect the supply roads and agree
once and for all on the modalities for resuming salary
payments. The one thing that can permanently end the
suffering of the Yemeni population is a sustainable,
peaceful political solution to the conflict. We call
again on all parties to demonstrate their commitment
to peace, to de-escalate — first and foremost around
Al-Hudaydah — and to engage without preconditions
with the Special Envoy. The children of Yemen deserve
protection from violence, hunger and disease. They
deserve a future.
Mr. Umarov (Kazakhstan): I join others in thanking
the Under-Secretary-General for Humanitarian Affairs,
Mr. Mark Lowcock, for his clear and comprehensive
update. We convey our readiness to extend our support
to his activities. We also express our deep appreciation
18-29457

21/09/2018

The situation in the Middle East

S/PV. 8361

to him and the staff of the Office for the Coordination
of Humanitarian Affairs for working tirelessly in one of
the worst humanitarian crises in the world. Kazakhstan
is closely following recent developments and would
like to make the following observations.

Mr. Ipo (Côte d’Ivoire) (spoke in French): Côte
d’Ivoire thanks the American presidency of the Council
for organizing this briefing on the humanitarian
situation in Yemen, and the United Kingdom for taking
the initiative to request this meeting.

First, we voice our support for the repeated
calls of the United Nations on all parties to save
civilian lives, prevent deaths and injuries and allow
for freedom of movement. We therefore note and
welcome the coordinated efforts of the stakeholder
arrangement — namely, the United Nations
agencies, non-governmental organizations and Gulf
countries — to provide humanitarian assistance to the
people of Yemen.

We thank Mr. Mark Lowcock, Under-SecretaryGeneral for Humanitarian Affairs and Emergency Relief
Coordinator, for his briefing on the latest developments
in the situation in Yemen.

Kazakhstan salutes the selfless work of the
humanitarian partners who have been providing food,
water, emergency kits, cash and health care. We regret
that two-thirds of the Yemeni population still require
protection from malnutrition, cholera and other
diseases, which have killed or afflicted thousands of
civilians, especially after the very hot summer season.
My delegation expresses hope that critical health
infrastructure and water stations will be thoroughly
protected to serve the local populations.
Secondly, we fully agree with Mr. Lowcock’s
call to boost commercial imports of food, fuel and
humanitarian supplies through all of Yemen’s ports. We
also appeal for the mobilization of emergency services
and adequate funding to relieve the population from
famine. At the same time, it is critical to seek new and
support all existing confidence-building measures in
the humanitarian sphere.
Finally, Kazakhstan welcomes the decision of the
coalition to keep open all Yemeni ports, including
Al-Hudaydah and Saleef, to allow humanitarian
and commercial cargo to enter without restriction.
Maintaining the flow of imports is essential for
humanitarian cases, especially in the light of the rise in
unemployment, the non-payment of salaries to public
sector employees for over two years and the devaluation
of the Yemeni rial, as well as rocketing food and
fuel prices.
We emphasize that all obligations under international
humanitarian law must be respected by all parties,
who must also take responsibility to mitigate the
humanitarian situation by cooperating fully with the
United Nations and the relevant humanitarian agencies.

My delegation is concerned by the resumption of
fighting since 18 September around Al-Hudaydah port
following the failure of the peace talks in Geneva on
8 September. These clashes are likely to aggravate the
humanitarian crisis, which is already considered by the
United Nations as the worst in the world. All the more
worrying is the fact that this takes place in an urban
area with more than 600,000 inhabitants. Furthermore,
the Al-Hudaydah port, which handles 70 per cent of the
country’s imports, is the main gateway for approximately
90 per cent of the humanitarian aid on which millions
of Yemenis depend. As a result, the renewed fighting
around that strategic port not only puts the delivery
of humanitarian aid at risk, but has also led to soaring
prices for basic necessities. According to the Office for
the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs, food prices
have risen by 68 per cent since 2015. Furthermore, there
are also fuel shortages.
Concerned by the serious deterioration of the
humanitarian situation, Côte d’Ivoire calls on the
warring parties to adhere to an immediate ceasefire to
allow safe and unhindered delivery of humanitarian aid
to populations in distress. We invite them to resume
dialogue with a view to a political settlement of the
current crisis and to respect their obligations under
international humanitarian law.
In conclusion, Côte d’Ivoire urges the parties to the
conflict to take ownership of the peace plan proposed by
Mr. Martin Griffiths, Special Envoy to the SecretaryGeneral on Yemen, and encourages him to continue
his mediation and good offices for the resumption of
intra-Yemeni dialogue.
Mr. Wu Haitao (China) (spoke in Chinese): I thank
Under-Secretary-General Mr. Mark Lowcock for his
briefing. I commend him and his team for their efforts
to ease the humanitarian crisis in Yemen.
The conflict in Yemen, which has been going on
for more than three years, has plunged the country

18-2945713/17

S/PV.8361

The situation in the Middle East

into an acute crisis. Today, as the conflict escalates
in Al-Hudaydah and other places, disruption to
humanitarian access is looming large, aggravating
the risk of famine and cholera outbreaks, which is a
dire consequence that no one — neither the Yemeni
people, the countries of the region nor the international
community — can endure. It is therefore incumbent on
the international community to empower the parties
in Yemen to set aside their differences in the spirit
of reconciliation so as to avoid the spread of conflict.
This must be done as a matter of urgency in order to
prevent further aggravation of the humanitarian crisis
in the country.
The international community should scale up
humanitarian assistance and provide medicine, food
and other supplies in accordance with needs on the
ground in order to mitigate the suffering of the Yemeni
people. We should urge the parties concerned in
Yemen to take measures to tame price hikes and keep
commercial goods moving. That would also go some
way towards easing the crisis. The parties concerned
should work together to improve humanitarian access
so that assistance to the Yemeni people can be delivered
unimpeded, safely and securely, paving the way for
better humanitarian outcomes in the country.
There is no alternative to a political solution if
Yemen is to have lasting peace and put an end to the
humanitarian crisis once and for all. The Yemeni parties
should return to the political track as soon as possible.
Special Envoy Martin Griffiths has recently continued to
engage with a broad spectrum of stakeholders, pushing
for the resumption of intra-Yemeni peace talks and the
implementation of confidence-building measures.
It behoves the international community to support
the United Nations and the Special Envoy in stepping up
their good offices to establish a sustainable mechanism
for dialogue and negotiation. China supports the
preservation of Yemen’s sovereignty, independence,
unity and territorial integrity. China also supports the
Yemeni parties in arriving at that inclusive solution
as soon as possible through dialogue and negotiations
based on relevant Security Council resolutions, the Gulf
Cooperation Council initiative and its Implementation
Mechanism, and the outcome document of Yemen’s
National Dialogue Conference.
Alongside the international community, China
stands ready to support the Special Envoy’s efforts
14/17

21/09/2018

and will continue to play a constructive role towards a
political solution to the Yemeni issue.
Mr. Amde (Ethiopia): We thank the delegation
of the United Kingdom for requesting this meeting,
and Under-Secretary-General Mark Lowcock for
his briefing. We also express our appreciation to
the United Nations and its humanitarian partners
for their selfless service in Yemen under extremely
difficult circumstances.
The humanitarian crisis in Yemen remains a source
of great concern. Millions are on the brink of famine. In
addition, the conflict in Al-Hudaydah governorate has
escalated further as renewed fighting has moved closer
to Al-Hudaydah city. With the situation deteriorating
dramatically, the Office for the Coordination of
Humanitarian Affairs warns that the recent escalation
of fighting has left the lives of hundreds of thousands in
an extremely dangerous situation.
We heard it loud and clear earlier from UnderSecretary-General Mark Lowcock that Yemen is facing
the worst humanitarian crisis. Almost every day,
millions struggle to survive and depend on humanitarian
assistance to obtain basic needs and services. The
devaluation of the Yemeni rial, rising food prices,
non-payment of public salaries and a cholera outbreak
have contributed to further worsening the humanitarian
situation in the country. As has been repeatedly stated
by the United Nations and its humanitarian partners,
Al-Hudaydah port is a lifeline for millions who depend
on humanitarian assistance.
In that regard, we appeal to all parties to do
everything possible so that the United Nations and
its humanitarian partners can have safe, sustained
and unimpeded humanitarian access to reach all
Yemenis in need. We also stress the importance of
protecting civilians and civilian facilities. In addition,
for the sake and consideration of civilians who have
suffered so much, we call on the parties to exercise
restraint to avoid civilian casualties. The launching of
missiles by the Houthis against the Kingdom of Saudi
Arabia and attacks on commercial vessels are also
counterproductive and unacceptable. We condemn
such acts.
It is indeed heartbreaking to note that despite the
continued efforts of the Special Envoy to revive the
political talks, the fighting in Yemen is escalating,
affecting civilians and the delivery of humanitarian
assistance. While urging all parties to cooperate with
18-29457

21/09/2018

The situation in the Middle East

the United Nations and its humanitarian partners,
we underscore that the ultimate solution to end the
unspeakable tragedy in Yemen is a comprehensive
political dialogue that meets the legitimate aspirations
of Yemenis and addresses the security concerns of
regional actors. In that regard, we support the tireless
diplomatic efforts of the Special Envoy, who has
continued his shuttle diplomacy to bring all parties
back to the negotiating table.
In conclusion, it is imperative for all parties to engage
with the Special Envoy in good faith and constructively,
without any preconditions. That is what the people of
Yemen expect from all parties. We also believe that the
Security Council and countries with influence should
extend their backing to the endeavours of the Special
Envoy as he continues to facilitate a political solution in
accordance with relevant Council resolutions, including
resolution 2216 (2015). Lasting peace in Yemen will be
possible only through an inclusive political process
facilitated by the United Nations.
The President: I will now make a statement in my
national capacity as the representative of the United
States.
I thank Mr. Lowcock for his briefing. What we
know about the humanitarian crisis in Yemen is
horrifying, but truthfully what is even scarier is what
we do not know. Recently, journalists visited a remote
village in northern Yemen. They found families wasting
away, surviving — if you can call it that — on a diet
of sour green paste made of leaves from a local plant.
One mother of a seven-month-old was so malnourished
that she often could not feed her baby, and she had no
other means. She told the journalists, “Since the day
she was born, I have not had the money to buy her
milk or buy her medicine”. The pictures of the village’s
starving babies captured by the journalists are almost
too much to take. These kids were wasting away off
the grid. Their parents cannot even afford the cost of
transporting their kids to clinics for help.
Families in Yemen rely on outside aid to survive.
Yet the needs are so vast and the obstacles so tough that
it is hard to figure out who needs help and actually get
it there. That is despite the best efforts of so many brave
aid workers, who struggle to deal with officials on the
ground blocking access and interfering with relief
efforts. In the end, we may never know how many kids
are dying in these remote villages. Parents rarely report

S/PV. 8361

their deaths and they never get counted in the already
dire statistics of the United Nations.
Stories like those are overwhelming, but the
Security Council is not helpless in the face of this crisis.
There are things that the international community can
do to help these starving children and their mothers.
We just have to have the will to do them. The last time
the Council met on Yemen (see S/PV.8348), we all
urged the parties to de-escalate and go back to talks.
But as we heard today, the opposite has happened. So
the United States calls on all parties to take precautions
to protect the grain mills and food storage facilities
around Al-Hudaydah. Yemen cannot afford any more
close calls with fighting around these warehouses.
Fighters must not enter United Nations facilities, which
must be protected from attack.
This is not rocket science. The minimum that the
Security Council can demand of the fighters from
all sides is to allow humanitarian relief to reach the
starving people of Yemen. Recent fighting is making
the main road from the port much harder to use and the
parties should work with the United Nations to get aid
moving around without interference. Finally, the parties
must avoid moving ahead with any new restrictions
on imports of foods, fuel and other lifesaving goods
bound for Yemen. Those are things that the parties can
do immediately.
In the longer term, everyone around the table today
knows what must be done. All of us support the efforts
of Special Envoy Martin Griffiths to find ways to
reduce the violence and return to talks. The tragedy that
is building in Yemen is almost beyond comprehension,
but we are not helpless in the face of it. Everyone — the
Security Council, the warring parties in Yemen and
their partners — should be focused on negotiating an
end to this war, not making the suffering of Yemeni
children worse.
I resume my functions as President of the Council.
I now give the floor to the representative of Yemen.
Mr. Bin Mubarak (Yemen) (spoke in Arabic): At
the outset, I would like to thank you, Madam President,
for giving us the opportunity to speak before the
Council for the second time this month. We wish you
and the delegation of the United States every success.
We would also like to thank Mr. Mark Lowcock and his
team, along with all the humanitarian workers, for their

18-2945715/17

S/PV.8361

The situation in the Middle East

sincere and great efforts to alleviate the humanitarian
suffering in my country.
Today, the Security Council is discussing the
humanitarian situation in my country. While we greatly
appreciate this international attention, the deteriorating
humanitarian situation is neither incidental nor the
result of a natural disaster. Its causes are clear, and those
responsible for them are known to everyone. Dealing
only with the results and the symptoms of the conflict
without addressing its root causes is a dangerous way to
address conflicts. It is bound to fail.
Four years ago, on 21 September 2014, the Houthi
militias, backed by Iran, the world’s State sponsor of
terrorism, launched a coup against the State and the
outcome of the national dialogue and against everything
that the Yemenis had agreed to. His Excellency the
President of the Republic, Abdrabuh Mansour Hadi
Mansour, said at the time that what Yemen was being
subjected to was “a conspiracy that is dragging the
country to civil war”. He affirmed that he would spare no
effort in discharging his constitutional responsibilities
and would work to restore State authority.
Since that day, the Yemeni Government, under
his leadership, has made every effort to put an end to
the coup and regain State authority. It has made one
concession after the other and extended its hand for
peace based on the terms of reference, in support of the
efforts of the United Nations and its Special Envoy for
Yemen, Mr. Martin Griffiths. The Yemeni Government
has made it its goal to achieve the dream of its people
to build a civil and modern federal State that supports
democracy, human rights and freedom based on the
rule of law and good governance. That is the only path
that we wish to take.
Throughout the latest developments, the Council
has agreed on a track to support peace, led by the
United Nations and based on the three terms of
reference that have been agreed that the local, regional
and international levels, namely, the Gulf Cooperation
Council Initiative and its Implementation Mechanism,
the outcome of the comprehensive National Dialogue
Conference and the relevant Council resolutions,
especially resolution 2216 (2015). That is the only way
to advance the peace process.
In every round of peace talks, the most recent of
which took place in Geneva, we have hoped to reach
a positive outcome on the humanitarian track, at least
in terms of alleviating the suffering of our people in
16/17

21/09/2018

all the matters on the agenda. However, the coup
forces intentionally absented themselves at the last
minute, which indicated their lack of will to discuss
any humanitarian measures, because that would cost
them a card that they have always played internally and
externally. The international community must be aware
of that.
Speaking of the humanitarian situation, all of the
cities that have been under the control of the coup
forces since 2014 have witnessed systemic raids, the
terrorization and humiliation of civilians, and the
recruitment and deployment of innocent children to
the battlefields of death, as well as the spread of black
markets and the theft of our people’s wealth in broad
daylight. That is a dangerous development of which we
have warned repeatedly.
The suffering of thousands of families in
Al-Hudaydah and all areas under the control of the
coup forces is due mainly to the imprisonment of family
breadwinners; the loss of income through confiscation
by the Houthis of over 70 per cent of the State’s resources,
according to United Nations reports; and the absence of
humanitarian aid because it is being obstructed, stolen
or diverted by the Houthi militias, as has been testified
to by United Nations agencies. That issue is at the core
of the conversation on confidence-building measures in
Yemen that have been sponsored by the Council, with
the support of the Special Envoy and the States that are
sponsoring the political process in Yemen.
Al-Hudaydah governorate is now the main challenge
to humanitarian aid because the Houthi militias are
the only ones benefiting from the seaport, while the
residents of the area are starving to death. That cannot
persist much longer. The humanitarian suffering in
Al-Hudaydah must end. We must not allow navigation
in the Red Sea to be threatened. We must take action,
while giving due protection and care to the civilians.
I do not exaggerate when I say that the humanitarian
aid being given to Al-Hudaydah by the coalition States,
foremost among which are the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia
and the United Arab Emirates is unprecedented in any
similar military operation in Yemen and the region. In
that regard, I would like to specifically mention that
such aid is being provided by the States of the coalition,
especially the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia and the United
Arab Emirates.
My country and the coalition States have sent a
letter to the Under-Secretary-General for Humanitarian
18-29457

21/09/2018

The situation in the Middle East

Affairs explaining their concern over the safety of
civilians and aid workers because the road between
Sana’a and Al-Hudaydah lies close to fighting in areas
where the Houthi militias have transformed the city of
Al-Hudaydah into a military centre. They have set up
numerous checkpoints that are hindering the movement
and passage of civilians. They have also used the Red
Sea mills, silos and warehouses for military purposes,
as Mr. Lowcock mentioned earlier.
We have affirmed that the Yemeni Government
and the coalition members understand that those roads
are used by commercial and humanitarian trucks, and
we are therefore actively working to secure them by
removing the mines planted by the Houthi militias,
which threaten civilians, aid workers and health-care
providers. That is merely one of the precautionary
measures that we are taking. The Evacuation and
Humanitarian Operation Cell has made it clear to all
stakeholders that there are many other alternative routes
that connect Al-Hudaydah and Sana’a. The coalition
of States sent a detailed letter today to the Office for
the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs concerning
those roads and routes.
The Yemeni Government confirms its commitment
to international law, international humanitarian law
and human rights law, and calls for equal condemnation
of all those who violate those laws. We also call for
the intensification of efforts and coordination with the
relevant official bodies, and for the establisment of
major hubs for the United Nations agencies working in

S/PV. 8361

the humanitarian field in the temporary capital of Aden
and other major Yemeni cities. The Yemeni Government
and the Arab coalition have previously called for
decentralized humanitarian work so as to avoid any
complications arising from military operations. There
are currently five humanitarian aid areas in Yemen,
each of which has land and sea corridors to guarantee
that aid reaches all the people of Yemen equally.
With regard to the depreciation of the Yemeni rial,
the Government of Yemen has established a higher
economic committee that has adopted several measures
to stop the currency deterioration, including creating
favourable conditions for exporting oil and gas, and
preventing the flight of hard currency, as well as
stopping the import of luxury goods and increasing
interest rates. In that regard, I would like to say that
the United Nations, States and donor institutions can
play a pivotal role in stabilizing the Yemeni currency
if they were to channel their aid to Yemen through the
Yemeni Central Bank, as is being done by the Kingdom
of Saudi Arabia.
Today, 21 September, holds a bitter memory for
our people, who call it the day of the catastrophe.
However, what fills us with hope is that in a few days
we will celebrate the anniversary of the 26 September
revolution, when our people got rid of the racist rule
of the imams that the rebellious militias are trying to
revive in Yemen. Those are the laws of nature. The night
ends and the sun always rises. Will our sun rise soon?
The meeting rose at 4.55 p.m.

18-2945717/17
