asdf

United Nations

S/PV.6874

Security Council

Provisional

Sixty-seventh year

6874th meeting
Wednesday, 28 November 2012, 10.50 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Hardeep Singh Puri . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(India)

Members:

Azerbaijan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Colombia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Germany . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Guatemala . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Morocco . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Pakistan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Portugal . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
South Africa . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Togo . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . .
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Mr. Mehdiyev
Mr. Wang Min
Mr. Osorio
Mr. Araud
Mr. Wittig
Mr. Rosenthal
Mr. Loulichki
Mr. Tarar
Mr. Vaz Patto
Mr. Pankin
Mr. Crowley
Mr. Kandangha-Bariki
Sir Mark Lyall Grant
Mr. DeLaurentis

Agenda
Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan
Report of the Secretary-General on South Sudan (S/2012/820)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-506.

12-61255 (E)

*1261255*

S/PV.6874

the Government’s development programmes, but could
also cause new tensions between its various entities and
within the security services.

The meeting was called to order at 10.50 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan
Report of the Secretary-General on South Sudan
(S/2012/820)
The President: Under rule 37 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the representative
of South Sudan to participate in this meeting.
Under rule 39 of the Council’s provisional rules
of procedure, I invite Mr. Hervé Ladsous, UnderSecretary-General for Peacekeeping Operations, to
participate in this meeting.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I wish to draw the attention of Council members to
document S/2012/820, which contains the report of the
Secretary-General on South Sudan.
I now give the floor to Mr. Ladsous.
Mr. Ladsous (spoke in French): I would like to
thank you, Mr. President, for this opportunity to present
the latest report of the Secretary-General on South
Sudan (S/2012/820). As the Council knows, the report,
published 8 November, covers the period from June
to 23 October and looks at all the major developments
during that period and some other important points.
During the reporting period, the South Sudanese
Government focused mainly on resolving pending
problems that pit it against the Sudan. The absence
of progress in resolving the security, economic and
political differences between the two countries
continues to have direct consequences for security and
stability within South Sudan and on efforts to promote
peacebuilding and State-building and to meet the
crucial needs of citizens.
While tensions between the Sudan and South
Sudan have undeniably eased with the signing of the
cooperation agreements of 27 September, the sluggish
implementation of those agreements could have a
negative impact on the economic stability of South
Sudan, in particular if there are delays in restarting oil
exports. The Council knows how dependent that country
is on oil revenues, and it is clear that any additional delay
would not only continue to have a negative impact on
2

Furthermore, that fragility has been somewhat
exacerbated by a degree of discontent in the country
with regard to how the discussions with the Sudan
have been developing. The oil provided to the Sudan
as compensation for the secession and the agreement
on the demilitarization of the so-called 14-mile area,
at the border between Bahr el Ghazal on the west and
South Darfur, have been perceived as a dangerous
compromise and caused significant internal opposition,
which is aggravated by the absence of concessions from
the Sudanese Government. I would refer in particular to
the definitive status of the Abyei region. The governor
of Northern Bahr el Ghazal, Mr. Paul Malong Awan,
who, to date, had adopted a robust stance on this issue,
nonetheless recently announced that he would not
oppose the seasonal migration of Sudanese Arab tribes
to the south.
Nevertheless, inter-community tensions remain
high in border regions, and they have been exacerbated
by their militarization and recurrent incidents.
Like many other countries in post-conflict
situations, South Sudan has to cope with very significant
internal challenges. The lasting stability of the country
will depend on the effectiveness of strategies used to
resolve them. The leaders of South Sudan must lay the
foundations of a democratic and participatory society
in which the management of public matters is rooted
in respect for the law and all citizens believe that their
Government is committed to protecting them and to
providing everyone with the dividends of peace, such
as services and basic infrastructure.
On the whole, the security situation in South
Sudan has remained stable over the past four months.
Nonetheless, Jonglei state remains the epicentre of
ongoing security challenges, while the tri-state area of
Unity, Warrap and Lakes states are also dealing with a
resurgence of instability.
Following violence late last year in Jonglei state,
the Government adopted a threefold strategy. It is
focused on disarming the population, launching
the reconciliation process and targeting discontent
communities to prevent the potential recruitment of
young people by militias.
Through its commitment, the United Nations
Mission in the Republic of South Sudan (UNMISS)
12-61255

S/PV.6874

has been able to convince the Government to launch a
preliminary voluntary disarmament campaign focused
on actively raising awareness among communities.
Between March and June, more coercive action followed
this first stage, with what we must admit are uneven
results. The abuses committed by the Sudan People’s
Liberation Army (SPLA) have been systematically
reported to the Government with the aim of bringing the
perpetrators to justice. The Government also took the
encouraging decision to redeploy Murle SPLA officers
in order to dispel doubts within that community as to a
potential ethnic polarization of the army.
(spoke in English)
On the political side, following the All Jonglei
Peace Conference of May 2012, progress towards
intercommunal reconciliation and peacebuilding has
been slow. Outreach to community leaders to prevent
the recruitment of their youths by rebel militia groups
has met with little success. The abundant availability
of weapons and weakened traditional community
structures have resulted in community leaders
confessing openly to having little control over their
respective youths. A comprehensive and inclusive
political process led by the Government that addresses
the core grievance of the disgruntled constituencies
remains an urgent need.
In the light of the foregoing, the recent activities of
militias led by David Yau Yau are a cause for serious
concern. Information on the ground points to high
risks of an escalation of violence as the dry season
has arrived. David Yau Yau’s militia clashed regularly
with SPLA troops throughout the reporting period
and has threatened United Nations peacekeepers in
the state. There have also been reports of his militia
actively recruiting among the Murle youth. UNMISS
has reinforced its presence in the State and remains,
of course, in constant touch with the Government to
counter the rebel militia group’s activities and prevent
abuses against civilians.
Concurrently,
sporadic
cattle
raids
and
intercommunal conflict continued in the Unity, Lakes
and Warrap tri-state area, despite the efforts of the
SPLA and the South Sudan National Police Service.
According to local authorities, clashes on 5 and
7 November in a cattle camp in Lakes state between
two Dinka sub-clans resulted in no less than 28 dead
and 37 seriously injured. A number of large-scale cattle
raids were also reported in northern Jonglei state.

12-61255

With regard to the establishment of national
institutions, progress on the constitutional review
process has been slow. The substantive work on the
transitional constitution has yet to begin, as has civic
education and State-wide consultations by the National
Constitutional Review Commission. A decision on
extending the one-year mandate of the Commission,
which lost a total of at least six months in its first year
of activity, has yet to be taken. Yet that process remains
one of the key pillars on which long-term stability
of the country would rest. We continue to urge the
Government to ensure that the process is transparent,
inclusive, consultative and not completed in haste.
On an encouraging note, the President decreed
the establishment of the National Disarmament,
Demobilization and Reintegration Council, which is
chaired by Vice-President Riek Machar. The Council held
its first meeting on 14 November to review preparations
for launching the disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration (DDR) pilot programme. Subsequently, a
second meeting took place on 20 November, at which
a road map was agreed upon for a total review of the
DDR programme proposal by all relevant ministries.
The Council therefore needs to take a decision on the
starting date of the pilot project, which is related to the
availability of Government and international funding.
The Government has also announced that it is
moving forward with the development of a national
human rights agenda, which the Mission hopes will
take into account a number of outstanding concerns,
including the recently resumed execution of prisoners
on death row, some of whom were sentenced with no
or inadequate legal representation, and continuing
incidents of prolonged arbitrary detention. The Ministry
of Justice’s forum of relevant Government authorities
aims to develop measures to mitigate the incidence of
arbitrary arrests and illegal detentions and to increase
access to justice. However, there is growing concern
over politically motivated incidents ranging from
threats to abductions that have targeted journalists,
civil society activists and political opponents. In the
effort to combat impunity, greater emphasis has to be
placed on strengthening civilian and military justice
systems and holding to account those responsible for
grave violations, including rape and torture.
Human rights remain a core element of the mandate
of UNMISS. We were therefore alarmed by the decision
of the Government, on 23 October, to expel one of
the Mission’s senior human rights officers, an act

3

S/PV.6874

which has no justification and was in clear violation
of both the United Nations Charter and the status-offorces agreement signed by the United Nations and the
Government of South Sudan. Despite the Mission’s
interventions with Government authorities at the highest
levels, the order has yet to be rescinded. I therefore
urge the Government to rescind its decision to expel the
UNMISS staff member and call upon members of the
Council to do the same.

next year. That unit will be stationed in Jonglei state to
cover the areas of greatest need for both UNMISS and
South Sudan. I regret to report, however, that progress
towards the full decentralization of the Mission has
been impeded by a number of factors, including the
limited engineering capacity in the first and second
years of the Mission and the wet season, which brings
construction work in the counties to a standstill for
almost half the year.

Another promising area where progress could
be achieved in our efforts to support capacitybuilding for key South Sudanese institutions is the
development of the Police Service, including through
the registration and training of police. However, in that
area progress will require key complementary legal and
administrative reforms as well as significant resources,
which so far have been lacking. The construction of
police stations and other essential police infrastructure
in the counties, and the provision of the necessary
police equipment — communications equipment and
vehicles in particular — are key impediments to that
process. The assumption of law enforcement functions
by the South Sudan National Police Service throughout
South Sudan is one of the most critical objectives for
long-term peace and stability in the country and will
require sustained attention and investment if it is to be
successful.

Although we had originally planned for a total of
28 country support bases for the first and second years,
we have had to recalibrate that figure to 20, and of those
the Mission currently has six fully operational bases
and a temporary presence in seven others. Seven more
country support base locations in Mayon and a number
of other places have been prioritized for 2012-2013.
However, the unintended delay in the operationalization
of those country support bases has meant that the time
frame for the construction of all 35 bases has had to be
extended to 2015.

In order to respond to the impact of the revenue
shortfall following the oil shutdown earlier this year,
the Government conducted a prioritization of crucial
governance functions called the core functions under
austerity initiative. The United Nations has provided
support to that process, in particular in the areas of
social and human development, the rule of law and
overall coordination. The initiative is now guiding
Government planning and budgeting for the 2013-2014
period. The Government, the United Nations country
team and other partners are currently in the process of
realigning their programmes with the priorities outlined
in the Government’s peacebuilding and State-building
initiatives. It is expected that a new compact will be
developed early next year to shape South Sudan’s
development agenda.
With regard to progress in consolidating UNMISS
and building the Mission’s own capacity, I am pleased to
confirm that Rwanda has agreed to deploy three Mi-17
helicopters to UNMISS and to consider the deployment
of another three helicopters, and that the Republic of
Korea has agreed to deploy an engineering unit early

4

At this time, the Mission’s military force is finally
fully deployed, while police deployments are at 80 per
cent of authorized capacity. As I said, we look forward
to receiving utility helicopters from Rwanda. An
assessment was carried out in September to determine
the requirements for riverine capacity for the Mission.
Its conclusions are now being implemented so as to
further enhance the mobility of both the civilian and
military components of the Mission.
I wish to conclude by thanking the members of
the Council for their continued engagement on South
Sudan and their sustained support for UNMISS, and
by expressing our appreciation to the leadership and
personnel of the Mission.
The President: I thank Mr. Ladsous for his briefing.
I now give the floor to the representative of South
Sudan.
Mr. Deng (South Sudan): This being my first time
to address the Council in my new capacity as Permanent
Representative of the Republic of South Sudan to the
United Nations, I would like to personally express my
appreciation for this opportunity and to congratulate
you, Sir, on your assumption of the presidency this
month.
I would like to thank the Under-Secretary-General
for Peacekeeping Operations for his briefing, and
Special Representative of the Secretary-General Hilde

12-61255

S/PV.6874

Johnson and Special Envoy Haile Menkerios for their
hard work in support of peace and security in South
Sudan and Sudan. Furthermore, I would like to express
my appreciation to Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon for
his comprehensive and balanced report (S/2012/820),
which has just been presented, outlining the successes
in and ongoing challenges to the maintenance of
peace and security between Sudan and South Sudan.
Establishing a comprehensive and sustainable peace
with the Republic of the Sudan is our Government’s
number-one priority.
The Republic of South Sudan would also like to
reiterate its appreciation to the members of the Security
Council for their support for the road map established
by the African Union Peace and Security Council on
24 April, and for the importance that this Council
attaches to the leading role that the African Union (AU)
plays in the promotion of peace and security in our
region.
The leaders of the Sudan and South Sudan have
long agreed, as far back as the signing of the Machakos
Protocol in 2002, that war would never represent a
viable solution to end the conflicts between them,
and that negotiation remains the only worthwhile
approach. At the same time, negotiation without end
is in no one’s interests. Our two States cannot prosper
or pursue greater development in an atmosphere of
continued uncertainty about their relations. It was for
that reason that the AU road map and resolution 2046
(2012) helpfully established deadlines for resolving all
the outstanding issues between our two States. Both
the AU road map and the resolution created a climate
and an opportunity for our two countries to resolve
those issues definitively. Resolution 2046 (2012) also
called on the Secretary-General, in consultation with
the African Union and the Intergovernmental Authority
on Development, to issue binding proposals on any
issues on which the parties could not agree within the
reasonable deadline established by the Council.
The Republic of South Sudan appreciates the efforts
of the African Union High-Level Implementation
Panel, comprised of President Thabo Mbeki, President
Pierre Buyoya and President Abdulsalami Abubakar,
all of whom tirelessly supported the parties during
this summer’s negotiations and provided the required
continental context and political support to enable the
creation of African solutions for establishing peace and
stability in our region.

12-61255

The agreements signed by the parties on
27 September are welcome. They represent an
important milestone, defining in concrete terms the
future relations between our two States. However, as
the Council itself recognized when it unanimously
adopted resolution 2046 (2012), what is required, some
seven years after the signing of the Comprehensive
Peace Agreement (CPA), is a final resolution of all
of the outstanding issues that remain between us. My
Government signed the cooperation agreements on
27 September because we were convinced that it would
be possible to resolve quickly the matters on which we
could not agree on that day, most importantly border
demarcation and the status of Abyei.
We would welcome the Council’s continued and
active support of that objective, in full cooperation
with, and in support of, the African Union. It is only
when all the issues are addressed and we have made
much greater progress towards the full implementation
of key provisions of the 2005 Comprehensive Peace
Agreement that sustainable peace will exist in our
region. There are no shortcuts to that destination.
It is with that in mind that we respectfully ask the
Security Council to support unreservedly the AU Peace
and Security Council decision of 24 October. As we are
all aware, the AU High-Level Implementation Panel’s
proposal of 21 September on the final status of Abyei
reflects the previous agreements signed by the parties,
such as the Abyei Protocol of the Comprehensive Peace
Agreement, the arbitration agreement that led to the 2009
Award of the Permanent Court of Arbitration, and the
agreement of 20 June 2011. Those agreements provided
the foundation for the High-Level Panel’s approach to
the discussions on Abyei over recent months. All of
them accept the need to hold a referendum in the Abyei
area. A referendum, implemented in accordance with
the terms of the CPA, does not represent a win-lose
solution for that area’s communities. Quite the contrary,
it would ensure peace, security and cooperation between
them, and to that extent it is a win-win proposal.
That having been said, following the 24 October
decision of the AU Peace and Security Council, my
Government expressed its readiness to negotiate with
the Sudan for a further six weeks. President Salva Kiir
Mayardit formally invited President Omer Hassan
Al-Bashir to Juba in order to continue their discussions
on the final status of Abyei. We regret that President
Al-Bashir has so far been unable to take up the
invitation.

5

S/PV.6874

The deadline established by the AU Peace and
Security Council is now approaching. It is our hope
that the efforts of my Government to negotiate on
the basis of the High-Level Panel’s last proposal and
to establish temporary institutions for the Abyei area
will be supported both by the members of the Peace
and Security Council and by the Council here. The
Republic of South Sudan would also welcome the
Security Council’s endorsement of any decision made
by the African Union with regard to Abyei or other
outstanding issues — not as an imposition on the
parties but rather as a demonstration of support for the
region’s considered view of what constitutes the most
appropriate way forward.
The Republic of South Sudan is also eager to
implement the security mechanisms, namely, the
safe demilitarized border zone and the Joint Border
Verification and Monitoring Mechanism, without
further delay. My Government remains extremely
concerned about the humanitarian impact of the
conflict in Southern Kordofan and southern Blue Nile
on the people of those areas, and indeed by extension on
the people of South Sudan, who have so far welcomed
more than 100,000 refugees from that conflict. As the
Secretary-General notes in a recent report, the human
suffering in the two States is a direct consequence of
the conflict in those areas, and only a resolution of the
conflict can stop the humanitarian crisis.
As the Council is aware, in connection with the
insecurity in the two areas, the Sudan has recently
conducted aerial bombardments inside the territory of
South Sudan, specifically in Northern Bahr el Ghazal
State. The Republic of South Sudan does not wish to
return to violence and remains fully committed to
peace. We do not believe that there can be genuine
security in the border states of either country nor,
therefore, sustainable peace in our region unless there
is a complete cessation of hostilities in the two areas.
We therefore strongly encourage dialogue between
the Government of the Sudan and the Sudan People’s
Liberation Movement (SPLA)-North, as called for in
resolution 2046 (2012), and offer ourselves to the parties
to play whatever facilitating role might be deemed
necessary. It is clear that unless there can be a dialogue
on the basis of previous agreements, including the CPA
and last year’s agreement of 28 June, it will be difficult
to implement the safe demilitarized border zone and
Joint Border Verification Monitoring Mechanism.

6

The Republic of South Sudan continues its
preparations for the resumption of oil production and
the transport of oil through the territory of the Sudan,
despite calls by the Sudan to halt those preparations
and its imposition of additional demands on security
issues that go far beyond the scope of the 27 September
agreements. We are nonetheless encouraged by a recent
exchange between our two Presidents and an agreement
to reconvene the Joint Political and Security Mechanism
in Khartoum next week.
While relations with the Sudan occupy the highest
priority on my Government’s agenda, the situation
in Jonglei state, as outlined in the statement of the
Under-Secretary-General, remains an acute focus of
concern. On Monday, President Salva Kiir reiterated
that his Government would spare no effort in support of
stability and inter-communal harmony in Jonglei. My
Government is pursuing a multi-pronged strategy in
Jonglei. The peace process is being led by a presidential
committee on peace, reconciliation and tolerance in
Jonglei state, and the disarmament process is being led
by the SPLA. Despite some very concerning reports
about the conduct of the SPLA in isolated situations,
the civilian disarmament process has largely been
conducted peacefully. The Government takes any
allegations of misconduct by the SPLA very seriously.
All allegations will be investigated and, if necessary,
addressed through the appropriate legal mechanisms
and channels.
The Government has gone to great lengths to
facilitate contact between the different communities
in Jonglei state. Both the reconciliation process and
the disarmament process have been welcomed by the
communities in Jonglei state, as has the SPLA’s pledge
to remain on the ground in the state for up to two years
to provide ongoing security. The Sudan Council of
Churches also continues a grassroots peace process to
complement the Government-led process.
We welcome the support that the United Nations
Mission in South Sudan (UNMISS) has provided to the
Jonglei peace process, and would welcome enhanced
logistical support, as well as ongoing support for the
implementation of the May 2012 peace agreements
signed in Jonglei.
We note the concerns expressed by several
members of the Council, as just articulated by the
Under-Secretary-General, regarding the expulsion of a
human rights officer who served with UNMISS. While
South Sudan takes these concerns very seriously, it is
12-61255

S/PV.6874

our belief that we acted consistently with the UNMISS
status-of-forces agreement. The Republic of South
Sudan does not intend to hinder human rights reporting
in South Sudan and accepts it as an integral component
of the work of UNMISS. We also welcome ongoing
negotiations and dialogue on this issue.
In that connection, I might add that, initially, two
individuals were expelled, including the Director,
but as a result of discussions with the leadership, the
decision regarding one was reversed. I should also say
that the relevant institutions within the Ministry for
Foreign Affairs and legal institutions have conducted a
thorough analysis of relevant international conventions
and norms in order to give a legal basis to the decision
made. We therefore believe that, contrary to the
allegations, the decisions were not taken lightly or in
disregard of the relevant international standards.
We want to underscore here our unwavering
commitment to international human rights and
humanitarian standards. The war that raged in our
region intermittently for half a century was a struggle
for human rights and the values of human dignity. We
recognize that there is always a gap between ideals and

practice on the ground and, in this area, we endeavour
to do more.
I noted with great interest some of the specifics,
cited by the Under-Secretary-General, of instances
indicating the gap I am referring to. Once again, we
are quite willing and prepared to discuss some of those
issues with our partners, and in particular the United
Nations presence on the ground, and, where possible, to
provide remedies to the satisfaction of both sides.
In conclusion, we want to reiterate our commitment
to peaceful coexistence and cooperation with the
Republic of the Sudan, as both sides stand to gain from
cordial ties. I take this opportunity to reaffirm our deep
appreciation for the sustained and unwavering support
we have received from the international community,
in particular the AU and the United Nations, without
which we could not have achieved all that we have been
able to achieve to date.
The President: There are no more names inscribed
on the list of speakers. I now invite Council members
to informal consultations to continue our discussion on
the subject.
The meeting rose at 11.30 a.m.

12-61255

7
