S/PV.4204 (Resumption 2)

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Fifty-fifth year

4204

th meeting
Thursday, 5 October 2000, 3 p.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Andjaba . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (Namibia)

Members:

Argentina . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Bangladesh . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Canada . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Jamaica . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Malaysia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Mali . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Netherlands . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Tunisia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Ukraine . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . . .
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Mr. Listre
Mr. Chowdhury
Mr. Heinbecker
Mr. Wang Yingfan
Mr. Levitte
Miss Durrant
Mr. Hasmy
Mr. Ouane
Mr. van Walsum
Mr. Lavrov
Mr. Ben Mustapha
Mr. Yel’chenko
Sir Jeremy Greenstock
Mr. Holbrooke

Agenda
The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian Question
Letter dated 2 October 2000 from the Permanent Representative of Iraq to the
United Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council
(S/2000/928)
Letter dated 2 October 2000 from the Permanent Representative of Malaysia to
the United Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council
(S/2000/929)
Identical letters dated 2 October 2000 from the Permanent Observer of
Palestine to the United Nations addressed to the Secretary-General and to the
President of the Security Council (S/2000/930)
Letter dated 2 October 2000 from the Permanent Representative of South
Africa to the United Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council
(S/2000/934)
Letter dated 2 October 2000 from the Permanent Representative of Malaysia to
the United Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council
(S/2000/935)
This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room C-178.

00-67648 (E)
`````````

S/PV.4204 (Resumption 2)

The meeting was resumed at 3.20 p.m., 5 October 2000.

his skill and experience in conducting the Council’s
work during the past eventful month.

The President: I should like to inform the
Council that I have received letters from the
representatives of Malta and Spain in which they
request to be invited to participate in the discussion of
the item on the Council’s agenda. In accordance with
the usual practice, I propose, with the consent of the
Council, to invite those representatives to participate in
the discussion without the right to vote, in accordance
with the relevant provisions of the Charter and rule 37
of the Council’s provisional rules of procedure.

You, Sir, come from a country that suffered
greatly under colonialism, occupation, settlementbuilding, racism and trusteeship. Your country fought
for its independence, freedom and dignity and you are
therefore in the best position to appreciate the reality of
the issue before us today. We are confident that, guided
by your experience and wisdom, the proceedings and
work of the Council this month will be crowned with
success.

There being no objection, it is so decided.
At the invitation of the President, Mr. Balzan
(Malta) and Mr. Arias (Spain) took the seats
reserved for them at the side of the Council
Chamber.
The President: I should like to inform the
Council that I have received a letter dated 5 October
2000 from the Permanent Representative of Togo to the
United Nations, which will be issued as document
S/2000/958, and which reads as follows:
“On behalf of the Organization of African
Unity, I have the honour to request that the
Security Council extend an invitation to His
Excellency Mr. Amadou Kebe, Permanent
Observer of the Organization of African Unity to
the United Nations, to address the Council under
rule 39 of its provisional rules of procedure
during the Council’s consideration of the item
entitled ‘The situation in the Middle East,
including the Palestinian Question’.”
If I hear no objection, I shall take it that the
Council agrees to extend an invitation under rule 39 to
Mr. Kébé.
There being no objection, it is so decided.
The next speaker inscribed on my list is the
representative of the Libyan Arab Jamahiriya. I invite
him to take a seat at the Council table and to make his
statement.
Mr. Babaa (Libyan Arab Jamahiriya) (spoke in
Arabic): Permit me at the outset to extend to you, Sir,
our warm congratulations on your assumption of the
presidency of the Council for this month. I wish to
express my gratitude to Ambassador Ouane of Mali for

2

The occupation of Palestine by settlers from all
over the world is a problem that has been before the
United Nations since its inception. All organs of the
United Nations have addressed this question,
particularly the Security Council, without reaching a
drastic solution thereto because the principal cause of
the problem — the uprooting of an entire people and its
exile, displacement and loss — has been ignored.
Moreover, those who remained behind have been
subject to the most horrendous practices — including
imprisonment, torture, murder, the destruction of their
homes, collective punishment and the confiscation of
their land — and to daily offences by the Zionist
occupation authorities and racist settlers aimed at
forcing them to follow in the footsteps of their
forebears.
The emerging revolution of that people
demonstrates to those who would deny the existence of
the Palestinian people that it is a living and extant
people. It continues to struggle and fight, even with
stones, for its survival and a dignified, free life and to
maintain its rights over its land, on which it has lived
for thousands of years and from which the Zionist
settlers are trying to uproot it.
In recent days, the entire world has watched on
television the images of dozens of defenceless
youngsters and children being killed in cold blood and
hundreds being wounded by the bullets of snipers,
grenades, cluster bombs, tank shells and helicopter
rockets. The killing of a Palestinian child, Mohammed
Al-Durra, shook the conscience of the world and
aroused international feeling. Many other atrocious
scenes and images have not been caught on the
correspondents’ cameras. All this indicates one thing:
there has been a premeditated design to kill, to
massacre and to carry out a true holocaust ever since
the Zionists planted their strange identity at the heart of

S/PV.4204 (Resumption 2)

the Arab world five decades ago. They have done so in
order to create and perpetuate new faits accomplis.
This bloody scenario recurs day in and day out in
occupied Palestine. There are settlements that are
heavily armed with lethal weapons. There are racist
settlers who provoke the defenceless indigenous
population and kill them. Massacres occur that recall
Hollywood films portraying the brutal wild west. Land
is confiscated. An army of occupation protects the
Zionists. A super-Power is providing the deadly
weapons and is defending these practices and blocking
world condemnation of them by all available means
within and outside the United Nations.
We have said before and we reiterate today that
there can be no solution to the occupation of Palestine
without the return of the Palestinian people to its land
and the establishment of its independent State on the
entire territory of Palestine, in which peoples of all
religions will coexist. What is occurring in the socalled “peace process” is merely palliative. We all
aspire to peace with justice; there can be no peace
without justice. The events in Palestine are links in the
chain of that people’s revolt against occupation,
expansion and annexation for the sake of its own
independence, dignity and freedom.
Today, we can only salute the Palestinian people’s
struggle, pray for its martyrs and condemn Israel’s
genocidal practices. Israel has succeeded in usurping
Palestine, displacing its people and controlling its
farms, lands and waters. Today, it is seeking to deprive
the Palestinian people of its mosques, churches and
other places of worship. The massacre raging in the
occupied territories is not the first and will not be the
last so long as the international community remains
unable to protect the Palestinian people and to help it
recover its legitimate and inalienable rights and so long
as the United Nations continues to be hamstrung by the
considerable pressures exerted by a super-Power in an
attempt to prevent the Organization from exerting its
authority. Blinded by its bias in favour of the criminal,
that super-Power justifies the brutal crimes any way it
can and accords equal treatment to the executioner and
to the victim so as to funnel more benefits to the
criminal and satisfy the Zionist lobby for electoral
purposes.
We call upon the Security Council to be honest
with itself and to exercise its authority by taking
deterrent measures under its Charter mandate. The

Council must stop this brutal and barbaric Israeli
aggression against the Palestinian people. Is it possible
for the Council to do this? Where is the humanitarian
intervention we constantly hear about in this building?
Where is the defence of human rights? Where is
respect for the Fourth Geneva Convention relative to
the Protection of Civilian Persons in Time of War? If
this matter concerned Iraq, Libya or the Sudan, even by
way of mere allegations, the Council would not have
taken all this time to adopt resolutions and to
implement sanctions.
In conclusion, we call upon the Council, first, to
take necessary and effective measures to provide full
protection to the Palestinian people and its property in
accordance with the principles of international law and
the Fourth Geneva Convention of 1949; secondly, to
condemn the Nazi-like practices perpetrated daily by
the Zionists in the occupied territories, which have
been perfected by those who call themselves the
victims of a holocaust at the hands of Nazi
executioners and who now apply them perfectly against
the Palestinians; thirdly, to condemn the use of lethal
weapons and cluster bombs that are internationally
prohibited
against
defenceless
Palestinian
demonstrators; and fourthly, to punish the criminals
who have caused the bloodshed and perpetrated the
crimes by ensuring that they are tried before an
international court for their crimes of war and
genocide.
The President: I thank the representative of the
Libyan Arab Jamahiriya for his kind words addressed
to me.
The next speaker is the representative of Sudan. I
invite him to take a seat at the Council table and to
make his statement.
Mr. Erwa (Sudan) (spoke in Arabic): Allow me
at the outset to congratulate you, Sir, on assuming the
presidency of the Security Council for this month. We
also express our appreciation to the Ambassador of
Mali for the commendable way in which he led the
Council last month. Furthermore, we thank you,
Mr. President, for calling this important meeting.
The Sudanese delegation wishes to express its
heartfelt condolences to the families of the martyrs of
the steadfast Palestinian people who were victims of
the recent and continuing Israeli aggression and
oppression.

3

S/PV.4204 (Resumption 2)

Seven years ago the international community’s
hopes were raised that the peace process would lead to
a just and comprehensive solution to problem of the
Middle East, especially the Palestinian question.
However, that optimism has dwindled day after day,
owing to the intransigence of Israel, which consistently
refused to implement the resolutions of international
legitimacy.
The visit of Ariel Sharon to Jerusalem to
desecrate holy sites and the ensuing bloody actions,
which did not even spare the worshippers inside the AlAqsa Mosque, were attempts to provoke a reaction
from the Muslims and the entire Arab nation. The visit
was undertaken under the protection of a terrorist
force. Sudan view the visit as but one in a series of
expansionist actions by which Israel seeks to
consolidate its objectives, turning them into faits
accomplis in order to render meaningless the IsraeliPalestinian negotiations on the final-status issues. The
visit also exposed the fallacy of Israel’s allegations
regarding the issue of sovereignty over Jerusalem, a
crucial issue dear to the hearts of the Palestinians and
all Arabs and Muslim peoples.
What has been happening in the occupied
Palestinian territories since the last week of
September — the wanton killing of defenceless,
unarmed Palestinian civilians — is in flagrant violation
of the Fourth Geneva Convention relative to the
Protection of Civilian Persons in Time of War. The
Convention applies to all the territories that have been
under Israeli occupation since 1967. It is clear that the
Israeli Government supports and gives its blessing to
these provocative acts of aggression, as well as to the
torture and intimidation of unarmed Palestinian
civilians before the eyes of the international
community, without the Israelis’ showing any remorse.
The Sudan strongly condemns the massacres
committed at Al-Haram Al-Sharif, massacres in which
hundreds of Palestinians — including elderly people,
youths, women and children — were killed, wounded
or maimed.
The Sudanese delegation is confident that in
addressing these heinous crimes being perpetrated
against unarmed Palestinian people the Security
Council will assume its full responsibility and protect
them against being killed and tortured by the Israeli
forces that are using the most sophisticated weapons of
destruction. We also call on the Council to force Israel
to implement all the relevant resolutions of

4

international legitimacy, including 242 (1967) and 338
(1973), and to withdraw completely from all occupied
Arab territories, including Palestine, the Syrian Golan
Heights and the remaining parts of southern Lebanon.
The Sudan urges the Council to put the necessary
pressure on Israel to desist from oppressive practices
and flagrant violations of human rights and to engage
in the peace process in a transparent and serious
manner. The Sudan also urges the Council to adopt the
draft resolution submitted by the Non-Aligned
Movement.
The Council’s inability to fulfil its obligations
towards the people of Palestine and to see that this
people’s rights are restored raises questions concerning
its credibility within the international community and
promotes the idea that the Council adopts selective
policies and double standards.
Finally, the Sudan reaffirms its full solidarity
with the people of Palestine in their struggle to defend
their territory and maintain their dignity.
The President: I thank the representative of the
Sudan for his kind words addressed to me.
The next speaker is the representative of
Indonesia. I invite him to take a seat at the Council
table and to make his statement.
Mr. Wibisono (Indonesia): My delegation would
like to begin by extending its congratulations to you,
Sir, on your assumption of the presidency at a time
when the Council has been convened to consider an
issue of critical importance to the international
community.
This emergency meeting has been called to
address a rapidly deteriorating situation in the occupied
territories, including Al-Quds Al-Sharif. My delegation
cannot but express its profound concern at Israel’s
aggression against unarmed Palestinian civilians,
resulting in scores of deaths and injuries. Such brutal
tactics justifiably deserve global condemnation, and we
therefore call upon Israel to immediately cease the
incessant violence and bloodshed. Tragically, it is the
women, children and elderly who bear the brunt of
excessive, lethal force. No longer can the international
community sit idly by while a defenceless people are
mercilessly attacked by military forces.
Ever since the peace process began in 1991, the
Palestinian
people
have
been
subjected
to

S/PV.4204 (Resumption 2)

procrastination, unkept promises and even outright
intransigence. The stalled peace process had already
heightened tension in the territories, as frustration and
bitterness began to replace hope and optimism,
particularly over the status of Al-Quds Al-Sharif. Thus
the blatant provocation by Mr. Ariel Sharon in visiting
Al-Haram
Al-Sharif
constituted
a
deliberate,
intentional act to incite violence and thereby cause the
loss of innocent life and material devastation.
Undeniably, there are some elements in Israel
intent on disrupting the peace process as they wilfully
disregard the ramifications of their actions. We were
even more appalled that, despite the efforts of the
Palestinian leaders to enter into a ceasefire agreement,
the violence continued unabated as the situation
worsened.
It is therefore incumbent upon the occupying
Power to exercise restraint and abide by its duties and
obligations under the Fourth Geneva Convention
relative to the Protection of Civilian Persons in Time of
War. Every support should be extended to ensure the
implementation of those measures. The compelling
question here is the protection of civilians under
occupation. Only through the realization of such
protection can the situation return to some form of
normalcy while they await the end of foreign
occupation.
The fact that the Council has dealt with this
conflict for so long makes it incumbent upon it to
shoulder its responsibilities with regard to adopting a
draft resolution, and it should proceed forthwith to
implement the provisions of the resolution. For failure
on the part of the Council to act in light of the
increasing number of casualties would cast doubt on its
credibility, and indeed moral stature, as a body that can
take action, particularly when it has condemned
instances of a lesser magnitude.
The use of military might can never detract from
the historical and indisputable fact that Al-Haram AlSharif is an integral part of the occupied Palestinian
territory, as reiterated in numerous General Assembly
and Security Council resolutions. It therefore behoves
Israel to refrain in the future from using force, which
would only further complicate an already volatile
situation on the ground.
Sombre developments over the past few days
show us how fragile peace can be and how essential it
is to achieve a comprehensive peace, which should be

based on the implementation of Security Council
resolutions 242 (1967) and 338 (1973) and on the
principle of land for peace. Provocative acts and the
perpetration of brute force against a nation and its
people make it increasingly difficult to convince them
that Israel is truly committed to take the path towards
peace.
Far more is needed than mere rhetoric of words
without follow-up concrete action to implement peace
agreements already entered into, the lack of which can
have dire consequences for security in the occupied
territories, the region and beyond. At this critical
juncture, as the spectre of violence looms, there can be
no other alternative but for Israel to assume its solemn
obligations and pursue in all earnest the peace
negotiations.
The violent incidents that we have borne witness
to is reminiscent of past strife, and it would serve the
international community well to come to the realization
that the patience of a people will endure only for so
long. This is a time to strike out for real and bold peace
with the valiant Palestinians. It is therefore our fervent
hope that the ongoing talks in Paris and later in Cairo
will result in ending the conflict and lead to the
resumption of peace talks.
In order for this millennium to make a truly
auspicious beginning, we should make every effort for
the Palestinian people to regain their sovereign national
rights in an independent homeland of their own. Only
then can it be said that a just and comprehensive peace
has been attained in the Middle East.
The President: I thank the representative of
Indonesia for his kind words addressed to me.
The next speaker inscribed on my list is the
representative of Oman. I invite him to take a seat at
the Council table and to make his statement.
Mr. Al-Hassan (Oman) (spoke in Arabic): Allow
me at the outset to express to you, Sir, on behalf of my
Government, our warmest congratulations on your
assumption of the presidency of the Security Council
for this month. Undoubtedly, your diplomatic
experience and skills are conducive to our
deliberations’ achieving the desired results. At the
same time, we express our appreciation to your
predecessor, the Permanent Representative of Mali, for
the excellent and distinguished manner in which he
steered the Council’s work during September.

5

S/PV.4204 (Resumption 2)

The Security Council is meeting today to
continue a discussion of the utmost importance, on a
serious matter threatening security and stability in the
Middle East — the latest massacre of Palestinian
civilians committed by the occupying Israeli security
forces in Al-Haram Al-Sharif and the other occupied
Palestinian territories.
My country expresses its profound sorrow and
condolences to the bereaved families of the innocent
people of the occupied territories that were victims of
these bloody events. We condemn this military
campaign launched by Israeli forces as a flagrant
violation of the United Nations Charter and the Fourth
Geneva Convention of 1949, which guarantees the
protection of civilians in time of war and which has
applied to the occupied territories since 1967.
What we have witnessed through the media of
Palestinian youth, children and elderly caught up in the
Israeli war machine must move world public opinion
and drive the members of the Security Council to take
a firm and responsible position against those who
commit such acts.
At the core of this serious crisis lies the question
of Al-Quds Al-Sharif, specifically east Al-Quds and
the Old City, which Israel has been forcibly occupying
since 1967, along with the rest of the occupied
Palestinian territories.
There is no doubt that the international
community, the members of the Security Council and
international public opinion now realize that this
massacre was triggered by the provocative visit by the
leader of Israel’s Likud party to Al-Haram Al-Sharif in
defiance of the feelings of Muslims both within and
outside the occupied territories. The Israeli
Government decision not merely to approve that
provocative visit to Al-Haram Al-Sharif — which is
the site of the Al-Aqsa mosque and the Dome of the
Rock, which are holy to Muslims worldwide — but
also to provide military protection for it was taken even
though the Government knew its implications and
consequences. That Israeli position inevitably makes us
wonder about the Government’s stand on the peace
process and about its seriousness about achieving a
peaceful final solution to the Middle East conflict.
Today more than ever before, the Security
Council must shoulder its responsibility for the
maintenance of international peace and security, in
conformity with the Charter and the principles of

6

international law, by immediately adopting effective
measures to compel Israel to cease its military
offensive forthwith, to withdraw its forces from the
occupied Palestinian territories, to carry out all its
obligations and to respect the Fourth Geneva
Convention of 1949. It is imperative for the Security
Council to send a clear message condemning this kind
of State terrorism against civilians, and to call for an
end to Israeli military extremism.
In conclusion, we call upon Israel to understand
the sensitivity of the situation with regard to Al-Quds,
which is sacred to Muslims throughout the world, and
to refrain from taking any action that could affect the
holy places — if it wants peace in the Middle East.
The President: I thank the representative of
Oman for the kind words he addressed to me.
The next speaker is the representative of the
United Arab Emirates. I invite him to take a seat at the
Council table and to make his statement.
Mr. Samhan (United Arab Emirates) (spoke in
Arabic): It gives me pleasure, Sir, to congratulate you
on your assumption of the presidency of the Security
Council for the month of October. We are fully
convinced that your expertise in international affairs
will be a major contribution to the success of the
Council’s work this month. We wish also to convey to
your predecessor, His Excellency the Permanent
Representative of Mali, our thanks for his unstinting
efforts and for the outcome of the Council’s work,
especially during its millennium summit.
This meeting is of particular importance in terms
of putting an end to the volatile and extremely
dangerous situation in the occupied Palestinian
territories. The present incidents began on 28
September when the leader of the Likud party, Ariel
Sharon, accompanied by a large number of Israeli
troops, stormed the forecourt of Al-Haram Al-Sharif.
The next day, Israeli forces, under orders from the
Israeli Government, launched unprecedented, brutal
attacks on worshippers. This provoked and exacerbated
tensions and heightened anger not only among
Palestinians but throughout the Arab and Muslim world
and among all members of the international
community. It revealed Israel’s dangerous, insidious
intention to consolidate its occupation of the Palestinian
territories, including Holy Jerusalem, the cradle of
human civilization, of tolerance, and of the religious
beliefs of the majority of the world’s peoples.

S/PV.4204 (Resumption 2)

The shameful images broadcast worldwide by the
media clearly showed the brutality of the massacres
and other crimes perpetrated by the Israeli occupation
forces against unarmed Palestinians, including women
and children. They have used weapons of all kinds —
including helicopters, tanks, heavy artillery, missiles
and weapons that are subject to international
prohibitions — to kill stone-throwing children and to
erode the peace process. It was supremely ironical —
and unacceptable — that members of the Israeli
security services disguised themselves in Palestinian
uniforms to arrest and imprison Palestinian children
and young people during the funerals of the martyrs.
In fact, this is not the first time that such things
have taken place. Previous Israeli Governments
perpetrated similar brutal crimes against unarmed
Palestinians, starting with the massacres at Kafr Kassim
and Deir Yassin, proceeding with the occupation of
Palestine in 1948, which was completed in 1967, and
continuing with the Sabra and Shatila massacres — which
were orchestrated and supervised by Ariel Sharon himself
in Lebanon in 1982 — and other subsequent massacres that
we are still witnessing.
The political leadership of the United Arab
Emirates accords the highest importance to the
unfortunate developments in the occupied Palestinian
territories, and was among the first to engage in
political and diplomatic contacts with a view to
containing the situation. Among such activities were
two messages from His Highness Sheikh Zayed bin
Sultan Al-Nahyan, President of the United Arab
Emirates, to the President of the United States of
America and the President of France, as well as
contacts by our Minister of State for Foreign Affairs,
His Highness Sheikh Hamdan bin Zayed Al-Nahyan,
with the Minister for Foreign Affairs of the Russian
Federation and with the Secretary-General, Mr. Kofi
Annan, with a view to taking decisive, effective
international and bilateral measures to protect the
Palestinian people and the holy places, and to put an
end to the ongoing crimes perpetrated by the Israeli
forces against unarmed Palestinians, including stonethrowing children and women. These violations
contradict, in letter and substance, all the norms of
international humanitarian law, including the Fourth
Geneva Convention relative to the Protection of
Civilian Persons in Time of War, of 12 August 1949.
They emphasize the need for the two parties, the
Palestinians and the Israelis, to resume negotiations in

order to seek a peaceful solution based on relevant
resolutions and international legitimacy. There is also a
need for an impartial international committee to
investigate the causes of the crimes perpetrated against
the Palestinian people and prevent the recurrence of
such crimes, in conformity with international law.
Despite the Paris meeting yesterday between the
two parties, in the presence of the Secretary-General
and the United States Secretary of State, to seek a
ceasefire and a peaceful solution to the present
situation, based on United Nations resolutions and the
agreements concluded between the two parties, the
Israeli Government continues to carry out massacres
and aggression against the Palestinian people and to
put them in detention. The number of martyrs exceeds
74, and there are more than 2,000 wounded, most in a
critical condition. Israeli forces continue to destroy
electricity stations in Palestinian towns and villages.
Furthermore, they are arresting and incarcerating
Palestinians simply because they are defending their
legitimate rights, covered by resolutions on
international legitimacy, as do other people of the
world.
The United Arab Emirates strongly condemns
these dangerous developments and incidents, the
violations and brutal crimes that the Israeli forces
continue to commit, and holds the Israeli Government
fully responsible for the results of these crimes against
the Palestinian people and for peace and security in the
region. Therefore, we call on the co-sponsors of the
peace process, other active countries and the Security
Council to assume their legal, political and historical
responsibilities. The Council, being responsible for the
maintenance of international peace and security, must
defend its relevant resolutions on the Palestinian
question by immediately implementing the necessary
measures to end the oppression and brutal murders
carried out by the Israeli forces throughout the
occupied Palestinian territories.
In conclusion, we reaffirm our full solidarity with
the Palestinian people and the Palestinian National
Authority, and support their legitimate aspirations to an
independent State, with Holy Jerusalem as its capital;
the return of Palestinian refugees to their homeland,
Palestine; and the removal of illegal Israeli colonialist
settlements. We also emphasize that a just and lasting
peace in the region requires the implementation of
Security Council resolutions 242 (1967) and 338
(1973), based on the principle of land for peace.

7

S/PV.4204 (Resumption 2)

Without the Israeli Government’s full compliance with
those resolutions, based on international legitimacy, the
problem in the Middle East will continue, resulting in
an instability in the region that will reflect on
international peace and security.
The President: The next speaker inscribed on my
list is Mr. Mokhtar Lamani, Permanent Observer for
the Organization of the Islamic Conference, to whom
the Council has extended an invitation under rule 39 of
its provisional rules of procedure. I invite him to take a
seat at the Council table and to make his statement.
Mr. Lamani (Organization on the Islamic
Conference) (spoke in Arabic): The Security Council is
meeting once again to consider Israel’s serious,
dangerous actions in the occupied Arab territories,
resulting in the killing of innocent children, women
and the elderly. Israel pays lip service to its desire for
peace but pursues activities and practices that run
counter to peace. The peace process, which started at
the Madrid Conference more than nine years ago,
reached an impasse because of those practices and
actions and because of the fluctuating positions
adopted by subsequent Israeli Governments towards
the process and the commitments and conventions
emanating from it. No one can predict the extent of the
dangerous repercussions that will result if Israel goes
back on the peace process, gradually evades its
obligations and disregards conventions.
The Islamic Group has resorted to your Council,
Mr. President, realizing that Al-Quds has a special
status in the United Nations, the General Assembly and
this Council. It also has an internationally irrefutable
position. Previous resolutions adopted by the Council
constitute the sound legal framework for this holy city.
The Palestinian reaction to Israeli provocations and use
of Israel’s military machinery is evidence of its belief
in its tireless struggle for self-determination and a
decent life, free and independent in its homeland.
Israel stands once again against the current of
history and the international trend to achieve peace,
upholding its positions and policies on the basis of
continued occupation, illegal terms, settlement
activities, the confiscation of property, house
demolitions, the Judaization and isolation of Al-Quds
Al-Sharif, the perpetration of aggressive acts against
holy Islamic sites, particularly Al-Aqsa Mosque, and
the collective punishment of the Palestinian people. All
this spells out how determined Israel is to undermine

8

and destroy the peace process and to spread tension and
anarchy throughout the region.
Once again we reaffirm the firm position of the
Organization of the Islamic Conference vis-à-vis the
question of Palestine and Al-Quds Al-Sharif, the crux
of the Middle East conflict. We support the Palestinian
position, which is based on upholding sovereignty over
Al-Quds Al-Sharif, including Al-Haram Al-Sharif, part
and parcel of the Palestinian territories occupied since
June 1967. The Security Council, given its weight in
the international arena, must play a fundamental role in
restoring the peace process to its proper track by
pressuring Israel to implement resolutions based on
international legitimacy and to abide by the agreements
it has signed with the Palestinian leadership. The
Palestinian people are a major partner in the peace
process. Peace cannot be just or lasting in the region if
that people do not regain their full legitimate rights,
like other people of the world, and if Israel does not
withdraw from all the Arab territories occupied since
1967.
The President: The next speaker inscribed on my
list is the representative of Japan. I invite him to take a
seat at the Council table and to make his statement.
Mr. Kobayashi (Japan): My delegation expresses
its appreciation to you, Mr. President, for providing us
with the opportunity to present Japan’s views on the
grave situation we face today in the Middle East.
Japan deplores the escalation of violent clashes
between Palestinians and the Israeli authorities in
Jerusalem and other cities, in which more than 60
people, mostly civilians and innocent children, have
been killed. We condemn the acts of provocation and
are concerned at the instances of excessive use of force
that have been observed in the past few days.
I wish, on behalf of the Government and people
of Japan, to extend my sincere condolences to the
bereaved families, and to express the sincere hope that
the wounded will recover quickly.
In the hope of helping the wounded and saving
precious lives, and in response to a request from the
Palestinian Authority, Japan has decided to provide
through the United Nations Development Programme
$500,000 in emergency humanitarian assistance for the
purchase of medical equipment, which is urgently
needed in the West Bank and Gaza at this time of
crisis.

S/PV.4204 (Resumption 2)

Further casualties must be avoided. The
immediate task is to halt the clashes as soon as
possible. To this end, we strongly urge the parties
concerned to act with utmost restraint and refrain from
any further acts of provocation and violence. Nothing
can be achieved through violence, which only claims
more victims and leaves deeper scars in the hearts of
the people.

Palestinian territory. We were aghast at seeing Israeli
forces use so much violence against demonstrators who
had legitimately risen up after the monstrous
provocation by the head of that country’s opposition.
The police, which should have prevented Sharon from
committing an irreparable act, fired upon those who
were expressing the emotions, hurt and shock they felt
at the moment.

In that context, Japan welcomes the diplomatic
efforts that the parties concerned have made in Paris to
reverse the cycle of violence, and we commend the
initiatives taken by the United States, France and Egypt
to facilitate such efforts. We appeal to the parties
concerned to respond to the call of the international
community for the cessation of violence and the
avoidance of further bloodshed.

However one interprets the facts, what happened
is to be resolutely condemned. The figures that have
been given include 80 dead and 1,000 injured, numbers
one expects to see when fighting against an army, and
not against a people.

The current crisis attests most starkly to the need
to realize a just, lasting and comprehensive peace in the
Middle East. This is what the people of the region so
desperately desire and what the international
community is committed to achieving. We must not
allow this crisis to derail the ongoing peace process.
Japan reiterates its support for the efforts of the parties
concerned to achieve peace. Japan remains committed
to assist the peace process through various
international forums and channels.
The President: The next speaker inscribed on my
list is the representative of Morocco. I invite him to
take a seat at the Council table and to make his
statement.
Mr. Zahid (Morocco) (spoke in French): On
behalf of the Moroccan delegation, I would first of all
like to extend to you, Mr. President, our sincere
congratulations on presiding over the work of the
Security Council this month. I would also like to thank
you for responding promptly to the requests addressed
to you for the Council to deal urgently with the events
that have taken place at Al-Quds Al-Sharif and in other
parts of the occupied Arab territories. I would also like
to congratulate and pay heartfelt tribute to Ambassador
Moctar Ouane for the excellent and competent way he
guided the work of the Council during the month of
September and during the Council’s Millennium
Summit.
We have looked on with horror at the
unimaginable scenes that have taken place in recent
days on the esplanade of the mosque at Al-Haram AlSharif and in various towns of occupied Arab and

At a time when we were beginning to see a
glimpse of hope that Palestine and Israel would at last
find peace and begin to try together to repair the
dozens of years lost by the hundreds of thousands of
people who have suffered in body and spirit; and at a
time when we truly believed that wisdom was going to
prevail over hatred, one man was allowed to call into
question everything that had been so patiently and
courageously woven together by people of good will. It
will take a long time for the families who lost family
members in these incidents to forget what has
happened, and even longer for the hundreds of millions
of believers throughout the world who felt their deepest
beliefs insulted and their strongest values offended.
These inexcusable acts could have been
prevented. Unfortunately, the violence continues. It is
inadmissible and nothing can justify it. The Palestinian
people did not have to be tested again in such a
horrible way. They have made enough sacrifices and
have paid their dues for peace and independence. Let
them at last be allowed to live in peace and to bind
their deep wounds.
Everything that has happened is so ghastly that
those responsible for it should be ashamed of
themselves. They should know that those who have
unleashed these events and massacres undoubtedly
wanted to destroy all the peace efforts made to date.
They almost succeeded. At any rate, they have partially
destroyed the large reserve of trust, which had already
been eroded.
It is equally serious and reprehensible that the
victims fell to the bullets of the police. The
international community should understand that if
peace, which has once again been jeopardized, does not
soon see the light of day and is not defended by all,

9

S/PV.4204 (Resumption 2)

both the immediate and the long-term future of this
region near to all our hearts will be doomed.

many innocent people, children in particular. All of us
were shocked by those murders.

Morocco extends its condolences to the families
of the martyrs and reaffirms its support for the peace
process. Morocco believes that there can be no just,
lasting and comprehensive peace in the region unless
the principles that emerged from the Madrid
Conference are respected, particularly that of land for
peace, and Security Council resolutions 242 (1967) and
338 (1973) are fully implemented, so as to help the
Palestinian people regain their inalienable and
legitimate rights, primarily the right to establish an
independent State in their territory, with Al-Quds AlSharif as its capital.

Lebanon condemns Israel’s continuing bloody
campaigns of aggression against the Palestinian people
and appeals to the Council to force Israel to respect the
Fourth Geneva Convention of 1949 and the relevant
protocols, as well as the Hague Convention of 1907.

We sincerely hope that the meetings that a
number of countries, including France, the United
States and Egypt, are attempting to organize will be
successful, for there is no alternative to the imperative
need to continue the peace process, regardless of the
obstacles it faces.
The President: I thank the representative of
Morocco for the kind words he addressed to me.
The next speaker inscribed on my list is the
representative of Lebanon. I invite him to take a seat at
the Council table and to make his statement.
Mr. Tadmoury (Lebanon) (spoke in Arabic): Sir,
we are pleased to see you preside over this meeting,
and we are confident that your wisdom and skills will
ensure the success of the work of the Council.
Once again the Security Council meets to discuss
dangerous and bloody events in Al-Quds Al-Sharif and
the other occupied Palestinian territories. Once again
the world witnesses the appalling behaviour of an
Israeli official, the head of the Likud party. He is
known to the Lebanese because of his role in the Israeli
invasion of Lebanon in 1982. The Lebanese people can
never forget the images of the massacres and tragedies
he inflicted on Lebanese and Palestinians alike. This
man, on 28 September last, carried out an act of
provocation — the violation of Al-Haram Al-Sharif —
in the framework of an orchestrated scenario, with the
goal of undermining hopes for peace. He was fully
aware of the consequences of his actions, which were
carried out in coordination with the Israeli authorities
and under their protection. He has carried out bloody
campaigns of repression, which continue to victimize

10

I should like to remind all present that Israel has
no right to act as it pleases with respect to Al-Quds and
the occupied Arab territories. It cannot impose its will
in contravention of the provisions of internationally
binding resolutions and the framework of peace
specified at the Middle East Conference — disrupting
peaceful negotiations by staging internal disputes,
preferring the logic of force to that of justice and right,
and ignoring human rights, which are being flagrantly
violated, in an unprecedented manner, in Al-Quds AlSharif and other occupied territories.
Al-Quds Al-Sharif has a special significance in
our country. Its holy places are ancient, dating far back
in the history of civilizations. We are sad to see AlQuds Al-Sharif bloodsoaked and awaiting a just peace
in the framework of international legitimacy. Today
more than ever before the Security Council must
endeavour to halt the deliberate provocations that are
taking place in Al-Quds Al-Sharif, to put an end to
Israeli violence, to create the necessary conditions for
both co-sponsors of the peace process and the
European Union, to bring the parties to the Arab-Israeli
conflict back to the negotiating table in order to
achieve a just and comprehensive solution on the basis
of resolutions 242 (1967) and 338 (1973), and to
realize the right of the Palestinian people to return to
their homes, in keeping with the provisions of
resolution 194 (III).
The requisites of peace are well-known now. The
opposition and the Government of Israel would do well
to realize that persisting in the use of violence will
never lead to the peace and security we all aspire to.
They must learn from recent experiences.
The President: I thank the representative of
Lebanon for the kind words he addressed to me.
The next speaker is the representative of Nepal. I
invite him to take a seat at the Council table and to
make his statement.
Mr. Sharma (Nepal): Let me begin, Sir, by
congratulating you on your assumption of the

S/PV.4204 (Resumption 2)

presidency of the Security Council for the month of
October. I thank you for convening this meeting to
consider the topical and sensitive issue of the Middle
East.
The Middle East is once again experiencing a
new bout of violence. The bullets did not spare even a
12-year-old boy, Mohammed Jamal Al-Durra. Nepal is
shocked by the loss of so many innocent lives as
violence sweeps through Jerusalem, other places in the
West Bank and Gaza. Nepal expresses its deep
condolences to the families of those who were killed in
the violence.
We had all hoped, not without reason, that the
Middle East would soon see the dawn of peace.
However, the recent eruption of violence is a disturbing
reminder that the Middle East peace process is still
precarious. There are people who would not mind
derailing it.
We believe that there should be a full
investigation into the flare-up, and that those who are
responsible for precipitating it must be held
accountable for their acts. The excessive use of force to
control the protests has further vitiated the environment
for improving the situation and retrieving the peace
process. Nepal strongly urges all sides to exercise the
utmost restraint, to cease hostilities and to prevent the
peace process from derailing.
Peace might not be so urgent for those who take
ill-conceived trips to sensitive areas, surrounded by a
posse of security personnel. But it is truly urgent for
ordinary people in Palestine and in Israel — for the
people who are tired of living in fear; for those mothers
whose children might be killed in episodes of violence
on their way to school; for those widows who have lost
their husbands to violence; for those old people who
cannot run swiftly from the scenes of violence; and for
those children who would otherwise have a long and
fulfilling life ahead.
The present cycle of violence underscores all the
more the urgency for a comprehensive, just and lasting
peace in the Middle East. In this context, Nepal fully
supports the inalienable rights of the Palestinian
people, including their right to return to their homeland
and to have their own independent State, with
Jerusalem as its capital. We also call for the
implementation of all United Nations resolutions on the
question of Palestine and for the withdrawal of Israel
from the occupied territories.

Nepal welcomes the Paris meeting of 4 October
and the Cairo meeting that is taking place today in an
effort to defuse the crisis. We commend the United
States for taking those initiatives. The Security Council
must swing into effective action to bring the situation
under control without delay. Now is the time to leave
mutual animosities behind, to build bridges and to
apply energy and resources to promote peace and
prosperity in the Middle East. All sides must exercise
leadership to preserve the achievements made so far
and move speedily ahead with the peace process,
especially when the region is closer than ever to a
durable peace.
The President: The next speaker inscribed on my
list is the representative of Viet Nam. I invite him to
take a seat at the Council table and to make his
statement.
Mr. Nguyen Thanh Chau (Viet Nam): I wish to
thank you, Mr. President, for giving me the opportunity
to speak, for the first time before the Council, about the
deplorable violent outbreaks that have taken place in
the Middle East.
First of all, I should like to extend my warm
congratulations to you, Sir, on your assumption of the
presidency of the Council for this month. I am
confident that, given your diplomatic skills and
wisdom, the work of the Council will be brought to a
productive conclusion. I also wish to extend my
appreciation to your predecessor, the Ambassador of
Mali, for all the efforts he made during his presidency
during the month of September. I also wish to
congratulate all the other members of the Council.
We are deeply shocked and horrified by the
unjustified killings of innocent people by the Israeli
troops, which ushered in a new cycle of violence and
excessive use of force in the eastern part of Jerusalem.
Those tragic events posed a serious threat to the fragile
peace, tirelessly worked out in the Middle East, and
further testified to the need for more painstaking
efforts to be made by all the parties concerned, so that
talks can again get under way and the peace process be
restarted.
We extend our heartfelt condolences to the
families of those who died or were wounded in the
recent violence. We urge all parties to act with utmost
responsibility and restraint and to refrain from any acts
of a provocative nature, which would surely complicate
the already volatile situation.

11

S/PV.4204 (Resumption 2)

Our position on the Middle East is clear: we have
consistently expressed our strong support for the
peaceful settlement of the Palestinian question. We
wish to reiterate our unreserved and unswerving
support for the inalienable rights of the Palestinian
people, including the right to establish an independent
State with Jerusalem as its capital, and the right of the
Palestinian refugees to return to their homeland, as set
out in the Hanoi Declaration adopted by the United
Nations conference on the inalienable rights of the
Palestinian people, held in Hanoi, Viet Nam, in March
2000.
We call on both parties to the conflict to make all
efforts to overcome the current obstacles and persevere
in their pursuit of a just and lasting solution to the
conflict. We firmly believe that the only possible way
to restore peace in the region is through a solution
based on Security Council and General Assembly
resolutions, on the principle of land for peace and on
various international agreements signed by the parties
concerned.
We welcome the continuing efforts of all the
parties concerned, inside and outside the Middle East,
to restore the peace process. We strongly believe that
efforts for peace will prevail and that the Palestinian
people will soon have the opportunity to live in
peace — a peace that they deserve and for which they
have courageously fought for so long.
The President: I thank the representative of Viet
Nam for his kind words addressed to me.
The next speaker inscribed on my list is
Mr. Amadou Kébé, Permanent Observer for the
Organization of African Unity to the United Nations, to
whom the Council has extended an invitation under
rule 39 of its provisional rules of procedure. I invite
him to take a seat at the Council table and to make his
statement.
Mr. Kébé (spoke in French): Thank you, Sir, for
inviting me to take part in this meeting. I should like to
convey to you my warmest congratulations on your
accession to the presidency of the Security Council for
the month of October. Given the steadfast commitment
of your country, Namibia, to the ideals of the United
Nations and the cause of peace and security throughout
the world, there can be no doubt that, during this month
of October, considerable progress will be made on all
the items on the Council’s agenda.

12

I also wish to extend congratulations to your
predecessor, Ambassador Moctar Ouane of Mali, for
the achievements in the month of September, the most
remarkable of which was certainly the Council meeting
of the heads of State.
The current violence in the West Bank and the
Gaza Strip is so serious that, if we are not careful, it
could jeopardize the entire peace process that the
international community has patiently and obdurately,
year after year, in one attempt after another had
managed to get on track.
In today’s debate, the purpose of my statement is
mainly to bring to the Council the statement made by
His Excellency Dr. Salim Ahmed Salim, SecretaryGeneral of the Organization of African Unity (OAU),
on 4 October 2000 to express the OAU’s concern at the
serious turn events have taken in that part of the world
so dear to us all.
“I have followed with great concern the
deplorable escalation of violence in the West
Bank and the Gaza Strip where a great many
Palestinians and Israelis have met their deaths
and where hundreds of Palestinians have been
injured.
“This situation has arisen as a result of the
visit that General Ariel Sharon, leader of the
Israeli Likud party, made under a strong military
escort to Al-Haram Al-Sharif, one of the most
important holy places of Islam. The Palestinian
people saw in this visit as a provocation. The
demonstrations which followed degenerated into
clashes between Israeli security forces and
Palestinians. The Israeli forces have tried to
repress the protests with violence, using
excessive brutality and causing a great many
victims.
“I make a heartfelt appeal to the Israeli
authorities for them to take every necessary
measure to deal with the underlying causes of this
resurgence of violence in the West Bank and in
the Gaza Strip and I call upon them to show
restraint to avoid any further loss of life on either
side.
“I most particularly call on the Israeli and
the Palestinian authorities to create conditions
conducive to ending the violence that prevails and
for them to enter into face-to-face negotiations so

S/PV.4204 (Resumption 2)

as to arrive at a comprehensive and lasting peace
in the region. In this respect, I welcome the recent
initiative taken by the United States Government
and express the hope that it may indeed defuse
the crisis.
“Finally, I wish to reaffirm the support of
the OAU for the Palestinian people in their
struggle under the leadership of the Palestine
Liberation Organization (PLO) to exercise their
inalienable national rights, including the right to
return to their homeland and to recover their
property, their right to self-determination and to
establish an independent State on national
territory, in accordance with the principles of
international law and the relevant resolutions of
the United Nations.”
I thank you, Sir, for having allowed me to bring
this important message to the Security Council.
The President: I thank His Excellency Mr. Kébé
for the kind words addressed to me.
The next speaker is the representative of Spain. I
invite him to take a seat at the Council table and to
make his statement.
Mr. Arias (Spain) (spoke in Spanish):
Mr. President, I wish to offer you our best wishes for
success in your work and to state that Spain endorses
the statements made by the representative of France on
behalf of the European Union.
Spain views what is happening in the occupied
territories with the deepest concern. These events
clearly show how easy it is for one obviously
unacceptable and destabilizing act of provocation to
spark a vortex of violence with tragic consequences
which as yet cannot be calculated. In these
circumstances, the disproportionate response of the
security forces merely serves the interests of those who
want the situation to get completely out of hand.
We consider that there is an urgent need now for
both those directly responsible for the events and the
international community to take whatever measures are
required to lessen tension and violence.
To that end, in this very dangerous time, what is
important, more important than ever, is to ensure
strictest compliance with the international legal
framework and international humanitarian law. It is
also essential to ensure observance of the agreements

between the parties aimed at ending the violence and to
have the presence of the armed forces reduced to a
minimum. It is also very important to have self-control
and prudence on the part of all. Similarly, Spain
considers that the establishment of an international
commission to objectively investigate what happened
could serve to reduce tension considerably.
These are initial emergency measures that should
make it possible, within the peace process, to address
the underlying causes of the crisis. The peace process,
with the principles and terms of reference that were
well established at the Madrid Conference, the Security
Council resolutions and the subsequent accords, are the
only common framework of reference that can bring
about a political settlement of the crisis.
Spain hopes that the meetings held yesterday in
Paris and being held today in Egypt will be able to give
effect to the measures required and that the proper
impetus can be given to the peace process, because the
enemies of peace must be thwarted in their purposes.
We must not play into the hands of those who
wish to sabotage the process.
It is very important to arrive at a peace
agreement. The Palestinians need it. The Israelis need
it. The international community needs this. It is deeply
to be hoped that the window of opportunity is not being
closed by these tragic events, because we need to make
use of it. Even more important is that the agreement,
particularly when it comes to Jerusalem, must be fair,
acceptable and satisfactory to both parties. This is the
only way to guarantee that it will be viable and lasting
and that a just peace can be attained, which has been
the hope of all the peoples in the region.
The President: I thank the representative of
Spain for the kind words he addressed to me.
The next speaker on my list is the representative
of Malta. I invite him to take a seat at the Council table
and to make his statement.
Mr. Balzan (Malta): Allow me at the outset to
congratulate you, Sir, on your assumption of the
presidency of the Council for the current month and to
express my appreciation to you for convening this
emergency meeting on an issue which has shocked and
saddened the international community.
The sight of the ongoing incidents in the Middle
East region cannot but highlight the importance of the

13

S/PV.4204 (Resumption 2)

resumption of the peace talks, which unfortunately
have suffered a severe setback at a point in time when
all those of good will were full of hope that, ultimately,
the comprehensive and lasting peace that has eluded us
for so long could be achievable.
Malta shares the concerns already expressed by
the European Union regarding the ongoing incidents
and supports President Arafat’s request for the creation
of an international commission entrusted with the
responsibility of objectively determining the root
causes and consequences of these incidents, which we
cannot fail to emphatically deplore.
Malta unreservedly condemns the irresponsible
provocations of those elements hostile to the peace
process, triggering the violent reactions of the past
days and resulting in the tragic loss of lives of civilians
and innocent victims, including children. May I express
our sincere and deepest condolences to the families of
those who fell victim in these tragic events. Indeed, the
shameful use of force perpetrated by those responsible
for the maintenance of order is in clear violation of the
Fourth Geneva Convention. We concur with the view
expressed by President Chirac that “one does not fight
against the emotion of a people with armour”.
We should not allow these incidents, however, to
reverse or undermine the progress achieved so far in
the peace process and we sincerely hope that all
initiatives currently undertaken to put the peace
process back on track receive the support and backing
of all those who have the achievement of a lasting
peace at heart. The tragic consequences of these
unfortunate events should not discourage the
international community. It should certainly not
discourage the interested parties. These devastating
circumstances should strengthen our commitment to
the achievement of a comprehensive peace based on
the relevant Security Council resolutions and in full
respect of international law.
Let me end this brief intervention by appealing on
behalf of the Government of Malta for an end to the
current violent events and an immediate return to the
negotiating table. It is only through constructive
dialogue and political will that a lasting, just and
comprehensive peace can be attained — a peace that
would ensure that Palestinians and Israelis alike live
peacefully side by side. We should not give up hope,
nor should the parties involved. This is why it is so
necessary to ensure that any hostile actions that

14

undermine the achievement of such a noble objective
are stopped. We are convinced that the international
community continues to have faith in a negotiated,
peaceful settlement.
The stakes may be high, but the price of peace is
never too high.
The President: I thank the representative of
Malta for his kinds words addressed to me.
I call on the representative of Israel.
Mr. Lancry (Israel) (spoke in French): I thank
you, Sir, for allowing me to make this additional
statement. I will try as best I can not to make my
response a rejoinder, despite the particularly difficult
context that has elicited it.
In order to keep peace moving ahead, in spite of
all the detours and setbacks that, in very painful and
tragic episodes, have set the pace of the peace process
between Israelis and Palestinians, we must exhibit a
healthy restraint in act and in speech. As we see it,
there is one choice only: the language of peace and the
teaching of peace cannot include white-hot rhetoric. I
therefore wish deliberately to speak in a muted voice
so as clearly to enunciate convictions that are as
earnest as they are necessary.
The first of these is on the need for a total and
immediate halt to the violence in order to provide
concrete and psychological support for the
consultations in Paris and Sharm el-Sheikh between us,
the partners in peace.
Only an abusively simplistic and reductive vision,
only a perception that is obstinately one-dimensional
could identify Israel as being solely responsible for the
tragic deterioration that we have witnessed. With the
passage of time, everyone will know and understand
this better. The truth is far more complex than the
systematically embroidered cliché of an Israeli war
machine launched against defenceless Palestinian
civilians.
Above and beyond young Palestinians throwing
stones, acts of Palestinian violence are being
committed by the armed militia of Tanzim and the
Palestinian police. This armed and organized
Palestinian violence, both civilian and military, is
directly answerable to the hierarchy of the Palestinian
Authority and is being carried out in strict obedience to
it. This campaign is in itself a continual source of

S/PV.4204 (Resumption 2)

provocation and bears heavily on the tragic course of
events.
Moreover, even Mr. Marwan Barghouti, a
member of the Palestinian Parliament and the head of
Tanzim, makes no secret of this. His recent call for the
wholesale killing of Israelis was based on the militia
members at his service and on the green light given by
the Palestinian Authority that supports him. In past
times and in a far more upbeat context, I personally
had the opportunity to promote peace with Mr.
Barghouti at the many Israeli-Palestinian talks in
Greece and as founding members of the Israeli-Arab
alliance for peace in Copenhagen.
The visit of Mr. Ariel Sharon has been identified
by most speakers in this Security Council debate as the
primary cause of the outbreak of violence of the past
few days. Some have gone so far as to imagine
premeditated collusion between Mr. Sharon and Prime
Minister Barak aimed at better establishing the Israeli
right to sovereignty on the Temple Mount. Others have
seen in it a loathsome profanation of Islamic holy sites.
These assertions seem to us to be so excessive
that they deserve to be recorded so that we may
underline, step by step, the full import of each.
First, whatever its motives and implications,
Mr. Sharon’s visit was undertaken in full compliance
with the fundamental principles of Israeli democracy.
Further, and because of this same democracy,
Mr. Barak could not impede Mr. Sharon’s visit to the
Temple Mount. A clear and unbiased view of Israeli
democracy would allow those who felt a responsibility
to be objective to qualify their judgements and to
distance themselves from entirely unfounded
presuppositions.
Finally, it is out of absolute respect for Islam and
its holy sites — Al-Haram Al-Sharif in particular —
that I would like to contribute to this serious and
solemn discussion. The Temple Mount is also the
foremost holy place of Judaism. Confronted with the
attempt — methodically pursued here and elsewhere —
to conceal this fundamental truth, we need to affirm
that the Temple Mount, sacred to Islam on the side
where Al-Haram Al-Sharif is located, is equally sacred
to Judaism for its more ancient layers, on which Jewish
identity and history are based.
We believe this reminder is necessary not only in
the context of the issue that concerns us here and now,

but also for the dialogue aimed at reaching a definitive
peace between the Palestinians and us. Only if the two
sides are able to consider and accept each other’s
symbolic systems and political systems can peace be
achieved.
Sudden progress and new forms of progress were
achieved at the Camp David negotiations and in the
negotiations that followed them. This progress was the
direct outgrowth of the Barak Government’s policy of
peace. During those negotiations, the untouchable
became tangible, the forbidden became palpable, and
some huge difficulties were removed.
We find ourselves at exactly this crucial stage.
President Arafat and his negotiators know this only too
well. The international community witnessed this fact
at the Millennium Summit. President Arafat and Prime
Minister Barak were summoned by history to agree to a
real peace — that is, a peace that cannot fulfil all the
dreams and utopian visions of either side.
This discussion that has been spread out over
several meetings of the Security Council could not
have been more solemn and bitter. Some of the residue,
some of the wilder scraps need, therefore, to be cleaned
up. Calumny cannot lie forever hidden under the most
forceful rhetoric. For example, there were the Bahraini
and Libyan delegations’ cold, oblique allusions to the
Nazi regime, and the Iraqi delegation’s repudiation of
Israel’s right to exist. As for Algeria, from the bottom
of our hearts we wish that it might put an end to the
succession of massacres occurring on its own territory.
Such an action would certainly put it in a better moral
position to denounce massacres occurring elsewhere.
In this unhappy and tragic moment in IsraeliPalestinian relations, there is a neither mawkish nor
superfluous need for compassion. How can one not
sympathize — from the heart, not condescendingly or
arrogantly — with the strong feelings that the
Permanent Representative of Palestine, Ambassador
Nasser Al-Kidwa, expressed during his statement this
past Tuesday. How can one not sympathize — with a
torn soul — with the distressing death of the young
Mohammed Jamal Al-Durra. It is with the Palestinians,
not against them, that we cry, as we cry for our own
dead.
At this point I would like to appeal with all my
heart for a return to calm and the rapid coming of
peace. This Israeli-Palestinian peace process is not yet
completely free of all contradictions. Sometimes the

15

S/PV.4204 (Resumption 2)

process brings us together, at other times it distances
us. Our joint healing, our redemption, must be achieved
by reaching peace with those near and far.
I would like to tell the Council the meaning of
this last idea in Hebrew and in Arabic to
simultaneously call attention to the visceral closeness
of these two languages and to the desires for symbiosis
that unite us.
(spoke first in Hebrew, then in Arabic)
Peace, peace be unto those far and near, God said.
The President: The Permanent Observer of
Palestine has asked for the floor.
Mr. Al-Kidwa (Palestine) (spoke in Arabic): Of
course we might have spared the members of the
Council this additional intervention, but naturally I
have to answer some of the points that were raised.
Allow me to start by informing the Council about
some incidents that took place today. I am quoting
from a news agency in English.
(spoke in English)
“A 20-year-old Palestinian was shot dead by a
bullet to his chest in the West Bank town of Beit
Jala near Bethlehem. The director of the Beit Jala
hospital said that at least one of the wounded
admitted to the hospital had been struck by a
dumdum bullet designed to explode inside the
body. Witnesses said that another Palestinian man
was shot dead as he tried to rip down an Israeli
flag from the military post at the junction of
Netzarim.”
(spoke in Arabic)
Netzarim is a colony situated in the heart of Gaza,
believe it or not. It is almost vacant, but its main
purpose is to make the life of the Palestinians in Gaza
almost impossible.
Today’s events occurred despite the efforts
deployed yesterday in Paris and today in Sharm elSheikh — and many of those who addressed the
Council expressed their hopes and prayers that those
efforts would be successful. Those efforts, regrettably
enough, have not yet led to any specific positive
results. During the meeting in Paris no agreement was
reached, and this was basically because Israel rejected
the idea of an international commission of inquiry.

16

What is more regrettable is that Mr. Barak did not
go to Sharm el-Sheikh. He did not go there, although
President Yasser Arafat and Mrs. Madeleine Albright
were there. The four-party meeting was not held. It
seems to me that this provides even more evidence of
Israeli intentions.
Regarding the visit by Ariel Sharon, whose
record is well-known, and the reference to Israeli
democracy in this context, it is not my intention to go
into a discussion of the nature of this democracy and
its modus operandi, at least when it relates to the
Israeli Arabs. This is not an issue for the Council to
discuss for today. But suffice it to say that we are
talking about occupied territories. We are talking about
occupied East Jerusalem, the subject of 24 resolutions
by the Council affirming that the Fourth Geneva
Convention applies to it. After 24 resolutions from the
Security Council the representative of Israel comes to
claim that Israel is dealing with this part of the territory
in consonance with Israeli democracy, instead of acting
in consonance with international humanitarian law, the
Fourth Geneva Convention and the obligations of Israel
as the occupying force. Al-Haram Al-Sharif, which is
the third holy place, is part of East Jerusalem, which is
part of the occupied Palestinian land. It belongs to the
Muslims and must be under Palestinian-Arab-Muslim
sovereignty, and we shall at no time, now or in the
future, accept any claims of Israeli sovereignty over
that part. At the same time, we have expressed our
readiness to accept the control of Israel over the
Wailing Wall, despite the fact that it is in the eastern,
occupied section of Jerusalem. We accepted that out of
respect for the religious beliefs of the other party,
irrespective of what we feel or believe. But, Israel is
now claiming rights over Al-Haram Al-Sharif, which
can only be interpreted as a desire to change the status
quo, perhaps desecrating existing holy places in the
future. We do not think that this has any relation to any
sincere religious sentiments.
The representative of Israel, Ambassador Lancry,
said how much he and other Israelis were deeply
moved by the death of the child, Mohammed Jamal AlDurra. I do not deny that such personal feelings and
emotions do exist. This is welcome, but what is the
difference between the murder of Mohammed Jamal
Al-Durra and the killing of other children? What is the
difference between Mohammed, Ahmed, or Ali or any
other name? The main difference here is that the
camera of Antenne 2 (of Canal France) captured that

S/PV.4204 (Resumption 2)

brutal Israeli act in this specific case. The camera, and
not the truth, is then what roused Israeli emotions. This
is deeply regrettable and goes to show that Israel is
bent on refusing to assume responsibility for the crime
that took place.
We were hoping that we would hear Israel
accepting responsibility, not only for Mohammed Jamal
Al-Durra, not only because of the camera that captured
that scene, but for all the other killings. We hoped that
we would hear an apology from Israel to the families of
the victims. This did not happen. This confirms that the
international
community
must
assume
its
responsibilities and put an end to this crime, impose
the convening of an international commission of
inquiry to find the truth and to punish those who are
responsible and to make sure that such crimes are not
repeated in the future.
I would like to refer to the Israeli allegation with
regard to what they call the “incitement”, or Palestinian
violence or what they call the organization etc.
In our address to the Council, we said that only
those who are incapable of seeing, or only a racist can
make such an allegation. Now, we should add stupidity
to those who have the courage to make such an
allegation. Why? Because now there are many cameras,
not only the one that captured the murder of
Mohammed Jamal Al-Durra. Those cameras have
exposed the truth of what has been happening to the
whole world.
Other ugly scenes took place inside Israel itself.
Did the Palestinian Authority plan or orchestrate what
happened inside Israel itself? Did it incite the Israeli
Arabs to do that? If not, why then are there 11 dead and
more than 100 wounded among the Israeli Arab? Israel
has immediately to stop making such shameless

allegations. This could be a genuine step towards
admitting the truth and recognizing the humanity of the
other party. Similarly, it could be the beginning of
Israel’s assuming and admitting its responsibilities.
Without doing this, Israel cannot claim that it wants to
make peace with the Palestinian people. It would not
be possible to claim that they are willing to make
peace.
There are some serious attempts to enable the
Council to adopt a clear, constructive and useful
position in consonance with the obligations of the
Council and in defence of justice and the cause of
peace in the region. In this respect, it is incumbent
upon us to thank the members of the Non-Aligned
Movement who are members in the Council and have
tabled the draft resolution. We express our deep
appreciation for the consultations that have taken place
on this subject. We do hope that the Council will be
able to take action and call for an urgent international
inquiry into the incidents of the past few days.
Finally, we express our deep gratitude to all
members of the Council and to all other States Members
of the United Nations and others that participated in the
debate over the past three days. They all spoke in
defence of the meaning and the symbols of humanity,
and in support of justice worldwide.
The President: There are no further speakers on
my list. The Security Council has thus concluded the
present stage of its consideration of the item on its
agenda.
Before adjourning the meeting, I wish to
announce to members of the Council that I intend to
convene consultations of the whole this evening at 10
o’clock to consider the draft resolution that our experts
are now busy working on.
The meeting rose at 5.25 p.m.

17
