UNITED NATIONS *

SECURITY COUNCIL
OFFICIAL RECORDS
THIRTIETH

1813 th

a,;,\;<L:,:; ’ i ~:.“-~ ; J

MEETING: 20 FEBRUARY 1975

NEW Y O R K

CONTENTS
Page

Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/l813) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

1

Statement by the President . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

1

Adoption of the agenda . . . . . . . . . . . . . . , . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . ..*.......

1

The situation in Cyprus:
Letter dated 17 February 1975 from the Permanent Representative of Cyprus
to the United Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council
(S/11625) . . * . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . * . . . . . . . . .
.l

1

-NOTE

,’

Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined with figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United
Nations document.
Documents of the Security Council (symbol Sj . . .) are normally published in
quarterly Supplements of the Ojj’iCial Records bf the Security Council. The date
of the document indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which information about it is given.
The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with’a
system adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Resolutions and
Decisions of the Security Council. The new system, which has been applied
retroactively to resolutions adopted before 1 January 1965, became fully operative
on that date.

.’

.

1813th MEETING
Held in New .York on Thursday, 20 February 1975, at 3 p.m.
President: Mr. HUANG Hua (China).

the Council during our consultations yesterday, the
Secretary-General ‘has received a letter signed by
the Minister for Foreign Affairs of the Republic of
Cyprus requesting that Cyprus be invited to participate
in the forthcoming meeting of the Security Council.
This letter stated also that the delegation of the
Republic of Cyprus is composed of five members,
,headed by Mr. Glafcos Clerides. This request for
participation is based on the relevant provisions of
the Charter and rule 37 of the provisional rules of
procedure of the Security Council.

Present: The representatives of the following
States: Byelorussian Soviet Republic, China, Costa
Rica, France, Guyana, Iraq, Italy, Japan, Mauri-’
tania, Sweden, Union of Soviet Socialist Republics,
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern
Ireland, United Republic of Cameroon, United
Republic of Tanzania and United States of America.
Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/MW)

1.
2.

Adoption of the agenda
The situation in Cyprus:
Letter dated 17 February 1975 from the Permanent
Representative of Cyprus to the United Nations
addressed to the President of the Security
Council (S/ 11625)

4. In conformity with the usual practice, and with
the consent of the Council, I therefore propose to
invite the representatives of Cyprus to participate
in the discussion without the right to vote.
At the invitation of the President, Mr. Clerides
(Cyprus) took a place at the Council table.

The meeting was called to order at 3.35 p.m.
Statement by the @residen;

5. The PRESIDENT (translation from Chinese):
As I have also already informed members of the
Council, I have received letters from the representatives of Turkey and Greece in which they
request that they be allowed to participate, under
the relevant provisions of the Charter, iri the current
debate by the Security Council on the situation in
Cyprus.

1. The PRESIDENT (translation from Chitzese):
This being the first formal meeting bf the Security
Council to be scheduled since the start of the term
of office of five new members of the Council,
I should like to take this opportunity to extend a
cordial welcome on behalf of all of us to our new
colleagues, Mr. Jackson of Guyana, Mr. Plaja of
Italy, Mr. Saito of Japan, Mr. Rydbeck of Sweden
and Mr. Salim of the United. Republic of Tanzania.
We look forward with pleasure to co-operating
with them in the coming months in the ,work of the
Security Council.

6. In conformity with the usual practice, and with
the consent of the Council, I therefore propose to
invite the representatives of Turkey and Greece to
participate in the discussion without the right to
vote.

2. I should like at the same time to mention the
sincere appreciation felt by all members of the Council
for the contribution made during their term of office
by the outgoing members of the Council, Mr. McIntyre
of Australia, Mr. Jankowitsch of Austria, Mr. Anwar
Sani of Indonesia, Ambassador Maina of Kenya and
Ambassador Perez de CuCllar of Peru.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Olcay
(Turkey) and Mr. Carayannis (Greece) took places,
at the Council table.

7. The PRESIDENT (translation from Chinese):
At this stage I wish to recall also that in the course
of our consultations yesterday the members of the
Council agreed that the Council should extend an,
invitation under rule 39 of its provisional rules of
procedure to Mr. Vedat A. Celik. I propose, if
I hear no objection, to take it that the Council
agrees to invite Mr. .Celik under rule 39 of the
provisional rules of procedure and, accordingly, at
: the appropriate moment I shall invite Mr. ‘Celik to
come to the Council table to make a statement.

Adoption of the Agenda
The agenda was adopted.

,-The situation in Cyprus:
Letter dated 17 February 1975 from the Permanent

Representative of Cyprus to the United Nations

addressed to the President of the Security Council
(S/11625)

1.

3. The PRESIDENT (translatio! from .?hin&e):

8. The PRESIDENT (translation from Chinese):
The. agenda lists the letter which I have received

As I had the occasion to inform the members of
1

from the representative of the Republic of Cyprus
dated .17 February 1975, requesting a meeting of
the Security Council in view of certain events
which have taken place in Cyprus. In addition to
that letter, members have before them the special
report of the Secretary-General [S/11624] on
developments in Cyprus.
9. The first speaker is the representative of Cyprus,
on whom I now call.
10. Mr.
CLERIDES (Cyprus): Thank you,
Mr. President, for giving me this opportunity to
place before the Security Council the views of the
Republic of Cyprus on, certain matters that are very
pertinent to its existence.
11. In December 1963, because of certain regrettable cases of intercommunal violence in Cyprus
caused by an unworkable Constitution imposed on
the. people of Cyprus by the 1959 Zurich and
London agreements, because of- threats of military
intervention by Turkey, because of repeated violations of the sovereignty and territorial integrity
of the Republic of Cyprus by Turkish armed forces,
a delegation of the Government .-of Cyprus, placing
its faith in the world Organization, appeared before
the Security Council, in this very chamber, urging
it to protect Cyprus from the threats of Turkish
invasion and thus save the independence of a small
State.
12. Twelve vears have passed since December
1963 and today, despite- the many resolutions
unanimously adopted by the General Assembly and
by the Security Council calling on all States to
respect the territorial integrity and sovereignty of
Cyprus, Cyprus appears before you again, no
longer for the purpose of seeking to have the
Organization prevent threats *to its sovereignty
and territorial integrity, nor of reporting or establishing the fact that Turkish forces have occupied
40 per cent of the Republic’s. territory and have
turned 200,000 Greek Cypriots into suffering
refugees, but to demand that measures be taken
urgently and firmly, for unless they are taken the
independence of Cyprus will be destroyed. In fact,
all that will remain will be the haunting echoes of
long debates in the General Assembly and the
Security Council and piles of unimplemented
resolutions in the files of the Secretariat.
13. I ask, Mr. President, for your indulgence if
I seem to speak with some emotion. But the cry
you hear is not mine: it is the cry of suffering
Cyprus. Do not let it be a cry in the wilderness
of conflicting international interests, of global
strategic positioning, of defined and undefined
spheres of influence and of chauvinistic nationalism.
Hear it and know it for what if is: it is a cry to
stop unbearable pain and suffering, to restore
trampled-upon human dignity and to prevent the

destruction of an independent small State. I ask
you to take now the necessary effective, measures
and provide the needed remedies to make the
United Nations resolutions effective’ through
implementation, restoring thus our confidence and
that of the world in the United Nations, in which
so many high hopes have been placed for peace
and security, for ~a world of human dignity, for a
better tomorrow.
14. It is not my intention in this address to ‘play
the role of the accu,ser of Turkey or of my compatriots the Turkish Cypriots, nor will I pretend that
mistakes have’ not been made by all sides. I will not
reopen old wounds, nor .will I attempt to, apportion
blame for what has happened or why it has happened.
Such matters have been discussed in extenso in
repeated debates on the Cyprus problem “before
the Security Council and the General Assembly
and with particular emphasis last November, when
the representatives of all the countries making up
the United Nations, having heard arguments and
views and having considered the. Cyprus ‘problem
in the General Assembly in all its aspects, unanimously
adopted resolution 3212 (XXIX), which: ‘was subsequently endorsed by the Security Council in its
j
resolution 365 (1974).
15. I deliberately choose this course in the sincere
desire to be constructive and not obstructive. What
the Government of Cyprus is interested in is helping
to find a just solution of the Cyprus problem, and
our delegation; in order to achieve this end without
malice or rhetorical venom, proposes coolly and
calmly to confine itself to examining whether ‘the
resolutions of the General Assembly and -of the
Security Council have been implemented; whether
in the meantime actions have been taken. by ,eithei
side contrary to the letter and the spirit of ..those
resolutions; whether the existing : procedures, in
view of what has happened in the .meantimei, are
any longer adequate or capable of. bringing’, a
peaceful solution to the Cyprus problem.
16. Finally, at the proper stage, the Cyprus
delegation will explain its views with regard to the
urgent measures needed to bring about compliance
with and implementation of the relevant General
Assembly and Security Council resolutions on
Cyprus and of the necessary new. procedures to
be adopted without delay for the solution ‘of the
problem.
,’ .b’
,., _I.!.
17.. I hope that the representative’: of Turkey. will
join issue j on these questions for I .will .hot be
sidetracked from them. Should he; however, -wish
to sidetrack me by attempting to establish. cause
and effect, he will find’ me brief, but not short of
proven facts and convincing arguments; returning
always after a short deviation to the main issues
that I have already placed before the Council today.

..

..,.

‘i

:

.-,:.‘;.~.‘.i

22. We have offered repeatedly to the Turkish
side, both at the Geneva conference and subsequently,
to withdraw all Government forces, including the
police force, from all areas of the island inhabited
by Turkish Cypriots and to place the Turkish
Cypriot population of the island under the protection
of the United Nations Peace-keeping Force in
Cyprus, a force that would be enlarged in order
to cope with this task effectively. This fair proposal,
which still stands, was rejected without discussion
by Turkey.

18. On 1 November 1974 the General Assembly
unanimously adopted resolution 3212 (XXIX), which
was voted upon aflirmatively by Turkey also and
which contain~s in its operative part certain cardinal
principles for the solution of the Cyprus problem.
About four months have passed since 1 November
and it is pertinent at this stage to examine whether
Turkey has .complied or even made an attempt to
comply with the, provisions of that resolution. This
analysis is very necessary and important because
it not only will demonstrate whether Turkey, a
Member of the United Nations, respects the resolutions of the General Assembly and the Security
Council, but also will clearly establish the real
intentions of Turkey with regard to the future of
Cyprus. It will bring into focus Turkey’s inflexible
determination to dictate and to impose a solution
on the Republic of Cyprus by using its military
forces-which it has not withdrawn or even made
an attempt to reduce-for the purpose of creating
faits accomplis in Cyprus, thus getting the solution
it had planned at gunpoint, instead of through free
negotiations conducted by representatives of the two
communities on an equal footing, as provided in the
resolutions of the General Assembly and the Security
Council.

23. The second cardinal principle of resolution
3212 (XXIX) was the speedy withdrawal of all
foreign armed forces and foreign military presence
and personnel ,.from the Republic of Cyprus and
the cessation of all foreign interference in its &airs.
Not a single Turkish soldier has ‘been withdrawn
since the adoption of the resolution, nor has there
been any attempt by Turkey to show any intention
of complying with the call for a speedy withdrawal
of its forces from Cyprus or, at least, as a first
step, to reduce .substantially its 40,000 troops in
the island and withdraw military forces from certain
areas, thus allowing refugees to return to their
homes. On the contrary, statements have been
made, both at the Geneva conference and after
resolution 3212 (XXIX) was adopted, that Turkey
does not intend to withdraw its forces from the
territory of the Republic, but only to reduce them,
without any commitment either as to the size or
the time of such reduction. Does this show respect
for or compliance with the resolutions of th,e
General Assembly and the Security Council?

19. Whether Turkey has complied or has shown
any intention of complying with the relevant resolutions of the ,General Assembly and the Security
Council is, on the one hand, an issue of the utmost
importance for ‘Cyprus, because without such
‘compliance it is possible neither to conduct meaningful negotiations nor to find a peaceful solution to
the Cyprus problem; while, on the other hand, it
constitutes:a major challenge to the world Organization, undermining’ its very foundation and leading
usback to the’ regrettable era of gun-boat diplomacy
followed by the use of force. :

24. Turkey has used its forces since the date of
the resolution to advance beyond the lines of the
& facto cease-fire in order to occupy or raid
factories, homes and properties belonging to Greek
Cypriots. It has used its forces to expel forcibly
from their homes Greek Cypriots who remained in
villages under Turkish occupation, in order to make
room for Turkish Cypriots who have, been moved
from areas in the south to the north, and it has,
contrary to eve* principle of the Universal
Declaration of Human Rights, the International
Covenants on Human Rights and the relevant
Geneva Conventions; restricted to the absolute
minimum the freedom of movement of Greek
Cypriots who live in areas under its military
occupation, at the same time permitting the Turkish
Cypriots to seize and exploit houses, factories,
industries and other properties not belonging to them.

20. ‘I .would ask’ the, President and the members of
the Council to permit me to summarize the cardinal
principles in the operative part of General Assembly
resolution 3212 (XXIX). It is necessary to examine
them briefly in order to establish that Turkey, has
not complied with a single one.
21. The first cardinal principle was respect for the
sovereignty, ‘independence and territorial integrity
of Cyprus, and abstention from all acts and interventions. directed against it. Turkey, regrettably,
has shown utter disregard for the sovereignty,
independence and territorial integrity of the Republic,
because it continues to keep under mi&ary occupation
40 per cent of the territory of Cyprus. The pretext
for this continued occupation is the alleged need
to protect the Turkish Cypriots from the danger
of attacks by the Greek Cypriots. This is really a
flimsy excuse to cover the real intention of -Turkey,
which is the continued occupation of Cyprus by
Turkish forces,

25. The third ca&nal principle of the resolution
was that the constitutional system of the Republic
of Cyprus concer& the Greek Cypriot and the.
Turkish Cypriot communities. Turkey, although
professing to comply with this principle, in reality
is dictating to the Turkish Cypriots the nature of
the constitutional solution of the Cyprus problem
and affording them the opportunity, by its military
3

presence in Cyprus, to take such unilateral arbitrary
action as that of declaring a separate State in the
area under Turkish occupation, thus creating
situations which prejudge the very outcome of the
negotiations.

7 February-Ambassador Weckmann-Mufioz, the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General,
issued a communique approved by Mr. DenktaS
and myself, which contained, inter ah, the following:
“Mr. diet-ides informed Mr. Denktaz that at
the next meeting, he will give him iin writing
proposals for the solution of the Cyprus problem.
Mr. Clerides and Mr. Denktas, together with
Ambassador Weckmann-Mufioz, will meet again
on Monday, 10 February.”

26. The fourth cardinal principle of resolution 3212
(XXIX) provided for negotiations to be conducted
freely, and on an equal footing, by the representatives of the two communities in’ order to find
a -mutually acceptable political settlement, based on
their fundamental and legitimate rights.

32. On the morning of 10 February-that is, the
day on which it had been agreed that the meeting
with Mr. DenktaS was to take place-I was informed
that at the request of Mr. Denktas, the meeting
had been cancelled and that perhaps we might meet
on Friday, 14 February, or on Monday, 17 February.

27. On the advice of the Secretary-General on the
eve of the adoption of the resolution, the representative of the Turkish community, Mr. DenktaS,
and I had commenced talks on humanitarian matters.
After the adoption of the General Assembly resolution the scope of these talks was enlarged to cover
negotiations on the substance of the Cyprus problem.
Despite my efforts to begin talks on the substance
of the problem as soon as possible, this was rendered
impossible because of objections from the Turkish
side, which demanded that, before any talks began,
the Greek Cypriot side accept the’ principle of a
bizonal federation.
:
28. As a result of diplomatic contacts and efforts,
the Foreign Minister of Turkey,. though maintaining
his country’s position with regard to a bizonal
, federation, agreed not to insist on preconditions
for the commencement of the talks, and 19 December was fixed as the date on’ which talks would
commence between the representatives of the two
communities on the substance of the matter.

33. In view of his cancelling our meeting “and having
promised to give the proposals of my side to
Mr. Denktas on 10 February, I forwarded my
proposals to him on that date. The proposals of
my side were as follows:
[The speaker read out annex I to docuhent
S/l 1 6 2 4 . 1
34. The objectives of these proposals were to

expedite the commencement of negotiations on the
substance of the Cyprus problem and to let
Mr. Denktas realize that certain possibilities existed
of narrowing the differences between the two sides.
The proposals, though based on a multiregional
federation, accepted that a substantial area in the
north would be under Turkish Cypriot hdministration and that the Turkish Cypriots would have a
substantial majority in that and in other areas:
Further, it was proposed that the Government would
undertake the financial responsibility of building
houses for Turkish Cypriots who might finally decide
to settle in areas under Turkish Cypriot administration.
I
35. It is pertinent at this stage, in order to establish
whether the Turkish side had any serious intention
to negotiate, to examine what steps it has taken
immediately after receiving the proposals of the
Greek Cypriot side and before submitting its own
proposals.

29. From 19 December onwards, I repeatedly
requested Mr. Denktag to commence such talks, and
although he agreed and the subject of the powers
and functions of the central Government in a federal
State was placed on the agenda, up to this very
day it has not been discussed. .
30. Having repeatedly informed him that I was
ready, and in order to facilitate progress in the
.talks, I proposed that in the meantime we should
begin examining the areas which would come under
Turkish administration, the total extent of such
areas, the return of refugees J to their homes, and
other considerations relevant to the solution of the
Cyprus problem. Again, I met with the same
monotonous reply from Mr;,* Denktas, that he was
not ready to discuss this subject either.

36. On 13 February the Turkish side decided on
and actually declared a separate State in the Republic
of Cyprus and elected Mr. Denktas, the Turkish
Cypriot negotiator at the talks, as the first President
of the Turkish Federated State of Cyprus.
i
37. In the document purporting to set up a separate
Turkish State in Cyprus, a number of reasons are
given but two of them are worth considering
carefully, because they betray the real imotive for
this action. It is stated in the document that the
Turkish Cypriots have come to the conclusion that

31. In view of the fact that no discussion on any
subject touching on the substance of the Cyprus
problem had taken place from 19 December 1974
to 7 February 1975, I informed Mr. Denktas that
at our next meeting, which was to be held on
Monday, 10 February, I would be submitting
proposals in writing for the solution of the Cyprus
problem. On the same date-that is to say, on
4

*-

‘i
z

I
I!
i

the only way to solve the Cyprus problem is to
create two respective regions. The document further
states that the Greek Cypriot community has not
made any constructive response to the proposal
for the establishment of an independent federal
State based on two regions and proceeded to
proclaim a separate State.
38. Before the proposals which I submitted were
discussed at the intercommunal talks, the Turkish
Cypriot side, acting arbitrarily and unilaterally,
declared a separate State in Cyprus, leaving us,
very’ generously, the option to’ decide whether to
accept it or not. Can one claim that such conduct
is consistent with good faith or with free negotiations
on an equal footing, as provided for by resolutions
of the General Assembly and the Security Council?
Does it not amount to a public statement, or a
public declaration, that the Turkish side will not
negotiate but impose, because of the presence of
Turkish military forces in Cyprus, the solution which
it wants? Can it be denied that this is an attempt
to dictate and impose a solution at gun-point?
39. This action by itself would have been enough
to destroy the goodwill that was so necessary if
meaningful negotiations were to take place. It would
have been enough to shake the confidence of the
staunchest supporter of the intercommunal talks.
In fact, it has. It has destroyed the confidence of
the people of Cyprus in the talks, that of the
Government ,of Cyprus and that of the Greek
Cypriot representative at the talks. As a Greek
Cypriot representative at the talks, even at the most
dismal hours when everybody else gave up hope
for a peaceful solution .of the Cyprus problem,
I staunchly defended the procedure of the intercommunal talks-and this is publicly known both in
Cyprus and abroad. With all sincerity, bearing in
mind my duty to Cyprus, my obligations to the
Security Council, which repeatedly recommended
this procedure, at this critical hour I state frankly,
honestly and openly that the Turkish action to impose
unilaterally a solution of the Cyprus. problem makes
the talks useless and unnecessary, and that new
procedures must be sought for the solution of the
Cyprus problem.
40. The Turkish side, as if the action of declaring
a separate State were not enough completely to
destroy the intercommunal talks, went even further
in its efforts to impose its own solution on Cyprus.
It has purported to enact a law by virtue of which
the 40,000 Turkish forces of occupation can settle
permanently in Cyprus, bringing also their families.
They will be settled, of course, in the north of the
island, in the homes from which 200,000 Greek
Cypriot refugees have been forced out by the Turkish
forces.
41. It is an act to colonize Cyprus and to change
the ethnic composition of the population of Cyprus.

The Turkish side decided that it must have a region
of its own. In order to get it, it employed the
simple but cruel method of forcing the Greek Cypriot
population out, turning them in their thousands
into destitute refugees. In order to fill the vacuum
created, it moved Turkish Cypriots from the south
to the north, and as the total population of Turkish
Cypriots in Cyprus is only llO,OOO-200,000 Greek
Cypriots having been expelled-it is now importing
Turks from Turkey to fill the gap. According to
confirmed information, this plan is already being
implemented and the first 100 families of Turks
from Turkey have already been settled in Greek
properties in Cyprus.
42. Yet there are certain people who hold the view
that what the Turkish side has done should be
ignored or should be glossed over by merely deploring
this Turkish action, and that the intercommunal
talks should continue as if nothing had happened.
The theory behind such a way of thinking is that
Turkey must not be pressed beyond a certain point
because it will become even more unto-operative
in the search for a solution to the Cyprus problem.
I do not doubt that such people are well meaning,
but, at the same time, I cannot agree with their
reasoning.
43. If Turkey is pressed to comply with resolutions
of the General Assembly and the Security Council,
we are told, it becomes more inflexible, more uncooperative, more obstinate. If it is left alone, it is
obsessed with the idea of imposing its own solution.
Yet, in the face of this intolerable situation, we
are advised to continue talking.
44. If the purpose of free negotiations on an
equal footing was merely to affix our signature to
a Turkish plan for the solution of the Cyprus
problem, then there is no need for such negotiations
to continue. We are not prepared to put our
signature to any agreement dictated by Turkey
and based on faits accomplis. This was not the
purpose nor what the General Assembly and the
Security Council had in mind in commending
negotiations between representatives of the two
communities for a freely reached and mutually
acceptable solution of the Cyprus problem. In fact,
General Assembly resolution 3212 (XXIX) provided
even for the eventuality of such a situation ‘as the
one which we are facing now.
45. The fifth cardinal principle of resolution 3212
(XXIX) was that all refugees should return to their
homes in safety and that urgent measures should
be taken to achieve that end. Turkey and the Turkish
Cypriot leadership have not permitted any of the
refugees to return to their homes, using the pain
and suffering of thousands of people as a lever to
gain political advantages for their solution of the
Cyprus problem. Not only have they shown utter
disregard for this part of the resolution but, further-

more, they have gone beyond. it and used both
remain in their homes. Now that they have been
physical and psychological pressure on the 9,000
moved to Morphou, they wish to go south because
the physical conditions in which they live are
Greek Cypriots who remain enclaved in the north
in order to break their spirit and make them evacuate
;. deplorable. They are confined in a school building;
,
their homes.
they are not, allowed to move out of the building,
I.
,
.* .’ their spirit has broken; they are lying on the floor
46. It is characteristic that, although in the areas
crying. As far as we know, they were moved by
the Turkish Army without any explanation.. They
under the control of the Government full freedom of
movement has been given both to ‘the Peace-keeping
were not allowed to take their furniture or their
Force and to the International Committee of the
’ personal belongings except for. a few clothes. I
Red Cross, the Turkish side, in *spite of repeated . had visited~ them ‘before and they were happy in
appeals by both the United Nations- and the Intematheir homes .and their villages.‘? 4
tional Committee of the Red Cross, has failed to
provide the necessary facilities and ‘continues to. .Then I put the following questions to .both Mr. Zuger
and Mr. Kelly:.
refuse to do so. This refusal, apart from everything
..,.’
else, makes difficult any effort to trace and rescue
2,700 Greek Cypriots who have been missing since
“Mr. Clerides: Mr. Kelly and Mr; Zuger, do you
,August 1974 without any information as to their fate.
have freedom of movement in the Greek areas?
I,
/
“Mr. Kelly and Mr. Zuger: Yes.
I
47. Furthermore, in other areas in the north where
Greek Cypriots have remained, the Turkish side has
“Mr. Clerides: Have you visited all the Turkish
forcibly ejected those Greek Cypriots .from their
homes, concentrated them in empty school buildings l villages in the south?
under guard and failed to provide for them even the
“Mr. Kelly and Mr. Zuger: Yes.
-’
rudimentary amenities for sustaining life, including
medical services, so that those people, who were once
happily living in their homes, are now in a state of
“Mr. Clerides: Have you seen in the south Turks
living in such conditions, that is, confined in school
complete cohapse and despair.
buildings, under guard, not living in their own
homes, underfed or undernourished, with broken
48. At this point I wish to read out a report which
:’ *
spirits?
Mr. Kelly, the representative of the High Commis*
sioner for Refugees, made before Mr. Weckmann-“Mr. Kelly and Mr. Zugeri Definitely no.”
Mufioz, Mr. Denktas and myself, during the meeting
of 7 February 1975.
49. I think I have established beyond reasouabIe
“Mr. Zuger: The people who were brought
doubt that Turkey has not complied with the provifrom villages to Morphou have been placed in a
sions of resolution 3212 (XXIX), that in fact it has
school building, in crowded conditions, under guard.
not withdrawn any of its forces on Cyprus, that it
has not permitted the Greek Cypriot refugees to return
They have no freedom to go outside the school
to their homes, that it did not enter into negotiations
building; they are mostly elderly men and women
between the two communities with any real intenand young children. The situation is similar to that
which existed in Vonni, Cypsou and Vitsadha. They tion of seeking a freely reached and mutually acceptable solution, that it has used delaying tactics in
want to go south because they are not allowed to
the talks for the purpose of gaining time to create
go back to their homes. We have not noticed any
signs of physical pressure on them, but it is true faits accomplis and to impose at gunpoint the solution
which it has always had in mind.
that. after six months of confinement they feel that
there is no hope for them. Even the Morphou people
50. The resulting situation is such that, unless the
are not allowed to live in their homes, -with the
Organization, and in particular the Security Council,
exception of one family. Our doctors fear for the
acts firmly now and takes the necessary measures
life of these people. Most of them have given up;
in conformity with paragraph 6 of General Assembly
they are lying on the floor; they are completely
resolution 3212 (XXIX), neither can the sovereignty,
uninterested in everything that goes on around them
and the only thing they do is cry. The Red Cross
the independence and the territorial integrity of the
Republic of Cyprus be saved, nor can a solution be
gives them what aid it can in medicines, but this
reached.
is not enough. On humanitarian grounds we urge
that they should be transferred to the south.
51. It is obvious that no freely agreed isolution can
“Mr. Kelly: One must distinguish their present
be arrived at as long as-the Turkish forces of occupation remain in Cyprus, thus permitting, the Turkish
situation during the last two months from that which
-side to create faits accomplis in the area under its
they were in before they were removed from their
control. We therefore see an urgent heed for the
villages. Before they were moved from the villages
Security Council to fix -a period of time within which
they did not want to go south. They wanted to
6
f -

.,

__

,~

,.
,.

‘,

::

readiness to payhto pay for its own mistakes and
for the mistakes of others-in order to help the international community, in order to help you distinguished members of this Council to save peace.
Unfortunately, the saving and restoration of peace
depend upon more than one party.

Turkey will have to comply with resolution 3212
(XXIX), which provides for the speedy withdrawal
of all foreign armed forces from the Republic of
Cyprus, for the adoption of urgent measures for the
return of the refugees to their homes in conditions
of safety, so that meaningful negotiations can take
place in order to find freely a mutually acceptable
solution.
:
.,
52. The Government of the Republic of Cyprus
seeks the strict and effective implementation of
General Assembly resolution 3212 (XXIX) and of
Security Council resolution 365 (1974), which have
been so persistently and grossly violated by Turkey.
Only through determined and effective action by the
Security Council to enforce the implementation of the
said resolutions, coupled with the provision of new
procedures for negotiation, can there be progress
towards a just and peaceful solution of the problem
within the recognized norms of international law and
the principles of the Charter of the United Nations.

58. We have had our fanatics, as Turkey and Cyprus
have-had theirs. But over the years Greece has never
failed the Organization. ,It has never betrayed its
resolutions or the votes my Government has cast on
those resolutions. Our record in this chamber is
clean, ‘and I intend to make my voice heard on the
strength of that record.
..
59. When I joined you in this Council last July, I
was not afraid to admit the mistakes of a military
dictatorship.. I frankly disclosed that Greece was
prepared to pay for the mistakes of a few Greeks.
I.am now authorized to inform this Council that we
are not prepared to pay’ whatever price is ,asked,
especially when that price is to be borne by the Greek
C y p r i o t s .

53. On the issue of new procedures, however, I
shall not state our views at this juncture. We have
come here in a sincere effort to help in a constructive
way, without any preconceived ideas, and will be
ready, after hearing what representatives will suggest,
to state our views. What experience has taught us,
however, is that the Cyprus talks alone, with the
presence of .the Turkish military forces in Cyprus,
cannot lead to the solution of the Cyprus problem,
a solution which has now assumed. great urgency.

60. I shall spare the Council the ordeal of the difficult
cease-fires and the tragedy of the two Geneva
conferences. I have already exposed them on previous
occasions, and they are on record. Recent ceasefire violations by Turkish armed forces figure in the
latest report of the Secretary-General before the
Council [S/11624]. I must stress, however, that what
happened when the cease-fires were violated and
the conference was torpedoed were not isolated
cases; they were the expression of a preorganized
long-term aggressive policy initiated by Turkey
against my country. Relations between Turkey and
Greece entered a completely new era some time ago.
Let us face it. They are characterized by two different mentalities, by two opposite approaches:
intimidation and faits accomplis, on the one hand,
and constructive compromise and effort for accommodation, on the other. This situation does not
relate to Cyprus alone; it relates to everything.
Throughout our’ long history we have learned the
value of compromise, moderation and understanding.
‘We have also learned their limits. We believe we
have reached those limits.

54. I should like to close my address by reminding
representatives that in the preamble of resolution 3212
(XXIX) the General Assembly recognized the urgent
need for a solution of the Cyprus problem and
expressed its-grave concern about the continuation of
the Cyprus crisis, which constitutes a threat to international peace and security.
55. Not only has Turkey failed to comply with the
provisions of resolution 3212 (XXIX) and all the
Security Council resolutions, it has taken action
contrary to their letter and spirit. As a result, the
situation has worsened and it is in fact far more critical
now than the situation which existed on 1 November
1974, when resolution 3212 (XXIX) was unanimously
adopted by the General Assembly. This is an additional
reason why urgent and determined measures are
needed now without further delay.

61.’ It has always been Turkey’s aim to find a solution to the Cyprus problem directly with Greece,
.behind the backs of the Cypriots. Before the invasion,
the aim was to negotiate with us a solution from
which both countries ‘would draw advantages. We
refused. After the invasion, the aim was to impose a
solution on us, again behind the backs of the Cypriots
-a solution based, of course, on Turkish victory
and Turkish intimidation. We again refused. That is
how the Cypriots came to the second half of the
second Gene& conference. As will be remembered,
the Cypriots did not participate either in the first
Geneva conference or in the first part of the second
conference. It was, however, in their presence that

56. The PRESIDENT (translation from Chinese):
I call upon the representative of Greece.
57. Mr. CARAYANNIS (Greece): The Greek
Government is facing with the utmost seriousness the
present situation in Cyprus. It is also facing it with
a clear conscience. Indeed, there are few, if any,
cases in the history of this Organization in which a
country has made greater efforts, given proof of
greater good will and unselfishness, shown greater
.,.

7

.

the conference was torpedoed. No wonder it left
bitter memories. No wonder the General Assembly
indicated another framework.

65, In an effort to break the stalemate thus created,
Nicosia and Athens offered a complete frame of
principles on which a federal State could be based.
That plan went far beyond any Turkish claim or
expectations prior to the invasion. It ensured separation of the Turks from the Greeks. It ensured a Turkish
majority in the Turkish areas and financial means
for having ail Turks who wished to live in the areas
in the north moved into houses to be built for that
purpose, instead of having them moved into Greek
houses. The plan offered the substance of everything
the Turkish Cypriots have asked for until now, and,
furthermore, it was proposed as a basis for further
negotiations. The plan was flatly rejected. The leading
Ankara newspaper, Cumhuriyet , reported that the
plan had been studied by the Turkish Foreign Ministry
and had been found unacceptable. Mr. Denktas
stated that Archbishop Makarios had no intention
of’solving the Cyprus problem and that the recent
Greek Cypriot proposals were unacceptable. And
in order to avoid any further negotiations on this
plan the occupied territory was proclaimedia separate
State.

62. Indeed, on 1 November 1974, the General
Assembly adopted its resolution 3212 (XXIX) on the
question of Cyprus. It was the product of an honest
effort by the non-aligned countries. That resolution
was adopted unanimously. A few minutes before the
vote, I made a wish. I said:
“I make the wish that the draft resolution [the
non-aligned countries] produced will be supported
by the affirmative votes of the whole Assembly
and that all those who will vote ‘yes’ will mean
‘yes 9 9, . 1
All voted “yes”, but Turkey did not mean “yes”.
63. Paragraph 4 of that resolution; referring to the
Nicosia talks just initiated it that time through the
good offices of the Secretary-General, reads as
follows:
“Commends the contacts and negotiations
taking place on an equal footing, with the good
of&es of the Secretary-General, between the
representatives of the two communities, and calls
for their continuation with a view to reaching
freely a mutually acceptable political settlement,
based on their fundamental and legitimate rights”,

66. The Turkish side has argued in various official
statements that nothing has been changed in the
status quo by this proclamation. That might be true.
But the status quo is a total partition, and we are
supposed to be against partition. Turkey is supposed
to be against partition-r at least so it ,proclaims.
If we are negotiating, it is precisely in order to change
the present status of partition and unify the island,
even if it is to be in the frame of a federal State
with Greek Cypriots and Turkish Cypriots separated.
If Turkey’s idea is to legaiize partition,,we do not need
1
negotiations.

I have to make three comments on that paragraph.
They have already been made by Mr. Clerides,
but I insist that I myself make them too. First, the
negotiations never took place on an equal footing;
they-were all the time conducted at gunpoint. Secondly,
never was there any intention to reach freely a political settlement; the intention was to impose one.
Thirdly, a political settlement unilaterally decided by
a fait accompli cannot by any standards be a mutually
acceptable settlement. j

67. Greek Cypriots have never rejected any Turkish
proposals prior to negotiations. They only expect
that their own proposals be given the same chance.
The Turkish Cypriots say now that they would be
prepared to consider also the Clerides proposals as
a basis .for negotiations. But that is not what they
said when the proposals were submitted. I have the
very words of Mr. Denktag. He stated-and I quote
from his declaration to the press: “The recent Greek
Cypriot proposals were unacceptable”. How can one
negotiate seriously after such statements? The Greek
Cypriots have always been ready to examine and
negotiate on any proposals in good faith, understanding
and moderation. Their requirement is, ho&ever, that
whatever is going to be finally decided should not
be contrary to General Assembly resolution 3212
(XXIX). I think that that is a perfectly legitimate
requirement. They are not and we are not prepared
to accept a violation of the resolution.

64. Even the kind of talks I have just described
were not easy to start and keep moving. Only humanitarian matters were discussed until the end of the
year, and it was only after repeated Greek efforts
that it was finally decided to deal with political and
substantive matters. Political negotiations started on
14 January. They survived not even a month, and
they were torpedoed just like those of Geneva. The
first problem was the airport. The Turkish Cypriot
representative made the mistake of agreeing to have
the Nicosia airport operated by the United Nations.
Ankara stepped in and vetoed that idea; the airport
should be operated on a fifty-fifty basis by the two
communities. The fifty-fifty principle had to be the
rule in all future arrangements. The bigger port of
the isiand, the port of Famagusta, was to be operated
100 per cent by the Turkish Cypriots. That was not
negotiable.

68. Resolution 3212 (XXIX) was adopted unanimously and subsequently, on 13 December 1974,
was endorsed, also unanimously, by the Security
Council in its resolution 365 (1974). Paragraph 5 of
8

resolution 3212 (XXIX) states that the General
Assembly

The dividing line was in fact suggested to run from
the village of Yialia on the north-western coast
through the towns of Nicosia in the center and
Famagusta in the east. The zone lying north of
this line was claimed by the Turkish-Cypriot community; it is said to ‘have an area of about 1,084
square miles, or 38 per cent of the total era of the
Republic”-they now have 40 per cent-“An
exchange of about 10,000 Greek families for about
the same number of Turkish families was contemplated”. [S/6253, para. 73.1

“C’onsid~s that all the refugees should return to
their homes in safety and calls upon the parties
concerned to undertake urgent measures to that
end”.
Turkey voted in favour of that paragraph. It is true
that the then Foreign Minister of Turkey formulated
some reservations after the vote. I quote from the
original text of the verbatim record of the plenary
meeting of the General Assembly held on 1 November
1 9 7 4 . ’

71. But I know by now how much my Turkish
colleague dislikes Mr. Galo Plaza, so why not hear
some other opinions, why not go further back in the
past?

“No principle appearing in the resolution adopted
runs contrary to the policy pursued by Turkey as
far as the quest,ion of Cyprus is concerned”.* ,

72. Lord Radcliffe, British Constitutional Commissioner for Cyprus, conducted an inquiry on Cyprus
in 1956. I shall now read from The Review of the
International Commission ,of Jurists, issue No. 13,
of December 1974:

And then came the reservations on paragraph 5 of
the resolution:
“As far as paragraph 5 is concerned, I should
like to state that this is a political paragraph, as
well as being a humanitarian one. It is very closely
linked-and this is quite well known to all those
concerned-with the political solution of the
problem”.*

6‘ . . . From the time of Lord Radcliffe’s enquiry in
, 1956, it has been a Turkish goal to partition the
island along [the Attila line Lefka-Famagusta] and
to create a federal Cyprus with an autonomous
Turkish state to the north. Such a division of the
island would be grossly unfair to the Greek Cypriots.
It would give the Turkish community, who constitute only 17 per cent of the population, one third
of the island comprising its most productive areas
and richest natural resources... It is difficult to
avoid the conclusion that Turkey is seeking, through
the forced exchange of populations causing untold
misery and suffering to both sides, to present the
Greek Cypriots with a fait accompli.”

That means that the refugee problem could not be
solved prior to a political solution; the solution to
the refugee problem should be found in the framework of the political settlement.
69. But even if the refugee problem was not to be
solved before there was a political solution, may I
ask my Turkish colleague how he intends to solve it
in the framework of the proclaimed so-called separate
Turkish Cypriot State? Mr. Clerides’ proposals were
precisely intended to take that into account and went
a long way towards meeting Turkish desires and
combining them at the same time with this necessity.
Greek Cypriots were willing to examine other proposals as well, provided they did not violate paragraph 5 or any other paragraph of the General Assembly
resolution, the resolution accepted by Turkey.

73. As for the present, I shall venture to present my
own arguments and I invite your judgement.
74. On 6 February Mr. Denktag made a declaration
to the Turkish press agency. A passage of that
declaration was quoted by the newspapers as follows:
“The Turkish Cypriot community brought to the
knowledge of Ankara that the time was ripe for
the Turkish side to create a Cypriot Confederation”-I underline the word “Confederation”“and to declare a Turkish Cypriot State member
of it.”
--.-_. ~~ ._.- -75. On 7 February, “The Turkish Cypriot Parliament” voted a new law recognizing persons of various
categories as citizens of the “Turkish Cypriot community”. That decision not only creates a separate
citizenship for the northern part of Cyprus but aims
as well at changing the composition of the population
in Cyprus and the “Turkization” of the island, since
it gives rights of so-called Turkish Cypriot citizenship
to Turks from Turkey. Now, according to that law
the following are considered citizens of the Turkish

70. The representative of Turkey has always made
a remarkable effort to convince us that Turkey’s
aim is not partition. As far as the past is concerned,
I shall refer to more objective persons than I am.
And what person could be more objective than the
Mediator for Cyprus appointed by the SecretaryGeneral, Mr. Galo Plaza? I quote from his report to
the Secretary-General dated 26 March 1965:
“[The Turkish-Cypriot community] envisaged a
compulsory exchange of population in order to
bring about a state of affairs in which each community would occupy a separate part of the island.
* Quoted in French by the speaker.

9

Cypriot community in Cyprus and, consequently, of
the so-called Turkish Cypriot State after its proclamation: first, ail Turks married to Turkish Cypriot
women-that is not too bad; secondly-this was
mentioned ,by Mr. Clerides-all Turkish soldiers
having served in Cyprus’ since 20 July 1974. That
means a total of 40,000 persons and, with the rotations
that have taken place, plus their families, the total
would be anumber of more than 100,000, thus doubling
the Turkish Cypriot population of the island; thirdly,
wives, children and parents of all soldiers killed
during the military operations against Cyprus; fourthly,
all Turks from Turkey who have served in Cyprus or
in Turkey in what is called the TMT-which is the
Turkish Cypriot equivalent of the National Guardsince 1 August 1958, that is, for almost 15 years.
That may be another 50,000.

its annexation to Turkey. So annexation is’one of the
possibilities,. though for tactical reasons and for the
present it is denied. But what I fail to understand is
Turkey’s allergy to the Security Council. Turkey is,
however, a Member of the United Nations. Turks
should not feel this way if, as they say, they have a
case.
79. It is interesting to notice in’ various Turkish
statements the interchange of the words “federation”
and “confederation”. We all know the dif’ference,
but Turkish officials have every reason to minimize
it. They. obviously like the word “confederation”
-that is clear-and they use it to test the intemational reaction. Whenever this reaction ;is strong,
they retreat to the more diplomatic expression “a
loose federation”. Mr. Erbakan is probably: not a very
good diplomat, but he is certainly representative of
Turkish thinking and philosophy. He actually said:
“a confederation without a central Government”.
Do members of this Council know a country in this
Organization, or even outside of it, lwithout a
I
Government?

76. What I am reading to the Council are not opinions,
judgements or estimates; they are adopted Turkish
Cypriot laws. And I ask: can anybody doubt that, on
the basis of those adopted laws, Turkey’has already
undertaken to transform the ethnic composition of r
the island population on a very large scale, thus
creating conditions for the partition of the island.? i
Obviously, the decision of the so-called Turkish.
Cypriot Cabinet to establish honorary consulates and
commercial agencies in .various cities in Turkey and
in other countries is a step in the same direction.

80. In today’s issue of Newsweek, an. interview
with the present Foreign Minister of Turkey;
Mr. Esenbel, is published. He did not use the word
“confederation”. He certainly is a better diplomat
than Mr. Erbakan. But Newsweek uses it in the
conclusions it draws: “confederation, that is what they
are asking for”.

77. Finally, we come to the famous proclamation
of a so-called Turkish Federated State of Cyprus.
On 13 February 1975 the former Vice-President of
Turkey, Mr. Erbakan, commenting on this proclamation, expressed his satisfaction at the decision and
said that the Turkish Cypriot side should immediately
form its own Government and its own Parliament
-by the way, they are now doing so. He added:

81. The United Nations has a good and, at the
same time, a bad record with respect to the Cyprus
issue. Few problems discussed in the Organization
have ever produced more and better resolutions.
At the same time, few have been the cases in which
so many resolutions have been ignored and violated
in so short a period of time. It would not be advisable
for the Security Council, for the United Nations or for
any single Member of the Organization to allow a
precedent to be created whereby an 18 per cent
minority would be forcibly concentrated b;y an invasion army in a part of the territory of an independent
State Member of the Organiiation and a separate
State unilaterally proclaimed. It would ,be a bad
precedent. It would be a bad precedent. for other
States which could have analogous misfortunes, a
bad precedent for encouraging similar foreign interventions, a dangerous precedent for the non-application of other resolutions concerning the same sensitive
region of the Middle East.
I

“The two federated States ‘can be linked in a
federation. The latter must have a federal house of
representatives but not a central government.
The Turkish Cypriot Federated State will very
shortly be recognized by all countries.”
That is what the former Vice-President of Turkey is
thinking of, a unilateral action which I am certain
will be described to us by my colleague from Turkey
as “an internal organization of the occupied territory
of the Republic of Cyprus”.
78. On the basis of this argument other Turkish
officials have been critical of the initiative taken by
the Government of the Republic of Cyprus in having
recourse to the Security Council. On this they agree
with the press in their own country and in its newlyacquired,colony. Three days ago the Turkish Cypriot
newspaper Bozkurr vigorously condemned the appeal
of Cyprus to the Security Council and warned the
Greek Cypriots that if they continued on this path one
of two things might happen: the proclamation of the
complete independence of the occupied territory; or

82. The resolutions before the Council offer ways
and means to satisfy all Turkish demands :and at the
same. time to prevent this precedent; $1 Turkish
demands, except one: partition.
1
83. I respectfully submit that the Security Council
has the duty and the means to implement the resoiutions. We feel that never was there a better chance
for the Council to save a small, non-aligned and
10

-.

._

I
i
1

l_.

unprotected Member State from dismemberment. We
feel that there is no graver responsibility for the
Council than the responsibility that consists in safeguarding the liberty, the lives and the very existence
of small countries. The problem is ,critical for us,
critical for us Creeks in Greece, and we do not only
need resolutions. We need to know the position of
every Member State, especially of those with greater
influence and responsibilities, regarding the attempt
by Turkey to abolish the Cyprus Republic, and
regarding the unprecedented manner in which it has
deliberately conducted negotiations so far in order
to achieve this purpose. We have friendly relations
with each one of the Council’s members and we need
and we are determined and we have to evaluate and
adjust our position in accordance with theirs.
,84. As far as we and the Greek Cypriots are con-,
cerned, we are committed to the United Nations
resolutions and we are determined to stand by them.
We sincerely desire a settlement and we have proved
our readiness for compromise and sacrifice. But we
can also live without a settlement. Greece has always
maintained that it is going to accept any solution the
Greek Cypriots will accept. I have, however, to
inform the Council, in View of the blackmail procedure we have been faced with, that my Government
would not be prepared to accept a solution, even
one accepted by the Greek Cypriots, if we were not
convinced that it had been accepted of their own
free, will. Paragraph 4 of General Assembly resolution 3212 (XXIX) requires a freely reached and
mutually acceptable political settlement. We intend
to stick to it.
85. The PRESIDENT (translation from Chinese);
The next speaker is the representative of Turkey, on
whom I now call.
86. Mr. OLCAY (Turkey) (interpretution
from
French): Mr. President, first of all, I should like to
say that I consider it an honour to be taking part in a
Council meeting under your distinguished presidency.
Your qualities are an assurance of its success.

represent a certain &ration in Cyprus. I see in it
two Greek Foreign Ministers, a President of the
Greek Parliament, a Greek Ambassador. and assistants
who are all Greek. Furthermore,’ the head of this
so-called Cypriot delegatiotthas that gift that I admire
in Greeks of acting with mercnrial agility and subtlety,
sometimes representing the Greek community and
discussing the future constitution of its State, and at
other times representing the Greek State as a whole,
89. This -delegation, in keeping with its traditional
policy, comes to New York not directly from Cyprus
.but via Athens; where it has duly received its latest
instructions; this is something that does not seem to
us illogical or unnatural but, in our view, it constitutes the root of the problem. Besides, a communique from the press and information secretariat of the
Republic of Greece leaves no doubt, if any still
remained in ,anyone’s mind, as to the collusion
between Athens and Nicosia-which, I repeat, is
something I consider neither illogical nor unnatural.
I shall read out the text. “It was announced that the
Greek Government, in concert with the Cypriot
Government;’ decided that the Republic of Cyprus
will have recourse to the United Nations Security
C o u n c i l . “ * .
90. If this is not a mistake, it seems to me rather
strange that a Government which, in our view, is,
to say’ the least, a foreign Government vis-&is
Nicosia should decide that the Republic of Cyprus
-and I am quoting the text--should “have recourse
to the United Nations”.
91. That is why, Mr. President, I should like to
request you this time, if you will be so kind--and, of
course, if they so wish-to call on the Turks of
Cyprus who, in our view, are alone entitled to reply
‘to their counterparts the Greeks of Cyprus.
92. As for me,since I have not asked for this meeting
of the Council, the usefulness ,of which is still not
apparent to me, I would prefer to speak again later,
in order to be able perhaps to- reply to’the representatives who may deem it necessary to speak on this
subject and so try as far as I can to explain to them
the attitude of my country with regard to the grave
problem of Cyprus in its present stage. I should also
like to take that opportunity to reply in full detail to
my distinguished colleague and friend, the Ambassador
of Greece, on the points he made with regard not only to the attitude of my country towards Cyprus
but also to my country’s foreign policy as a whole,
and to dissipate certain doubts he has raised as to
our intentions.

87. At this stage of our debate, I hope I can be brief,
and I shall reserve my’ right to ask to speak again
after the members of the Council have expressed
their views.
88. We have just heard the Greek point of view
expressed twice by the honourable Greek personalities who have spoken before me. I shall not dwell
at length on what has just been said by the representative of the Greek Cypriots, the distinguished
Mr. Clerides. I would simply like to recall that the
very composition of the delegation-which for complex.
legal reasons that it would be difficult to analyse in
detail here you yourself, Mr. President, described .a
moment ago as the delegation of the Republic of
Cyprus-would suffice to indicate how representative it is of Cyprus as a whole. However, it does

93. That is all I wish to say for the present. But,1
would request you, Mr. President, to be so kind as
to call on me again at a later stage.
* Quoted in English by the speaker.

11

94. The PRESIDENT (franslufion from Chinese):
The next speaker is Mr. Celik, to whom the Council
has extended an invitation under rule 39 of the provisional rules of procedure. In accordance with the
decision taken at the outset of the meeting, I invite
Mr. Celik to take a place at the Council table and to
make his statement.

101. We never wanted separation. Separ
forced on us by the Makarios administratibn. There
is no crisis and there is no reason for alarm. The
whole thing is a specially prepared piab by the
Makarios administration to influence world public
opinion. It is part of a plan to kill intercommunal
negotiations, intemationaiize the Cyprus problem and
prevent a solution based on the political ireality in
0
the island.

95. Mr. CELIK: Mr. President, I should like to
thank you and all the members of the Council for
having given me the opportunity to speak today in
order to present to the Council the views of the Turkish
side on the Cyprus problem.

102. The Cyprus problem was fully discu!ssed both
in the General Assembly and in the Secuiity Council only a -few months ago. The represeniatives of
both communities were allowed to pre$ent their
views, and the General Assembly unanimously
adopted resolution 3212 (XXIX) on 1 vmber
1974.

96. The fact that I have been allowed to speak is
in itself proof that the Turkish side is not being
represented by the so-called Cypriot delegation which
spoke before me.

103. What was the spirit of Gknerai Assembly
resolution 3212 (XXIX), which was later lendorsed
by Security Council resolution 365 (1974)? It was
that: there are two equal national communities in
Cyprus; the constitutional system of the ; Republic
of Cyprus primarily concerns the Turkish Cypriot
and Greek Cypriot communities. The politidai settiement should be sought and found in Cypru$ through
intercommunal negotiations taking place on an equal
footing.
I

97. Through its illegal and unconstitutional actions
the Makarios administration has disqualified itself
from the title and moral right of representative of
Cyprus, and the Greek Cypriot delegation to the
United Nations cannot, therefore, claim to represent
the whole of Cyprus. They are Greek Cypriot representatives, and they speak only for the Greek
Cypriots and their administration.

104. As progress is made towards a peacifui settiement, as a feeling of security is re-established and
as the danger of renewed fighting and bidodshed is
removed, ail foreign forces will be withdrawn and
the humanitarian problem, including the problem of
the refugees, which is common to both communities,
will be solved.

98. Why are we here? Why has the Security Council
been called to an emergency meeting? Why are the
Greek Cypriots here criticizing a situation which they
themselves caused? Why are they complaining about
a state of affairs for which they themselves are wholly
responsible and for which they can blame no one
but themselves? Why are we here and not in Nicosia
carrying out intercommunal talks?

105. I said “as progress is made” be&se, as I
said during the statement I made before thk Council
on 13 December 1974 [181Oth meeting], #both the
question of refugees and the question of vriithdrawal
of forces are political problems, in view of the security
risk involved, and can only be solved within the
framework of the final political settlement.

99. Was it not Makarios who forcibly ousted the
Turkish Cypriots by armed force from ail branches
of government in 1963 and never allowed them to
return? Was it not Makarios who insistently refused
in 1964 and 1965 proposals by Mr. KiiQik-the
then Turkish Cypriot Vice-PresidentAfor joint
meetings of the Turkish Cypriot and Greek Cypriot
Ministers to discuss normalisation with a view to
rectifying the anomalous situation existing on the
island? Was it not the Greek side that refused permission to the Turkish Cypriot Members of Pariiament, elected representatives of the community, to
attend the meetings of the House?

106. There is no need to be a prophet t”d be able
to anticipate what could and would happen if the
Turkish forces were to be withdrawn tomorrow or
if 150,000 Greek Cypriot refugees were to9 return to
the north. The United Nations archives are full of
records of what the Greek Cypriots can a$d will do
to us if and when the opportunity arises.
1
107. Even the Turkish military interventibn of July
1974 did not prevent the massacre of thd innocent
Turkish Cypriot civilian population. Mais graves
unearthed in the presence of the United Nations
Peace-keeping Force in Cyprus and foreign correspondents at Murataga, Atliiar and Sahdaliar in
which the bodies of whole village papuiations,
including small babies, women and 90-year-bid people
were discovered, are ample proof that ineeds fro

100. The Turkish representatives were presented
with an ultimatum to the effect that, unless they
agreed to the abrogation of the Constitution and
endorsed the unconstitutional laws enacted in their
absence by their Greek Cypriot counterparts, their
return would be prevented by the use of physical
force. This incident was related in the SecretaryGeneral’s report of 29 July 1965 to the Security Council
[S/6569 and Add.11.

12

further comment. This is not to mention mass
executions at Taskent, Aydin, Ayios Ioannis,
Limassol and other places.
‘.
108. What has happened in Cyprus since the resolutions of the General Assembly and the Security
Council of late last year? Makarios’ intransigence,
which was so openly manifested during the statement he made in the plenary meeting on 1 October
1974, unfortunately continued after his return to the
island. Constructive proposals put forward and
efforts made by the Turkish Cypriot community for
a peaceful and just settlement of the Cyprus problem
did not receive a positive response from the Greek
Cypriot side.

with the national centre, Athens. What is the meaning
of this statement? What is Makarios’ national
interest? The whole world knows by now both about
his sacred oath to accomplish en&s during his lifetime and about his national aspiration.
113. Through wilful cease-fire violations, official
statements and propaganda; constant efforts have
been made to create the impression that no progress
had been made or could possibly be achieved during
the talks. They created an artificial feeling of high
tension on the island. The purpose was twofold:
first, to bring outside pressure to bear on Turkey
and the Turkish Cypriot community, for example,
by influencing the United States Congress through
the Greek lobby, whose existence is acknowledged
by the whole American press and by the press of
the world, to cut off military aid to Turkey; and
secondly, to take the Cyprus problem outside its
proper context of intercommunal talks and make it
an international issue, and to prevent a solution in
accordance with the spirit of General Assembly
resolution 3212 (XXIX), which recognized the
existence of two equal national communities and
confirmed that intercommunal talks were the best
way of solving the Cyprus problem.

109. We agreed to the reopening of the Lefkose
(Nicosia) International Airport to international traffic
under a neutral foreign airport manager, with a
Turkish Cypriot and a Greek Cypriot assistant. We
consented to the initial return of about 13,000 Greek
Cypriot refugees to Athienou, Akhna and Troulli
villages in the area under Turkish control. We dedared
the Magosa (Famagusta) port open to Greek and
Greek Cypriot ships.
1.10. And what was the response of the Greek
Cypriot side to these Turkish proposals and gestures?
The Greek side showed no interest in our proposal
to open Lefkose International Airport. Our consent
for the return initially of about 13,000 Greek Cypriot
refugees to the Turkish-controlled northern part of
Cyprus did not please them. And the declaration by
the’ Autonomous Turkish Cypriot Administration that
the Magosa port was open to Greek and Greek
Cypriot ships was taken as an insult. It has thus been
ascertained beyond any doubt that any concessions
whatsoever by the Turkish side which fall short of
reducing the Turkish Cypriot community to a simple
minority and confirming the Makarios administration
as the unconditional Government and authority in
Cyprus wiil fail to satisfy the Greek Cypriot side.

114. Recourse to Geneva at a time when the intercommunal talks were going on, the use of the Commission on Human Rights as a forum for the
exploitation of the political question of Cyprus under
the pretext of humanitarian issues and the call for
the appointment of a fact-finding mission are ample
proof of the sincerity and the faith the Greek Cypriot
side had in the peace talks.
115. And why is the appointment of a fact-finding
mission necessary? The fact-finding mission, they
say, will trace the missing persons. Which missing
persons? The thousands of people who were brutally
murdered during the coup of 15 July 1974 by the Greek
National Guard, by the Greek mainland officers, by
EOKA-B, and by Sampson’s armed bandits.

111. Makarios, who unfortunately cannot yet see
the suffering, misery and calamity which he has
caused to Greeks and Turks alike in ‘Cyprus and
who persistently continues to disregard the reality
on the island, chose to respond to the Turkish
proposals by provocative and irresponsible speeches
which cannot in any way contribute to an early peaceful settlement of the problem. For instance, “We
shall not lower the standard of fighting .:. We shall
pursue our struggle to the bitter end.” That is taken
from his speech at Lakadamia on Sunday, 9 February.

116. We do not say that..Makarios said it, and the
Greek Cypriot press wrote it. During the statement
he made before the Security Council on 19 July 1974,
Makarios said: “The coup caused much bloodshed
and took a great to11 of human lives” [/78&h meeting,
para. 211. “I am afraid that the number of casualties
is large and that the material destruction is heavy”
[ibid., para. 161. Immediately after the coup the
Greek Cypriot press unanimously rated the number
of Greek Cypriots kilIed during the coup to be as
high as 3,000 to 4,000.

112. His frequent allusions to an all-out struggle for
“national restoration” and for “the survival of the
Hellenism of Cyprus” have given rise to serious
misgivings among the Turkish-Cypriot community.
He has made public statements to the effect that he
would solve the national problem in accordance with
Greek national interests and in close co-operation

117. But now, unfortunately, as usual, the various
factions within the Greek community have once
more joined forces to blackmail the Turkish side,
and they are trying to attribute their losses’ to the
Turkish armed forces. I am sure no one will take
those lies and unfounded allegations very seriously.
13

118. This is part of the well-known Greek scheme
to internationalize the Cyprus problem. The attempt
to send a fact-finding mission to Cyprus, allegedly
on humanitarian grounds, which they tried to achieve
in Geneva last week.but failed, is a first step towards
a wider political international conference on Cyprus,
to which we are strongly opposed for the well-known
reasons we have made public on many occasions
in the past.

remove any misunderstandings and speculation that
might possibly exist. The joint resolution of the
Council of Ministers and the Legislative Assembly
of, the Autonomous Turkish Cypriot Administration
adopted on 13 February 1975 reads’as follows: I,
1 :

[The speaker. read out unnei II to document.

S/l 1 6 2 4 . 1

1 ‘.
123. The Council of Ministers and the Ggislative
Assembly, after adopting their joint resolution on
the declaration of the Turkish Federated State of the
Republic of Cyprus, further resolved tinanimously
that the president of the Autonomous Turkish Cypriot
Administration, Mr. Rauf Denktas, should forthwith
assume the presidency of the Turkish Federated
State of Cyprus.

119. So the rush by the Greek Cypriots to bring
the Cyprus problem to the Security Council is not a
surprise to us. Mr. Kyprianou, who headed the
Greek Cypriot delegation to the United Nations
during the twenty-ninth session of the General Assembly, who seemed dissatisfied with resolution 3212
(XXIX), which was adopted by the Assembly
unanimously, publicly declared during his statement
before the General Assembly that:
124. It will be .observed from. the .self~xplanatbry
text
I have just read out that the Greek Cypriot
$6 . . . we shall try to bring the matter before the
administration has intentionally misinterpreted,
General__Assembly,
even at an extraordinary
sesgrossly exaggerated and harshly exploited this Turkish
_
_
_
sion, if developments so require, because we ? Cypriot decision, which is purely an internal matter
believe that today . . . is not oniy the beginning of of the Turkish Cypriot community and has nothing
the involvement of the United Nations in Cyprus,
whatsoever to do with the Greek Cypriot community..
for it has been involved for a long time, ‘but the
beginning of specific actions”‘.
125. Archbishop Makarios, since his return to the
island in December .1974, has taken decisions that
That is why we are here-not because the circumare more provocative+ and more unconstitutional in
stances so warranted, but because the Greek Cypriot
nature than this proclamation. He has set up a national.
plan so demanded. The intention was there; it had to
council “to further the national cause”, in,the same
be so.
way as we have formed the constituent assembly,
which is nothing more than the reinforcement of our
120. Well, we are here. But although we are here
already existing House, of Representatives. He has
as a result of a plan cunningly implemented by the
formed a new Cabinet, constituted purely!of GreeR.
Makarios administration, it has been made to appear
Cypriots. Contrary to the Constitution of tfie island,
as if we are here to discuss a. so-called emergency
there is not a single Turk in the Cabinet. :
,
situation that has arisen as a result of the prociama.I
tion of the.
of the-Rsublic
--_ Turkish
._ -_. Federated
-..--.- State_..--.--.
126. Why all the panic, therefore? What :is ail the.
of Cyprus. That was only an excuse. The plan and the
excitement about? Nothing has changed on the island.
intention was to bring the Cyprus problem to the
between the last meeting of the Security Council
Security Council. Had it not been for that proclamaand today. The proclamation of the Turkish Federated
tion, Makari0.s would have declared the talks dead
State of Cyprus has not changed anything. What has
and would have come to New York all the same.
really happened is a‘ reorganization of the internal
But most probably he would have done that not in
structure of the Autonomous ‘Turkish: Cypriot
the middle of February, as he has now, but some
Administration to cope with the increasing social,
time next month. We sensed that all along, and tried
administrative and politica needs of the Turkish
to prevent it. But ail our goodwill proved insufficient
Cypriot community. There is nothing in. the proclato lead the peace talks to success. It takes two to
mation that is contrary to the General !Assembly
make an agreement, and here the second party does
and Security Council resolutions, which we’ respect.
not seem very anxious for an agreement.
This is a state of affairs that has existed, in reaiity,
since July 1974.
121. What is the purpose and intention of the
j s
declaration of the Turkish Federated State of Cyprus?
What are the reasons that -prompted the Turkish 127. _On the same day that the. Turkish Federated
Cypriot community to take such an action? What State of C~IVI.E was proclaimed, Mr.’ Denktag
announced in most clear terms that the interdoes that decision aim to achieve?
communal talks would continue, as scheduled, and
122. With your indulgence, I shall read out the
submitted to Mr. Clerides, through the SpeciaiRepresentative of the SecretaryGeneraI in Cyprus,
original text of the proclamation so as to put on
Mr. Weckmanm-Muiioz, a document tontaining
record the true facts regarding the decision of the
Autonomous Turkish Cypriot Administration and to principles proposed by the Turkish Cypriot side on
14

.i . .

the constitutional problem of the island. The Turkish
proposals were as folIows:

:

,.

‘,,.a.

134. This is not political talk nor is biregional
federation the decision of the Turkish Cypriot political leadership. It is the unanimous wish of the whole
Turkish’ Cypriot community freely manifested and
actually implemented, despite all efforts and inhuman
measures taken by the Greek Cypriot administration
to prevent it. Even brutal murder of women and
children for money by Greek Cypriot taxi-drivers
did not and cannot stop the Turkish Cypriots from
going to the north.

[The speaker read out annex 111 to document
S/11624.]
128. Unfortunately, instead of considering our
proposals and carrying on the negotiations, the
Greek Cypriot side chose to declare the peace talks
“dead”, rushed to Athens, where they received
their visas for the United Nations, and then came
to New York and called, to our mind unnecessarily,
for an urgent meeting of the Security Council.

135. Turkish Cypriots caught by the so-called Greek
Cypriot police or security forces trying to escape
to the north lose al1 their money and valuables,
they are beaten and tortured and then, if not killed,
sent back to, their villages. The House of Representatives of the Greek Cypriot administration
enacted legislation prohibiting the transportation of
Turkish Cypriots by Greek Cypriot-owned taxis.
The fines are constantly being increased, and such
crimes-if crimes they are-have been made the
subject of appeals to the High Courts, and penalties
have been increased to as much as six’ months’
imprisonment for each offence. But all those and
other inhuman measures have failed to prevent the
Turkish Cypriots from going to the north.

129. I should like to put on record once more that
we believe in the intercommunal talks. The Turkish
side is waiting at the table, with all goodwill and
good faith, ready to resume negotiations with the
Greek Cypriot side, if and when they decide to
return-and I hope they will.
130. The Turkish Cypriot position on the Cyprus
problem is well known. We stand for a biregional,
independent, non-aligned federal State. We need this
not for its own sake but for the sake of our security,
for our very existence. Experience and past record
have proved that the two national communities
cannot live peacefully together. The only way to
bring peace and quiet to the island is for the two
communities to live side by side, free to develop
and prosper socially and economically, without any
pressure, discrimination or domination of one by the
other.

136. About 35,000 of a total of 45,000 Turkish
Cypriots living in the south in July 1974 have already
taken refuge in the northern Turkish-controlled part
of the island, leaving behind everything they owned
and cherished. I am sure that the remaining unfortunate 10,000 Turkish Cypriots too will, despite
everything, find a way to come to the north and
live the rest of their lives as free people and not
as hostages or virtual prisoners of the Greek Cypriots.

131. As national feelings, which are at present very
high, cool down and & mutual respect and cdoperation develop between the two national communities, we may hope for and expect the gradual
emergence of a common identity..

137. The free census carried out at the British
sovereign base at Episkopi among the 10,000 Turkish
refugees which showed 100 per cent of those refugees
opting in favour of going to the north is ample proof
of how insecure, how miserable and how desperate
those people feel. It is also indicative of how wrongly,
to say the least, the ,Turkish Cypriots have been
treated by those who pretend to be the Government
of Cyprus and seek United Nations support to continue to torture and indiscriminately to kill innocent
people for their unrealistic political aims.

132. As regards the internal structure, organization
and other details of the biregional federation, we are
ready with all good will to discuss mutual compromise
and accommodation at the negotiation table.
133. At the risk of repeating myself, I should like,
with the Council’s indulgence, to quote from the
statement I made before the Special Political Committee on 29 October 1974:

138. They are here claiming to be “the Govemment”, but they have forfeited that title and they
have proved that they are no longer worthy of it
by their very actions and treatment of the Turkish
Cypriot community-a part of their people. They
are here seeking support for the maintenance of the
independence of Cyprus, but they are unique in the
world as a so-called Government which has armed
itself to the teeth not to protect but to destroy that
independence and to unite with another country.

“Three times”-in 19551959, in 1963-1967 and
in 1974-“the Turkish community in Cyprus was
subjected to terror, mass murder, and heavy material
losses. Three times the Turkish [Cypriot] community
. . . was . . . uprooted from its homes and villages and
forced to become refugees. Three times the Turkish
community in Cyprus was dispossessed of its
property and belongings; and three times the Turkish
[Cypriot] community was deprived of its income.
There must be no fourth time. There shall be no
fourth time.“2

139. It is the Turkish Cypriot community which is
the real fighter and the real defender of the inde15
P

pendence of Cyprus. Had it not been for the Turkish
Cypriot community there would be no independent
Cyprus today. The events of the past 12 years have
proved beyond any doubt that the salvation of the
independence of Cyprus depends on the ability of
the Turkish Cypriot community to defend both itself
and that independence.

law, with a wider coverage, has been enacted by
the Greek Cypriot House of Representat&es, in the
absence of Turkish members, granting Cypriot
citizenship to mainland Greeks and Greek mainland
army personnel. This has been verified by the dual
nationality identity cards discovered on Greek
mainland soldiers caught during the July and August
fighting of last year.

140. The Greek Cypriots are here speaking against
biregional federation and asking support for the
preservation of the demographic status of the island,
but they have ‘managed to chase all the Turkish
Cypriots to the north, where they ran for their lives.
They are here complaining about the proclamation
of the Turkish Federated State, which is really nothing
more than an internal reorganization of the ‘Turkish
Cypriot community; but for 12 years they unheedingly
violated the Constitution, forcibly ousted the Turkish
Cypriots from government, tried to make Cyprus a
Greek island, reduced the Turks to second-class
citizenship and failed to give the Turkish Cypriots
that feeling of security, that feeling of being wanted,
that is so essential for peaceful coexistence.

146. The Greek Cypriots and the Greeks of mainland Greece should ‘not worry over this point. There
are more Turkish Cypriots abroad who either have
Cypriot nationality or can acquire Cypriot icitizenship
under the Constitution as it stands than we can
possibly accommodate on the island. There is no
need to draw on Turkish mainland nationals.
I
147. It has been claimed today that the kurich and
London agreements have been imposed on Cyprus.
I should like to put on record that at the London
conference, which was attended by both communities, as well as by Greece, Turkey and Britain,
the Greek Cypriot side was represented ,by a very
large delegation, and the agreements were signed
freely and accepted. What has been really imposed
on the Greek side is not the agreements but independence, which was never wanted because what
was actually wanted was the union of Cyprus
.’ 1 with
Greece.
/’

141. All we can say is that even at this late hour,
we hope that the Greek Cypriots with their President,
leadership and people, will realize their mistakes,
co-operate towards a realistic solution which will
save further trouble and suffering, and help to rebuild
a new, peaceful, prosperous Cyprus.

148. The decision of the Autonomous Turkish
Cypriot Administration to proclaim the Turkish
Federated State of Cyprus was taken freely by the
Turkish Cypriot community and was not in any way
imposed on us from outside. Mr. Denktas, who is
our negotiator at the intercommunal talks, is negotiating freely, in consultation with his colleagues,
with the members of his Cabinet, and whatever
we decide he takes to the negotiation table. We shall
not deny that we do consult with the Turkish Govemment at times. But we do not in any way receive
directions and we are definitely not p&ssured or
given orders as to what to do or what io choose,
what not to accept or to accept during the 1talks.

142. We have been criticized by the Greek Cypriot
delegation today for having passed a bill allegedly
granting Turkish Cypriot citizenship to 40,000 Turkish
soldiers and their families. This is untrue. There
are definitely not 40,000 troops on the island, and
the bill under reference does not purport to give
Turkish Cypriot citizenship to any soldier. What the
bill aims to give is more psychological than real.
143. It is meant as a token of appreciation for
the families of those who fell fighting for the independence of Cyprus. It is an honorary title for those
concerned. We are not an independent country.
We have not declared an independent Cyprus. We
are not asking for political recognition. We are not
a separate country. Therefore, there should not be,
I presume, a separate Turkish Cypriot citizenship.
How can we give away what does not exist, let
alone the fact that, legally, it is not possible, according
to Turkish mainland laws, to give Turkish Cypriot
or Cypriot nationality to any Turkish nationals,
because the Turkish Nationality Law does not
recognize dual nationality. But that is, I think, beside
the point.

149. I am sorry to observe that the Greek Cypriot
side has not come out honestly with the fact that
it is in touch with Greece and that in fact it receives
orders from Greece. Archbishop Makarios, returning
to Cyprus from New York, where he attended the
General Assembly, could not go back ‘to Cyprus
before he called in at Athens. The nego’ i iations did
not start before the summit meeting was held at the
national centre, Athens. The Greek Cypriot delegation that is here today did not come here before
it went to Athens. I shall not comment any
1 further
on this.

144. I should like to repeat once more that this is
only a psychological way of expressing our gratitude
to the families of those who fell fighting for the
independence of Cyprus.

1

150. It has been claimed that the Turkish side
has kept putting off and postponing negotiations
and discussions of the substance of the political
problem during the talks. I should like” to put on

145. Incidentally, and for the information of the
Council, I should like to put on record that a similar
16

record that the agenda of the negotiations was mutually
agreed upon by both representatives of the communities-Mr. Clerides and Mr.! Denktaz-in the
following order: the Nicosia airport, the Famagusta
port and, the third item, the political’talks. And the
negotiations started in that order. If there has been
no progress whatsoever, it is because we have not
yet reached agreement on the two issues that precede
the political substance of the matter, and, naturally,
both sides having exchanged proposals for the talks,
I hope that when negotiations resume the negotiators
will come around to the political issues, as well.

International Airport, but that upon directions from
Ankara, Mr. Denktas had to go back on his decision.
I should like to put the record straight by saying
here that such an agreement was not reached in Nicosia. Our position, as our most recent proposals
indicate-and they still stand-is to reopen the Nicosia International Airport to international traffic under
a neutral foreign airport manager with two assistants,
one Greek Cypriot and one Turkish Cypriot.
156. Ankara supports only what Mr. DenktaS and
his colleagues accept and agree upon, and I must
state most emphatically that there are no directions
or interventions from Ankara.

151. A multicantonal solution-which has been
advocated-is one which has been tried and failed.
Cantons existed since 1963. All Turkish Cypriots
living in the cantons or enclaves were treated as
prisoners or virtual hostages until, ultimately, in
July 1974 all of them had been broken up, and there
are no enclaves and no cantons to return to today.

157. Mr. MALIK (Union of Soviet Socialist Republics) (interpretation from Russian): Today the
Security Council meets for the first time in the
current year, 1975, at an official meeting. This year
1975 is a special year. In May, the Soviet people,
the peoples of the countries of the anti-Hitler coalition
and the peoples of the whole world will be celebrating
the great historical event of the thirtieth anniversary
of the victory over fascism. The great patriotic war
of 1941-1945 was for the Soviet people one of the
sternest tests ever undergone by our country.

152. As regards the proposals, nothing in them should
be interpreted as being the last word. Naturally,
since negotiations are going on, proposals and counterproposals will be negotiated, and the final settlement
will be mutually agreed upon. We do not agree with
the view that the proclamation of the Turkish Federated State of Cyprus has made talks either useless
or unnecessary. This being an internal reorganization
of the Turkish Cypriot community, it should not in
any way affect the talks, which we consider as
continuing.

158. The Soviet Union, its people and its valiant
armed forces, under the leadership of the Communist
Party, defended its freedom and independence and
carried out a great mission of liberation and honourably
discharged its international duty. Our country played
a decisive role in the defeat of Hitlerite Germany.
It was not a cheap victory; it cost 20 million lives;
1,890,OOO million roubles was the cost of the war
over four years, and 675,000 million roubles was the
cost of the damage caused in the enemy-occupied
territory.

153. It is suggested that paragraph 6 of General
Assembly resolution 3212 (XXIX) should be enforced
by the Assembly and that a fixed period of time
should be set during which Turkey should comply
with its provisions. We share the feeling of urgency
about finding a solution for the problem. But we
differ on how to go about solving it. The Turkish
forces on Cyprus are there at our invitation and in
accordance with international agreements in order
to prevent bloodshed and to maintain the independence of the island. As I stated earlier, the complete
withdrawal of troops, in view of the security risk
involved, can only go on in parallel with or after
the solution of the political problem and a feeling
,
of security is achieved.

159. A major contribution to the common victory
over the enemy was made by the peoples and armies
of the States of the anti-Hitler coalition. The possibility of effective co-operation of States with different social and political systems was thus demonstrated.
160. The thirtieth anniversary of the victory over
Fascist Germany is an outstanding political event in
the life of the Soviet people and the whole of
progressive mankind. The 9th of May 1975 will be
celebrated in our country as a great national holiday.
The General Secretary of the Central Committee
of the Communist Party of the Soviet Union,
Mr. Brezhnev, at a luncheon in the Kremlin in honour
of the Prime Minister of the United Kingdom, Harold
Wilson, on 14 February 1975, stated the following:

154. Speaking of the withdrawal of troops, I am sorry
that the question of the illegal presence of Greek
mainland forces on the island has not been referred to.
And again I should like to note that for the past 11 years
during which we have been negotiating a peaceful
solution on Cyprus at gunpoint and under pressure
from Greek-mainland forces illegali~on-the i%%l%
one spoke of the urgency of solving the problem and
there was no call for fixing a date for its solution. None
the less, we believe in the urgency of solving the
problem and we shall do everything possible to contribute towards that end.

“The present day of our planet on which we
are living as ever closer neighbours is hallmarked
by a struggle for dedication to the memory of those
who gave their lives in the battle against aggression and for the right of people to live in condi-

155. It has been claimed by Mr. Carayannis that
Mr. Denktag accepted the reactivation of the Nicosia
17

tions of peace, independence and liberty. It would,
recent years there has been a particular strengthening
I believe, be no exaggeration to say that never
of the comprehensive and businesslike relations
before have such vigorous efforts been made on a and,co-operation between the Soviet Union and those
broad international scale to strengthen peace and
States. Those countries have often been represented
peaceful. co-operation among St&es. But a great
in the Council ana have made their contribution to
i
deal remains to be done.” .I .
its work.
1
161. In the flames and, sufferings ,of the Second 166. The delegation of the Soviet Union cannot
World War the idea of &eating the United ,Nations
fail to express its gratitude to ‘the .,delegations of
was born, and the Organization itself .was created.
Indonesia, Kenya, Peru, Austria,, and ! Australia,
The major purpose.of the Organization, as is stated
whose terms of office in the Council Iexpired at
in its Charter, is to maintain international peace and
the end of 1974. We very much appreciate the spirit
security and to save succeeding generations from the
of mutual understanding and co-operation which
scourge of war.
their representatives displayed in the Security Council in the discharge of the responsible tasks facing
162. In 1975 the peoples of the United,Nations will
the Council, and also the contribution which they
also be celebrating the thirtieth anniversary of
made to the Council’s work.
,.
the Organization at the thirtieth session of the
‘. :
General Assembly. This, too, will make 1975 a
167. Today’s meeting of the Security iCouncil is
memorable year.
the first one after the conclusion of the work of the
twenty-ninth session of the General Assembly, the
163. As is well known, the defeat of Hitler’s Germany
results- of which are of importance, and, I think one
and its henchmen in Europe and the Far East promoted
can say without exaggeration, of historical signifithe powerful upsurge of the national liberation movecance, both for. the future of the United Nations
ment and the collapse of the colonial system of
itself and for the maintenance and *strengthening of
imperialism. Many countries of Asia, Africa and
peace and international security ‘and the deveiopLatin America liberated themselves from colonial
ment of intemationai co-operation as a whole.
1
slavery and set forth confidently on the. part to independent development. Proof of this is the emergence
168. The Assembly unambiguously pronounced
of many new independent States which became, as
itself in favour of expanding and intensifying the
they were entitled to, Members of the United Nations,
easing of international tension and in favour of the
the membership of which has almost trebled. Here
process of detente becoming irreversible. The Assemtoday, around the Security Council table, there are
bly adopted a number of important decisions designed
a number of representatives whose countries achieved
to complete the process of decolonizatian and also
independence in the post-war period. The Soviet
prepared and laid down in the historic ilCharter of
delegation takes great pleasure in welcoming the new
Economic Rights and Duties of States the fundamental
members of the Council.
principles of international economic co-operation
and the development of young’ States. Thus it
164. We welcome the United Republic of Tanzania
consolidated the decisions adopted at the sixth special session of the General Assembly on the creation
and Guyana in the persons of their Permanent
of a new international economic order. The Charter
Representatives,
Mr. Salim and Mr. Jackson.
Everyone knows the active role which is being played
of Economic Rights and Duties laid down such poiiby both of these States in the non-aligned movement
tically pxessive
-__. principles and provisions as the
and ‘in the United Nations. The Soviet Union has
prmciple of peaceful coexistence, the Zcrple urai
international- trade should be coursed -on the basis
enjoyed many years of friendly relations and coof mutual benefit, equal advantage ;ind ithe mutual
operation with the United Republic of Tanzania,
relations which embrace the political, economic and
granting of most favoured nation status,’ the provision on theinadmissibility of discrimination in trade
cultural spheres. We are ready to develop relations
of all kinds also with the young non-aligned State
and in other forms of economic co-operation based
of Guyana. The representatives of those countries
upon differences in political, economic 1 and social
-~-.
are well known in the Umll‘gons for their great
systems, the obligation on-’ all States to promote the
diplomatic experience and authority, and there is
achievement of general and complete disarmament
every reason to believe that they will make a very
under effective international control, tke provision
important contribution to the work of the Council in
on the link between disarmament and development;
and the need to eliminate colonialism and: aggression,
ensuring international peace and security.
and mentioned a number of other principles and
165. The delegation of the Soviet Union welcomes
provisions.
and congratulates the new members of the Security
Council, Italy, Sweden and Japan, in the persons of
16Y. The Assembly adopted a number of important
decisions designed to bring about a peaceful and just
their Permanent Representatives, Mr. Plaja, Mr. Rydsettlement in accordance with the principles of the
beck and Mr. Saito, upon the election of their
countries as members of the Security Council. In
United Nations Charter of such urgent intemationai

unanimously endorsed by the Security Council, and
thus became binding upon all States Members of the
United Nations. As is well known, in those decisions
of the Security Council and the General Assembly,
provision was made for a settlement of the Cyprus
question on the basis of respect for the sovereignty,
independence and territorial integrity of the Republic
of Cyprus, respect for its policy of non-alignment
and the immediate withdrawal of all foreign troops
and military personnel from its territory, nonintervention in the internal affairs of the Republic
of Cyprus and the early return of all refugees to their
homes in safety.

in the Council, with certain circies of the North
Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO) // that are
attempting to use Cyprus for their military and
strategic .purposes. The current events in Cyprus
amply demonstrate that those circles are btubbomly
continuing to pursue their policy of consolidating
the partition of the island and converting the territory
into a bulwark of this bloc in the eastern Mediterranean.
Attempts are still being made to solve the Cyprus
problem within the narrow circle of membership of
NATO, and there is still resistance to the consideration of the Cyprus problem in a broader international
forum.

180. Those fundamental decisions on the settlement
of the Cyprus problem have not yet been implemented. On the contrary, unilateral actions have
been taken which are in direct contravention of
decisions of the United Nations, and which have
caused the situation in and around Cyprus, which
was already complicated and explosive enough, to
deteriorate even further.

185. What we are witnessing is a deliberate attempt
to keep the United Nations out of direct, active
participation in a settlement of the Cyprus crisis
on the basis of the lofty principles and /provisions
of the Charter and the decisions on Cyprus taken by
the Security Council and the General Assembly. It
is quite clear that these circles have not abandoned
their intentions or their attempts to impose upon the
people of Cyprus a solution to the Cyprus problem
prepared in the closed, narrow circle of the Atlantic
Powers. The essence of such a decision could notfai1
to be in conflict with the genuine national interests of
the people of Cyprus, because it would be designed
to supplant the independence and sovereignty of the
Republic of Cyprus and ensure the dominance in the
island of a military bloc, thus burying lthe policy I
of non-alignment pursued by that State. 1

181. The Soviet delegation considers it necessary
to acquaint the Security Council and its members
with an official statement of TASS, made on 16 February 1975, in connection with the recent events on
Cypms. It reads:
[The speaker read out the statement contained
in document S/11627.]

186. Such actions and such plans for solving the
Cyprus problem have nothing whatsoever in common
with the genuine national interests ‘of the people of
Cyprus and, furthermore, constitute an .attempt to
bypass the unanimously adopted ‘resolution of the
General Assembly and the decisions taken by the
Security Council on Cyprus. These documents of
the United Nations unambiguously call for a halt to
all foreign intervention in the internal f affairs of
Cyprus, the earliest possible withdrawal from the
island of all foreign troops and the immefiate return
of the refugees to their homes.
1
187. The Soviet Union has firmly and consistently
supported and continues to support the sovereignty,
independence and territorial integrity of the Republic
‘of Cyprus. It is against the partitioning of the&land;
it is against enosis, and also so-called double en&s.
Since the very beginning of the tragic events in
Cyprus the Soviet Union has put forward a number
of concrete, constructive proposals that, if implemented, could bring about a speedy and: just settlement of the Cyprus crisis, in the interksts of the
people of Cyprus. The people of Cyprus would
cease to be the pawns of those who have no regard
for their freedom or independence. It {is not the
Soviet Union’s fault that those proposals have not
been adopted or acted upon. The responsibility for
the continuation of the tragedy of the Cypriot people
lies fully with those who have resisted the effective

182, The delegation of the Soviet Union wishes
to express its serious concern over the unilateral
actions I have mentioned, which have been taken by
the leadership of the Turkish community in Cyprus.
It is quite clear that such actions threaten the prospects
for the achievement of agreement in the intercommunal talks. The steps taken by the leadership of
the Turkish community in Cyprus will inevitably
lead to a separation of the Cyprus communities from
each other and to their estrangement. Those steps,
which will lead to the defacto partition of the Cyprus
State, are in direct contravention. of the decisions
of the Security Council and the General Assembly
aimed at preventing partition of the Republic of
Cyprus and confirming its sovereignty, independence
and territorial integrity.
183. Such actions may be used for their own narrow
purposes by those circies that have iong since been
hatching plans to eliminate Cyprus as an independent
and sovereign State with territorial integrity, in spite
of the interests of the Cypriot people. They contradict
the repeated appeals of the Security Council to the
parties to the Cyprus conflict to show the utmost
restraint and to refrain from any action that could
cause the situation to deteriorate even further.
184. The responsibility for the events in Cyprus
and for the further exacerbation of the situation in
that area lies, as has been repeatedly pointed out
20

participation of the United Nations in a settlement
of the Cyprus problem and have taken action to place
the solution of this problem within the narrow cons fines of a certain group of countries.
.
188. In all important international talks with the
Governments of other countries the Soviet Union
has raised and will continue to raise the question of
the need for an early solution of the Cyprus problem.
As the Soviet delegation has already pointed out,
the Cyprus question occupied an important place in
the talks held last November in the Vladivostok
region between the General Secretary of the Central
Committee of the Communist Party of the Soviet
Union, Comrade Brezhnev, and the President of the
United States, Mr. Ford; and in the talks held with
the President of France, Mr. Giscard d’Estaing, at
the time of Comrade Brezhnev’s visit to France in
December 1974. I should like to take this opportunity
to recall the provisions relating to the Cyprus question
that are contained in the Soviet-American and SovietFrench communiquCs. Those provisions are still
relevant today, and they are fully in keeping with
the decisions on Cyprus taken by the Security Council
and the General Assembly. They are of particular
importance in connection with the recent events in.
,
Cyprus.

191. The question of Cyprus and the recent events
on Cyprus were referred to also in the joint SovietBritish statement signed on 16 February 1975 in
Moscow by the General Secretary of the Central
Committee of the Communist Party of the Soviet
Union, Comrade Brezhnev, and the Prime Minister
of the United Kingdom, Mr. Wilson. The relevant
part of the statement reads:
“In connection with recent events in Cyprus
the Soviet Union and the United Kingdom reaffirm
their support for the principle of the preservation
of the sovereignty, independence and territorial
integrity of the Republic of Cyprus. They support
the implementation of the relevant resolutions on
Cyprus of the Security Council and the General
Assembly of the United Nations. The Soviet Union
and the United Kingdom recognize the one lawful
Government of Cyprus, headed by President
Makarios.”
192. I should like to refer now to another more
recent document. In the joint communique on the
talks they held at Geneva on 16 and 17 February
this year, the Foreign Minister of the Soviet Union,
Mr. Gromyko, and the Secretary of State of the
United States, Mr. Kissinger, once again proclaimed
the firm support of the Soviet Union and the United
States for the independence, sovereignty and territorial
integrity of the Republic of Cyprus and its lawful
Government. The document states:

189; In the joint Soviet-American communique of
24 November 1974 the two parties made the following
declaration:
“Having discussed the situation existing in the
eastern Mediterranean, both sides state their firm
support for the independence, sovereignty and
territorial integrity of Cyprus and will make every
effort to that end. They consider that a just settlement of the Cyprus question must be based on
the strict implementation of the resolutions regarding
Cyprus adopted by the Security Council and the
General Assembly of the United Nations.**

“As a result of ‘the exchange of opinions on the
Cyprus problem, both sides confirm their strong
support for the independence, sovereignty and
territorial integrity of Cyprus. They recognize the
present Cyprus Government as the lawful Govemment of the Republic of Cyprus. Both sides continue to hold that a just solution of the Cyprus
problem must be based on strict implementation
of the resolutions on Cyprus of the Security Council
and the General Assembly of the United Nations.”

190. Similarly, in the Soviet-French communique
of 7 December 1974, the mutually agreed position
of the two sides on Cyprus was set forth as follows:

193. The position expressed in .those joint communiques and statements on Cyprus by four permanent
members of the Security Council, based upon decisions of the Council and the General Assembly on
the Cyprus question, ‘together with those United
Nations decisions, constitute a good basis for a
settlement of the Cyprus question.

“The Soviet Union and France express their
concern regarding the continuation of the dangerous
situation in Cyprus. They proceed on the premise
that the settlement of the Cyprus question should
be achieved through negotiations and should be
based on full respect for the independence,
sovereignty and territorial integrity of the Republic
of Cyprus and on strict implementation of the
decisions on Cyprus of the Security Council and
the General Assembly of the United Nations.

194. In this regard it is appropriate to recall that
at the twenty-ninth session of the General Assembly
the Foreign Ministers of Turkey and of Greece also
stated, on behalf of their Governments, that their
countries were against the partition of Cyprus.

“The Soviet Union and France are in favour of
the earliest possible withdrawal of all foreign troops
from the Republic of Cyprus and the return to
their homes of all refugees, in conditions of
security.”

195. The Foreign Minister of Turkey said the
following in his statement to the General Assembly:
“On behalf of the Government of Turkey, I condemn
any idea of partition, whether in the past or in the
future...“3
21

:.
.
_‘

196. The Foreign Minister of Greece made a similar
statement in thi General Assembly. He said: “I
am glad to be given the opportunity to solemnly
reiterate from this rostrum, that Greece has no ulterior
aims in Cyprus. As a signatory of the Nicosia agreements, it is committed against enosis and against
partition.‘*4
197. In considering the Cyprus question in connexion
with recent events on Cyprus, the Security Council
is entitled to expect that four permanent members
of the Security Council will act in accordance with
their positions officially stated in the above-quoted
joint communiques; and that the representatives of
Turkey and Greece will, for their part, confirm the
statements made by the Foreign Ministers of their
countries at the twenty-ninth session of the General
Assembly. In this way the doubts of the members
of the Council and of the general public can be
dispelled, as it has been officially confirmed that
neither the Government of Turkey nor the Govemment of Greece is pursuing the goal of partitioning
the island on any pretext or under any cover
whatsoever.
198. As has already been pointed out, the appeal
for respect for the sovereignty, independence and
territorial integrity of the Republic of Cyprus is
contained in the unanimously adopted decisions of
the Security Council and the General Assembly
with whose aims the Governments of Turkey and
of Greece have agreed.
199. The Soviet Union continues to consider that
these decisions should serve as a basis for a settiement of the Cyprus question. Guided by that position
of principle, the Soviet delegation considers it
necessary to state that the Soviet Union recognizes
the only lawful Government of the Republic of Cyprus
headed by President Makarios. This is in keeping with
the decisions of the Security Council in its resolutions 353 (1974) of 20 July 1974 and 364 (1974) of
13’December 1974. This was once again confirmed
in the Soviet-British declaration that I have mentioned
and in the Soviet-United States communique.
200. In view of the seriousness of the situation now
prevailing in Cyprus, the delegation of the Soviet
Union considers that the Security Council should,
in its resolution, confirm the need to preserve the
sovereignty, independence and territorial integrity of
the Republic of Cyprus. It must also clearly and
unambiguously express its opposition to any actions
leading to the partition of the Republic of Cyprus
and take measures to implement the Council’s decisions with regard to the immediate withdrawal of
foreign troops from the territory of Cyprus.
201. A study of the report submitted by the SecretaryGeneral to the Security Council on the question of

:

I
4

Cyprus gives us grounds for concluding that it &as
impossible for the intercommunal talks, in the conditions in which they were conducted, to y$eld positive
results and in the final analysis they wefe subverted
by the unilateral actions of the leadership of the
Turkish community. It is understandable why. the
Secretary-General stated to correspondents in Athens,
as emerges from United Press agency reports: “I
believe that it would he useful if we could find
a new approach to the process of talks.” Indeed,
there is need now to seek formulae for the talks that
would ensure a speedy and just settlement of the
Cyprus question in accordance, with the decisions of
the Security Council and resolutions oq the twentyninth session of the General Assembly.
i
202. Recent events in Cyprus and the whole tragedy
of the Cyprus people, as has already been repeatedly
pointed out, demonstrate the totally unfounded nature
of the system of .guarantees imposed upon Cyprus.
The course of events and experience have once
again amply confirmed that a just and lasting settlement of the Cyprus problem, with a guarantee of a
durable existence for Cyprus as an independent,
sovereign and territorially integral State, cannot be
sought within a narrow circle of countries which
are guided only by their bloc and strategic interests.
/
203. In view of what has occurred in /recent days
exacerbating the ‘situation in Cyprus, the Soviet
Union once again confirms its ‘well-known position:
the most effective way to solve the Cyprus problem
would be to consider it at a representative intemational conference, within the framework of the
United Nations and with the participation of members
of the Security CounciI and a number of other States,
in particular from among the non-aligned countries.
Such a conference should prepare and implement
effective measures to ensure the independence,
sovereignty and territorial integrity of the. Republic
of Cyprus. The present situation in Cyprus highlights
the need to intensify efforts to convene su.ch a
representative conference. The Soviet delegation is
firmly convinced that, if the non-aligned countries
were to take a firm pos’ition with similar determination and unanimity on the Cyprus matter. as ‘they
did on a number of questions ,of concern to -them
during the twenty-ninth session of the General
Assembly,. then by their joint efforts with members
of the Security Council the Cyprus probiem couid be
solved on a lasting and just ‘basis and it would be
possible to ensure the continued existence of Cyprus
as an independent, sovereign, territo~lly integral
and non-aligned State. ,
;
3
204. In conclusion, the delegation of the Soviet
Union considers it appropriate also to remind the
Council of the previous proposal of the Soviet Union
to dispatch a Security Council mission to Cyprus.
In connection with the present aggravated situation in Cyprus that requires the adoption of urgent

,:

measures, the Council would be acting sensibly and
correctly if it were immedia$ly to dispatch to Cyprus
a special mission which would acquaint itself with
the situation on the spot and present a’report on it
to the ,Couiicil.
.
:.
,
The meeting rose at 7p.m.

Notes
’ See Osficial

Records of the General Assembly, Twenty-ninth

Se;?&,

Plenary Meetings, 2275th meeting.
Twenty-ninth Session, Special Politick/

Summa$

Records, 18 September-4 December 1974,922nd

‘Ibid., Twenty-ninth Session, Plenary Meetings.
4 Ibid., 2 2 3 9 t h meeting.

.’

*

).

meeting:

para. 69.

:

_’

Committee

‘.

,

.’

/

23

:

‘f‘

.’

2241st meeting.

.

.

HOW TO OBTAIN UNITED NATIONS PUBLICATIONS
United Nations publications may be obtained from bookstores and distributors throughout the
world. Consult your bookstore or write to: United Nations, Sales Section, New York or Geneva.
COMMENT SE PROCURER LES PUBLICATIONS DES NATIONS

UNITS

Les publications des Nations Units sont en vente dans les libtairies et les agences depositaires du
monde entier. Informez-vous auprb de votre libraire ou adressez-vous a : Nations Unies, Section
des ventes, New York ou Geneve.
KAK IIOJTYUE~TIB

IllAAHEIII OPI-AHH

3AQHH

OFbEAMHEHHhIX

HAUMFf

Wsaaxwn Opranusauxw
06+t,enxxenxbrx Hat@3 ~omxo xynmb B xmmib~x maraJuHaX U arexTCTx&x ao xeex paRoxax hfupa. Hasonu-re cnpaxxu 0 6 u3AaHnRx B
xatuex XARXHOW maraaxxe HIIH nHmWTe no aapeev: Opraxmaqns 06%eAWHeHAblX
HawR,

Cexum no npoztawte wsnarrwti, HMO-Plopx HIIW XCenesa.

COMO CONSEGUIR PUBLICACIONES DE LAS NACIONES UNIDAS
Las publicaciones de las Naciones Unidas es& en venta en librerias y casas distribuidotas en
todas partes de1 mundo. Consulte a su librero o dirijase a: Naciones Unidas, Seccidn de Ventas,
Nueva York o Ginebra.

Litho in United Nations, New York

82-612024eptember

1983-2.20
