S/PV.9393

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-eighth year

9393rd meeting

Tuesday, 8 August 2023, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mrs. Thomas-Greenfield. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(United States of America)

Members:

Albania . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Brazil. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ecuador. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Gabon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ghana . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Japan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Malta. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Mozambique . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Switzerland . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Arab Emirates . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 

Mr. Stastoli
Mr. França Danese
Mrs. Gui Dan
Mrs. Sánchez Izquierdo
Mrs. Jaraud-Darnault
Mr. Biang
Mr. Agyeman
Mr. Tamaura
Mr. Camilleri
Mr. Afonso
Mr. Glukhov
Mr. Hauri
Ms. Alshamsi
Mr. Phipps

Agenda
The situation in the Middle East
Letter dated 6 July 2023 from the Secretary-General addressed to the President
of the Security Council (S/2023/508)
Letter dated 27 July 2023 from the Secretary-General addressed to the President
of the Security Council (S/2023/558)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of speeches delivered
in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records of the Security Council.
Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They should be incorporated in a copy
of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the
Verbatim Reporting Service, room AB-0601 (verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be
reissued electronically on the Official Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

23-23479 (E)
*2323479*

Accessible document

Please recycle

S/PV.9393

The situation in the Middle East

The meeting was called to order at 10.05 a.m.

Prohibition of Chemical Weapons (OPCW) Technical
Secretariat on activities related to resolution 2118
(2013).

Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.

Since the Council’s previous meeting on this matter
(see S/PV.9372), the OPCW Declaration Assessment
Team (DAT) has continued its efforts to clarify all
outstanding issues regarding the initial declaration
and subsequent declarations submitted by the Syrian
Arab Republic.

The situation in the Middle East
Letter dated 6 July 2023 from the
Secretary-General addressed to the President
of the Security Council (S/2023/508)
Letter dated 27 July 2023 from the
Secretary-General addressed to the President
of the Security Council (S/2023/558)
The President: In accordance with rule 37 of the
Council’s provisional rules of procedure, I invite the
representatives of the Islamic Republic of Iran, the
Syrian Arab Republic and Türkiye to participate in
this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the following
briefers to participate in this meeting: Mr. Adedeji Ebo,
Deputy to the High Representative of the United Nations
Office for Disarmament Affairs; and Mr. Mohamad
Katoub, Project Manager, IMPACT — Civil Society
Research and Development.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I wish to draw the attention of Council members
to document S/2023/508, which contains a letter dated
6 July 2023 from the Secretary-General addressed to
the President of the Security Council, and document
S/2023/558, which contains a letter dated 27 July 2023
from the Secretary-General addressed to the President
of the Security Council.
I give the floor to Mr. Ebo.
Mr. Ebo: I thank Council members for the
opportunity to brief them once again on the
implementation of Security Council resolution 2118
(2013) on the elimination of the chemical weapons
programme of the Syrian Arab Republic. I am providing
this briefing on behalf of the High Representative for
Disarmament Affairs, Mrs. Izumi Nakamitsu, who is
currently away from Headquarters.
Since the most recent consideration of this matter
by the Council, and consistent with established practice,
the Office for Disarmament Affairs has been in regular
contact with its counterparts in the Organization for the
2/13

08/08/2023

As previously reported, the last round of
consultations between the DAT and the Syrian
National Authority took place in February 2021.
Since then, all efforts to organize the next — that
is, the twenty-fifth — round of consultations have
been unsuccessful. I have been advised that although
the Syrian Arab Republic agreed to the OPCW
Technical Secretariat’s May 2022 proposal to address
the declaration-related issues through exchange of
correspondence, the Technical Secretariat has yet to
receive from the Syrian Arab Republic any declarations
or other documents requested. That includes a complete
declaration of activities at the Scientific Studies and
Research Centre (SSRC) and a declaration of quantities
of nerve agents produced at one chemical-weapon
production facility that the Syrian Arab Republic had
declared as never having been used to produce chemical
weapons. Due to that situation, and in a further attempt
to implement its mandate, the OPCW Technical
Secretariat has deployed a reduced team, consisting
of several members of the DAT, to the Syrian Arab
Republic to conduct limited in-country activities. The
first such deployment took place from 17 to 22 January,
and the second from 12 to 19 April. The outcomes of
the deployments were reported to the States parties to
the Chemical Weapons Convention in March and July
2023, respectively.
I have been informed that in March, following a
prior attempt by the OPCW Technical Secretariat in
November 2022, the Syrian Arab Republic proposed
meeting with the Technical Secretariat in Damascus or
Beirut to develop a new work plan to resolve all issues
related to the Syrian chemical-weapon dossier. As a
result, a delegation from the Technical Secretariat met
with representatives of the Syrian Arab Republic in
Beirut on 22 and 23 June. I understand that the meeting
had a fully open agenda, and the following points
were addressed.
First, a six-month extension to the tripartite
agreement between the OPCW, the Syrian Arab
23-23479

08/08/2023

The situation in the Middle East

Republic and the United Nations Office for Project
Services was agreed, extending its duration up to and
including 31 December.
Secondly, the Syrian Arab Republic committed
to presenting proposals for better implementing
its obligations.
Thirdly, the OPCW Technical Secretariat and the
Syrian Arab Republic discussed the conduct of the
twenty-fifth round of consultations as the optimal
means of achieving outcomes related to the Syrian
chemical-weapon dossier.
Fourthly, the OPCW Technical Secretariat
emphasized that its priority was a resumption of
rounds of consultations that would include all experts
designated by the Technical Secretariat. Regarding
the resumption of consultations, I understand that the
matter was to be referred to the head of the Syrian
National Authority and that the OPCW Technical
Secretariat is awaiting that decision in order to proceed
with planning for the next round.
The OPCW Technical Secretariat remains fully
committed to implementing its mandate aimed at
verifying the fulfilment of the Syrian Arab Republic’s
declaration obligations under the Convention, decisions
by the OPCW policymaking organs and resolution 2118
(2013). However, as has been previously emphasized,
the full cooperation of the Syrian Arab Republic
with the OPCW Technical Secretariat is essential
in closing all outstanding issues. Considering the
gaps, inconsistencies and discrepancies that have
been identified and remain unresolved, at this time
the OPCW Technical Secretariat assesses that the
declaration submitted by the Syrian Arab Republic still
cannot be considered accurate and complete as required
under the Chemical Weapons Convention.
With regard to the inspections of the Barzah and
Jamrayah facilities of the SSRC, I have been advised
that the OPCW Technical Secretariat continues to plan
the next round of inspections, to be held in 2023. I regret
to inform the Council that the Syrian Arab Republic
has yet to provide sufficient technical information
or explanations that would enable the Technical
Secretariat to close the issue related to the detection
of a Schedule 2 chemical at the Barzah facilities of
the SSRC in November 2018. In addition, I have been
informed that during the ninth round of inspections at
the Barzah facility of the SSRC in September 2022,
the inspection team observed a number of boxes
containing a chemical of a dual-use nature stored

S/PV.9393

in large quantities at the facility’s chemical storage
warehouse. Following the inspection, the OPCW
Technical Secretariat engaged the Syrian National
Authority on the matter and requested information that
would allow it to assess that all activities conducted in
the facility are for purposes not prohibited under the
Convention. I understand that the Technical Secretariat
is still awaiting that information.
Regarding the unauthorized movement of the two
cylinders related to the chemical-weapon incident that
took place in Douma on 7 April 2018, which were
allegedly destroyed in an attack on a chemical-weapon
production facility, the OPCW Technical Secretariat is
still awaiting information related to the unauthorized
movement of those cylinders. I again call on the Syrian
Arab Republic to respond with urgency to all of the
Technical Secretariat’s requests.
I have been advised that the OPCW Fact-Finding
Mission continues to study all available information
related to allegations of the use of chemical weapons in
the Syrian Arab Republic. As the Council was previously
informed, on 28 June the OPCW Technical Secretariat
issued a report of the Fact-Finding Mission regarding
incidents of alleged use of toxic chemicals as a weapon
in Kharbit Massasneh on 7 July and 4 August 2017.
The report concluded that the information obtained
and analysed in line with the Fact-Finding Mission’s
mandate did not provide reasonable grounds for the
Mission to determine that toxic chemicals were used as
a weapon in the reported incidents. I understand that the
Mission is currently preparing upcoming deployments
and will report to the Executive Council on the results
of its work in due course. The Investigation and
Identification Team is also continuing its investigations
into incidents in which the Fact-Finding Mission has
determined that chemical weapons were used or likely
used in the Syrian Arab Republic and will issue further
reports in due course.
As the High Representative for Disarmament
Affairs has emphasized on many occasions, any use
of chemical weapons is unacceptable. The absence of
accountability for that use is a threat to international
peace and security and a danger to us all. In closing, I
would like to urge the members of the Council to unite
on the issue and show leadership in demonstrating
that impunity in the use of chemical weapons will
not be tolerated. The United Nations Office for
Disarmament Affairs stands ready to provide whatever
support and assistance it can.

23-234793/13

S/PV.9393

The situation in the Middle East

The President: I thank Mr. Ebo for his briefing.
I now give the floor to Mr. Katoub.
Mr. Katoub: I would like to thank the presidency
of the Council for giving the floor to civil-society
organizations and witnesses of atrocities.
Twelve days from today, the world will mark the
tenth anniversary of the largest chemical massacre that
the twenty-first century has witnessed, a massacre that
took place in eastern Ghouta on 21 August 2013, killing
more than 1,200 people and injuring more than 10,000.
I witnessed the Ghouta massacre. Through my work
as a member of a medical team in Ghouta and later,
after I fled Syria, of other civil-society organizations, I
have been engaged in the medical response to chemical
attacks and the documentation of the use of chemical
weapons in Syria. It represents unfortunate experience
that I, as a dentist, would not have had to go through
had there been any measures of accountability.
On the morning of that day, I walked out of my
office to a nearby school that we had turned into a
decontamination centre. I cannot forget the scene in the
school halls. Bodies were scattered around, turning a
sacred space for children into a vast funeral home. The
towns of Ghouta were then under siege by the Al-Assad
regime and engulfed in a war where the use of chemical
weapons was one of many war crimes occurring
simultaneously. We did not have protective gear, or the
time and space for each patient who needed care after
being suffocated by the chemical weapons, but at the
time we had hope that if we exposed those crimes we
could prevent future attacks in Syria and elsewhere in
the world.
A few days after the chemical attack, the
investigators of the United Nations Mission to
Investigate Allegations of the Use of Chemical Weapons
in the Syrian Arab Republic arrived at the locations
of the attack in Ghouta. They were already in Syria
investigating other attacks. They collected samples and
interviewed witnesses. Soon after, the Security Council
adopted resolution 2118 (2013), on the use of chemical
weapons in Syria. With the resolution’s adoption, and
Syria agreeing to abide by the Chemical Weapons
Convention — a treaty signed by almost every State in
the world — we should have had absolute compliance.
Instead, more than 170 chemical attacks have since
been reported in Syria. In the past 10 years, more than
1,500 people have been killed and 15,000 injured by the
chemical weapons of the Al-Assad regime.
4/13

08/08/2023

That was not a message to us, the victims,
witnesses and civil-society organizations. It was not a
message to us, the people of Ghouta and other towns
in Syria attacked by chemical weapons. We were
gassed and killed, but we did not write the Chemical
Weapons Convention or the Charter of the United
Nations. The Member States did. It was therefore a
clear message from the Syrian regime that it disregards
international institutions and treaties. The response by
the international community, including the Council,
was limited to further investigations, with no serious
action taken towards accountability.
It is very hard to do nothing while watching rescue
and medical teams risking their lives to save one more
life or enter contaminated areas without protective gear
to retrieve one more piece of evidence. On 4 April 2017,
one of the civil defence volunteers was pregnant. She lost
her baby while rescuing other people after the chemical
attack in Khan Shaykhun. Ten days earlier, Dr. Ali
Darwish, who worked at the hospital in Al-Lataminah,
died when the hospital was attacked with a chemical
bomb dropped by the Al-Assad air forces. Knowing all
of that and doing nothing is very hard. Hiding behind
a Russian veto that might block an attempt to refer the
situation to the International Criminal Court does not
make it any easier (see S/PV.7180). And no — sanctions
are not enough and do not provide the accountability
that victims want.
The Council has received heaps of reports from
the Joint Investigative Mechanism (JIM) established
by the Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical
Weapons (OPCW) and the United Nations and the
OPCW Investigation and Identification Team (IIT)
confirming the responsibility of the Syrian regime for
the chemical attacks. Because of impunity, the Syrian
regime put an end to an international norm that had
long been agreed on.
The risk of the use of chemical weapons remains.
The same regime that used them with impunity is
still in power and the same Russian allies are still
supporting Syria’s war criminals. And other dictators
worldwide may get the wrong message if they see that
the paths to accountability are blocked. In response
to the heaps of evidence collected and investigations
conducted, denial has been the Syrian regime’s
strategy. It has employed a number of tactics, such as
manipulating evidence, presenting false witnesses and
intimidating survivors, witnesses and their families. It
has pressured investigators — whether individuals or
institutions — and invested resources in running media
23-23479

08/08/2023

The situation in the Middle East

disinformation campaigns. Those tactics are being used
in other countries as well. Through our research, we
have found that some of the same social media accounts
have been used in denying war crimes in both Syria and
Ukraine, which comes as no surprise.
Among the survivors of the Douma attack on
7 April 2018 is a family of four that I know. They were
displaced to northern Syria after the attack, as were
many other people from Douma. They also witnessed
the earthquake in February this year that hit northern
Syria and southern Türkiye. The father told me once
that the pain of the chemical attack itself, the suffering
due to being forcibly displaced from his hometown, the
panic in the wake of the earthquake, the memories of
his two children in the shelter with their neighbours
and facing death and the unknown — all of that pales
in comparison to the pain he feels when people ask
him if it is true that Al-Assad did indeed use chemical
weapons. Denial has made us more determined to
make our voices heard. It made witnesses sharpen their
memories so that they could recall every detail when
they testified. It made investigators stricter in their
methodologies so that their reports would be more solid
before any court.
In Syria we are lucky — or perhaps unlucky — to
have had all those investigative bodies with all those
acronyms. It is hard to even remember all of them — the
Independent International Commission of Inquiry, the
JIM, the IIT, the Fact-Finding Mission, the Declaration
Assessment Team, and so forth. Syrian civil society, the
families of victims and the rescue and medical teams
cooperated with all of them. Those investigative bodies
did their jobs, as did the Council. When Russia vetoed
the renewal of the mandate of the JIM (see S/PV.8073),
there was a way to keep those investigations going.
The IIT was established in an unprecedented vote at
the OPCW. And the Council can still do its job. There
are similar ways to bypass a potential veto of a referral
of all perpetrators to the International Criminal Court.
There are ways to stop doing nothing. Doing nothing
is undermining the brave work of those investigators,
the international institutions and treaties that Member
States created, the work of the OPCW that the United
Nations built and protected around a norm that was said
to be universal. It is undermining the Council, which is
supposed to be responsible for peace globally.
Ten years have passed since the Ghouta massacre
and the adoption of resolution 2118 (2013), which should
make everyone think about the message that the Council
is sending to the Syrian regime, and the message that

S/PV.9393

the OPCW States members are sending not only to the
Syrian regime, but to other perpetrators — and to the
investigators who have been working so tirelessly. But
we will continue the fight to explore concrete options to
reinstate the norm of the prohibition of chemical weapons
by finding ways to hold all perpetrators to account,
alongside States that believe that the exceptional use of
chemical weapons requires exceptional measures to say
no — no to impunity.
The President: I thank Mr. Katoub for his briefing.
I shall now make a statement in my capacity as the
representative of the United States of America.
Let me start by thanking Mr. Ebo and the entire team
at the United Nations Office for Disarmament Affairs
and the Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical
Weapons (OPCW) for their leadership on this critical
issue. I also deeply admire Mr. Katoub’s courage and
his advocacy on behalf of the Syrian people.
As Mr. Katoub detailed, 10 years ago, early in the
morning of 21 August, the Al-Assad regime released
sarin on Syrian civilians in the Ghouta district of
Damascus. That brutal attack killed more than 1,400
people. Sadly, many of them were children. The world
saw toddlers struggling to breathe and besieged first
responders desperately trying to decontaminate their
neighbours. Piles of bodies lined the streets. The attack
was a sickening milestone in the regime’s campaign of
terror against the people of Syria. Less than a month
later, and after broad international condemnation, the
Al-Assad regime submitted its instrument of accession
to the Chemical Weapons Convention (CWC), and the
United States and Russia adopted a framework for the
complete destruction of the Syrian chemical-weapon
programme. That was followed shortly thereafter by the
Security Council’s adoption of resolution 2118 (2013).
We now know that the regime never planned to
comply with the CWC and that it wilfully hid chemical
weapons from the OPCW. In fact, since acceding to
the CWC in September 2013, the United Nations and
the OPCW’s investigative mechanisms confirmed that
Syria used chemical weapons against its own people
in nine subsequent attacks. The Al-Assad regime has
repeatedly lied to the international community and to the
investigators examining the incidents. Syria has never
provided a full accounting of its chemical-weapons
programme, and despite its obligations under resolution
2118 (2013) to fully cooperate with the OPCW, it has
repeatedly obstructed the OPCW’s work. For all those
reasons, Al-Assad’s chemical-weapon attacks demand

23-234795/13

S/PV.9393

The situation in the Middle East

the Council’s continued attention. The Council cannot
allow Al-Assad and his henchmen, who have killed
thousands of people, to get away with those atrocities.
To do so would endanger all of us. It would mean turning
a blind eye to regimes that choose to manufacture,
stockpile and use chemical weapons.
We have heard some of our colleagues say that our
monthly meetings on this issue feel repetitive. And I
have to say that I regret that two permanent members
of the Council have indicated that they will not speak
today on a matter of such gravity. But the Al-Assad
regime is betting that the Council will simply move on.
It is hoping that we will change the subject. We must
not succumb to fatigue — or worse, indifference. The
Al-Assad regime used weapons of mass destruction
against its own people. We will not move on, and the
regime will not escape accountability. Syria has a duty
to implement its obligations under the CWC in resolution
2118 (2013). We urge Damascus to stop delaying,
obfuscating and spreading disinformation. We continue
to press for action in the OPCW and here in the Council,
so that the OPCW can make progress towards fulfilling
its investigative mandate, which has shed light on the
regime’s numerous chemical-weapon attacks.
Let me be clear. The United States remains
committed to pursuing justice for the victims of Ghouta
and other chemical-weapon attacks. We must never forget
their victims and survivors. Their loved ones deserve
justice. The Syrian people deserve justice. The Council
must come together to demand justice and, at long last,
real steps to end Syria’s chemical-weapon threat.
I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.
I give the floor to those members of the Council
who wish to make statements.
Mrs. Jaraud-Darnault (France) (spoke in French):
I would like to thank Mr. Ebo and Mr. Katoub for
their briefings.
Independent investigations by the United Nations
and the Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical
Weapons (OPCW) have documented and demonstrated
the use of chemical weapons by the Syrian regime.
Today we are meeting here once again because the
Syrian regime used weapons of mass destruction
against its own population. Independent investigations
by the United Nations and the OPCW have proved that
on nine occasions. Nearly a decade after the adoption
of resolution 2118 (2013), the regime still refuses to
6/13

08/08/2023

provide information on the status of its stockpiles,
which we know were not completely destroyed. But the
regime has a responsibility to respect international law.
The Syrian regime has continued its deliberate
policy of obstruction. It is imperative for the regime to
allow the deployment of OPCW personnel to Syria so
that it can fulfil its mandate. As indicated in the latest
monthly report from the OPCW Director-General (see
S/2023/558), the OPCW is still awaiting a response from
the regime in order to organize the twenty-fifth round of
consultations between the initial Declaration Assessment
Team and the regime. Let me remind the Council that
those consultations have been pending since April 2021,
more than two years now. In addition, the restrictions
that Syria has imposed on the deployment of the initial
Declaration Assessment Team are unacceptable, and
the limited deployment of OPCW teams in Syria is
unacceptable. Syria must stop obstructing the work
of the OPCW Technical Secretariat and comply with
its international obligations. Despite the obstacles, the
Technical Secretariat has continued its investigative
work with tenacity, independence and professionalism,
and I want to commend it for that once again.
In conclusion, I would like to reiterate that the use
of chemical weapons by the regime against its own
population constitutes war crimes and crimes against
humanity. We cannot accept impunity, for the sake
of the Syrian people, the region and the international
community as a whole. Combating impunity is the
foundation for ensuring the effectiveness and credibility
of the regime prohibiting chemical weapons. Failing
to implement it now is tantamount to accepting the
possibility of new violations of the CWC, new crimes
and new threats to international order and security.
That is why France will continue to work determinedly
and relentlessly with its partners to combat impunity
for the use of chemical weapons.
Mr. Tamaura (Japan): I would first like to
thank Mr. Ebo, Deputy to the High Representative
for Disarmament Affairs, and Mr. Katoub for their
insightful briefings. We reiterate our full support for
the impartial, independent and professional work
of the Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical
Weapons (OPCW) and its Technical Secretariat,
including its Fact-Finding Mission and Investigation
and Identification Team.
It is regrettable that we have not seen concrete
progress on this file, and the monthly report by the
OPCW Director General once again confirmed that
23-23479

08/08/2023

The situation in the Middle East

the declaration submitted by the Syrian Arab Republic
still cannot be considered accurate and complete.
Japan urges Syria to engage in good faith with the
OPCW Technical Secretariat and provide all requested
documents to solve the outstanding issues related to the
initial and subsequent declarations submitted by Syria.
We regret that all efforts to hold the next round
of consultations between the Declaration Assessment
Team and the Syrian National Authority have been
unsuccessful. In that regard, we express our gratitude
to the OPCW Technical Secretariat for providing
updates on their meeting with Syrian representatives
in Beirut on 22 and 23 June 2023. As emphasized by
the Technical Secretariat during the meeting, priority
should be given to the resumption of rounds of
consultations, incorporating all experts designated by
the Technical Secretariat.
The use of chemical weapons by Syria remains a
threat to international peace and security. The Security
Council cannot remain silent and allow impunity for
those responsible for the use of chemical weapons
against their own people. Preventing the recurrence
of the use of chemical weapons in Syria must continue
to be the Council’s priority. We call upon all Council
members to join us in urging the Syrian Government
to fully comply with its obligations under the
Chemical Weapons Convention and Security Council
resolution 2118 (2013) and eliminate its entire chemical
weapons programme.
Ms. Alshamsi (United Arab Emirates) (spoke
in Arabic): At the outset, I thank Mr. Adedeji Ebo,
Deputy to the High Representative of the United
Nations Office for Disarmament Affairs, for his
briefing. We also listened to the briefing delivered by
Mr. Mohamad Katoub.
Before I deliver my statement, I would like to
reiterate what the United Arab Emirates has previously
recalled, namely, the need to use the time and resources
of the Council wisely, including by convening meetings
that have a purpose and that are not limited to restating
positions that are already widely known to all, in the
absence of any developments. The Council should
therefore reassess the effectiveness of convening
monthly meetings on chemical weapons in Syria. An
agreement should be reached to hold such meetings once
every three months unless significant developments
warrant otherwise.
Regarding the subject of our discussion today, I
would like to reiterate my country’s position on this file.

S/PV.9393

First, my country reaffirms the importance
of maintaining constructive dialogue between the
Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons
(OPCW) and Syria. In that regard, we welcome the
meeting held between the two sides in Beirut last June
to discuss the twenty-fifth round of consultations and
other outstanding issues that are pertinent to making
progress on this file.
Secondly, we reiterate the need to devote sufficient
attention to the threat of chemical terrorism, especially
as Da’esh continues to carry out terrorist attacks and
has shown no hesitation in utilizing all available means
to achieve its objectives. The report issued last month
by the Analytical Support and Sanctions Monitoring
Team on Da’esh and Al-Qaida confirmed that Da’esh
continues to use north-eastern Syria to launch attacks,
rebuild its capacities and networks, recruit fighters and
release its members from prison, posing a serious threat
not only to the security and stability of Syria, but to the
entire region.
In conclusion, the United Arab Emirates emphasizes
once again the importance of making progress on
Syria’s chemical weapons file and on all other files
related to resolving the Syrian crisis.
Mr. Hauri (Switzerland) (spoke in French): I would
first like to thank the Deputy to the High Representative
for Disarmament Affairs, Mr. Ebo, for his presentation.
I also take note of Mr. Katoub’s briefing.
Switzerland reiterates its full confidence in the
Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons
(OPCW) as the principal guardian of the Chemical
Weapons Convention. The integrity and professionalism
of the OPCW and all its missions are beyond doubt.
Switzerland regrets that the efforts of the OPCW
Technical Secretariat to organize the next round of
consultations between the Declaration Assessment
Team and the Syrian National Authority have remained
unsuccessful since April 2021. The obstacles posed by
Syria to the restoration of full cooperation with the
OPCW and to the immediate and unlimited deployment
of designated personnel on its territory constitute
a serious lack of compliance with the obligations
contained in Security Council resolution 2118 (2013).
In that context, Switzerland welcomes the
discussion of the resumption of bilateral consultations
between the Technical Secretariat and Syria, which
took place in Beirut on 22 and 23 June. We hope that
that is a first step towards full cooperation between the

23-234797/13

S/PV.9393

The situation in the Middle East

Syrian authorities and the Technical Secretariat. To that
end, we encourage Syria to comply with its obligations
under Security Council resolution 2118 (2013) and to
provide answers to the 20 points still to be clarified in
its initial declaration.
Finally, we are encouraged by the six-month
renewal of the tripartite agreement between Syria, the
OPCW Technical Secretariat and the United Nations
Office for Project Services. The renewal should
facilitate operations on the ground in accordance with
the OPCW’s working modalities, which were clearly
reaffirmed in resolution 2118 (2013).
By unanimously adopting that resolution almost 10
years ago, the Council reaffirmed that the proliferation
of chemical weapons and of their means of delivery
constitutes a threat to international peace and security.
Switzerland recalls that the use of chemical weapons
by any actor is prohibited in all circumstances and
constitutes a war crime in armed conflicts. It calls
on all parties to respect their obligations under the
Convention and international humanitarian law.
Finally, Switzerland fully supports the cooperation
between the OPCW and the International, Impartial and
Independent Mechanism to Assist in the Investigation
and Prosecution of Persons Responsible for the Most
Serious Crimes under International Law Committed
in the Syrian Arab Republic since March 2011, which
ensures that such crimes are documented and do not
go unpunished.
Mr. França Danese (Brazil): I thank the Deputy
to the High Representative for Disarmament Affairs,
Mr. Adedeji Ebo, and Mr. Mohamad Katoub for their
briefings today.
Once again, we have read the most recent report
of the Director General of the Organization for the
Prohibition of Chemical Weapons (OPCW) (S/2023/558)
and found little new information that would merit the
attention of the Council. We reiterate that the frequency
of these meetings could be adjusted in order to allow
the Security Council to devote itself more intensely to
other, more urgent matters.
Nevertheless, we must say that we are encouraged
by the recent contacts between members of the OPCW
Technical Secretariat and representatives of the Syrian
Arab Republic in Beirut on 22 and 23 June 2023. We
welcome Syria’s commitments to implementing its
obligations under the Chemical Weapons Convention,
and we hope these initial contacts may permit the
resumption of consultations at a higher level in the near
8/13

08/08/2023

future. Dialogue, closer cooperation between Syria and
the OPCW and continued and full compliance by Syria
remain our best hopes for closing this file.
Having said that, Brazil reaffirms that chemical
weapons are utterly incompatible with international
humanitarian law and must therefore have no place in the
practices and doctrines of today’s world. The production,
storage and use of such weapons violate international
agreements and pose serious threats to international peace
and security. Brazil strongly condemns the development,
storage and use of chemical weapons anywhere, by
anyone, under any circumstances. Incidents must be
addressed with transparency and be subject to thorough
and impartial investigation, in accordance with the
Chemical Weapons Convention and international law.
Mr. Phipps (United Kingdom): Let me begin by
thanking Deputy to the High Representative Mr. Ebo for
his briefing and in particular Mr. Katoub not only for his
briefing today but also for his work responding to the
abhorrent chemical attack in Ghouta in 2013 and for his
ongoing efforts to fight impunity on behalf of all of the
victims of chemical weapons.
Mr. Katoub’s briefing is a reminder of why it is
imperative that we remain focused on this agenda. In the
decades since Syria acceded to the Chemical Weapons
Convention, internationally mandated organizations
have confirmed that the Syrian regime used chemical
weapons against its people on at least nine occasions.
As Mr. Katoub said, there have been many more attacks.
The human impact of those attacks has been horrific. The
Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons
(OPCW)-United Nations Joint Investigative Mechanism
and OPCW’s reports have provided undeniable and direct
evidence of the Syrian State’s shocking track record of
murdering its own civilians using chemical weapons. We
collectively owe it to the thousands of victims to pursue
justice and to hold those responsible for those crimes
to account.
Syria continues to fail to meet its obligations under
resolution 2118 (2013) and the Chemical Weapons
Convention. Despite concerted efforts by the OPCW
to get to the truth, Syria’s chemical weapons stockpile
declaration is still not accurate. Syria has failed to
declare and destroy all of its chemical weapons, which
continue to pose a serious threat to regional, as well as
international, security.
We therefore once again reiterate our calls on
the Syrian regime to fulfil its obligations under the
Convention and under resolution 2118 (2013) and to
23-23479

08/08/2023

The situation in the Middle East

S/PV.9393

engage meaningfully with the OPCW. It must declare
and destroy all aspects of its chemical weapons
programme. It is our responsibility to uphold and defend
the integrity of the Chemical Weapons Convention, the
non-proliferation architecture and the global consensus
that those weapons must never be used.

Ecuador once again expresses its solidarity with
all victims of chemical weapons attacks. We reiterate
our rejection of the production and stockpiling of those
weapons and our categorical condemnation of their use
by anyone, against any person, anywhere and under
any circumstances.

Mrs. Sánchez Izquierdo (Ecuador) (spoke in
Spanish): My delegation is grateful for the briefings by
the Deputy to the High Representative of the United
Nations Office for Disarmament Affairs, Mr. Adedeji
Ebo, and Mr. Mohamad Katoub.

Mr. Biang (Gabon): I have the honour to deliver this
statement on behalf of the three African members of the
Security Council (A3), namely, Ghana, Mozambique
and my own country, Gabon.

The monthly report presented by the DirectorGeneral of the Organization for the Prohibition of
Chemical Weapons (OPCW) (see S/2023/558) reflects
once again the limited progress on the issue of chemical
weapons in the Syrian Arab Republic due to the failure
to respond to and facilitate the work of the technical
teams. Despite all the constraints faced, we appreciate
the efforts of OPCW and its technical teams in their
continued efforts to achieve the complete and verifiable
elimination of chemical weapons in the Syrian
Arab Republic.
The meeting held at the end of June between the
OPCW Technical Secretariat and the Syrian authorities
reflected the possibility that exists to develop a new
work plan to resolve all outstanding issues with regard
to the Syrian chemical weapons dossier. Ecuador calls
upon the Syrian Arab Republic to keep that mechanism
of dialogue open, in addition to cooperating and
addressing the proposals made during the most
recent meeting, which will be a step forward towards
fulfilling its obligations under the Chemical Weapons
Convention, the decisions of the OPCW governing
bodies and the relevant resolutions of the Security
Council, including resolution 2118 (2013).
We also stress the importance of extending until
31 December the tripartite agreement among the United
Nations Office for Project Services, the Syrian Arab
Republic and the OPCW, which facilitates the activities
recommended by the OPCW Technical Secretariat in
the country. We therefore urge Syria to allow access to
the required information, as that is the only way we can
ensure that those acts do not go unpunished
Lastly, my delegation takes note of the findings
presented by the OPCW Fact-Finding Mission on the
alleged incidents in Kharbit Massasneh in the Syrian
Arab Republic on 7 July and 4 August 2017. The
findings demonstrate the impartial and professional
work of the Fact-Finding Mission and the OPCW teams.

We thank Director Adedeji Ebo for briefing us on
the status of the implementation of the elimination of
the Syrian chemical weapons programme. We welcome
the participation of our colleagues the representatives
of the Syrian Arab Republic, the Islamic Republic of
Iran and the Republic of Türkiye in this meeting.
We thank the Organization for the Prohibition
of Chemical Weapons (OPCW) for its 118th monthly
report covering the period from 24 June to 23 July (see
S/2023/558). Gabon, Ghana and Mozambique would
like to reiterate their full support for the Organization’s
work as the main body responsible for ensuring the full
implementation of the chemical weapons elimination
programme in Syria.
The report provides a sober account of both
progress made and continuing gaps that persist. On
the one hand, we must acknowledge Syria’s ongoing
cooperation, including the recent six-month extension
of the tripartite agreement facilitating the OPCW’s
activities. That reflects a shared commitment to see
this process through.
It is in that sense that we welcome the conduct of
limited in-country activities by a reduced team of the
Declaration Assessment Team in Syria, as part of the
OPCW Technical Secretariat’s ongoing efforts to fulfil
its mandate, leading to reports communicated to the
States parties in March and July.
We have taken note of the submission of the 116th
report by the Syrian Arab Republic on activities
carried out on its territory related to the destruction
of its chemical weapons, as well as its chemical
weapons production facilities, as requested by the
Executive Council. In addition, the A3 welcomes the
meeting between the OPCW Technical Secretariat and
representatives of the Syrian Arab Republic on 22 and
23 June in Beirut, which represents a positive step
forward in the implementation of the chemical weapons
destruction programme in Syria.

23-234799/13

S/PV.9393

The situation in the Middle East

At the same time, serious issues remain unresolved.
Syria has yet to provide sufficient information to
enable the closure of all outstanding issues regarding
its initial and subsequent declarations. Moreover, we
encourage Syria to complete the measures requested
by the Executive Council 90 days ago to redress the
situation regarding the 2017 chemical weapon attacks.
Those measures are essential to shedding full light on
Syria’s capabilities, so we call for enhanced cooperation
between the OPCW Technical Secretariat and the
Syrian National Authority.
The amendment to the agreement signed by the
Syrian Government, the United Nations Office for
Project Services and the OPCW, extending its duration
until 31 December, which will facilitate the Technical
Secretariat’s mandated activities in the Syrian Arab
Republic, concerning the complete elimination of the
Syrian chemical weapons programme is likely to bring
us closer to resolving the issue.
We are convinced that the Syrian Arab Republic’s
exchanges and collaboration with United Nations bodies
will be useful in building confidence and providing the
necessary impetus to advance the various aspects of the
programme and encourage further cooperation.
However, the international community generally
and the Council in particular must continue to be
concerned about the potential re-emergence of chemical
weapons and take the steps needed to accelerate action
towards a world free of chemical weapons. The A3
remains committed to the norms established against
the use of chemical weapons and supports all efforts
aimed at eliminating their production, stockpiling or
use. We reiterate our support for resolution 2118 (2013).
Finally, we commend the commitment and efforts of
the countries contributing to the OPCW’s Trust Fund
for Syria Missions. Such contributions help facilitate
the work of the OPCW and make it possible for it to
fully implement its mandate.
The A3 encourages the parties to engage in a
constructive and continuing dialogue. The completion of
the elimination of Syria’s chemical-weapon programme
is an important part of our common goal of international
peace and security. We firmly believe that progress
requires good faith on all sides. Only cooperation and
consensus between the two sides can result in a just
and definitive conclusion to the issue. We owe that to
the Syrian people and to humankind as a whole. The
10/13

08/08/2023

world is watching, and we must do everything in our
power to address all issues that inhibit progress in the
implementation of resolution 2118 (2013).
Mr. Camilleri (Malta): I thank Deputy High
Representative Ebo and Mr. Katoub for their insightful
briefings today.
I reiterate Malta’s full support for the independent,
unbiased and expert work of the Organization for the
Prohibition of Chemical Weapons (OPCW) and its
Technical Secretariat. The OPCW, including through
its Investigation and Identification Team, Fact-Finding
Mission and Declaration Assessment Team (DAT),
plays a pivotal role in the implementation of the global
ban on chemical weapons and in ensuring the complete
elimination of all chemical weapons in Syria.
Since our last meeting (see S/PV.9372), the OPCW
has issued its most recent report (see S/2023/558). Once
again, regrettably, the Technical Secretariat’s efforts
to organize a twenty-fifth round of consultations
between the DAT and the Syrian National Authority
have been unsuccessful. Among other things, that
is due to the Syrian Arab Republic’s refusal to issue
a visa to the DAT’s lead technical expert. The report
also shows that no progress has been made on the 20
outstanding issues because the Syrian Arab Republic
has not presented any of the documents requested by
the Technical Secretariat. The declaration submitted
by the Syrian Arab Republic therefore still cannot be
considered accurate and complete, in accordance with
the Convention, as well as with resolution 2118 (2013).
While we take note of the six-month extension of the
tripartite agreement and the deployment of two reduced
DAT missions in January and April, we reaffirm that
they are by no means sufficient substitutes for Syria’s
obligations. The lack of progress is deplorable, and
Syria bears complete responsibility for it. We call on
the Syrian Arab Republic to fully cooperate with the
Technical Secretariat in accordance with resolution
2118 (2013). Malta is also deeply concerned about the
repeated and baseless assertions aimed at undermining
the credibility of the OPCW or casting doubt on
its findings. The Council should address and rebut
them decisively.
We reaffirm our full support to the OPCW
Technical Secretariat and its technical teams, who carry
out their mandate independently and impartially and in
accordance with the highest international standards.
Independent OPCW and joint United Nations-OPCW
investigations have concluded that the Syrian regime has
23-23479

08/08/2023

The situation in the Middle East

used chemical weapons against its own people on nine
occasions. That is unconscionable and deeply troubling.
There can never be a justification for their use. In 2013,
the Council unanimously adopted resolution 2118
(2013), establishing that those responsible for the use
of chemical weapons must be held accountable. Their
use cannot and must not go unpunished. Malta firmly
believes in the universalization of the global norm on
the prohibition of chemical weapons, as mandated by
the Chemical Weapons Convention.
To conclude, we call on Syria to cease obstructing
the efforts of the OPCW and to comply with its
international obligations. We reiterate our strong
condemnation for the use of chemical weapons by any
actor in any circumstances.
Mr. Stastoli (Albania): Allow me to thank Mr. Ebo
for his briefing. I would also like to thank Mr. Katoub
for his chilling account of his first-hand experience
of the Al-Assad regime’s use of chemical weapons
against civilians.
The periodic reports of the Organization for the
Prohibition of Chemical Weapons (OPCW) clearly
demonstrate that Syria has no interest in cooperating.
The clarification of the 20 questions currently
outstanding regarding the initial and subsequent
statements submitted by Syria remains unaddressed.
Syria’s systematic failure to comply with its obligations
under the Chemical Weapons Convention (CWC)
and resolution 2118 (2013) is deplorable, and Albania
condemns that attitude. Due to Syria’s refusal to
cooperate, the Declaration Assessment Team (DAT)
has had to deploy a reduced mission to carry out limited
activities in the country. We await the results of the
samples collected that are currently being analysed by
the OPCW’s laboratories, but we would like to underline
that the reduced DAT missions cannot replace the
next round of consultations with Syria. Regarding the
inspections of the Barzah and Jamrayah facilities, Syria
persists in its failure to provide sufficient technical
information or explanations that would enable those
files to be closed. We nevertheless await the results of
the inspections of those facilities.
We welcome the information from the most recent
report of the Fact-Finding Mission (see S/2023/508),
which dismisses the baseless allegations made by
the Syrian regime about the alleged use of chemical
weapons against the Syrian Arab Army on 7 July and
4 August 2017. The objective, rigorous and impartial
establishment of the facts is essential to all of us. We

S/PV.9393

also welcome the work of the Office of the Investigation
and Identification Team and its reports identifying the
perpetrators of the use of chemicals as weapons in
Syria. We fully endorse the findings of its third report
that the Al-Assad regime was responsible for the deadly
chemical-weapon attack on Douma on 7 April 2018. We
condemn the repeated use of chemical weapons by the
Syrian regime. The people responsible for those acts
must be brought to justice. The Security Council must
impress on Syria that there is no alternative to full
cooperation with the OPCW and the implementation
of resolution 2118 (2013), adopted unanimously by
the Council.
It is time for Syria to understand that it must fully
declare and destroy its chemical-weapon programme
in a transparent and verifiable manner. We commend
the work of the OPCW, which verifies the facts
with objectivity, impartiality, independence and
professionalism. The OPCW calls on Syria to do what
is stated in resolution 2118 (2013) and to implement its
obligations under the CWC, which Syria itself has signed.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of the Syrian Arab Republic.
Mr. Dandy (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke
in Arabic): The Security Council discussed the
chemical-weapon issue last month (see S/PV.9372).
My delegation is surprised that the debate is being
held again this month, given that there have been no
new developments that would require it, other than
providing a new opportunity for some States, which are
familiar to all of us, to repeat their accusations against
my country, thereby wasting the Security Council’s
time and resources.
My country has repeatedly condemned the use of
chemical weapons anytime, anywhere, by anyone and
under any circumstances. In that regard, I would like
to mention that the United States of America continues
its attempts to exploit the chemical weapons dossier
to serve its hostile agenda against Syria. Available
information indicates that the United States’ military
forces, which are based illegally in the Al-Tanf area,
have provided elements of the so-called New Syrian
Army, which is a terrorist one, with toxic chemical
substances and trained them on their use in order to
stage an incident involving the use of chemical weapons
and accuse Syria for it.
The Syrian Arab Republic has consistently
cooperated with the Organization for the Prohibition
of Chemical Weapons (OPCW) and has honoured

23-2347911/13

S/PV.9393

The situation in the Middle East

all of its obligations under the Chemical Weapons
Convention. Relevant reports of the organization attest
to that. In that regard, I note that the Syrian National
Authority submitted its 116th monthly report regarding
the activities that it carried out on its territories. It
facilitated the visits of the Declaration Assessment
Team to Damascus and was behind the initiative to
hold a meeting in Beirut with the OPCW Technical
Secretariat to discuss ways to enhance cooperation.
The extension of the tripartite agreement between
Syria, the OPCW and the United Nations Office for
Project Services was also discussed at that meeting
with a view to facilitating the work of the organization
and its teams in Syria. Contacts are ongoing in order
to prepare a meeting between the Minister for Foreign
Affairs and Expatriates, the Head of the Syrian National
Authority and the Director General of the OPCW in
order to agree on an agenda for that meeting.
The Syrian Arab Republic regrets that some insist
on ignoring its positive cooperation with the OPCW
Technical Secretariat. We are also surprised that the
Technical Secretariat continues its politicized approach,
which is devoid of all objectivity and professionalism
and allows some Western States to level accusations
against Syria as they take advantage of the Technical
Secretariat’s biased reports to serve their agendas.
The Syrian Arab Republic reiterates its keenness
to hold the twenty-fifth round of consultations with the
Declaration Assessment Team as soon as possible. We
call upon the OPCW Technical Secretariat to refrain
from using certain procedural aspects as a pretext to
postpone the convening of that round.
Syria believes that the reports issued by the FactFinding Mission constitute further proof that the OPCW
is using its mandate in a politicized manner when
carrying out investigations into reported incidents
concerning the alleged use of chemical weapons on
Syrian territories. The Fact-Finding Mission continues
to employ unprofessional working methods, intelligence
modalities and double standards in conducting its
investigations. There have also been long delays in the
completion of its investigations.
In conclusion, some States are trying feverishly to
exploit the reports of the OPCW to serve their anti-Syria
agendas, which risks undermining the credibility and
impartiality of the organization. It is incumbent on
all States to assume their responsibility and correct
the course taken by the OPCW away from deception,
12/13

08/08/2023

politicization and polarization so that the organization
can effectively and credibly fulfil its mandate pursuant
to the Chemical Weapons Convention.
What was said during this meeting regarding the
alleged use of chemical weapons in Ghouta clearly
and openly reflects the continued hostile approach of
certain States against Syria. Such attempts are aimed
at spreading false and misleading ideas. In that regard,
the Syrian Government once again denies categorically
those lies and allegations regarding the Syrian Arab
Army’s use of toxic chemical substances. It reaffirms
that the Syrian army does not possess any kind of
chemical weapons, nor has it ever used them in its
fight against terrorists or anyone else, even in the most
difficult conditions on the ground, because it does not
possess any such substances.
Syria stresses that the armed terrorist groups and
their sponsors are fabricating and staging incidences
of the use of chemical weapons in order to establish
pretexts for waging attacks and military aggressions
against Syria and blackmail my country.
The United States of America and other
Western States continue to hide behind slogans that
demand justice for Syrians while shedding tears
for their suffering. However, they are fooling no
one with their blatant attempts to cover up for their
devastating interventionist agendas and their hostile
anti-Syria policies.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of the Islamic Republic of Iran.
Mr. Ahmadi (Islamic Republic of Iran): We
welcome the presence of Mr. Ebo, Deputy to the
High Representative for Disarmament Affairs, at
today’s meeting.
As a country that has experienced the horrors of
chemical weapons first-hand, Iran strongly condemns
the use of chemical weapons at any time, anywhere, by
anyone and under any circumstances. The use of such
weapons is a flagrant violation of international law,
constituting a crime against humanity and posing a
serious threat to global peace and security.
The Syrian Arab Republic remains steadfast in
its commitment to fulfilling its obligations under the
Chemical Weapons Convention. In alignment with that
commitment, the Syrian Government has continued
its constructive cooperation with the Organization
for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons (OPCW).
We fully support constructive dialogue between
23-23479

08/08/2023

The situation in the Middle East

Syria and the OPCW, setting a specific time frame to
address any remaining issues and bring the file to a
final and conclusive closure. Such an approach will
ensure transparency, accountability and a satisfactory
resolution of all outstanding matters related to chemical
weapons in Syria. In that context, we applaud Syria’s
determination to convene a high-level meeting between
the Syrian Foreign Minister and the Director General
of the OPCW.
To ensure a successful outcome, any investigation
into chemical-weapon incidents must be conducted
with utmost impartiality, professionalism, credibility
and objectivity, strictly adhering to the Convention’s
requirements and procedures. The integrity and
credibility of the OPCW as the most competent
international authority rest on its ability to remain
neutral and objective, guided solely by scientific and
technical considerations. That principled approach
is essential to effectively deter the use of chemical
weapons and advance the objectives of the Convention.
We therefore emphasize the full, effective and
non-discriminatory implementation of the Convention.
All Member States must fully adhere to the obligations
outlined in the Convention to foster a safer world that is
free from the threat of chemical weapons.
The repetition of statements made during today’s
meeting underscores the concern that the holding of
regular and monthly sessions on this matter may be
inefficient, given the lack of progress and significant
developments. That approach could potentially waste
valuable United Nations resources and the precious
time of the Security Council. The report presented by
the Deputy to the High Representative of the United
Nations Office for Disarmament Affairs did not offer
any new insights into the current situation. Because of
that, some Council members have already put forth the
suggestion that discussing this topic once per quarter,
instead of monthly, could suffice. Iran supports that
proposal, which is aimed at streamlining the Council’s
efforts in order to focus on matters that truly demand
its immediate attention.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Türkiye.

S/PV.9393

Mr. Ekren (Türkiye): We thank the Deputy to the
High Representative of the United Nations Office for
Disarmament Affairs, Mr. Ebo, and Mr. Katoub for
their briefings.
While all parties to the Chemical Weapons
Convention must comply with their obligations, the
118th monthly report of the Director General of the
Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons
(OPCW) once again demonstrates that the Syrian regime
has yet to fulfil its obligations under the Convention
and address all outstanding issues in relation to its
initial and subsequent declarations. We commend the
independence, impartiality and professionalism upheld
by the OPCW’s Technical Secretariat.
We applaud the efforts of the Technical Secretariat
and the investigative bodies of the OPCW to clarify
all outstanding issues of the initial and subsequent
declarations of the Syrian regime, yet we remain
concerned that the OPCW still cannot consider the
regime’s declaration accurate and complete owing to
identified gaps, inconsistencies and discrepancies that
remain unresolved. The OPCW Technical Secretariat is
still waiting for a response regarding the unauthorized
movement of two cylinders used in the chemical attack
in Douma in 2018.
We take note that a delegation from the OPCW
Technical Secretariat met with a representative of the
Syrian regime in Beirut on 22 and 23 June, during which
they agreed on a six-month extension of the tripartite
agreement. Although a resumption of the rounds of
consultations between the Declaration Assessment
Team and the Syrian regime was also discussed at the
meeting, the OPCW Technical Secretariat has still not
received a decision by the regime allowing it to proceed.
Türkiye strongly condemns the use of chemical
weapons anywhere, by anyone and under any
circumstances. We call on the Syrian regime to fully
cooperate with the Technical Secretariat and the
investigative bodies of the OPCW in accordance with
the Convention and resolution 2118 (2013), including
by resuming the rounds of consultations with the
Declaration Assessment Team and by responding to the
inquiries of the OPCW.
The meeting rose at 11.20 a.m.

23-2347913/13
