S/2021/312

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
30 March 2021
Original: English

Conflict-related sexual violence
Report of the Secretary-General

I. Introduction
1.
The present report, which covers the period from January to December 2020, is
submitted pursuant to Security Council resolution 2467 (2019), in which the Council
requested me to report annually on the implementation of resolutions 1820 (2008),
1888 (2009), 1960 (2010) and 2106 (2013), and to recommend strategic actions.
2.
In 2020, in the midst of an unprecedented global pandemic, two major
milestones in the development of the women and peace and security agenda, namely,
the twentieth anniversary of the adoption of Security Council resolution 1325 (2000)
and the twenty-fifth anniversary of the adoption of the Beijing Declaration and
Platform for Action, were commemorated. The onset of the coronavirus disease
(COVID-19) pandemic revealed the fragility of the hard-won progress made in this
area and put political commitments at risk of being rolled back or reversed, as
attention and resources were redirected towards the prevailing public health
emergency. The pandemic amplified gender-based inequality, which is a root cause
and driver of sexual violence in times of conflict and peace. It exacerbated the
disproportionate socioeconomic and care burden borne by women and led to a global
spike in gender-based violence at a time when avenues for seeking redress were
narrower than ever, as shelters closed and clinics were repurposed in response to
COVID-19. Lockdowns, curfews, quarantines, the fear of contracting or transmitting
the virus and limited access to first responders compounded the existing structural,
institutional and sociocultural barriers to the reporting of sexual violence, which is
already a chronically underreported crime. The contraction of routine health services
and the imposition of transportation restrictions also created barriers to the provision
of services, including access to emergency post-rape care and sexual and reproductive
health care, for victims of sexual violence. The pandemic further complicated the
pursuit of justice and redress, as lockdowns affected reporting mechanisms, the work
of investigators, judges, prosecutors and lawyers and the overall effective functioning
of justice and accountability systems. In addition, oversight and monitoring of
contexts in which conflict-related sexual violence frequently occurs, such as detention
facilities, displacement settings and remote rural areas in which women undertake
essential livelihood activities, were significantly reduced.
3.
In addition, COVID-19 gave rise to new, gender-specific protection concerns
linked with: militarization, as well as checkpoint and border closures, which restricted
the operating space for women’s organizations; sexual harassment of women health -

21-03724 (E)

080421

*2103724*

S/2021/312

care workers and women in isolation and treatment centres; and sexual violence
against women detained for alleged curfew violations. Women and girls in congested
refugee and displacement settings were among the hardest hit by the intersecting
crises of conflict, forced displacement and COVID-19, facing elevated risks of sexual
violence, exploitation and trafficking, a situation that was exacerbated by an overall
decline in humanitarian reach and resources. Economic desperation and collapsed
social safety nets increased recourse to negative coping mechanis ms, such as child
marriage and “survival sex”. Marginalized women and girls in conflict -affected and
displacement settings were also among the hardest to reach, as restrictive social norms
and the gender-based digital divide impeded their access to health and safety
information. Moreover, in contravention of my call of 23 March 2020 for a global
ceasefire to enable the world to focus on defeating COVID -19, a number of parties to
armed conflict continued to use sexual violence as a cruel tactic of war, terro r, torture
and political repression in order to advance their strategic objectives, including those
of propelling population flight and controlling contested territory and natural
resources. As the pandemic raged on, many armed actors seized the opportunit y to
strike and gained ground while the scrutiny and attention of the international
community and the media were diverted. Conflict-related sexual violence does not
occur in a vacuum; rather, it is linked with wider security factors such as economic
hardship, social tensions, impunity and institutional weakness, many of which have
been exacerbated by the advent and consequences of COVID -19. Limitations on the
availability and capacity of law enforcement and judicial authorities to receive and
process reports of sexual violence, the stalling of legislative reform, the suspension
of training for judicial and security actors and, in some cases, the release from custody
of perpetrators of sexual violence, as part of efforts to curb viral transmission in
crowded detention facilities, all contributed to a climate conducive to impunity.
4.
The current pandemic is a gendered crisis, and no effective response can be
gender-blind. The present report confirms that the needs of survivors of sexual
violence cannot be put on pause, and neither can the response to such violence. If left
unaddressed, conflict-related sexual violence can engender vicious cycles of violence
and impunity, with corrosive effects on social cohesion, public health and
peacebuilding. To rebuild better, we must ensure that the survivors are not forgotten
and that their voices are heard and heeded at all levels of decision-making, in line with
the survivor-centred approach advanced in resolution 2467 (2019). In its resolution
2532 (2020), the Security Council further recognized that conflict can exacerbate the
effects of the pandemic and called for concrete action to minimize the disproportionate
negative impact of the pandemic on women and girls. Accordingly, in collabo ration
with national authorities, the United Nations system and civil society partners
endeavoured to sustain efforts to address this scourge, where possible, by pivoting to
virtual services and hotlines, convening remote training sessions, coordination
meetings and consultations with referral networks in order to compensate for the
reduced physical presence in the field and advocating the integration of concerns
pertaining to conflict-related sexual violence into national emergency response plans.
In that context, efforts were made to promote the designation of sexual and
reproductive health care as an essential service in order to avoid its defunding and
de-prioritization in the light of the painful lesson, learned from past epidemics, that
more women die as a result of a lack of access to reproductive health care than from
the disease itself. Adaptation and innovation strategies included reporting through the
lens of intersectionality, which highlights vulnerabilities arising from various forms
of discrimination, demonstrating that survivors cannot be treated as a homogenous
group. Although addressing conflict-related sexual violence has been made more
complex by intersecting crises and inequalities, the dire effects of such violence on
human rights, public health, peacebuilding and development render our collective
response more urgent than ever. The pandemic demands a paradigm shift: efforts must
2/30

21-03724

S/2021/312

be made to silence the guns and amplify the voices of women peacebuilders, as well
as to invest in public welfare rather than in the instruments of warfare. In this context,
service delivery is not a secondary issue, but rather the ultimate expression of political
will. The current crisis is a test of our resolve to translate commemorations and
commitments into real-world results, through an intersectional, gender-responsive and
ultimately transformative global pandemic recovery.
5.
The term “conflict-related sexual violence”, as used in the present report, refers
to rape, sexual slavery, forced prostitution, forced pregnancy, forced abortion,
enforced sterilization, forced marriage, and any other form of sexual violence of
comparable gravity perpetrated against women, men, girls or boys that is directly or
indirectly linked to a conflict. This link may be evident in the profile of the perpetrator,
who is often affiliated with a State or non-State armed group, which includes terrorist
entities or networks; the profile of the victim, who is frequently an actual or perceived
member of a persecuted political, ethnic or religious minority, or targeted on the basis
of actual or perceived sexual orientation or gender identity; the climate of impunity,
which is generally associated with State collapse; cross-border consequences, such as
displacement or trafficking; and/or violations of the provisions of a ceasefire
agreement. The term also encompasses trafficking in persons for the purpose of sexual
violence and/or exploitation, when committed in situations of conflict.
6.
While many countries are affected by the threat, occurrence or legacy of conflictrelated sexual violence, the present report is focused on 18 countries for which
information verified by the United Nations exists. It should be read in conjunction
with my 11 previous reports, which provide a cumulative basis for the listing of
52 parties (see annex). The majority of listed parties are non-State actors, with several
having been designated as terrorist groups according to the sanctions list of the
Security Council Committee pursuant to resolutions 1267 (1999), 1989 (2011) and
2253 (2015) concerning Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (Da’esh), Al-Qaida and
associated individuals, groups, undertakings and entities. National military and police
forces that are listed are required to adopt specific, time-bound commitments, to cease
violations and to implement action plans in order to address abuses, and are prohibited
from participating in United Nations peace operations until they have done so.
Effective implementation of commitments, including the cessation of violations, is a
key consideration for the delisting of parties. Non-State armed groups are also required
to implement action plans to prevent and address sexual violence in compliance with
international humanitarian law and relevant Security Council resolutions.
7.
Delivering effective responses, based on reliable reporting, to this historically
“hidden” crime requires dedicated human and financial resources that are
commensurate with the scale of the challenge. In this regard, the deployment of
women’s protection advisers, who are responsible for convening the monitoring,
analysis and reporting arrangements on conflict-related sexual violence in the field,
ensured the continued availability of information at a critical moment, when the issue
was at risk of being further obscured by COVID-19. At the time of writing, women’s
protection advisers are deployed in seven United Nations field operations. A total of
four peacekeeping missions with mandates that include the protection of civilians
have established monitoring arrangements and incorporated the matrix of early
warning indicators of conflict-related sexual violence into their broader protection
structures. Two special political missions have also established monitoring
arrangements. In 2020, both the authorization of the mandate for the United Nations
Integrated Transition Assistance Mission in the Sudan (UNITAMS) and the renewal
of the mandate for the United Nations Support Mission in Libya (UNSMIL) required
the deployment of women’s protection advisers in the respective missions.
8.
To promote effective coordination, the United Nations Action a gainst Sexual
Violence in Conflict network unites efforts across 19 United Nations system entities
21-03724

3/30

S/2021/312

with the goal of preventing conflict-related sexual violence, meeting the needs of
survivors and enhancing accountability, through multidisciplinary expertis e. The
network is the primary forum through which my Special Representative on Sexual
Violence in Conflict promotes cooperation and coherence among relevant actors, in
accordance with the principle of “Delivering as one”. United Nations Action also
provides strategic support to country-level action through a multi-partner trust fund.
Between 2009 and 2019, support was provided for 52 projects in 16 conflict-affected
countries, as well as regional and global initiatives, under the fund. Following an
internal review, the network launched a successor fund, namely, the conflict -related
sexual violence multi-partner trust fund. This fund, which builds upon past
achievements by, and synergies developed among, members of the network,
Governments and civil society partners, will advance the survivor-centred approach
outlined in resolution 2467 (2019) by supporting the provision of comprehensive
services for survivors and for children born of wartime rape, and by addressing
structural root causes. In 2020, the fund prioritized a project in Somalia aimed at
supporting the rehabilitation and reintegration of approximately 400 women formerly
associated with Al-Shabaab, many of whom are survivors of conflict-related sexual
violence. Since the onset of COVID-19, the project has been adapted to include the
provision of preventive health training and of personal protective equipment, as well
as hybrid in-person and virtual capacity development for national counterparts. Th e
network also undertook strategic advocacy, assisting my Special Representative in
developing a policy brief on the nexus between COVID-19 and conflict-related sexual
violence, and marked the twentieth anniversary of the women and peace and security
agenda by issuing a joint statement in which all parties were urged to comply with
my call for a global ceasefire, including for the cessation of sexual violence. In
addition, the network mobilized to gather and share information, finding that the
pandemic had exacerbated sexual violence, hampered the timely collection of data,
impeded access to services owing to the imposition of quarantines, cur fews and
movement restrictions and diverted funding away from activities aimed at combating
sexual violence, thereby exacerbating the chronic shortfalls in the resources allocated
to addressing this crime.
9.
To strengthen accountability, the Team of Experts on the Rule of Law and Sexual
Violence in Conflict, in accordance with its mandate under Security Council resolution
1888 (2009), assists national authorities in establishing institutional safeguards against
impunity, as part of broader efforts to reinforce the rule of law. Although some progress
has been made, impunity prevails. In 2020, the pandemic had an undeniably adverse
impact on the rule of law response, constraining the ability of law enfor cement and
judicial authorities to investigate, prosecute and adjudicate these crimes. Despite these
challenges, the Team pursued initiatives to enhance the evidence base for effective
accountability measures, partnered with the Journal of International Criminal Justice
on the publication of a landmark special issue of the Journal on accountability for
sexual violence in conflict and launched a digital dialogue series that reached
thousands of academics, policymakers and rule of law practitioners, fostering a
community of practice that transcends national borders and institutional divides. Since
its establishment, the Team has engaged in 13 conflict-affected settings, in follow-up
to the high-level political engagements of my Special Representative and with the
consent of affected States. In the Central African Republic, the Bangui Court of Appeal
handed down three convictions for conflict-related sexual violence in 2020, following
the provision by the Team of technical and financial support to the national j udiciary.
The Team also helped to build case-tracking capacity in the high courts of Bangui and
Bimbo in order to strengthen coordination between national investigative units and
relevant jurisdictions. In the Democratic Republic of the Congo, the Team pro vided
technical assistance for the investigation, prosecution and trial of Ntabo Ntaberi
Sheka, who was convicted by the Operational Military Court of North Kivu in
4/30

21-03724

S/2021/312

November 2020. In Colombia, the Team provided guidance for the development of a
document entitled “International standards for the prosecution of crimes of sexual
violence in armed conflict”, which will support the transitional and ordinary justice
systems in addressing these crimes. In Iraq, the Team worked with partners to
strengthen the draft of the Yazidi Female Survivors Law, which was adopted on
1 March 2021. The Team also continued to support the national authorities in Guinea
in ensuring accountability for the crimes of 28 September 2009. In Nigeria, the Team
contributed to the training of personnel from the Attorney General’s Office, the
Nigerian Institute of Advanced Legal Studies and the National Judicial Institute, with
a view to integrating sexual violence charges into ongoing cases.
10. While acknowledging that conflict-related sexual violence committed by parties
to conflict is distinct from incidents of sexual exploitation and abuse that continue to
be committed by United Nations personnel in complex operating environments, I
reiterate my commitment to improve the way the Organization prevents and addresses
such conduct. In my report on special measures for protection from sexual
exploitation and abuse (A/75/754), I provided information on efforts to strengthen the
system-wide response and ensure full implementation of the zero-tolerance policy.

II. Sexual violence as a tactic of war and terrorism: patterns,
trends and emerging concerns
11. The present report is limited to incidents of conflict-related sexual violence that
have been verified by the United Nations; while it conveys the severity and brutality
of recorded cases, it does not purport to reflect the global scale and prevalence of t his
crime. As survivors were compelled to navigate the aftermath of sexual violence in
situations of curfew, lockdown and quarantine, challenges to reporting that predate
the pandemic, including stigma, fear of retaliation, a lack of access to services and
weak rule of law institutions, were compounded. Accordingly, once restrictions were
eased and the mobility of human rights monitors and humanitarians improved, an
increase in reported cases was observed. Moreover, the severe sociocultural and
structural impediments to reporting were clearly illustrated by cases in which
survivors opted not to lodge formal complaints owing to a fear of reprisals and
rejection, and by cases in which civilians were raped by members of national security
forces, which bear the primary responsibility for their protection.
12. During the period under review, sexual violence was employed as a tactic of
war, torture and terrorism in settings in which overlapping humanitarian and security
crises, linked with militarization and the proliferation of arms, continued unabated.
In Ethiopia, during military operations in the Tigray region in November 2020,
following attacks on the northern command of the Ethiopian National Defence Forces
by the Tigray People’s Liberation Front, alleged serious violations of international
humanitarian and human rights law, including sexual violence, were recorded in
northern and central Tigray. Allegations of over 100 rape cases were reported. There
were also disturbing reports of individuals who had allegedly been forced to rape
members of their own family under the threat of imminent violence, of women who
had been forced by military elements to have sex in exchange for basic commodities,
and of sexual violence being perpetrated against women and girls in r efugee camps.
In a report dated 11 February 2021, the Ethiopian Human Rights Commission
confirmed that 108 rapes had been committed during a two-month period. The
Ministry of Women, Children and Youth Affairs of Ethiopia, the Federal Attorney
General and the Ethiopian National Defence Forces established a fact-finding task
force to investigate allegations of sexual violence; the Ministry confirmed that “rape
ha[d] taken place conclusively and without a doubt”, and recommended further
investigation in order to determine the full extent of the problem. The Government
21-03724

5/30

S/2021/312

has expressed its willingness to collaborate with international experts on such
investigations and has reiterated its policy of zero tolerance on sexual violence. My
Special Representative has offered the technical assistance of her Office and the
United Nations system in order to support the national authorities in their prevention
and response efforts. In Cameroon, long-standing regional tensions have led to an
upsurge in violence between the Defence and Security Forces of Cameroon and armed
separatists in the North-West and South-West Regions since late 2016. Reports
indicate that 24 women were allegedly raped in the South-West Region on
29 February 2020, during a military operation. The survivors did not receive any
immediate post-rape treatment, as the alleged incident was only disclosed in July and
access to services was limited owing to security threats and poor road infrastructure.
In the Central African Republic, pre-electoral violence flared up, exposing women
and girls to threats and heightened risks of sexual violence. In Burundi, women from
opposition parties faced targeted intimidation, threats and arbitrary detention during
the electoral period. The intensification of localized conflict at the subnational level
was a worrying trend that was observed in several contexts. In the Sudan,
transhumance routes were a flashpoint for sexual violence, in particular incidents of
rape and gang rape linked to conflicts between farmers and her ders. Similarly, in
Somalia, clan-based attacks intensified as a result of land-related disputes fuelled by
the socioeconomic impact of COVID-19. Intercommunal rifts intensified in both
South Sudan, where a significant number of perpetrators were members o f civil
defence groups, and the Democratic Republic of the Congo, where conflict was linked
to disputes over natural resources and armed groups used sexual violence as a tactic
to dehumanize and displace populations. Displaced women and girls also faced a high
risk of sexual violence, particularly while undertaking essential livelihood activities
around campsites. The socioeconomic fallout of the pandemic led to the use of
harmful coping mechanisms, such as child marriage, as desperate parents living in
internal displacement settings in Iraq, the Syrian Arab Republic and Yemen arranged
marriages for girls as young as 10 years old. Overall, disturbing patterns were
observed in a range of settings, from displacement sites to remote areas embroiled in
localized violence, where armed actors employed various forms of sexual violence,
fuelling cycles of identity- and resource-based conflict.
13. The nexus between sexual violence, conflict-driven trafficking in persons and
violent extremism, as described in Security Council resolution 2331 (2016), continued
to disproportionately affect women and girls. In Afghanistan and Iraq, hundreds of
“wives” and children of terrorist fighters continued to be held in prisons without due
process. Survivors and their children faced myriad challenges related to stigma,
rejection and a lack of identity documents, which can lead to statelessness. The plight
and rights of children born of conflict-related sexual violence and of their mothers will
be explored in a forthcoming special report, as requested by the Security Council in
its resolution 2467 (2019). While national authorities in regions affected by Islamic
State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL) continued to grapple with the legacy of trafficking,
sexual slavery and terrorism perpetrated by ISIL, including by pursuing efforts to
respond to the needs of survivors, reports indicated that the group had taken advantage
of the pandemic in order to intensify its operations. The surge in armed violence across
the Sahel and the Lake Chad basin, where Boko Haram factions carried out brutal
attacks targeting women and girls, reinforced the need for regional cooperation,
including in the areas of cross-border monitoring and response capabilities.
14. Survivors continued to demonstrate their agency and resilience, playing a key role
in their own recovery. For instance, in Darfur, women’s protection networks facilitated
referrals and worked to enhance the profiling of perpetrators. In many settings, women
were specifically targeted on account of their activism, as observed in Afghanistan,
Colombia and Yemen. The majority of survivors were socioeconomically marginalized
women and girls, often living in remote areas which present access difficulties and
6/30

21-03724

S/2021/312

where State authority is weak. Survivors, who come from diverse ethnic and religious
backgrounds, were often targeted for their actual or perceived identity. Incidents of
sexual violence against men and boys were recorded in almost all the countries covered
in the present report, with the majority occurring in detention settings. Structural
challenges to service provision, particularly in remote or inaccessible areas, persisted,
including in the Central African Republic, the Democratic Republic of the Congo and
South Sudan, compelling survivors to travel vast distances to reach shelters and clinics.
Although humanitarian service providers continued their response efforts despite the
pandemic, for instance, by establishing one-stop centres in South Sudan and integrating
sexual and reproductive health services into safe spaces for women and girls in the
Syrian Arab Republic, widespread coverage continued to be impeded by insecurity,
access constraints and chronic underfunding, as already scarce resources were
redirected towards the COVID-19 response.
15. Despite significant gaps in the areas of prevention, accountability, reparations
and the protection of victims and witnesses, there were a number of positive
developments during the reporting period. National courts convicted leaders of armed
groups for sexual violence, and the number of prosecutions of State actors also
increased, although, in both cases, the reparations awarded to the victims have ye t to
be disbursed. Economic barriers to justice persist, as victims and witnesses are often
compelled to pay exorbitant fees and bribes in order to gain access to the justice
system. The adoption and implementation of protective legal frameworks stalled, i n
some cases owing to opposition from traditional and religious leaders, a situation that
highlighted the need to engage a broad constituency on these issues. My Special
Representative continued to develop tools aimed at supporting national efforts,
notably the Model Legislative Provisions and Guidance on Investigation and
Prosecution of Conflict or Atrocity-Related Sexual Violence, which is designed to
assist States in harmonizing domestic laws with international standards. At the
International Criminal Court, the trial of an alleged member of Ansar Eddine for, inter
alia, crimes of rape and sexual slavery committed in northern Mali in 2012 and 2013,
which opened in July 2020, resumed in September 2020. The Court also handed down
its first conviction for the crime of forced pregnancy in February 2021, in the case
against Dominic Ongwen, a former member of the Lord’s Resistance Army. The work
of transitional justice mechanisms to address sexual violence continued in Colombia,
and, in South Sudan, the Government committed itself to expediting the establishment
of all the transitional justice institutions provided for in the revitalized peace
agreement, including the Hybrid Court for South Sudan.
16. Despite the robust framework put in place by the Security Cou ncil over the past
decade, the level of compliance by parties to conflict remains appallingly low. As
noted in the gap assessment included in my previous report ( S/2020/487), over 70 per
cent of the listed parties are persistent perpetrators, having appeared in the lists
included in the annexes to my annual reports for five or more years without taking
remedial or corrective action. For parties that have assumed commitments in the form
of joint and/or unilateral communiqués or frameworks of cooperation, the level of
implementation of these measures remains minimal. It is therefore critical to enhance
coherence between the practice of listing and the designation of parties for the
imposition of targeted sanctions, in order to leverage behavioural change through
political influence. Notably, the leader of Retour, réclamation et réhabilitation, Sidiki
Abbas, was added to the United Nations sanctions list in August 2020 for his
involvement in planning, directing or committing acts of sexual violence including
rape, as well as abduction and forced displacement, in the Central African Republic.
There is also heightened awareness in conflict-resolution processes that perpetrators
of sexual violence must not benefit from de facto or de jure amnesties. The exclusion
of perpetrators of sexual violence from national institutions, including security forces,
is a necessary step towards restoring public confidence. In the context of mission
21-03724

7/30

S/2021/312

transitions involving peacekeeping operations, the United Nations worked to
consolidate monitoring, reporting and response capacity. In March 2020, a framework
of cooperation to address conflict-related sexual violence was signed between my
Special Representative and the Government of the Sudan, prioritizing efforts to
address this crime as an integral part of the broader political and democratic
transition. All tools have to be made available to strengthen compliance with relevant
international law and international standards, in order to br eak the vicious cycle of
sexual violence, underreporting, impunity and revenge, even in the midst of
overlapping crises such as COVID-19. However, this agenda has not been fully
incorporated into efforts to rebuild better from the pandemic in conflict -affected
settings. Combating sexual violence will require mutually reinforcing measures to
foster public health and durable peace, which put survivors of sexual violence at the
centre of all efforts made on their behalf.

III. Sexual violence in conflict-affected settings
Afghanistan
17. The monitoring and reporting of sexual violence in Afghanistan were hindered
by chronic instability, structural gender inequality and a climate of impunity, with
minimal access to services for survivors. Services were further curtailed by pandemic related movement restrictions, and at least two multisectoral service centres ceased
to function following threats from the Taliban. In 2020, the United Nations Assistance
Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA) documented 271 cases of sexual and gender-based
violence, 18 of which were verified as conflict-related sexual violence, affecting nine
boys, five women and four girls. Acts of conflict-related sexual violence committed
against three girls were attributed to members of the Taliban. Members of the Afghan
National Army, the Afghan National Police and the Afghan Local Police were also
implicated. Five cases of sexual violence against boys were documented as bacha
bazi, a practice involving the sexual abuse of young boys by men in positions of
power. The United Nations received further information regarding nine credible
allegations of conflict-related sexual violence, which could not be verified owing to
concerns about the safety of survivors. Although the number of reported incidents of
sexual violence, as well as recourse to services, decreased in 2020, this is likely due
to COVID-19 containment measures.
18. With respect to the implementation of the Law on Elimination of Violence
against Women, specialized prosecution offices are now operational in all
34 provinces; 32 of these offices are headed by women. Afghan National Police
family response units are also operational in all provinces, and women comprise
approximately 40 per cent of their staff. Despite this progress, lawmakers have not
yet prohibited “virginity testing”, there is a low conviction rate for cases of violence
against women and girls, and impunity remains the norm. In the context of counter terrorism, protection concerns have been raised about the Pul-e-Charkhi women’s
prison in Kabul, where over 150 women, many with accompanying children, have
been held in prolonged pretrial detention owing to their alleged links with Islamic
State in Iraq and the Levant-Khorasan.
Recommendation
19. I commend the Government’s efforts to implement a protective legal f ramework
for women, girls and boys at risk of sexual violence, and call for the enhanced
protection of women human rights defenders and for the full and meaningful
participation of women in the peace negotiations and in decision -making at all levels.

8/30

21-03724

S/2021/312

Central African Republic
20. In the Central African Republic, the humanitarian and security situation
worsened, following the volatile presidential and legislative elections held in
December. Armed groups attacked and killed United Nations peacekeepers and
members of the security forces, in addition to committing grave violations against the
civilian population, including conflict-related sexual violence. In 2020, displacement
increased, as 90,000 refugees fled to the Democratic Republic of the Congo and a
further 13,000 fled to Cameroon, Chad and the Republic of the Congo, reversing the
trend of population return observed in previous years. In refugee and internal
displacement camps where State authorities are absent, armed elements posed threats
to civilians. For instance, in Batangafo, families expressed the fear of being pressured
to marry women and girls to armed elements. Earlier in the year, measures aimed at
curbing the spread of COVID-19 had an adverse impact on civilian security. In May,
the Ministry of Justice released 676 prisoners, including 59 reported perpetrators of
rape, from detention centres, in order to minimize virus transmission. In Ouham Pendé, when a reintegration project was suspended owing to the pandemic,
ex-combatants returned to their activities within armed groups, resulting in increased
reports of sexual violence in the area. Incidents of sexual violence also reportedly
increased during the transhumance season; the majority of such incidents occurred in
the prefectures of Nana-Grébizi, Ouham and Ouham-Pendé, where women and girls
were attacked with extreme brutality in isolated areas while carrying out livelihood
activities. In one such case, a victim was gang raped by 11 perpetrators and her entire
family was killed. In the context of clashes over transhumance corridors, arms bearers
have burned houses, raided cattle and used violence as a means of extortion. Another
disturbing trend is the practice of Fulani girls being forcibly married to members of
armed groups with whom Fulani elements are aligned. Mining sites remained
flashpoints for sexual violence in Ouham-Pendé, in which members of Retour,
réclamation et réhabilitation and ex-Séléka elements gradually expanded their areas
of control, rendering more of the region inaccessible to humanitarian organizations.
The proliferation and illicit circulation of small arms facilitated the use of violence
against civilians, including rape.
21. The monitoring of conflict-related sexual violence is challenging owing to the
prevailing atmosphere of insecurity, stigmatization, the fear of reprisals, the climate
of impunity and the limited available services, the majority of which are provided by
international organizations. During the reporting period, the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in the Central African Republic
(MINUSCA) documented 240 cases of conflict-related sexual violence, affecting
129 girls, 108 women and 3 men. These incidents included 221 rapes or attempted
rapes and 12 cases of sexual slavery. Of the total number of incidents documented by
MINUSCA during the reporting period, 22 had occurred in previous years. In terms
of the profile of the perpetrators, 55 incidents were attributed to Retour, réclamation
et réhabilitation, 23 to armed Fulanis, 17 to Union pour la paix en Centrafrique, 16 to
anti-balaka elements, 14 to Front populaire pour la renaissance de la Centrafrique,
11 to Front populaire pour la renaissance de la Centrafrique and M ouvement
patriotique pour la Centrafrique, 7 to Mouvement patriotique pour la Centrafrique,
3 to the Lord’s Resistance Army, 2 to Front populaire pour la renaissance de la
Centrafrique and Union pour la paix en Centrafrique, 2 to Mouvement des libérateurs
centrafricains pour la justice, 1 to an ex-Séléka faction, 1 to armed Sudanese militias
and the remainder to unidentified perpetrators. A total of 10 cases were attributed to
the Armed Forces of the Central African Republic. Service providers recorded
481 cases that had been perpetrated by armed actors.
22. Impunity remained widespread, despite some important developments. On
5 August, the Security Council imposed sanctions against the leader of Retour,
21-03724

9/30

S/2021/312

réclamation et réhabilitation, following a briefing by my Special Representative to
the Security Council Committee established pursuant to resolution 2127 (2013)
concerning the Central African Republic. In addition to perpetrating the highest
number of documented cases during the period under review, Retour, réclamation et
réhabilitation demonstrated extreme brutality. In July, combatants from Retour,
réclamation et réhabilitation abducted and repeatedly raped eight women, who were
released a week later, after villagers paid ransoms. One of the victims, who had been
pregnant at the time of her abduction, died as a result of the injuries inflicted on her
during the attack. The newly established Commission on Truth, Justice, Reparation
and Reconciliation will complement the work of national jurisdictions and the Special
Criminal Court by investigating grave violations committed between 1959 and 2019,
albeit without a judicial mandate.
Recommendation
23. I call upon all parties to uphold their commitment to cease all forms of sexual
violence, as outlined in the Political Agreement for Peace and Reconciliation in the
Central African Republic. I reiterate my call to the Government to appoint a special
adviser on conflict-related sexual violence within the Office of the President, to
accelerate the adoption of an action plan aimed at implementing the joint communiqué
signed between the United Nations and the national authorities in 2019, to ensure
accountability and survivor-centred services and to strengthen oversight of security
institutions by developing a vetting mechanism to exclude perpetrators of sexual
violence.
Colombia
24. Despite the important progress achieved since the signing of the Final
Agreement for Ending the Conflict and Building a Stable and Lasting Peace between
the Government of Colombia and the Fuerzas Armadas Revolucionarias de Colombia Ejército del Pueblo (FARC-EP), the implementation of key provisions, including
those related to gender equality, remains uneven, constituting a challenge to the
consolidation of inclusive and sustainable peace. The pandemic increased
vulnerability in areas affected by conflict, making it difficult for survivors and
women’s organizations to gain access to protection mechanisms and referral
pathways. As part of efforts by the Government to ensure continued access to services,
some institutions offered virtual support, temporarily su spending in-person services.
For instance, the Office of the Attorney General continued to receive cases virtually.
In 2020, the National Victims’ Unit recorded 239 cases of conflict-related sexual
violence. Of these, 197 were committed against women, 15 against girls, 13 against
men and 6 against boys. Eight victims identified as lesbian, gay, bisexual, transgender,
queer or intersex. Moreover, 67 victims were Afro-Colombians and 15 were
individuals from indigenous communities. Sixteen cases concerned pers ons living
with disabilities. The Office of the Ombudsperson reported 189 cases of sexual
violence, primarily affecting women. Of these, 19 concerned former members of
FARC-EP undergoing the process of reintegration, and 19 affected Afro-Colombians.
Three attacks were targeted at transgender women and seven at homosexual men. The
United Nations documented 32 cases of sexual violence. Dissident groups of
FARC-EP were implicated in six of these cases, and one case was attributed to
Ejército de Liberación Nacional (ELN). Members of the military were implicated in
cases of sexual violence against three indigenous girls. The closure of the border with
the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela led to an increased risk of sexual violence and
trafficking, as Venezuelan refugees and migrants, as well as Colombian returnees,
resorted to the use of informal border crossings controlled by illegal and criminal
armed groups. Five cases of trafficking-related sexual violence were documented
against Venezuelan women in this context.
10/30

21-03724

S/2021/312

25. Conflict dynamics, which were exacerbated by challenges arising from the
pandemic, correlated with new trends with respect to sexual violence. Illegal armed
groups took advantage of mobility restrictions to expand their social and territorial
control. The fragmentation of armed actors, transiting between regions, made it more
difficult for survivors to identify perpetrators. In the regions of Antioquia, Cauca,
Chocó, Nariño and Norte de Santander, there were clashes between armed actors and
criminal groups over control of territory and illegal economies, which the
Ombudsperson’s early warning system linked with increased risks of conflict -related
sexual violence. The Office of the Ombudsperson issued the highest number of early
warnings with respect to Autodefensas Gaitanistas de Colombia, ELN and dissident
groups of FARC-EP. However, it is reported that all armed actors committed sexual
violence as part of the social control strategies employed against women and
individuals with diverse sexual orientations and gender identities. In 2020, the United
Nations also reported killings of women human rights defenders, including the murder
of five women, among them a former FARC-EP combatant undergoing reintegration.
26. The National Victims’ Unit implemented strategies focused on reparations and
psychosocial rehabilitation for survivors of sexual violence. The Ministry of Health
trained 22,516 health-care professionals in accordance with the protocol for
comprehensive health care for victims of sexual violen ce. The Agency for
Reintegration and Normalization and the FARC-EP gender commission continued to
work with former female combatants to prevent sexual and gender-based violence in
the context of reintegration. The President of Colombia, Iván Duque Márquez, issued
guidelines on strengthening gender equality in the security forces, with the aim of
improving their overall effectiveness and responsiveness with respect to sexual and
gender-based violence. In October, my Special Representative participated in a v irtual
visit to Colombia led by the Deputy Secretary-General, which was aimed at
supporting national efforts to accelerate the implementation of the gender-related
provisions of the peace agreement and to foster inclusive conflict recovery. Of the
132 cases of conflict-related sexual violence referred to the Office of the Attorney
General, 6 have proceeded to trial, 4 are under investigation and 1 remains at the
preliminary investigation phase, and the remaining 121 are undergoing initial inquiry.
The Special Jurisdiction for Peace has integrated strategies for investigating conflict related sexual violence into four of its seven ongoing emblematic cases. In its first
indictment concerning hostage-taking and other severe acts of deprivation of liberty
committed by FARC-EP, the Special Jurisdiction for Peace included charges against
eight of the former group leaders for war crimes and crimes against humanity,
recognizing that sexual violence in the context of captivity generally went
unpunished. The Truth and Reconciliation Commission continued to receive reports
of conflict-related sexual violence and interviewed 5,440 women on the impact of the
conflict on civilians, including the use of sexual violence.
Recommendation
27. I reiterate my call for the full implementation of the gender-related provisions
of the peace agreement. I further call upon the authorities to effectively implement
the zero-tolerance policy on sexual violence within the military, to ensure service
delivery for survivors in rural and border areas, to protect women human rights
defenders and community leaders, and to accelerate the pace of justice.
Democratic Republic of the Congo
28. Insecurity increased in the eastern part of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, against the backdrop of heightened political tensions within the ruling
coalition, culminating in its dissolution by the President of the Democratic Republic
of the Congo, Félix Antoine Tshilombo Tshisekedi, in December. Conflict-related
21-03724

11/30

S/2021/312

sexual violence remained widespread in the provinces of North Kivu, South Kivu,
Ituri and Tanganyika. In 2020, the United Nations Organization Stabilization Mission
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO) documented 1,053 cases of
conflict-related sexual violence, affecting 675 women, 370 girls, 3 men and 5 boys.
Of these cases, 177 dated back to previous years. The majority (700) were attributed
to non-State armed groups. State actors accounted for the remaining cases, 239 of
which were attributed to the Armed Forces of the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
76 to the Congolese National Police and 38 to other State actors. Most of the cases
perpetrated by the national police were documented in Kasai and Kasai Central
Provinces, and over half of them affected minors. Incidents occurred inside victims’
homes, in detention centres, in fields or in other isolated locations. Sexual violence
continued during military operations against armed groups, including in North Kivu
and Ituri. After one family escaped an attack by an armed group on their village, the
mother and daughter were raped by soldiers from the national armed forces who had
been conducting operations against the assailants. In th e Kasais and in Haut-Katanga
Province, sexual violence by members of both the national police and the national
armed forces was often accompanied by looting. While enforcing pandemic -related
restrictions, the national police perpetrated two cases of sexual violence, one during
a patrol and the other against a woman who was being held in custody.
29. Armed groups continued to use sexual violence as a tactic to assert control over
natural resources in North Kivu. A split in the leadership of Nduma défense du CongoRénové created two rival factions, triggering clashes across Walikale and Masisi
territories, which fuelled sexual violence in areas of artisanal gold mining. The
perpetration of sexual violence by Forces démocratiques de libération du Rwanda was
widespread, reflecting persistent patterns of attacks against women and girls
collecting firewood in Virunga National Park. In the mining areas of North Kivu,
Mai-Mai forces patriotiques populaires-armée du peuple, which were formerly part
of Mai-Mai Mazembe, were implicated in patterns of sexual slavery. In South Kivu,
Mai-Mai and other militias carried out retaliatory attacks against civilians, resulting
in mass displacement and exposing women and girls to sexual violence. There were
also renewed incursions by Mai-Mai Raia Mutomboki factions into mining areas
during the reporting period. In response, the second phase of the Shabunda action
plan, designed to curb conflict-related sexual violence by bringing together the
civilian and military components of MONUSCO, national authorities and
non-governmental organizations, was launched. In Ituri, assailants based in Djugu, in
particular elements of Coopérative pour le développement du Congo (CODECO),
committed acts of sexual violence, including rape and sexual slavery, against multiple
women and one man. In Tanganyika, at least 61 cases of sexual violence were
attributed to various Twa militias, and 11 cases of rape, gang rape and sexual slavery
were attributed to members of Mai-Mai Apa Na Pale.
30. Important progress was made in the fight against impunity. In November, former
armed group commanders Ntabo Ntaberi Sheka and Serafin Lionso were convicted
and sentenced to life imprisonment for war crimes, including rape and sexual slavery,
committed between 2010 and 2017 in North Kivu. The trial of former Forces de
résistance patriotique de l’Ituri leader Justin Banaloki, alias “Cobra Matata”, on
charges of war crimes and crimes against humanity, including sexual violence, is
ongoing in Kinshasa. Following mobile court hearings held in South Kivu,
Takungomo Mukambilwa, alias “Le Pouce”, senior leader of the armed group
Mai-Mai Raia Mutomboki Charlequin, was convicted and sentenced to 20 years in
prison for crimes against humanity, including rape and sexual slavery. How ever, the
arrest warrants against Guidon Shimiray Mwissa (Nduma défense du Congo -Rénové)
and “General” Janvier Karairi Bwingo (Alliance des patriotes pour un Congo libre et
souverain-Janvier), issued in 2019 and 2013 respectively, remain unexecuted. In
2020, mobile military courts enabled the prosecution and conviction of State actors,
12/30

21-03724

S/2021/312

including 103 members of the national armed forces and 28 members of the national
police; 8 members of non-State armed groups were also convicted. However, courtordered reparations have yet to be paid. In the Kasais, judicial investigations into
serious violations attributed to the armed forces between 2016 and 2019 confirmed
the widespread use of sexual violence by the military during operations carried out in
communities perceived to be supporting Kamuina Nsapu militias. The United Nations
continued to assist survivors, including through remote means: for example, it
launched a helpline for victims of sexual and gender-based violence in August.
Collaboration continued between the United Nations and the Government. In that
context, a workshop was convened by the Special Adviser to the President on Youth
and Violence against Women, with the support of MONUSCO, resulting in the
endorsement of a road map aimed at implementing th e 2019 addendum to the 2013
joint communiqué on addressing sexual violence in conflict.
Recommendation
31. I welcome the Government’s efforts to address conflict-related sexual violence
and stress the urgency of allocating adequate resources for the effective
implementation of the addendum to the joint communiqué, as well as the action plans
for the armed forces and the national police. I urge the authorities to establish a vetting
mechanism to ensure that perpetrators of sexual violence are excluded from the
security forces, to adopt pending legislation to protect victims and witnesses and to
ensure the payment of reparations, through the establishment of a fund with dedicated
resources.
Iraq
32. Sporadic attacks by ISIL members continued in 2020, as the pandemic
exacerbated socioeconomic and protection challenges, which particularly affected
internally displaced persons. United Nations reports indicate that members of the Iraqi
security forces harassed and sexually abused women in camps under their control, such
as Ninawa. Moreover, as restrictions aimed at curbing the spread of COVID -19
curtailed economic activity, the use of harmful coping mechanisms, including child
marriage, increased. Civilians who had been abducted and subjected to sexual slavery
by ISIL in the Syrian Arab Republic continued to return to Iraq. According to the
Directorate of Yazidi Affairs of the Ministry of Endowment and Religious Affairs of
the Kurdistan Regional Government, of the estimated 6,417 Yazidis who were
abducted, 3,543 people (1,204 women, 1,044 girls, 956 boys and 339 men) have been
rescued and 2,874 remain missing (1,574 men and 1,300 women). Other affected
groups, such as the Turkmen Shia, are not included in these figures. Conflict -related
sexual violence remains underreported owing to a lack of trust in the justice system, a
fear of reprisals, pressure from family members, and stigma codified in the law, which
allows perpetrators to quash a criminal case by marrying their victims. The United
Nations verified nine cases of conflict-related sexual violence against Yazidi girls
which occurred in 2014, when the girls were kidnapped by ISIL and held as sexual
slaves. Service providers recorded 30 cases perpetrated by armed actors in 2020,
primarily against women. The United Nations also reported a case of sexual violence
against a man while he was in detention. The man later relocated to another city, after
receiving threats. Mothers who have children conceived as a result of rape continued
to face barriers to obtaining identity cards and gaining access to services. Deeply
rooted stigma, combined with gaps in service coverage and a lack of psychosocial
support, continued to prevent survivors from coming forward to seek redress.
33. On 1 March 2021, the Council of Representatives of Iraq enacted the Yazidi
Female Survivors Law, which provides for assistance, reparations and redre ss for
Yazidi, Turkmen, Christian and Shabak survivors of atrocities committed by ISIL. In
21-03724

13/30

S/2021/312

October 2020, an agreement was reached between the federal Government and the
Kurdistan Regional Government to provide security and services in order to facilitate
the return of Yazidis to Sinjar. At the same time, the Government closed or reclassified
16 camps and informal sites for internally displaced persons, 78 per cent of whom
were women and children, who are highly vulnerable to economic shocks and
protection risks, including sexual violence. Returnees perceived as being affiliated
with ISIL were subjected to discrimination and, in some cases, to violence, by local
populations. Criminal courts continued to use counter-terrorism frameworks to
prosecute members of ISIL, with no charges of sexual violence having been brought
to date. Christian, Shia and Yazidi religious leaders endorsed a statement stressing the
importance of supporting survivors of sexual violence, combating stigma and holding
members of ISIL accountable for their crimes. However, comprehensive legislation
and social support for children born of sexual violence remain lacking.
Recommendation
34. In line with the 2016 joint communiqué, I call upon the Government to
holistically address the needs of survivors, particularly those who have recently
returned to their areas of origin following the closure of camps. I urge the Government
to put in place comprehensive legislation in line with international standards, in order
to ensure the effective prosecution of sexual violence as a stand -alone international
crime.
Libya
35. The signing of a ceasefire agreement on 23 October 2020 was an important step
towards ending the conflict in Libya and an opportunity to prevent further violations
against civilians. Despite this positive development, the migration crisis, the
fragmentation of armed groups and the proliferation of illicit arms and ammunition
persist. The climate of insecurity has allowed transnational smugglers, traffickers and
armed groups to perpetrate rape, sexual harassment of detainees and trafficking of
migrants and asylum seekers with impunity. State actors, including corrections
officials, have also been implicated. The United Nations Support Mission in Libya
(UNSMIL) verified 27 cases of conflict-related sexual violence, including rape, sexual
exploitation and forced prostitution, perpetrated against 23 women, 3 men and 1 girl,
all of whom were migrants or asylum seekers. Underreporting remains a challenge,
stemming from a fear of reprisals, intimidation, stigma and social norms related to
honour and shame, factors that led the family of a girl who had been gang raped by four
armed men in Tripoli to decide against lodging a complaint. UNSMIL received credible
accounts of sexual violence that could not be verified owing to the fear of retaliation,
including an account of the rape of two women in Benghazi. In April, the Ninth Brigade
of the Libyan National Army (known as “Kaniyat”) abducted seven women and three
children; the whereabouts of the abductees remain unknown. In 2020, several factors,
including the volatile security situation, the outbreak of COVID -19 and the denial of
access to detention facilities, restricted monitoring. At the Mitiga prison, which is under
the control of the Ministry of Interior, two women detainees were stripped by male
Special Deterrence Force members and raped. At least three Libyan men held in
detention were sexually abused by Government officials during interrogation. UNSMIL
also documented the rape of a man detained by the armed group known as Nawasi
brigade in Tripoli, allegedly in retaliation for political activity.
36. Migrants and asylum seekers reported having been subjected to sexual violence
by traffickers, smugglers and armed men. Some migrants were sexually abused by
corrections officers in detention centres run by the Department for Combating Illegal
Migration. In May, UNSMIL documented two incidents of kidnapping and rap e,
including gang rape by armed men, of asylum seekers from the Sudan and Eritrea,
14/30

21-03724

S/2021/312

one of whom was three months pregnant. In June, UNSMIL announced the
establishment of monitoring, analysis and reporting arrangements on conflict -related
sexual violence, and in September, the Security Council adopted resolution 2542
(2020), in which it called for the deployment of women’s protection advisers. In order
to strengthen national capacity to address these crim es, a virtual training programme
was provided for six judges, including five women, who had been appointed to newly
established special courts on violence against women and children.
Recommendation
37. I urge the authorities to grant humanitarian access to detention facilities and to
put in place measures to protect detainees, including migrants and asylum seekers,
from sexual violence, and assist those who have suffered abuse. I reiterate my call to
the Libyan authorities to adopt anti-trafficking legislation and, with United Nations
support, to strengthen its rule of law institutions in order to ensure that allegations of
sexual violence can be effectively investigated and prosecuted.
Mali
38. In 2020, Mali experienced political upheaval and escalating security concerns,
which exacerbated trends of conflict-related sexual violence, in particular in the
northern and central regions. Following the coup d’état of 18 August, there was a
spike in the number of cases of conflict-related sexual violence, despite
underreporting owing to stigma, insecurity and the constraints placed on humanitarian
access, compounded by pandemic-related restrictions. Moreover, the proliferation of
illicit small arms and a surge of intercommunal violence propelled civilian
displacement, making women and girls more vulnerable to trafficking. The United
Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali (MINUSMA)
reported cases of conflict-related sexual violence affecting 21 women and 8 girls.
Perpetrators included Coordination des mouvements de l’Azawad, associated with
Mouvement arabe de l’Azawad, Ganda Izo, Groupe d’autodéfense des Touaregs
Imghad et leurs alliés, violent extremist groups and unidentified armed men. The
Malian Defence and Security Forces were also implicated. The incidents occurred in
Gao, Kayes, Ménaka, Mopti, Ségou and Timbuktu Regions and included cases of gang
rape, forced marriage, abduction and sexual slavery. Humanitarian service providers
registered 1,020 cases affecting 510 women, 489 girls, 15 boys and 6 men, as well as
68 cases of children conceived as a result of rape. These violations occurred in a
context of structural gender inequality and harmful social norms, with 89 per cent of
women and girls between 15 and 49 years of age having undergone female genital
mutilation, and over 50 per cent having been married before the age of 18.
39. The United Nations continued to support the Government in developing a
protective legal environment for women. The current draft of the penal code now
covers conflict-related sexual violence crimes. Since 2017, the Ministry for the
Advancement of Women, Children and the Family, in collaboration with civil society,
worked to formulate a law on gender-based violence. However, the High Islamic
Council of Mali, despite having issued a fatwa in 2019 to prevent conflict-related
sexual violence, objected to the draft, resulting in its suspension. Services for
survivors are extremely limited, with 23 per cent unable to access health care and
56 per cent unable to reach shelters. As many as 48 per cent of health centres lacked
post-rape kits, while one-stop centres reported 38 incidents of rape that resulted in
HIV infection. MINUSMA, in collaboration with local partners, organiz ed a
campaign to raise awareness of HIV infections linked to conflict -related sexual
violence, followed by testing and services for 1,181 women and girls in Diré, Gao,
Ménaka and Mopti Regions. A case before the International Criminal Court was
allowed to proceed against an alleged member of Ansar Eddine for his role in
21-03724

15/30

S/2021/312

enforcing a policy of forced marriage leading to large -scale rape and sexual slavery
in Timbuktu in 2013. Despite concerted advocacy by MINUSMA and civil society
organizations, 115 cases of conflict-related sexual violence, perpetrated during the
Islamist occupation and the Tuareg rebellion in northern Mali, remain pending before
the tribunal of commune III in Bamako.
Recommendation
40. I urge the Government to expedite the implementation of the joint communiqué,
including through the validation of a concrete action plan; to address the obstacles
and prioritize the prosecution of pending cases of conflict-related sexual violence;
and to adopt the gender-based violence bill, which guarantees reparations and access
to multisectoral services for survivors.
Myanmar
41. Despite a lull in fighting following the general elections in November, armed
conflict persisted between the Tatmadaw, the Myanmar armed forces, and the Arakan
Army in Rakhine State and southern Chin State, with Kayin State, eastern Bago
Region and northern Shan State also marked by conflict. An estimated 130,000
Rohingya in Rakhine State continue to live in encampments in a state of protracted
displacement and are subjected to discriminatory movement restrictions that impede
their access to livelihood opportunities and services. Reports indicate that parties to
the conflict, including ethnic armed organizations in Rakhine, Chin and Shan States,
committed sexual violence in 2020. The Tatmadaw was also involved. Security,
access and protection concerns for survivors impeded verification. Rohingya women
and children in camps for internally displaced persons, and those who fled to
Bangladesh, remained at significant risk of sexual violence, including forced
marriage and forced pregnancy. Moreover, pandemic-related movement restrictions
and economic strain limited livelihood opportunities for women and increased the
risk of trafficking and sexual exploitation. In Cox’s Bazar, Bangladesh, which hosts
more than 800,000 Rohingya refugees, the first case of COVID-19 was confirmed in
May. Subsequently, the presence of protection actors in the camps was reduced by
half, creating a security vacuum and raising concerns about trafficking and sexual
violence. In response, the Bangladesh Armed Police Battalion deployed and in creased
the number of female officers serving at women and children police help desks.
42. Following the signature of the 2018 joint communiqué by the Government and
the United Nations, a national committee on combating conflict -related sexual
violence was formed. However, the draft national plan to implement the communiqué
was formulated unilaterally by the Government in 2019, without United Nations
engagement. The Government also established its own Independent Commission of
Enquiry, which dismissed allegations of sexual violence against the security forces.
The Commission’s findings call into question both the willingness of th e authorities
to ensure genuine accountability and the Commission’s independence ( A/HRC/45/5).
In June 2020, a woman was reportedly raped by Tatmadaw soldiers who entered her
village in Rathedaung township, Rakhine State. Though the incident was initially
denied by the Tatmadaw, the military later announced that three soldiers had been
prosecuted by a military tribunal and sentenced to 20 years of imprisonment. The
draft law on the prevention of violence against women, developed in 2013, is still
pending parliamentary adoption, as are the revisions to the Constitution and Penal
Code recommended by the Committee on the Elimination of Discrimination against
Women. The authorities continue to deny several United Nations mandate holders and
human rights mechanisms, including the Independent Investigative Mechanism for
Myanmar, access to the territory of Myanmar. In the hearings on the request for the
indication of provisional measures submitted by the Gambia before the International
16/30

21-03724

S/2021/312

Court of Justice (The Gambia v. Myanmar), Myanmar did not address the allegations
made by the Gambia of sexual violence against Rohingya civilians in northern
Rakhine, which were largely based on the reports of the independent internatio nal
fact-finding mission on Myanmar.
Recommendation
43. I reiterate my calls for the full implementation of the 2018 joint communiqué
and for the deployment of a women’s protection adviser, in line with Security Council
resolution 2467 (2019), to enhance collective efforts to address conflict-related sexual
violence. I urge the authorities to grant unhindered humanitarian access to conflict affected areas to facilitate the delivery of assistance to survivors of sexual violence.
I also call for immediate, full, unrestricted and unmonitored access to the territory of
Myanmar, including for the Independent Investigative Mechanism for Myanmar.
Somalia
44. Protracted conflict, structural gender inequality and successive humanitarian
crises have exposed Somali women and girls to heightened levels of conflict -related
sexual violence. Al-Shabaab continued to subjugate areas under its de facto control
using sexual violence as political tensions rose in the run-up to national elections.
The United Nations Assistance Mission in Somalia (UNSOM) verified cases of
conflict-related sexual violence perpetrated against 400 girls, 12 women and 7 boys,
primarily attributed to clan militias and Al-Shabaab. While the Somali Police Force
was implicated in 16 cases, another 25 incidents involved the Somali National Army.
The Jubbaland security forces and Puntland forces bore responsibility for nine and
five of the recorded cases, respectively. The remaining cases were a ttributed to
unknown armed actors. Rape and attempted rape were the most frequently reported
forms of sexual violence. Reports of sexual violence increased significantly compared
with the previous reporting period, fuelled by intensified clashes among clan s related
to land-based disputes and the fragile security situation in settlements for internally
displaced persons. While pandemic-related movement restrictions limited the ability
of survivors to access services and hampered monitoring, most reported cas es
continued to be handled according to xeer, a system of customary practices that focus
on the clan rather than the needs and rights of the survivor. In addition, judicial
services, including the adjudication of sexual violence cases, were temporarily
suspended. Although services were provided remotely, psychosocial support
remained lacking owing to funding shortfalls. A paucity of personal protective
equipment for shelter workers impaired their ability to admit survivors of genderbased violence. In response, the United Nations developed guidance, outlining models
for remote service delivery in order to assist practitioners.
45. In January, the Ministry of Women and Human Rights Development initiated a
road map for a new national action plan on ending sexual violence in conflict, the
implementation of which had to be postponed owing to the pandemic. The Somali
Police Force, with United Nations support, is developing a discipline policy and a code
of conduct aimed at combating sexual and gender-based violence. Efforts to reform the
legislative framework have been complicated by conflicting legal systems. Legislators
developed a new draft law on crimes relating to sexual intercourse as an alternative to
the 2018 draft sexual offences bill. In August, UNSOM led a joint analysis of this bill,
which found that it omitted numerous substantive offences, contained weak procedural
provisions, and allowed for the marriage of minors upon physical maturation,
irrespective of age, in contravention of the Convention on the Rights of the Child, which
Somalia has ratified. My Special Representative engaged with the authorities to
encourage the reintroduction of the 2018 draft sexual offences bill.

21-03724

17/30

S/2021/312

Recommendation
46. I reiterate calls for the adoption of the 2018 draft sexual offences bill and
encourage the Government’s effort to initiate a new national action plan on ending
sexual violence in conflict, as agreed with my Special Representative.
South Sudan
47. The 2017 Agreement on the Cessation of Hostilities continued to hold and the
Revitalized Transitional Government of National Unity was established in February
2020 despite delays in implementing the 2018 Revitalized Agreement on the
Resolution of the Conflict in South Sudan. While women’s participation in the peace
process remains below the 35 per cent quota stipulated in the peace agreement,
women now hold 9 of the 35 ministerial positions. Localized violence intensified with
sexual violence being used as a tactic to displace and terrorize rival communities. The
appointee for the governorship of Western Equatoria State was profiled by the United
Nations in 2018 for his alleged involvement in widespread conflict-related sexual
violence, including sexual slavery, in his former capacity as a commander of the
pro-Riek Machar Sudan People’s Liberation Army in Opposition (SPLA -IO/RM). In
Central Equatoria, Western Equatoria and Upper Nile, viol ence is attributed to
fracturing alliances, whereas intercommunal clashes intensified in Jonglei and the
Greater Pibor Administrative Area, Warrap and Lakes. The number of abductions for
the purposes of forced marriage and sexual slavery – a chronic feature of the conflict –
has increased in Jonglei since late January 2020, with over 390 women and girls
abducted during violence over access to natural resources between heavily armed
rival civil defence groups.
48. The United Nations Mission in South Sudan (UNMISS) documented 193 cases
of conflict-related sexual violence affecting 142 women, 46 girls and 5 men. A further
25 cases, which occurred between 2014 and 2019, affecting 14 women, 8 girls and
3 men, were also verified in 2020. Perpetrators included community-based militias,
civil defence groups and other armed elements. The South Sudan People’s Defence
Forces were implicated in 27 per cent of the incidents. Cases were also attributed to
members of the South Sudan National Police Service and the National Security
Service. Some 11 per cent of incidents were attributed to Major General Ochan Puot’s
forces allied to the South Sudan People’s Defence Forces. SPLA-IO/RM was
implicated in 8 per cent of incidents. Civil defence groups now account for 32 per cent
of reported cases. The remaining cases involve other actors such as the National
Salvation Front (NAS), under Major General Daniel Dongo and Major General James
Nando, both of whom defected from SPLA-IO/RM, and unidentified armed men. The
majority of cases occurred in the Greater Equatoria Region, Greater Upper Nile and
Greater Bahr el-Ghazal. Survivors ranged in age from 3 to 70 years, with 81 per cent
subjected to rape, gang rape or attempted rape. Cases of forced nudity, forced
marriage, sexual slavery and threats of sexual violence were also recorded. Service
providers reported 227 incidents perpetrated by armed actors. Sexual violence was
often committed during or on the margins of military operations and in the vicinity of
military bases and cantonment and training sites, while victims were engaged in
routine livelihood activities. Nursing mothers and pregnant women were not spared,
and attacks were also reported against internally displaced pers ons and individuals
with disabilities. Victims were often targeted on the basis of their actual or perceived
ethnic or political affiliation, with some stripped naked in public as a form of
humiliation.
49. Access to services remained extremely challenging, with survivors often
compelled to undertake long journeys, which exposed them to the risk of further harm.
In consultations on the impact of the pandemic, survivors of sexual violence reported

18/30

21-03724

S/2021/312

reduced access to clinics owing to fears of contracting the virus and higher rates of
intimate partner violence and harmful traditional practices, such as early marriage. In
order to enhance reporting and response, the Ministry of Gender, Child and Social
Welfare launched a helpline for those affected by gender-based violence, with support
from civil society and the United Nations. The United Nations supported the
establishment of two one-stop centres in Akobo and Aweil, and a shelter in Western
Bahr el-Ghazal. A communiqué was issued on 18 September by the leader of NAS,
committing to training its forces on the prohibition of sexual violence. With UNMISS
support, the implementation of the action plans of the South Sudan People’s Defence
Forces, the South Sudan National Police Service and SPLA -IO/RM continued, with
over 700 uniformed personnel receiving training on command orders prohibiting
sexual violence. The United Nations assisted the Military Justice Directorate of the
South Sudan People’s Defence Forces in conducting training on international and
domestic legal standards to prosecute sexual violence crimes. With technical support
from the United Nations, the South Sudan People’s Defence Forces finalized a
training curriculum for new recruits on preventing and eliminating conflict -related
sexual violence, which was endorsed by the Minister of Defence and the Chief of
Defence Forces. In anticipation of the deployment of unified forces, the leadership of
the South Sudan People’s Defence Forces and SPLA-IO/RM initiated the
consolidation of action plans on preventing and eliminating sexual violence. A
welcome development was the release of dozens of women and children held against
their will on SPLA-IO/RM bases in Western Equatoria, in line with command orders
issued by Riek Machar, the leader of SPLA-IO/RM, in 2019.
50. Although impunity remains prevalent, 2020 saw a total of 26 uniformed
personnel convicted for conflict-related sexual violence, including the rape and gangrape of minors, by military and civilian courts, including mobile courts, supported by
the United Nations in Kuajok, Malakal, Maridi, Yambio and Wau. The personnel
convicted were 16 elements of the South Sudan People’s Defence Forces, 5 members
of the South Sudan National Police Service and 5 members of SPLA-IO/RM. The
South Sudan People’s Defence Forces also prosecuted and convicted 13 soldiers of
rape, at the district court martial in Yei. The resulting sentences ranged from 7 to
14 years of imprisonment and included orders to compensate the survivors financially
and in heads of cattle. To date, survivors have not received compensation, however,
and only low-ranking soldiers have been tried. Concerns persist about the absence of
protection measures for survivors during court proceedings. In Western Equatoria,
two survivors were so intimidated by the courtroom presence of armed senior
commanders that they stopped attending court hearings.
Recommendation
51. I welcome the formation of the Revitalized Transitional Government of National
Unity and urge all parties to comply with the provisions prohib iting the use of sexual
violence, as set out in the 2017 Cessation of Hostilities Agreement and in the
Revitalized Agreement on the Resolution of the Conflict in South Sudan. I also
welcome the Government’s announcement that it will expedite the establishm ent of
transitional justice mechanisms, including the Hybrid Court for South Sudan, and call
for all perpetrators of sexual violence to be prosecuted, irrespective of rank. I further
call for the immediate and safe release of all abducted women and childre n.
The Sudan
52. The signing of the Juba Peace Agreement in October marked a milestone in the
stabilization of the Sudan. Nevertheless, active conflict persisted in several locations,
including the greater Jebel Marra area, largely fuelled by clashes between factions of
the Sudan Liberation Army-Abdul Wahid (SLA-AW), which did not join the peace
21-03724

19/30

S/2021/312

process, and clashes with transitional Government forces. Intercommunal conflicts in
West, North and South Darfur States pitted pastoral and farming communities against
each other. There were continued reports of conflict-related sexual violence committed
against women, girls and boys. Internally displaced women and girls faced heightened
risks of sexual violence in and around the camps, including while engaged in
livelihood activities. A Rapid Support Forces soldier reportedly raped a boy in a Darfur
camp and an adolescent girl was reportedly gang-raped by three members of the
Sudanese Armed Forces as she harvested fruit. A woman was abducted from a campsite
and held hostage for several days by SLA-AW elements. Clashes between SLA-AW
splinter groups in Central Darfur resulted in the targeting of girls by rebel elements
for sexual violence, including abduction and gang-rape. During the reporting period,
the African Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur (UNAMID)
documented 105 cases of conflict-related sexual violence, affecting 65 women,
39 girls and 1 boy. Incidents were attributed to elements of SLA-AW and armed
nomads. The Sudanese Armed Forces and the Rapid Support Forces were also
implicated.
53. The Security Council, in its resolution 2524 (2020), established the United
Nations Integrated Transition Assistance Mission in the Sudan (UNITAMS) to support
the political transition and assist in peacebuilding, the protection of civilians and the
strengthening of the rule of law. The mandate of the Mission includes promoting
accountability for sexual and gender-based violence, and enhanced monitoring and
reporting through the deployment of women’s protection advisers, which will support
the implementation of the framework of cooperation to address conflict -related sexual
violence signed between my Special Representative and the transitional Government
in 2020. The transitional Government announced its adoption of all rights-related
provisions in the African Charter on the Rights and Welfare of the Child, including the
prohibition of child marriage, which provides legal recourse to child victims of sexual
violence who are forced to marry the perpetrator in out-of-court settlements. The
Criminal Act of 1991 was also amended to criminalize female genital mutilation. The
authorities adopted a national action plan on women and peace and security;
reactivated the federal unit to combat violence against women; and, in response to the
drawdown of UNAMID, developed a national plan for the protection of civilians to
enhance security, especially for women and girls.
54. In response to the limited capacity of the justice system to investiga te and
prosecute sexual violence, the transitional Government drafted a law aimed at
combating gender-based violence, which is pending adoption. Medical, legal and
psychosocial services are only available in a few urban areas and access to post exposure prophylaxis remains limited to major hospitals. The United Nations
continued to support the provision of services and the training of service providers.
UNAMID harnessed social media platforms for outreach, training and sensitization
as part of efforts to adapt to the pandemic. Women protection networks in camps for
internally displaced persons in Darfur promoted capacity-building on psychosocial
assistance and dialogue between women, camp management and UNAMID. These
networks have been instrumental in profiling perpetrators implicated in sexual
violence, mapping hotspots and analysing threats to inform early warning.
Furthermore, in December, a survivors’ network was launched to serve as a platform
for advocacy and to facilitate access to specialized services.
Recommendation
55. I encourage the transitional Government to work closely with my Special
Representative to implement the framework of cooperation. I also urge the authorities
to enhance the protection of women and girls in areas affected by insecu rity, to ensure

20/30

21-03724

S/2021/312

comprehensive service provision for survivors and to hold perpetrators of sexual
violence accountable for their crimes.
Syrian Arab Republic
56. The Syrian peace process remained fragile, with civilians disproportionately
affected by ongoing hostilities, challenges to humanitarian access and the
socioeconomic effects of a decade of conflict, which have been exacerbated by the
COVID-19 pandemic. United Nations entities and humanitarian partners continued to
address the logistical and operational challenges resulting from the reduction to one
authorized border crossing following the adoption of Security Council resolution
2533 (2020). Against this backdrop, reports of incidents of conf lict-related sexual
violence have continued. The Independent International Commission of Inquiry on
the Syrian Arab Republic reported 30 rapes in February 2020 in northern Syrian Arab
Republic (A/HRC/45/31). Members of the Free Syrian Army, a loose coalition of
armed opposition groups, were implicated in a number of these incidents, including
sexual violence committed during house raids. Members of the Free Syrian Army
have also used sexual violence in detention settings as a strategy to humiliate and
extract confessions, such as in the case of the rape of a minor in front of male
detainees at a detention facility in Afrin in 2020. The Commission further documented
cases of sexual violence in detention by Syrian authorities. For instance, women have
reportedly been sexually assaulted at informal detention sites, including Branch 227,
while men have reportedly been sexually abused in Saydnaya prison. S exual violence
remains severely underreported owing to stigma, a lack of services and fear of
retaliation by perpetrators or of “honour killings” by family members. The United
Nations documented 19 cases affecting 12 girls and 7 women; in 5 of the cases, Yazidi
girls in former ISIL-controlled areas of northern Syrian Arab Republic were targeted.
57. Recourse to harmful coping mechanisms in the face of physical and financial
insecurity increased, particularly in overcrowded camps for internally displaced
persons. In a shift in social practices arising from conditions of protracted conflict, in
2020, there were cases of girls as young as 10 being forced to marry and reports of
prepubescent girls in north-west Syrian Arab Republic being forced by their parents
to take hormones to induce puberty in anticipation of early marriage. The
Autonomous Administration of North and East Syria and the self -organized Yazidi
structures continued to support the return of Yazidi women from Hawl camp to Iraq,
although the process stalled owing to pandemic-related precautions. Seven survivors
returned to Iraq, leaving behind their children born during ISIL captivity, who were
placed in orphanages. Mothers who conceived children as a result of rape faced
difficulties in obtaining official documentation for their children, placing them at
heightened risk of statelessness. Despite challenges related to access and coverage,
service providers referred over 1,300 women, girls, men and boys to specialized
services, including for clinical management of rape and the provision of postexposure prophylaxis. Community centres and safe spaces for women and girls
reproductive health care and gender-based violence services to support survivors.
Impunity persists, with no convictions to date for sexual violence offences committed
during the decade-long Syrian conflict. In Germany, the trial of Anwar R., a former
official of the Syrian General Intelligence Service, for torture as a crime against
humanity, including rape and aggravated sexual assault, began in April 2020.
Recommendation
58. I reiterate my call to all parties to the conflict to immediately cease the
perpetration of sexual violence, hold perpetrators accountable and allow humanitarian
access throughout the country to ensure the provision of services. I urge the

21-03724

21/30

S/2021/312

authorities to ensure that survivors of sexual violence committed by terrorist groups
are recognized as victims of terrorism and entitled to reparations and redress.
Yemen
59. As the conflict in Yemen entered its sixth year, the humanitarian situation there
has continued to deteriorate, leaving the country on the brink of famine and economic
collapse. The already dire humanitarian crisis was exacerbated by the destruction of
essential infrastructure, such as health facilities, the spread of COVID -19 and
restricted humanitarian access. The signing of the Riyadh Agreement between the
Government of Yemen and the Southern Transitional Council in 2019, despite
showing signs of fragility, constitutes a pathway for peace in the country. The attack
on Aden airport on 30 December, as members of the newly formed cabinet returned
to Yemen, marked a setback for reconciliation efforts. As conflict intensified during
2020, over 158,000 civilians were displaced, heightening the risk of sexual violence.
Migrants also faced an increased risk of sexual violence, illegal detention and
extortion by smugglers in border areas.
60. In its resolution 2511 (2020), the Security Council affirmed that sexual violence
in conflict could constitute a sanctionable act and a threat to the peace, security or
stability of Yemen. In its most recent report, the Panel of Experts on Yemen reiterated
that Sultan Zabin remained the director of the Sana’a-based criminal investigation
department, despite his prominent role in a policy of intimidation and sexual violence
against politically active women (S/2021/79). In response, the Security Council
decided in its resolution 2564 (2021) adopted on 25 February 2021 that Sultan Zabin
shall be subject to sanctions for the use of sexual violence in armed conflict. The
Panel further documented cases of sexual violence against two internally displaced
women in Dar Sa‘d, Aden, committed by members of the Security Belt Forces, and
cases of sexual violence in detention settings committed by the Houthis (also known
as Ansar Allah). The Group of Eminent International and Regional Experts on Yemen
documented patterns of sexual violence and ill-treatment in detention centres, such as
the Sana’a Central Prison and Al-Saleh Prison in Ta’izz, controlled by the Houthis,
where men and boys were subjected to rape, electrocution and beating of genitals,
and threats of sterilization and forced nudity, in order to extract confessions or to
punish them for their perceived political affiliation ( A/HRC/45/6). Persons with
diverse sexual orientations or gender identities faced heightened risks of sexual and
other violence, particularly in detention settings, owing to deep -rooted patriarchal
norms. The Group of Eminent Experts documented nine cases of arbitrary detention,
ill-treatment, torture and sexual violence perpetrated by the Houthis and Security Belt
Forces against individuals accused of spreading prostitution and homosexuality and
supporting the enemy.
Recommendation
61. I urge all parties to the conflict to adopt commitments to prevent and respond to
conflict-related sexual violence and to hold perpetrators accountable for their crimes.
I call for safe and unimpeded humanitarian access for service providers to deliver
assistance to survivors of sexual violence and those at risk, including in detention
settings.

IV. Addressing crimes of sexual violence in post-conflict settings
62. In Bosnia and Herzegovina, survivors of conflict-related sexual violence have
struggled to achieve recognition as legitimate victims of the war and to access
reparations and redress. In August 2020, in response to an individual complaint, the

22/30

21-03724

S/2021/312

Committee on the Elimination of Discrimination against Women concluded that
investigations into conflict-related sexual violence in Bosnia and Herzegovina had
been ineffective and slow and that compensation and support for the victims were
inadequate. The complainant had pursued justice for more than a decade, after being
raped in 1995, and had been unable to afford adequate treatment for the physical and
psychological trauma she suffered. The United Nations continues to forge
partnerships to advance justice, while preventing a relapse into violence. My Special
Representative continued to engage with the authorities and key partners to promote
comprehensive services, justice, access to reparations and economic empowerment
for survivors, and to work with interfaith organizations to alleviate stigma. The
Government has worked to expand the availability and improve the quality of medical
and psychosocial support, including through virtual means during the pandemic,
while civil society organizations continue to provide critic al assistance to survivors,
their families and children born of wartime rape.
63. Following the drawdown of the United Nations Operation in Côte d’Ivoire
(UNOCI) in 2017 and the removal of Forces armées de Côte d’Ivoire from the list
annexed to the report of the Secretary-General published in 2017 (S/2017/249), the
United Nations has continued to support the Government to consolidate progress in
the prevention of conflict-related sexual violence. My Special Representative
supported the deployment of two experts to build the capacity of Forces armées de
Côte d’Ivoire, support the Government in implementing its plan of action to combat
sexual violence, and bolster its monitoring, analysis and reporting arrangem ents. In
order to prevent the recurrence of sexual violence, in the period from March to August
2020, civil society organizations in collaboration with the National Committee to
Combat Conflict-Related Sexual Violence organized training for members of the
armed forces, local administrators and community leaders, as well as judicial police
officers. The Government has taken steps to create a protective legal environment for
survivors, including by removing the requirement that survivors must produce a
costly medical certificate in order to file a complaint. The Ministry of Justice and
Human Rights appointed a gender focal point, whose role is to ensure the systematic
monitoring of cases involving sexual and gender-based violence in the courts.
Nevertheless, at the subnational level, some women peacebuilders were targeted with
intimidation, including physical and sexual violence.
64. Since the signing of the Comprehensive Peace Agreement ( 2006), the
Government of Nepal has continued to face challenges in ensuri ng criminal
accountability for conflict-era sexual violence. After a prolonged delay, the
Government appointed commissioners to head Nepal’s two transitional justice
commissions, the Truth and Reconciliation Commission and the Commission of
Investigation on Enforced Disappeared Persons. Despite the widespread perpetration
of sexual violence during the conflict, and the fact that survivors face a high risk of
stigmatization, the Truth and Reconciliation Commission did not establish a
confidential mechanism to enable victims to file complaints of sexual violence. There
were some signs of progress, however, such as the finalization of the second national
action plan on women and peace and security, which is pending approval. The plan
reflects the concerns of sexual violence survivors, female ex-combatants and children
born of wartime rape.
65. More than a decade since the end of the conflict between the Government and
the Liberation Tigers of Tamil Eelam in Sri Lanka, a meaningful transitional justice
process that would address crimes committed during three decades of civil war,
including crimes of sexual violence, is yet to be established. In February 2020,
President Rajapaksa, who took office in 2019, announced the formal withdrawal of
his Government’s co-sponsorship of Human Rights Council resolution 30/1 with a
view to developing a domestically-driven approach to reconciliation and
21-03724

23/30

S/2021/312

accountability. Survivors of conflict-related sexual violence, particularly those who
came forward to engage with the transitional justice process, are experiencing
increased barriers to attaining justice in the current context. War widows and other
marginalized groups are at heightened risk of sexual violence, in particular in he avily
militarized areas such as the Northern Province, owing to an entrenched post -conflict
culture of violence.
Recommendation
66. I call upon the governments of countries undergoing post-conflict transitional
justice processes to ensure concrete measures are taken to deliver accountability,
award reparations and provide redress for conflict-related sexual violence, avoiding
amnesty or impunity for these grave international crimes. I encourage these
governments to consult survivors in the design and delivery of transitional justice
processes, in line with a survivor-centred approach, and to ensure that past perpetrators
are removed from national institutions through credible vetting procedures.

V. Other situations of concern
Nigeria
67. As the conflict in Nigeria entered its second decade, Boko Haram factions
continued to carry out a series of brutal attacks, including mass abd uctions of girls and
boys. The violence disproportionately affected civilians in the north-east and northwest of the country, as well as parts of Cameroon, Chad and the Niger, resulting in mass
displacement and heightened risks of sexual violence. The Gov ernment’s special
investigations panel on sexual and gender-based violence documented 210 cases of
conflict-related sexual violence committed in 2020, including rape and forced marriage,
affecting 94 girls, 86 women and 30 boys, noting that such crimes continue to be
chronically underreported owing to stigma and harmful social norms. Several governors
declared a state of emergency in response to a spike in gender-based violence during
lockdowns. In order to promote accountability, the United Nations continued to support
national judicial authorities. A specialized unit of the Office of the Attorney General
continued to investigate and prosecute crimes committed by Boko Haram factions,
although no sexual violence crimes have been prosecuted to date. The Unite d Nations
facilitated access to medical care, psychosocial and livelihood support, and legal
assistance for survivors. Seven one-stop centres and three shelters in the north-east
provided counselling and confidential care to survivors. The United Nations a lso
supported the establishment of the first national forensic DNA laboratory in Adamawa
State, which will contribute to effective prosecutions of sexual violence.
Recommendation
68. I urge the authorities to prioritize the investigation and prosecution of sexual
violence, including in counter-terrorism cases, and to strengthen measures to prevent
abductions, which increase the risk of rape, forced marriage, sexual slavery and other
forms of sexual violence.

VI. Recommendations
69. The following recommendations should be read in conjunction with those
presented in my previous reports. In line with the survivor-centred approach,
strategies to rebuild better in the wake of the pandemic will require the full and
meaningful participation of survivors, who have suffered the effects of intersecting
crises, including limited access to services, resources and judicial redress. The work
24/30

21-03724

S/2021/312

of the Security Council to enforce compliance by State and non-State actors with the
series of resolutions on sexual violence in conflict adopted since 2008, remains
critical for translating commitments into compliance and resolutions into results.
70.

I recommend that the Security Council:

(a) Demand the complete cessation with immediate effect of all acts of
sexual violence by all parties to armed conflict, consistent with the Security
Council resolution 2532 (2020) and in response to my call for a global ceasefire;
(b) Continue to incorporate sexual violence as a stand-alone designation
criterion for sanctions, including when used as a tool of reprisals against women
in public and political life; ensure coherence between the parties listed in the
present report and the individuals and entities designated by sanctions
committees; continue to invite my Special Representative on Sexual Violence in
Conflict to share information with sanctions committees, as appropriate; and, in
the context of the Security Council Committee pursuant to resolutions 1267
(1999), 1989 (2011) and 2253 (2015) concerning Islamic State in Iraq and the
Levant (Da’esh), Al-Qaida and associated individuals, groups, undertakings and
entities, integrate conflict-related sexual violence considerations and ensure that
parties providing support to such groups through the sale, trade or trafficking
of women and children are eligible for listing;
(c) Continue to address the nexus between trafficking in persons and
conflict-related sexual violence, further to resolutions 2331 (2016) and 2388
(2017), including the links between trafficking committed in situations of armed
conflict, political instability, terrorism and the financing of armed and violent
extremist groups;
(d) Encourage all State and non-State parties to conflict to adopt specific
commitments to address conflict-related sexual violence and monitor their
compliance, including through the Informal Expert Group on Women and Peace
and Security;
(e) Employ all means at its disposal to influence parties to armed conflict
to comply with their international law obligations, including under international
humanitarian law;
(f) Refer to the Prosecutor of the International Criminal Court situations
in which crimes of sexual violence, as defined in its Statute, appear to have been
committed;
(g) Give due consideration to the early warning signs of sexual violence in
its monitoring of global crises, especially in relation to periods of rising violent
extremism, terrorism and gender-based hate speech, widespread insecurity,
electoral violence, political instability, intercommunal tensions and mass
displacement, and take appropriate action;
(h) Ensure a focus on conflict-related sexual violence in its periodic field
visits, including through engagement with national authorities on their obligations
to prevent and respond to these crimes, guided by a survivor-centred approach
and the views of affected communities, women-led organizations and service
providers, with due consideration to the principles of safety and confidentiality;
(i) Reflect the prevention and response to conflict-related sexual violence in
mandate authorizations and renewals of peace operations through the inclusion of
specific operational provisions; and support the accelerated deployment of
women’s protection advisers to peace operations and offices of United Nations
resident and humanitarian coordinators in all relevant situations of concern.

21-03724

25/30

S/2021/312

71. I encourage Member States, donors, regional and intergovernmental
organizations:
(a) To ensure that victims of sexual violence perpetrated by armed and/or
terrorist groups are recognized as legitimate victims of conflict and/or terrorism, in
order to benefit from multisectoral assistance, reparations and redress, including
through the revision of national legal and policy frameworks, as necessary;
(b) To adopt a survivor-centred approach to preventing and responding
to conflict-related sexual violence that recognizes that survivors are unique
individuals and seeks to empower them by prioritizing their different needs,
perspectives and wishes; and by paying particular attention to intersecting
inequalities, namely, ethnicity, religion, migratory status, disabilities, age,
political affiliation, perceived association with armed groups, sexual orientation
and gender identity, and HIV status, among others; to ensure that survivors’
rights are respected, that they are treated with dignity, and that their capacity to
make informed decisions and to guide interventions to prevent future incidents
is promoted;
(c) To ensure adequate funding for comprehensive and quality multisectoral
assistance for survivors of sexual violence, namely medical, psychosocial and legal
services, sexual and reproductive care, including access to emergency
contraception, safe termination of pregnancy, HIV prevention, awareness and
treatment, as well as socioeconomic reintegration support for survivors and their
dependants, and to ensure that these services reach rural and remote areas;
(d) To enhance protection measures, in particular for women and children
in displacement and refugee settings; to support durable solutions to
displacement, including voluntary return in conditions of safety and dignity,
through adequate socioeconomic reintegration support, and the prosecution of
perpetrators implicated in sexual violence;
(e) To guarantee the full and meaningful participation of women, girls
and survivors of sexual violence, including women-led organizations, in decisionmaking processes, including as part of the COVID-19 pandemic recovery and
response to ensure that they are not left behind, including in terms of
socioeconomic support measures;
(f) To tackle the root causes of conflict-related sexual violence, including
structural gender inequality, harmful social norms that lead to victim-blaming
and the stigmatization of survivors, and intersecting forms of exclusion and
discrimination, by promoting women’s leadership in national political, security
and rule of law institutions, as well as by engaging with faith-based, traditional
and community leaders, the media and women’s organizations to promote
attitudinal and social change;
(g) To ensure that ceasefire and peace agreements contain provisions on
the prohibition of sexual violence in the definition of ceasefire and related
monitoring and verification frameworks, and that amnesties and immunities are
not granted to perpetrators of these international crimes;
(h) To ensure humanitarian access to detention facilities and to put in
place measures to protect and assist those who have suffered, or are at risk of,
sexual violence, including those with a perceived or actual association with an
armed or terrorist group; to ensure swift responses and assistance to survivors
and persons at risk of sexual violence in detention facilities and to hold
perpetrators accountable;

26/30

21-03724

S/2021/312

(i) To guarantee that law enforcement agencies have the capacity to
investigate, prosecute and adjudicate cases of conflict-related sexual violence,
including by increasing the representation of women at all levels; to ensure that
transformative, gender-responsive reparations and witness and victim protection
programmes are made available; and that all efforts are guided by the principles
of security, confidentiality and informed consent;
(j) To address the proliferation and trafficking of small arms, which drive
and exacerbate the commission of sexual violence in conflict and post-conflict
zones, in line with the Arms Trade Treaty (2014) and other global instruments;
and to continue to highlight the nexus between conflict-related sexual violence
and the diversion of small arms from national stockpiles in policymaking,
programming and capacity-building initiatives;
(k) To ensure that the national forces listed in the annex to the present
report, or those listed for grave violations against children, are not deployed to
peacekeeping operations;
(l) To address chronic funding shortfalls for combating conflict-related
sexual violence by providing predictable financial support to the conflict-related
sexual violence multi-partner trust fund; to draw on the expertise of the United
Nations system in the areas of justice and the rule of law by supporting the Team
of Experts on the Rule of Law and Sexual Violence in Conflict; and to enhance
coordination through the United Nations Action against Sexual Violence in
Conflict network, in particular by ensuring sustainable, regular and adequate
funding for their work.

21-03724

27/30

S/2021/312

Annex
List of parties credibly suspected of committing or being
responsible for patterns of rape or other forms of sexual
violence in situations of armed conflict on the agenda of
the Security Council
The following list does not purport to be comprehensive, but rath er includes
parties in relation to which credible information is available. It should be noted that
the names of countries appear only to indicate the locations where parties are
suspected of committing violations.
Parties in the Central African Republic
Non-State actors:
(a)

Lord’s Resistance Army;

(b)

Ex-Séléka factions: Union pour la paix en Centrafrique, Mouvement
patriotique pour la Centrafrique, Front populaire pour la renaissance de
la Centrafrique – Gula faction, Front populaire pour la renaissance de la
Centrafrique – Abdoulaye Hussein faction, Rassemblement patriotique
pour le renouveau de la Centrafrique; Mouvement national pour la
libération de la Centrafrique; Mouvement des libérateurs centrafricains
pour la justice;

(c)

Front démocratique du peuple centrafricain – Abdoulaye Miskine;

(d)

Révolution et justice;

(e)

Retour, réclamation et réhabilitation;

(f)

Anti-balaka associated militia.

Parties in the Democratic Republic of the Congo
1.

28/30

Non-State actors:
(a)

Alliance des patriotes pour un Congo libre et souverain-Janvier;

(b)

Allied Democratic Forces;

(c)

Bana Mura militias;

(d)

Forces démocratiques de libération du Rwanda;

(e)

Force de résistance patriotique de l’Ituri;

(f)

Kamuina Nsapu;

(g)

Lord’s Resistance Army;

(h)

Nduma défense du Congo;

(i)

Nduma défense du Congo-Rénové faction led by “General” Guidon
Shimiray Mwissa and faction led by Commander Gilbert Bwira Shuo and
Deputy Commander Fidel Malik Mapenzi;

(j)

Mai-Mai Kifuafua;

(k)

Mai-Mai Simba;

(l)

Nyatura;

21-03724

S/2021/312

(m) Mai-Mai Raia Mutomboki;

2.

(n)

Mai-Mai Apa Na Pale;

(o)

Mai-Mai Malaika;

(p)

Mai-Mai Fimbo na Fimbo;

(q)

Mai-Mai Yakutumba;

(r)

Coopérative pour le développement du Congo;

(s)

Twa militias;

(t)

Mai-Mai forces patriotiques populaires-armée du peuple.

State actors:
(a)

Armed Forces of the Democratic Republic of the Congo;*

(b)

Congolese National Police.*

Parties in Iraq
Non-State actors:
Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant.
Parties in Mali
Non-State actors:
(a)

Mouvement national de libération de l’Azawad, part of Coordination des
mouvements de l’Azawad;*

(b)

Ansar Eddine;

(c)

Mouvement pour l’unification et le jihad en Afrique de l’Ouest;

(d)

Al-Qaida in the Islamic Maghreb, part of Jama'a Nusrat ul-Islam wa
al-Muslimin;

(e)

Groupe d’autodéfense des Touaregs Imghad et leurs alliés, part of
Plateforme des mouvements du 14 juin 2014 d’Alger.*

Parties in Myanmar
State actors:
Tatmadaw, including integrated Border Guard.*
Parties in Somalia
1.

Non-State actors:
(a)

2.

21-03724

Al-Shabaab.

State actors:
(a)

Somali National Army;*

(b)

Somali Police Force* (and allied militia);

(c)

Puntland forces.

29/30

S/2021/312

Parties in South Sudan
1.

2.

Non-State actors:
(a)

Lord’s Resistance Army;

(b)

Justice and Equality Movement;

(c)

Pro-Riek Machar Sudan People’s Liberation Army in Opposition;*

(d)

Sudan People’s Liberation Army in Opposition forces aligned with
Vice-President Taban Deng.

State actors:
(a)

South Sudan People’s Defence Forces;*

(b)

South Sudan National Police Service.*

Parties in the Sudan
1.

2.

Non-State actors:
(a)

Justice and Equality Movement;

(b)

Sudan Liberation Army-Abdul Wahid.

State actors:
(a)

Sudanese Armed Forces;

(b)

Rapid Support Forces.

Parties in the Syrian Arab Republic
1.

2.

Non-State actors:
(a)

Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant;

(b)

Hay'at Tahrir al-Sham led by Nusrah Front (Levant Liberation
Organization);

(c)

Army of Islam;

(d)

Ahrar al-Sham.

State actors:
(a)

Government forces, including the National Defence Forces and
pro-government militias;

(b)

Intelligence services;

Other parties of concern on the agenda of the Security Council
Non-State actors:
Boko Haram, including affiliated/splinter groups.

* Indicates that the party has made formal commitments to adopt measures to address conflict related sexual violence.
30/30

21-03724
