86

General Asaembl,--Thirtieth Seuion

Discrimination and Protection of Minorities, to the
General Assembly at that session.
2400th plenary meeting
JO November 1975
3384 (XXX), Declaration on the Use of Scientific
and Technologieal Progress in the Interests
of Peace and for the Benefit of Mankind

The General Assembly,
Noting that scientific and technological progress has
become one of the most important factors in the development of human society,
Taking into consideration that, while scientific and
technological developments provide ever increasing opportunities to better the conditions of life of peoples
and nations, in a number of instances they can give rise
to social problems, as well as threaten the human rights
and fundamental freedoms of the individual,
Noting with concern that scientific and technological
achievements can be used to intensify the arms race,
suppress national liberation movements and deprive
individuals and peoples of their human rights and fundamental freedoms,
A/so noting with concern that scientific and technological achievements can entail dangers for the civil
and political rights of the individual or of the group
and for human dignity,
Noting the urgent need to make full use of scientific
and technological developments for the welfare of man
and to neutralize the present and possible future harmful consequences of certain scientific and technological
achievements,
Recognizing that scientific and technological progress
is of great importance in accelerating the social and
economic development of developing countries,
Aware that the transfer of science and technology is
one of the principal ways of accelerating the economic
development of developing countries,
Reaffirming the right of peoples to self-determination
and the need to respect human rights and freedoms and
the dignity of the human person in the conditions of
scientific and technological progress,
Desiring to promote the realization of the principies
which fonn the basis of the Charter of the United
Nations, the Universal Declaration of Human Rights,
the Intemational Covenants on Human Rights, the
Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples, the Declaration on Principies of International Law conceming Friendly Relations and Co-operation among States in accordance
with the Charter of the United Nations, the Declaration on Social Progress and Development, and the
Charter of Economic Rights and Duties of States,
Solemnly proclaims that:
l. Ali States shall promote international co-operation to ensure that the results of scientific and
technological developments are used in the intere~ts
of strengthening internationa1 peace and sec-urity,
freedom and independence, and also for the purpose
of the economic and social development of peop]es
and the realization of human rights lllld freedoms in
accordance with the Charter of the United Nations.
2. All States shall take appropriate measures to
prevent the use of scientific and technological devel-

opments, particularly by the State organs, to limit or
interfere with the enjoyment of the human rights and
fundamental freedoms of the individual as enshrined
in the Universal Declaration of Human Rights, the
International Covenants on Human Rights and other
relevant international instruments.
3. All States shall take measures to ensure that
scientific and technological achievements satisfy the
material and spiritual needs of all sectors of the
population.
4. All States shall refrain from any acts involving the use of scientific and technological achievements for the purposes of violating the sovereignty
and territorial integrity of other Stares, interfering
in their interna! affairs, waging aggressive wars, suppressing national liberation movements or pursuing a
policy of racial discrimination. Such acts are not
only a flagrant violation of the Charter of the United
Nations and principies of international law, but constitute an inadmissible distortion of the purposes
that should guide scientific and technological developments for the benefit of mankind.
5. All States shall co-operate in the establishment, strengthening and development of the scientific and technological capacity of developing countries with a view to accelerating the realization of the
social and economic rights of the peoples of those
countries.
6. All States shall take measures to extend the
benefits of science and technology to all strata of the
population and to protect them, both socially and
materially, from possible harmful effects of the misuse of scientific and technological developments, including their misuse to infringe upon the rights of
the individual or of the group, particularly with regard to respect for privacy and the protection of the
human personality and its physical and intellectual
integrity.
7. AH Sta tes shall take the necessary measures,
including Iegislative measures, to ensure that the
utilization of scientific and technological achievements promotes the fullest realization of human
rights and fundamental freedoms without any discrimination. ~hatsoever on grounds of raoe, sex, language or rehg1ous beliefs.
8. All States shall take eflective measures includin~ _Ieg!slative m~asu!es, to pre~nt and preciude the
utilizatton of sc1~ntific and technological achievements to the detnment of human rights and fundamental freedoms and the dignity of the human person.
. 9. AH States sh~1, whenever necessary, take ac!1on to ensu~e comphance with 1egis1ation guaranteem~ h1;1man nghts and freedoms in the conditions of
sc1ent1fic and technological developments.
2400th plenary meetinK
10 November 1975
344._1 (XXX).

1971 Convention on Psychotropic
Suhstances

The General Assembly,
Recal/ing its resolution 3147 (XXVIII) of 14 De~ember _1973, in which it stressed the importance to
t~rernational di:ug control of universal accession to the
Smg]e Convent1on on Narcotic Drugs, 1961,D the 1971
9

United Nations, Treaty Series. vol. 520, No. 7515, p. 151.

87

Resolutions adopted on tbe reporte of the Third Committee

Convention on Psychotro~ic Substances_1º and the 19~2
Protocol Amending the Smgle Convention on N arcotic
Drugs, 1961, 11
Expressing its satisfaction that d~ring 1975 ~veral
additional States have become parties to those mstruments,
Mindful, however, that the 1971 Conve1:1tion on Psychotropic Substances has not yet entered mto force,
Convinced that the entry into force of that Convention would constitute an important step towards the
establishment of effective intemational control of the
licit trade and the prevention of illicit traffic in psychotropic substances,
Recognizing the need to mai~tain m?mentum in the
systematic strengthening of the mtemat1onal drug control system,
l. Expresses the hope that the 1971 ~onvention on
Psychotropic Substances will soon enter mto force;
2. Urges ali States not yet parties to that Convention, in particular those which are directly concem~
in ,the manufacture and production of and trade m
psychotropic substances, to take urgent action to adhere to it;
3. Requests the Secretary,;,General to transmit the
present appeal to the Govemments of those States.
2433rd plenary meeting
9 December 1975

3444 (XXX). 1972 Protocol Amending the
Single Convention on Narcotic Drugs, 1961
The General Assembly,
A ware that the 1972 Protocol Amending the Single
Convention on Narcotic Drugs, 1961, 11 has entered
into force,
Mindful that the Protocol in~reases the responsib~ties of the Intemational Narcotics Control Board w1th
a view inter alia to ensuring, in collaboration with
Goven::ments worÍd-wide availability of narcotic drugs
required for 'meclical and scientific purposes, while_ at
the same time preventing illicit cultivation, product1on
and manufacture of and illicit trafficking in and use of
such drugs, .
Noting that ali measures taken by the Board under
the Convention are to be those most consistent with the
intent to further Govemments' co-operation witb tbe
Board and to provide the mechanism for a co!ltinuing
dialogue between Govemments and the Board m order
to assist and facilitate effective national aotion to attain
the aims of the Convention,
N oting also that tbe Protocol specifically empowers
tbe Board to recommend to tbe competent United
Nations organs and to the specialized agencies _that
technical or financia! assistance, or both, be provtded
to Governments in support of their efforts to oarry out
their obligations under the Convention,
1. Invites Govemments to co-operare fully with the
Intemational N arcotics Control Board in its efforts to
carry out its increased responsibilities;
10 See Of!icial Record, o/ the United Natlons Conference
for the adoption of a Protocol on Psychotroplc S~b,tance,,
vol. I (Uruted Nations publication, Sales No. E.73.xl.3),
pert four.
11 See Of/iclal Records of. tlu United Nations Conference to
consider amtndments to the Single Conventlon on Narcotlc
Drugs, 1961, vol. I (United Nations publication, Sales No.
E.73Xil.7), part three.

2. Invites the Secretary-General to continue to pr~
vide the support necessary to enable the _B~~d and 1ts
secretariat to assume these new respons1b1hties;
3. Requests the competent United Nations organs,
especially the Unired Nations Fwtd for _Drug ~buse
Control and the specialized agencies to g1ve particular
attentio~ to recommendations made by the B?ard c<;>ncerning the provision of technical and financial assts!anceto -support Govemments' efforts to carry out the!r
obligations under the Single Convention on Narcottc
Drugs, 1961. 12
2433rd plenary meeting
9 December 1975

3445 (XXX). Adequate priority for
narcotics control
The General Assembly,
Bearing in mind the increasing responsi~ilities entrusted to the United Nations through treat1es for the
control of narcotic drugs and psychotropic substances,
Mindful of the deep concem of a large number of
Governments over the growing threat caused by the
spread of drug abuse in certain parts of the world, ~s
conñrmed by the overwhelming support accorded to 1ts
resolutions and those adopred by the Economic and
Social Council during the past few years,
Recognizing that these developments hav~ led to a
considerable increase in the work to be camed out by
the competent United Nations bodies under their regular and statutory obligations,
Recalling its resolution 3279 (XXIX) of 10 December 1974 in which it noted with appreciation the activities of tbe International Narcotics Control Board
and of the Commission on N arcotic Drugs in tbe field
of the control of illicit traffic and the struggle against
the abuse of drugs,
Having regard to Economic and Social Council resolution 1910 (LVII) of 2 August 1974 relating to priorities in the economic, social and human rights ficlds.
Requests the Secretary-General, in preparing and
presenting the proposed_ )1.r~e budge~ and the
medium-term plan, to g1ve particular attention to the
resources requested for th~ competent United Nations
bodies and tbeir secretariats, in view of this increased
work in drug control, in o'rder to ensure th~t,. ~ the
light of the importance attdbuted to these aetivities by
the General Assembly and 1the Economic and Social
Council, adequate priority will be given and the m:lCCSsary resources allocated.
2433rd plenary meeting
9 December 1975
3446 (XXX). United Nations Fund for
Drug Abuse Control
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 3145 (XXVIII) of 14 December 1973 concerning the urgent need for providing
adequate financia! resources . to enable tbe United
Nations Fund for Drug Abuse Control to continue and
expand its activities to asmst the developing countries
concemed in carrying out their respective narcotics
control programmes,
Aware that the financia! resources of tbe Fund remain insufficient in the face of the continuing serious
menace of drug abuse,
1

12 United Nations, Treaty Seri~s, vol. 520, No. 7515, p.

151.
