S/2014/852

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
26 November 2014
Original: English

Report of the Secretary-General on the African UnionUnited Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur
I. Introduction
1.
The present report is submitted pursuant to paragraph 26 of Security Council
resolution 2173 (2014), in which the Council requeste d me to report every 90 days
on the implementation of the mandate of the African Union -United Nations Hybrid
Operation in Darfur (UNAMID). The report provides an update and analysis of the
situation in Darfur and progress towards achievement of the Operati on’s strategic
priorities and benchmarks for the period from the date of my previous report,
22 July 2014 (S/2014/515), until 15 November 2014. It also includes updates on the
measures taken by the mission to implement the strategic priorities outlined in my
special report of 25 February 2014 (S/2014/138).

II. Overview and analysis of the conflict dynamics and
operating environment in Darfur
A.

Analysis of the current trends and conflict dynamics in Darfur
2.
During the reporting period, while military operations decreased overall,
possibly because of the rainy season (July to September), clashes between
Government forces and armed movements occurred intermittently and aerial
bombardments by the Government of the Sudan were reported on a number of
occasions. Competition over resources continued to exacerbate the security
situation, resulting in deadly clashes between tribes and increased criminality and
banditry, all of which had a significant impact on the civilian population,
particularly in North, South, East and Central Darfur.
Fighting between Government forces and rebel groups
3.
The recent resurgence of activities by the armed movements in several of their
strongholds in North, South and Central Darfur points to their possible regrouping
several months after the campaign of the Rapid Support Forces earlier in the year
had left them substantially weakened. In September and October, the Sudan
Liberation Army-Abdul Wahid (SLA-AW) managed to inflict casualties on
Government forces in Rockero and Golo (Central Darfur) and in the Jebel Amer
area (North Darfur). While the Sudan Liberation Army-Minni Minawi (SLA-MM)

14-65546 (E)

011214

*1465546*

S/2014/852

and the Justice and Equality Movement-Gibril Ibrahim (JEM-Gibril) avoided direct
confrontation with Government forces, they asserted their presence by setting up
checkpoints in their strongholds of South and North Darfur and extorting cash or
fuel from United Nations transportation contractors.
4.
In recent months, the military presence and influence of SLA-AW have waned
beyond its stronghold in Jebel Marra at the junction of Central, North and South
Darfur. Factionalism within the group, triggered by the prolonged absence of Abdul
Wahid, has weakened the group both politically and militarily. While there have
been reports that internal rifts have affected SLA-AW military operations and
effectiveness, clashes between the Sudanese armed forces and SLA-AW
demonstrated the determination of core SLA-AW elements to limit Government
incursions into the area. Recent fighting sparked by the Government’s decision to
establish Golo as the capital of the newly created locality of Central Jebel Marra is a
case in point. Owing to access restrictions at Rockero, U NAMID was not in a
position to verify the exact fallout of these clashes at the time.
5.
Further, clashes between Government forces and SLA-AW near the Straha
camp of internally displaced persons at Nertiti (Central Darfur) on 15 October
resulted in the killing of two members of the Sudanese armed forces and three
members of SLA-AW. Thereafter, the Sudanese armed forces instructed internally
displaced persons to suspend regular activities outside the camp because of the
volatile security situation. After two days, and following UNAMID intervention on
the issue, the situation returned to normal.
6.
SLA-MM, based mainly in South and East Darfur with traditional strongholds
in Shearia, Labado and Muhajeria, bore the brunt of the campaign led by the Rapid
Support Forces in the first quarter of 2014. Since July, its combatants have been
sighted in Labado and Shearia, though not in active battle. SLA -MM has however
been engaged in extortion activities at a number of checkpoints between Nyala and
Shangil Tobaya against commercial and Government convoys. On 11 September, a
Government convoy travelling from Nyala to El Fasher was ambushed by SLA -MM
elements in Nurtic village, near the UNAMID team site at Shangil Tobaya, resulting
in the death of four Government personnel. In response, Government security
established restrictions on vehicle movement along the El Fasher-Shangil Tobaya
road and surrounding areas.
7.
Unlike either SLA-MM, whose constituents are mainly Zaghawa, or SLA-AW,
which is predominantly Fur, JEM-Gibril has a diverse membership which in the past
contributed to its influence throughout Darfur. However, following the split in its
ranks after JEM-Bashar (now JEM-Peace) signed the Doha Document for Peace in
Darfur and a large number of JEM-Gibril combatants started fighting in Southern
Kordofan and South Sudan, JEM-Gibril has not been active in Darfur except in the
area between Um Baru and Tine in North Darfur. On 20 October, following air
strikes by Sudanese armed forces on villages in Um Baru, JEM placed checkpoints
between Um Baru and Tine. There have been no military activities by JEM -Gibril in
Darfur during the reporting period.
8.
Following information from the population regarding aerial bombardments on
19 October in Abu Leha and Orschi villages near Um Baru, UNAMID established
that six bombs had been dropped in the area, killing one civilian. A separate mission
undertaken by the UNAMID Ordnance Disposal Office confirmed that no
unexploded ordnance remains in either village. Reports were also received of

2/18

14-65546

S/2014/852

civilian causalities from bombardments in eastern Jebel Marra on 16 and
30 October. These could not be confirmed by UNAMID. The mission was, however,
able to confirm information of a bombardment in Rofata, eastern Jebel Marra (North
Darfur) on 5 November. A follow-up verification mission is planned by the
Ordnance Disposal Office.
Threats and attacks against civilians
9.
A total of 55 cases of violence and attacks against civilians were recorded by
UNAMID, of which 16 cases were allegedly perpetrated by Arab militias, 23 by
Government forces and 16 by unknown armed elements. For the first time in many
years, elements of SLA-AW and SLA-MM were also involved in a number of direct
attacks on civilians and acts leading to civilian casualties, injuries a nd
displacements.
10. In August and September, armed Arab militias and the Rapid Support Forces
increased their control over areas in North, South and East Darfur with reported
attacks on civilians, including internally displaced persons, by the Northern R izeigat
in Korma, Tawilla and Shangil Tobaya (North Darfur) and by the Northern Rizeigat,
Southern Rizeigat and Misseriya in Menawashi (South Darfur) and Labado (East
Darfur). In addition, 12 alleged attacks by suspected Arab militias against civilians
in eight villages in Korma and the Korma camp of internally displaced persons,
which included acts of killing, rape, assault, abduction, threat, robbery and livestock
rustling, were reported.
11. On 14 August, 45 Arab men dressed in uniforms of the Rapid Supp ort Forces,
the Sudanese armed forces and the Border Guard surrounded and threatened to
attack the Hamada and Mosku camps of internally displaced persons (South Darfur)
over allegations that camp residents had killed two members of the Rapid Support
Forces on 9 August. Two days later, 100 Arab men on camels armed with machine
guns and assault rifles reportedly fired indiscriminately in the vicinity of Hamada
camp for three hours. The Sudanese armed forces intervened and a Government -led
mediation resulted in the internally displaced persons paying blood money for the
death of the two men. In a separate incident, on 22 September, a group of internally
displaced persons were harassed, beaten and robbed of personal belongings and
livestock by suspected members of the Rapid Support Forces near Kobi village
(South Darfur).
12. Internally displaced persons continued to express concerns about the
deteriorating security situation, particularly in Mournei, Hujaj, Abuzar and Al Riyah
camps (West Darfur), and Nifasha and Shadad camps (North Darfur). Early in
October, the internally displaced in Labado camp (East Darfur) reported to
UNAMID of harassment by armed Arab nomads in the area. One incident involved
the killing of two internally displaced persons and the subseque nt theft of their
livestock on 4 October. This was followed by the attempted theft of livestock
belonging to internally displaced persons by Arab nomads on 7 October. The
ensuing clash led to the death of two Northern Rizeigat tribesmen. UNAMID was
able to verify both incidents.
13. The armed movements were involved in several incidents that resulted in the
attack or displacement of civilians. On 7 September, elements of SLA -AW
kidnapped six leaders of the internally displaced from Nertiti camp (Central Da rfur)
over accusations that they were encouraging internally displaced persons to

14-65546

3/18

S/2014/852

participate in the peace process. The abducted leaders were reportedly detained at
the SLA-AW base in Kutum (15 km east of Nertiti) for trial. The head of the group
was released on 16 September following negotiations between SLA-AW and the
Peaceful Coexistence Committee and Native Administration in the area. The trials
were abandoned after UNAMID leadership intervened with the movement’s leaders.
The other members of the group were released at the end of September.
14. Elements of SLA-AW were also involved in an attack on an Arab Rizeigat
nomadic settlement in the Al Wehda area, near Menawashi (South Darfur) on
11 September in which a sheikh and his son were killed along with 10 camels
belonging to the community. A pursuit operation by the Rizeigat resulted in an
exchange of gunfire at the Dobo Madrasa area and the death of 10 SLA -AW
members and injury of two Rizeigat tribesmen. On 1 October, SLA -AW elements
reportedly abducted 10 teachers and members of the Parent-Teacher Association at
Rockero (Central Darfur). The teachers were accused of participating in a National
Congress Party conference in Zalingei (Central Darfur) on 24 September and
organizing the elections of April 2015 in the area. The political undertone to several
of those attacks characterizes a disturbing trend, particularly in the light of the
internal power struggles within the SLA-AW movement.
15. On 11 September, Arab militiamen attacked three villages located 50 km from
the UNAMID team site at Shangil Tobaya. The attack was triggered by a cattlegrazing dispute between farmers and nomads and resulted in the deaths of three
men, as well as four children burned, four women raped, and displacement to
surrounding camps of internally displaced persons.
Local violence and intercommunal conflicts
16. During the reporting period, intercommunal clashes, largely between ethnic
Arab tribes over access to resources, continued to affect and displace civilians:
11 confrontations and 377 reported fatalities were recorded as compared to
24 confrontations and 93 confirmed deaths in the previous period. The conflicts
between the Rizeigat and the Ma’alia in East Darfur, the Beni Hussein and the
Northern Rizeigat in North Darfur and the Fallatta and the Habbaniya in South
Darfur represent the most significant tribal conflicts.
17. Of the reported fatalities, a total of 320 deaths resulted from clashes in August
between Southern Rizeigat and Ma’alia in Um Rakuba and Abu Kari nka (East
Darfur), which were triggered by the theft of cattle by a Southern Rizeigat
tribesman at a Ma’alia village in Um Rakuba. The theft sparked an attack by
Southern Rizeigat on a Government police station, in which two vehicles and an
unknown number of weapons were seized. A pursuit operation by Ma’alia on
16 August resulted in the death of 29 Ma’alia and 35 Southern Rizeigat, with an
undetermined number injured. UNAMID was informed by local sources in Adilla
that Southern Rizeigat involved in the clash wore uniforms similar to those of the
Rapid Support Forces and the Border Guards and were allegedly in possession of
high-powered automatic weapons and mortars. The violence continued until
20 August when Southern Rizeigat attacked Ma’alia positions in Um Rakuba,
resulting in an undetermined number of dead and injured. Fighting subsided after
Ma’alia blocked the strategic El Obeid-El Daein road on 14 September. Tensions
again escalated with two additional clashes recorded on 3 and 9 October in Abu
Jabra and El Daein and in Abu Dangal in Shearia, respectively.

4/18

14-65546

S/2014/852

18. Resource-based intercommunal fighting continued in North Darfur, where
Beni Hussein and Northern Rizeigat in the localities of El Sireif and Saraf Umra
clashed five times from 25 to 28 August, when 150 camels were stolen by Beni
Hussein at Taigai village. In total, at least 16 Northern Rizeigat and 25 Beni Hussein
were killed.
19. On 6 September, members of the Fallata and Habbaniya tribes clashed near
Shagag village, Buram locality (South Darfur), resulting in two fatalities on each
side. Another clash erupted the following day, resulting in the death of two
Habbaniya and four Fallata tribesmen. The clashes appeared to have been caused by
incidents of animal rustling by both sides. On 30 September, Fallata tribesmen
clashed with Southern Rizeigat in Labado (East Darfur).
Criminality and banditry
20. Criminality remains a major concern. It is compounded by the limited capacity
of local law enforcement authorities, impunity, proliferation of small arms and a
culture of violence stemming from Darfur’s protracted conflict environment.
Criminal activities during the reporting period included attacks on villages and
incidents of rape, hijacking and abduction. However, while recorded crimes
decreased to 284 cases from 331 cases in the previous reporting period, several
alleged cases of abduction of internally displaced persons by criminal groups were
recorded, a majority of the incidents occurring in areas near camps of the internally
displaced.
21. Various forms of criminality by suspected Arab militias targeting local
communities and internally displaced persons who were farming were also recorded.
These involved incidents of murder, rape, physical assault, intimidation and animal
rustling. In most cases, the internally displaced persons were warned not to farm in
the area.
22. To counter the high number of criminal incidents, on 15 July, the Governor of
South Darfur introduced emergency security measures, which included a state -wide
curfew, ban on movement of armed civilians, individuals wearing masks and
unregistered vehicles, and extensive search operations in camps of internally
displaced persons with a view to detaining persons implicated in criminal activities
and the illegal possession of arms and alcohol. An emergency court was established
and prosecutors appointed. In line with these measures, authorities conducted
cordon and search operations in Otash and Al Salam camps of the internally
displaced from 3 to 5 August, resulting in the arrest a nd trial of persons suspected of
criminal activities. While these measures have improved the security situation in
South Darfur, internally displaced persons continue to express strong resistance to
the Government entering camps.

B.

Humanitarian situation
23. According to the Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs, in
addition to more than 2 million long-term internally displaced persons, the number
of people displaced by conflict since the beginning of the year increased from
385,000 in the previous reporting period to 431,300. While 132,000 of these have
returned home, 298,700 people remain displaced. The main flash points for
displacements during the reporting period involved two major clashes between the

14-65546

5/18

S/2014/852

Ma’alia and Hamar and between the Ma’alia and Rizeigat in East Darfur, and
between the Beni Hussein and Northern Rizeigat in North Darfur. Returns of
internally displaced persons remained sporadic and temporary. Permanent voluntary
returns continued to be hindered by insecurity and lac k of basic services in places of
return, as well as a general reluctance on the part of those persons to relinquish their
internally displaced status and associated monthly ration entitlement.
24. Heavy rains and floods affected thousands of internally displaced persons in
many parts of Darfur in August. According to the International Organization for
Migration (IOM), approximately 9,300 people were displaced into Korma and Zam
Zam camps and parts of El Fasher town in North Darfur, where heavy rains
destroyed 2,894 homes, partially submerged three hospitals, and affected an
estimated 16,600 people. At the request of the State Ministry of Health and the
World Health Organization, UNAMID assisted with the draining of stagnant water
from parts of the city to reduce mosquito breeding areas. In El Salam camp (South
Darfur), 203 homes were destroyed and another 595 damaged by flooding.
Impassable roads also led to a reduction in patrols and armed escorts by the mission,
including those for humanitarian partners delivering critical assistance to affected
communities.

C.

Operating environment
25. The operating environment in Darfur continues to be challenging, with
insecurity, criminality and restrictions of movement impeding UNAMID mandate
implementation and programme delivery by humanitarian actors, and threatening
the safety and security of UNAMID and United Nations agency personnel.
Restrictions of movement decreased overall during the rainy season, the highest
number of restrictions being in North Darfur State. UNAMID leadership engaged
the military authorities at local and national levels to address access denials,
emphasizing the need for UNAMID to have unhindered access to all areas of
Darfur. While access to communities generally improved over the rainy season,
UNAMID has again started to experience difficulties in obtaining access to conflict
areas, as the examples of Thabit, Kutum and Korma in North Darfur, and Abu
Karinka in East Darfur demonstrate. The resulting restrictions of movement have
been imposed by both the Government and the armed movements, allegedly on the
basis of security concerns.
26. UNAMID personnel were attacked three times during the reporting period,
resulting in the death of three UNAMID peacekeepers and one national staff member.
On 30 August, in Ardamata, El Geneina, a UNAMID security guard was shot and
killed by a Government police officer over a personal matter. On 16 October, a
group of unidentified militia attacked a UNAMID patrol guarding a water borehole
at Shoba, North Darfur. Two Ethiopian peacekeepers were killed at the scene, and a
third later died from his injuries. The perpetrators seized one gun -mounted vehicle
and 100 rounds of ammunition before fleeing the scene. On 29 October, a group of
unidentified men aboard two gun-mounted vehicles attacked a UNAMID patrol at a
water point outside of Kutum, North Darfur. In the ensuing firefight, three South
African peacekeepers were injured, one seriously. UNAMID has since taken
measures to reduce the exposure of personnel to identified security threats and
strengthened the security coordination mechanism with the Government, with joint
investigations carried out into incidents affecting United Nations personnel.

6/18

14-65546

S/2014/852

27. With regard to abductions, on 25 July, the Head of IOM in Sout h Darfur was
released 21 days after being abducted by unknown armed men in Nyala. One
UNICEF national staff member and two GOAL international staff members taken
hostage on 18 June in Kutum (North Darfur) were released on 19 July after 32 days
in captivity.
28. The problem of carjacking and theft of United Nations/UNAMID vehicles
during the reporting period was particularly acute in El Fasher owing to the
presence of armed elements and criminal gangs. As at 15 November, 13 United
Nations/UNAMID and five vehicles of international non-governmental organizations
had been carjacked as compared to eight and five, respectively, in the previous
reporting period. Six of the vehicles (five United Nations/UNAMID and one
belonging to an international non-governmental organization) were recovered as
compared to four in the previous reporting period. As at 15 November, a total of
67 incidents (56 affecting United Nations/UNAMID and 11 affecting international
non-governmental organizations) involving house break -ins, robbery and theft were
recorded, as compared to 77 incidents previously.
29. Road extortion targeting United Nations/UNAMID contracted trucks
contributed to road insecurity. On three separate occasions, on 21 and 29 August and
8 September, UNAMID convoys were stopped by SLA-MM at Tangarara (North
Darfur) and requested to pay for their passage. At a meeting with SLA -AW,
SLA-MM and JEM-Gibril in August in Kampala, UNAMID impressed on the armed
movements that the extortion of tolls was unacceptable. Representati ves of the
armed movements undertook to take corrective measures; no incidences have been
reported since.
30. Seven cases of arrest of United Nations national personnel by the Government
and armed movements were recorded during the reporting period as comp ared to
three in the previous period. On 8 August, Government police in El Daein (East
Darfur) arrested and later released without charge three national staff members (two
of UNAMID and one of the Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs)
suspected of stealing United Nations-owned equipment from the El Daein UNAMID
camp. Further, on 7 September, Government police arrested four UNAMID national
staff members linked to theft of United Nations-owned equipment (10 refrigeration
cooling units) from the UNAMID warehouse in El Fasher. UNAMID is
investigating these allegations. On 14 August, in Kaguro area (North Darfur), one
UNAMID individual contractor was arrested and later released by SLA -AW forces
for undisclosed reasons.
31. During the reporting period, the Government of the Sudan issued 844 visas for
UNAMID personnel, including 23 civilian personnel, 104 military, 430 police,
182 contractors, one consultant, 103 official visitors and one visa for a dependant of
a Khartoum-based staff member. As at 10 November, 57 visas were pending for
7 civilian personnel, 3 United Nations Volunteers, 10 military, 4 police,
19 contractors, 2 consultants, 10 official visitors, and 2 dependants.
32. Twenty-four military units and 13 formed police units are currently deployed
to UNAMID. Of the 24 military units, 11 are operating at a serviceability rate above
90 per cent, while 11 have a serviceability rate of above 70 per cent. Two units were
operating below 50 per cent but have since improved to a rate of approxim ately
60 per cent. Of the 13 formed police units, the serviceability rates of 11 units are
above 90 per cent and the average rate of all units is almost 91 per cent.

14-65546

7/18

S/2014/852

Nonetheless, shortfalls in contingent-owned equipment and self-sustainment
continue to place a burden on the mission’s resources and limit the much-needed
temporary deployment capability of troop-contributing countries.
33. While humanitarian access remains problematic, some improvements were
recorded during the reporting period, and several inter-agency field missions were
undertaken in all five Darfur states to assess needs and deliver assistance. As at
early November, humanitarian partners estimate that approximately 75 per cent of
newly displaced persons had been provided with some form of assistance since the
beginning of 2014. In total, humanitarian partners report having undertaken 187 field
missions in Darfur from June to October. However, they continue to report
challenges in securing sustained access that allows for systematic needs a ssessment,
provision of assistance and protective services, and impact monitoring. The
humanitarian response has been adversely affected by insecurity, with rising
criminality and banditry representing key operational challenges. Bureaucratic
impediments by the Government, impassable roads due to the rainy season, and
shortfalls in capacity of humanitarian partners also affected the response, as did
funding shortfalls. As at 15 November, funding for the humanitarian workplan for
the Sudan stood at only 49 per cent.

III. Achievements and impact of the mission
34. During the reporting period, the mission continued to focus on the three
strategic priorities reflected in its revised benchmarks (see S/2014/279) endorsed by
the Security Council in resolution 2148 (2014) and further in resolution 2173
(2014).

A.

Inclusive peace process
Negotiation process
35. The African Union-United Nations Joint Chief Mediator for Darfur continued
his consultations with the parties to the conflict in an effort to arrive at direct talks
between the armed movements and the Government. From 2 to 6 August, in
Kampala, a UNAMID delegation held technical-level consultations with senior
officials from JEM-Gibril, SLA-MM and SLA-AW to gauge the movements’
interest in participating in the national dialogue announced by President Omar
El-Bashir in January. The movements expressed reticence about participating in the
national dialogue as conceived, but reiterated interest in direc t talks under the
umbrella of the Sudan Revolutionary Front (SRF) at a venue outside the Sudan. On
8 August, SRF and the National Umma Party (NUP) signed an agreement in Paris,
in which SRF declared readiness to cease hostilities as a basis for a credible national
dialogue.
36. Further progress was made in synchronizing the mediation tracks on Darfur
and the Two Areas. Following a meeting on 18 August in Khartoum between the
African Union High-level Implementation Panel, the Special Envoy to the Sudan of
the Intergovernmental Authority on Development (IGAD), my Special Envoy for the
Sudan and South Sudan, and the Joint Chief Mediator, it was agreed (a) that the
High-level Implementation Panel was best placed to leverage its broader Sudan

8/18

14-65546

S/2014/852

mandate to urge and facilitate the Sudanese armed movements to join the national
dialogue; (b) that pre-talks and confidence-building activities were an essential first
step to bridging the gap between the parties; (c) that the Doha Document for Peace
in Darfur addressed important local and Darfur-specific root causes, which should
continue to be supported; to that end it was agreed to consult and seek the support
of the Government of Qatar; and (d) that a time frame for direct talks between the
Government and Darfur armed movements would commence in September to
influence progress on the national dialogue.
37. As a result of those discussions, from 30 August to 3 September, the High level Implementation Panel, the Joint Chief Mediator and the United Nations and
IGAD Special Envoys held a series of meetings with the leadership of JEM -Gibril,
SLA-AW, SLA-MM, the Eastern Front and the Sudan People’s Liberation
Movement-North (SPLM-N) as well as representatives of NUP and the Democratic
Unionist Party, to discuss modalities for their participation in the national dialogue.
The movements expressed readiness to end the war in the Sudan and insisted on
combining the Darfur and SPLM-N mediation processes under one mechanism.
While apprehensive of the credibility of the process, they ex pressed willingness to
consider engaging in it if it was comprehensive and included a robust agenda that
could lead to peace. They argued that any commitment to pre -talks should be
preceded by an agreement on the cessation of hostilities.
38. On 4 September, the African Union High-level Implementation Panel
facilitated talks between representatives of the Preparatory Committee and the Paris
Declaration Group. The talks resulted in an agreement on initial talks on cessation
of hostilities, outside the Sudan, between the Government and the Darfur armed
movements as well as the Government and SPLM-N with the same facilitator, the
High-level Implementation Panel, but on separate mediation tracks. It was also
agreed that the Panel would facilitate preparatory talks on national dialogue
procedural issues. As SPLM-N and the Darfur armed movements insisted on signing
the agreement as the Sudan Revolutionary Front, the Preparatory Committee
declined to sign a joint agreement and instead two identical agreements were signed
on 5 September.
39. The pre-talks meetings on the cessation of hostilities, initially scheduled for
mid-October in Addis Ababa, were postponed at the request of the Government of
the Sudan to allow for the holding of the General Convention of the N ational
Congress Party from 17 to 25 October. The National Congress Party elected
President Bashir as the chairman of the party and as the party’s candidate for the
2015 presidential elections. The talks on the Two Areas led by the African Union
High-level Implementation Panel were held in Addis Ababa from 12 to
16 November, while the talks on Darfur are scheduled for 23 to 27 November.
Implementation of the Doha Document for Peace in Darfur
40. There has been limited progress on the implementation of the Doha Document
for Peace in Darfur during the reporting period. On 25 August, the Darfur Security
Arrangements Implementation Commission commenced the integration of
1,350 JEM-Sudan combatants into the Sudanese armed forces, with an initial focus on
inspecting, registering and collecting long-range and crew-assisted weapons.
UNAMID, the United Nations Development Programme and the World Food
Programme (WFP) are currently working with the Sudan Disarmament,

14-65546

9/18

S/2014/852

Demobilization and Reintegration Commission on planning for the demobilization
of 724 ex-combatants who failed to meet the integration criteria.
41. JEM-Sudan and the Government of the Sudan have continued to make
progress in implementing the power-sharing provisions of the Doha Document for
Peace in Darfur. On 4 September, President Bashir appointed the Movement’s
Vice-President, El Tom Suleiman, to the position of Federal Minister of Human
Resources and Sabri Bakhit as State Minister for Agriculture.
42. Progress on the implementation of the Darfur Reco nstruction and
Development Fund has continued. Following the payment of SDG (Sudanese
pounds) 800 million by the Government of the Sudan to the Fund last year, the
Darfur Regional Authority reported that 70 per cent of the 315 development projects
launched early in 2014 were nearing completion. The projects cover education,
health, water, reconstruction, and community, youth and women’s development
centres. On 15 October, the Darfur Regional Authority confirmed receipt of a
further SDG 900 million from the Government of the Sudan which will be used to
complete all 315 projects. In addition, the State of Qatar and the United Nations
Development Group recently signed a US $88.5 million grant agreement on the
execution of reconstruction and development projects in Darfur.
43. Preparations for the commencement of the Darfur internal dialogue and
consultation process were finalized. In August and September, the Implementation
Committee for the process held consultative meetings in the state capitals of North,
South and Central Darfur with the Governors, legislative assemblies, members of
the Doha Civil Society Follow-up Mechanism and other stakeholders to raise
awareness on the internal dialogue process, and enlist cooperation. Similar meetings
were held with the Darfuri diaspora abroad, leaders of the non-signatory armed
movements and the media. While there is strong support for the process as a whole,
continuing insecurity in some parts of Darfur may make it difficult to conduct a
comprehensive dialogue in some localities. The internal dialogue process is
scheduled to start on 1 December.
44. While Qatar has contributed one quarter of the total budget of the internal
dialogue and consultation ($1.7 million), there is concern that continued delays in
the disbursement of financial contributions by the Government of the Sudan and
international donors to fund the process will erode the goodwill and momentum
generated by the launch of the Implementation Committee on 26 May 2014.

B.

Protection of civilians
Provision of physical protection
45. During the reporting period, the mission provided protection to displaced
populations in camps and around team sites, in villages, towns, markets, areas of
return and firewood collection areas, as well as to other vulnerable local communities.
UNAMID military personnel conducted 16,803 patrols, including 9,145 routine
patrols, 3,355 night patrols, 1,796 administrative escorts, 1,038 humanitarian escorts,
1,123 short-range patrols, and 346 long-range patrols. UNAMID police conducted a
total of 7,628 patrols, including 4,237 inside camps of internally displaced persons,
3,125 in villages, towns and markets, 223 in firewood areas, and 43 in return areas. Of
these, 833 were medium-range patrols, 284 long-range patrols and 6,511 short-range
patrols.

10/18

14-65546

S/2014/852

46. Training courses for Sudanese police officers continued in the areas of
community policing, close protection, treatment of suspects, criminal investigation
and computer skills. UNAMID police conducted 12 courses for 329 Government
police on human rights, basic computer skills, community policing, crime
investigation, detention and treatment of suspects and VIP protection courses, and
undertook 12 human rights and family and child protection courses for
807 community policing volunteers based in camps of internally displaced persons
to prevent criminal acts in the camps and coordinate effectively with Darfur’s
criminal justice institutions.
47. In August, upon learning of the Government’s plan to conduct cordon and
search operations inside the internally displaced person camp at Kalma (South
Darfur), UNAMID proactively engaged with state and local authorities to attempt to
avert violence. While local authorities continue to assert their sovereign right to
enter the camp, they agreed that any Government operation would be fully
coordinated with UNAMID. UNAMID urged Government authorities to uphold
international human rights standards and humanitarian law while implementing
security measures. On 20 August, the Joint Special Representative met with camp
leaders to reassure them of UNAMID protection should search operations be
conducted and urge cooperation with the Government. UNAMID and the United
Nations country team then developed response preparedness plans in the event of an
escalation of tensions in Kalma camp. Increased UNAMID presence through daily
patrols and the establishment of a temporary operating base near the camp enhanced
the mission’s ability to provide protection. Engagement and focused intervention by
UNAMID leadership at national levels further helped to de-escalate tensions and
improve the security situation. No operation was conducted in Kalma camp during
the reporting period.
48. On 8 October, representatives of the estimated 13,200 internally displaced
persons of Labado camp approached the nearby UNAMID Labado team site (East
Darfur) to seek protection, fearing retaliatory attacks by armed Arab militias
stationed on the outskirts of the camp following clashes with the Northern Rizeigat.
UNAMID engaged with key community leaders, the leadership of the internally
displaced and the Government to resolve the issue, which led to an agreement and
withdrawal of the militia.
49. In Nertiti (Central Darfur), clashes between SLA-AW members and Sudanese
armed forces on 15 October also led the internally displaced of Straha camp to seek
protection at the UNAMID team site. The mission’s response included confidence building patrols in the area and continued interaction with the internally displaced
until the security situation improved.
Logistic and security support to humanitarian operations
50. Despite the fragile security environment, UNAMID worked closely with
humanitarian agencies to access remote locations and facilitate the delivery of
humanitarian assistance through provision of escorts and logistical support,
integrated joint missions, and contributing to area security. UNAMID provided a
total of 293 humanitarian escorts throughout Darfur and together with the United
Nations country team facilitated 18 medical evacuations for critically injured
civilians. UNAMID also facilitated the transportation of 778 kg of drugs to assist a
local clinic at Muhajeria and the internally displaced person clinic in Labado on

14-65546

11/18

S/2014/852

5 August. A joint UNAMID-WFP logistics operation facilitated the transfer of 5,690
tons of food and 22 tons of non-food items throughout Darfur.
Protective environment
51. During the reporting period, UNAMID recorded 210 incidents involving 406
victims of human rights violations and abuses across Darfur. Arbitrary ar rests and
detentions accounted for 10 cases (36 victims). In addition, 87 cases (202 victims)
of violation of the right to physical integrity, including 15 cases and 81 victims of
abductions; 47 cases (69 victims) of violation of the right to life; and 66 cases
(99 victims) of sexual and gender-based violence were reported. Eighty-five of 204
cases were attributed to Government security forces and 3 cases (13 victims) to
SLA-AW; 122 cases involving 196 victims were attributed to unknown armed men,
in most cases suspected by the victims to be Arab militia. UNAMID verified
167 cases while the remaining 43 could not be confirmed owing to insecurity and
difficulties in accessing remote locations.
52. To highlight and make public information concerning human rights issues in
Darfur, a public report on the situation of human rights in Darfur for 2013 prepared
jointly by UNAMID and the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for
Human Rights was published on 31 October. Comments by the Government of the
Sudan will be published when received.
53. With regard to child protection, SLA-MM established an operational
mechanism to end recruitment and use of child soldiers on 6 August. On 6 October,
Musa Hilal initiated a community-based strategic plan aimed at ending the use of
children to fight in inter- and intra-ethnic clashes in North Darfur. The plan was
endorsed by tribal leaders of the Northern Rizeigat, Beni Hussein, Fur, Tama and
Gimir in various areas in North Darfur.
54. UNAMID recorded 66 cases involving 99 victims (30 minors) of conflictrelated sexual violence. Thirty-six of these were reported to Government police, and
only nine were investigated, leading to four arrests. Rape accounted for 55 cases
and 88 victims (28 minors) while there were 11 cases a nd 11 victims (two minors)
of attempted rape. In 45 cases (67 victims), the alleged perpetrators were described
by the victims as unidentified armed men, while in 21 cases (32 victims), the
perpetrators were alleged to be members of the Sudanese armed forc es, Rapid
Support Forces and Government police. Instances of under-reporting and
non-reporting remain a major challenge in the fight against impunity. Victims feared
stigma and reprisals and in some cases refused to file complaints against members
of security forces, proxy armed forces and paramilitary forces. Many victims also
refused to appear in court, resorting instead to out -of-court settlements, sometimes
against legal advice. There is a prevailing lack of confidence in law enforcement
agencies to take action, particularly when perpetrators belong to armed groups.
Many police stations are ill-equipped to act on civilians’ complaints.
55. On 18 September, the Special Court for Darfur Crimes in El Fasher delivered
final judgement on the case of four persons accused of attacking and robbing
UNAMID personnel and raping a female police officer on 10 April in El Fasher.
One of the accused was acquitted and the other three found guilty of armed robbery,
sentenced to three years’ imprisonment and ordered to jointly pay $6,700 to the
victims of the rape and robbery. One of the convicted persons was also found guilty
of rape and sentenced to an additional five-year prison term and 100 lashes.

12/18

14-65546

S/2014/852

56. On 28 August, a Chadian man accused of the rape and physical assault of a
10-year-old girl in Kulbus (West Darfur) on 16 May was sentenced to 10 years’
imprisonment. Another case involving the rape of a 14 -year-old internally displaced
girl from Ardamata camp, West Darfur, by an airport Civil Defence Officer on
29 December 2013 was dismissed and the accused released, owing to the continuing
absence of both complainant and victim from court sessions. On 27 October in
El Geneina, a 17-year-old minor was found guilty of raping and impregnating a
14-year-old girl in January 2013 and sentenced to 10 years. On 5 November, a
25-year-old Sudanese armed forces soldier was found guilty of abducting and raping
a 13-year-old girl in February 2014 and sentenced to 10 years’ imprisonment with a
court fine of SDG 3,000 and SDG 2,000 compensation to the victim.
57. On 2 November, media sources reported that over 200 women and girls in
Thabit (North Darfur) had been raped by members of the Sudanese armed forces on
30 and 31 October. An initial UNAMID military verification mission dispatched on
4 November from Shangil Tobaya to investigate the allegations was denied access to
the village. Over the following days, UNAMID continued to engage with the
Government, including at the highest levels, to secure access to Thabit. Finally, on
9 November, UNAMID was able to send an integrated mission to interact with the
local community. The team’s findings, however, were inconclusive, requiring
further investigation, owing in part to the heavy presence of military and police in
Thabit. UNAMID continues to request the Sudanese authorities to grant access to a
small team to investigate the allegations of rape. The team is on standby and ready
to deploy immediately by road or by air. The clearance has not yet been received.
58. In support of rule of law activities, UNAMID conducted training on prison
management and treatment of offenders for 161 newly recruited prison staff in
El Geneina and Nyala. UNAMID also supported a training of trainers course for
20 prison staff and skills training for 32 prisoners in Shallah Federal Prison and
Kheir Khanaga Women’s Prison on welding, metal works, basketry, beadwork and
tailoring to enhance future community reintegration.
59. UNAMID continued the implementation of community-based labour intensive
projects aimed at reducing the exposure of youth to potential recruitment into armed
groups or engagement in criminal activities. Of the 25 projects approved for the
2013/14 fiscal year, 15 projects have been completed and handed over to local
communities through relevant line ministries, while the remaining 10 are in the final
stages of completion. The projects targeted over 1,600 at-risk youth through
provision of vocational skills training, as well as improved access to health,
education, livelihoods, water and sanitation facilities for 70,000 local community
members.
60. During the reporting period, UNAMID and the United Nations Mine Action
Service began destruction of a stockpile of more than 3 million pieces of small arms
ammunition at Zam Zam team site, with over 266,000 pieces of ammunition already
destroyed. Weapons and ammunition safety management facilitated the delivery of
four sea containers for the storage of surrendered weapons and ammunitions to the
Darfur Security Arrangements and Implementation Commission. Suppo rt was
provided to Government police through the refurbishment of three weapons and
ammunition storage facilities in El Fasher.

14-65546

13/18

S/2014/852

C.

Prevention and mitigation of community conflict
61. In view of the ongoing tribal fighting, UNAMID continued to engage w ith
tribal leaders and the authorities to encourage peaceful coexistence. The mission
extensively engaged with the Native Administration and tribal leaders from North
and West Darfur, state authorities and the Sudanese armed forces in an effort to
contain violent clashes between Northern Rizeigat and Beni Hussein in El Sireif
(North Darfur) and pursue genuine reconciliation. From 18 to 21 September,
Northern Rizeigat Native Administration leaders and Beni Hussein leaders from
El Geneina (West Darfur), Nyala (South Darfur) and Zalingei (Central Darfur),
established a peace committee and conducted campaigns in the Jebel Amer
gold-mining area.
62. Reconciliation efforts by tribal leaders resulted in ending the conflict and
restoring relative calm in El Sireif. UNAMID encouraged leaders to continue
consultations with the Northern Rizeigat to open the blockade of the El Sireif Kabkabiya-Saraf Umra road, which hindered movement of civilians and curtailed
commercial activities in the area. The road reopened on 28 September. Tensions
remain over the future management of the Jebel Amer gold mine.
63. In response to renewed tensions between the Southern Rizeigat and Ma’alia in
East Darfur, UNAMID continued to engage with federal and state authorities and
with the Truth, Justice and Reconciliation Commission. UNAMID actively engaged
with the Governor of East Darfur and the Deputy Nazir of the Southern Rizeigat as
well as with members of Darfur civil society organizations in Khartoum, urging
immediate measures to stop the fighting and relaunch the stalled reconciliation
process. A task force consisting of eight representatives from the two tribes was
formed to invigorate the reconciliation process. The Prosecutor of East Darfur State
informed UNAMID that three suspects were arrested in connection with the
Ma’alia-Rizeigat tribal clashes of August 2014 in East Darfur. Four investigators
and five judges were appointed to investigate and prosecute persons suspected of
involvement in the clashes. Despite these efforts, there wa s little progress in the
reconciliation process during the reporting period. If the authorities do not take
concrete steps to resolve the longstanding conflict and address disagreements over
ownership, control and utilization of land and resources, the cyc le of fighting is
likely to continue.
64. Late in July, UNAMID engaged with Native Administration leaders of the
Northern Rizeigat and Zaghawa in North Darfur to prevent a further escalation of
tensions between the two tribes and encourage the use of dial ogue for securing the
release of 12 Zaghawa members and two Arab youths abducted the previous month
by SLA-Unity in Goba village. A reconciliation conference initiated by Musa Hilal
with Zaghawa tribal leaders late in September aimed to resolve tensions be tween the
two North Darfur tribes, and resulted in an agreement between the Zaghawa and
Northern Rizeigat which secured the release of the hostages on 26 October.
65. Following a reconciliation conference mediated by a committee composed of
leaders from the Nuba, Misseriya, Hawazima, Dar-Hamid, Bidiryia, Berti and
Showayhat tribes, and witnessed by the second Vice-President, the State Minister of
Justice and the Governors of East Darfur and Western Kordofan, an agreement
between the Hammar and Ma’alia was signed in Al Foula, Western Kordofan, on
27 September. The two parties committed themselves to implementing the

14/18

14-65546

S/2014/852

agreement, which aims to address issues of resource sharing, the amount of blood
money (diya) and the return of Hammar living in Ma’alia territor y and vice versa.
By the end of October, the Hammar and Ma’alia tribesmen had returned to their
respective tribal areas.
66. Following reports of rising tensions between the Fallata and Habbaniya tribes
in South Darfur because of incidents of cattle rustling on 6 September, UNAMID
held meetings with tribal leaders and state authorities to encourage dialogue
between the two communities. This resulted in the creation of a mediation
committee to further dialogue and peace. UNAMID also met with South Darfur
state officials to urge that the underlying and unresolved issue of border
demarcation be addressed, which contributed to the defusing of a potentially volatile
situation between the two tribes.
67. Ahead of the migration season, UNAMID continued to promote peaceful
coexistence among farmers and pastoralists by engaging with local stakeholders in
inter-group dialogue over the sharing of access to natural resources. A total of
32 meetings were held with locality authorities, local leaders of farmers and pastor al
communities, the agricultural protection committees and the peaceful coexistence
committees in all five states of Darfur in the reporting period. Similar efforts were
replicated in Central Darfur on 30 and 31 October with a conference on crop
protection and peaceful coexistence, jointly sponsored by the state government and
UNAMID, targeting 298 participants of the Native Administration, state institutions,
the Council of Political Parties and other state locality representatives.
68. In support of local agricultural protection committees, during September and
October, UNAMID collaborated with the Food and Agriculture Organization of the
United Nations to conduct peace campaigns in North and West Darfur targeting
farmers and pastoral communities. The campaigns were conducted through joint
workshops with traditional leaders and the Darfur Land Commission, which
discussed land tenure versus traditional land ownership and raised awareness about
natural resource sharing to secure livelihood opportunities and p romote peaceful
coexistence.

IV. Implementation of the strategic review
69. Over the past months, the mission has further recalibrated its activities towards
the three newly defined strategic priorities, discontinued other tasks, and conducted
a comprehensive assessment and adjustment of the structure of UNAMID, its
personnel and material capacities as reported to the Security Council in my letter of
16 September (S/2014/670). The UNAMID streamlining exercise has been
completed, and 1,260 posts have been identified for abolition. A total of 770 posts are
to be abolished in the 2014/15 budget year, with the remaining 490 posts to follow in
the 2015/16 budget year. An additional 56 posts will be nationalized in 2014/15.
70. UNAMID has also reconfigured its aviation fleet, reducing it by four fixed wing aircraft and two helicopters. The mission is deploying 400 vehicles to the
United Nations Mission for Ebola Emergency Response.
71. UNAMID and the United Nations country team developed the integrated
strategic framework for 2014-2016, the principal mechanism for planning,
implementing and monitoring joint UNAMID and United Nations country team

14-65546

15/18

S/2014/852

initiatives. It focuses on the three strategic priorities and is consi stent with key
documents and strategies, including the United Nations Development Assistance
Framework for 2012-2016, the humanitarian strategic response plan for 2014 and
the Darfur Development Strategy.
72. Furthermore, UNAMID, in collaboration with the United Nations country
team/humanitarian country team, is finalizing the implementation of an early
warning and response system, which includes a monitoring and evaluation
mechanism to assess the impact of the mission’s protection of civilians activities.
73. The UNAMID military component increased its engagement with the
Government and armed movements to promote freedom of movement of UNAMID
personnel by reinforcing relations with relevant authorities at all levels. The military
component has also created an Operational Readiness Assessment and Support
Team, which visits team sites to ensure the proper implementation of standard
operating procedures, directives and instructions. Consultations have continued with
troop-contributing countries to improve the standards of their contingent-owned
equipment and to enhance operational efficiency and pre -deployment training on
protection of civilians issues. It is estimated that the two additional military sectors
will be operational by December 2014 to further improve coordination among all
UNAMID components.
74. The police component undertook a review of the ways in which patrols are
conducted, with a focus on prioritizing quality over quantity. During the reporting
period, this resulted in increased interaction with community leaders in camps of
internally displaced persons, which has in turn improved information -gathering,
including in relation to sexual and gender-based violence. As part of the strategic
review implementation plan, the police component, in close coordination with
police-contributing countries, also focused on recruitment of officers.

V. Financial aspects
75. The General Assembly, by its resolution 68/297 of 30 June 2014, authorized
the Secretary-General to enter into commitments for UNAMID in a total amount not
exceeding $639,654,200 for the period from 1 July to 31 December 2014.
76. As at 25 November 2014, unpaid assessed contributions to the UNAMID
Special Account amounted to $192.0 million, and the total outstanding assessed
contributions for all peacekeeping operations amounted to $2,295.0 million. Also as
at that date, reimbursement to contributing Governments for troop and formed
police unit costs and for contingent-owned equipment costs has been made for the
periods up to 31 May 2014 and 31 March 2014, respectively, in accordance with the
quarterly payment schedule.

VI. Observations and recommendations
77. Since my last report (S/2014/515), clashes between the Government of the
Sudan and the armed movements, and inter-tribal clashes, continued to have a
significant impact on civilians across Darfur. Competition over resources,
obstruction of migration routes and land ownership continue to fuel intercommunal
clashes. I encourage the Government of the Sudan and tribal leaders to enhance

16/18

14-65546

S/2014/852

their efforts to contain inter-tribal conflicts, including by addressing the root causes
of conflict. The Government of the Sudan should urge the affected communities to
respect the efforts of the local mediations and impress on all stakeholders the need
to respect signed agreements.
78. Tribal rivalry and intercommunal tensions, particularly in Central, East and
North Darfur, as well as clashes and retaliatory attacks between the Government and
armed movements and aerial bombardments perpetuate a climate of insecurity and
impunity. In some areas this insecurity was compounded by a limited presence of
law enforcement officers, raising protection concerns as internally displaced persons
and local communities suffered under continuing harassment of Arab militias and
SLA-AW rebel forces.
79. I remain deeply concerned about the impact of the prevailing insecurity on
UNAMID and humanitarian personnel working throughout Darfur. In this
connection, I condemn in the strongest terms the attacks on 30 August and
16 October, which resulted in the deaths of a UNAMID national staff member and
three Ethiopian peacekeepers, respectively. I would like to express once again my
condolences to the Government of Ethiopia and to the families of the peacekeepers
who paid the ultimate price for peace in Darfur. My heartfelt condolences also go
out to the family of the United Nations national civilian staff member who died in
the line of duty.
80. I welcome the progress in the implementation of provisions of the Doha
Document for Peace in Darfur relating to power-sharing and security arrangements
between the Government of the Sudan and JEM-Sudan. In this regard, I urge the
Government of the Sudan and the Liberation and Justice Moveme nt (LJM) to
accelerate the completion of the LJM verification process, which is long overdue. I
take this opportunity to thank the Government of Qatar for its continuing support
and commitment to peace, stability and development in Darfur. The commencement
of the Darfur internal dialogue and consultation process should provide much needed impetus to the implementation of the Doha Document for Peace in Darfur
and the peace process in Darfur in general. I therefore call upon other Member
States, including the Government of the Sudan, to also make financial contributions
towards implementation of the internal dialogue and consultation process.
81. I commend the efforts of the Joint Special Representative and Joint Chief
Mediator to bring together the Government of the Sudan and the leaders of armed
movements to hold direct talks on the national dialogue called for by President
Bashir. I very much welcome the fact that the mediation tracks on the Two Areas
and on Darfur have now been synchronized under the auspic es of former Presidents
Thabo Mbeki and Abdulsalami Abubakar, thereby enabling the parties to participate
in the national dialogue. The role of the Joint Chief Mediator and my Special Envoy
for the Sudan and South Sudan in support of their efforts is cruci al and I thank them
both for their efforts. President Bashir ’s national dialogue initiative remains the
most important avenue to achieve lasting peace in the Sudan, and I am in full
support of a transparent and inclusive process.
82. Collaboration and coordination between UNAMID and the Government of the
Sudan is essential for the mission to carry out its mandated tasks. During the
reporting period the Government and UNAMID worked closely in reducing tensions
in Kalma camp and in addressing issues of community conflict. While access in
general terms remains good, access to some areas, including in North and East

14-65546

17/18

S/2014/852

Darfur, remains a challenge, particularly in areas of ongoing conflict and around
some protection issues. I am deeply concerned over access restric tions to the area of
Thabit, where UNAMID has tried to investigate fully allegations of mass rape.
Tensions around this issue between the Government and the mission need to be
reduced and practical steps taken to address the allegations. All efforts need t o be
made by the Government and UNAMID to ensure that the protection concerns of
innocent civilians are addressed. I am ready to engage the Government of the Sudan
towards this end and have instructed my senior officials to continue to reach out to
their interlocutors in the Government to resolve this issue.
83. I would like to welcome Abiodun Bashua as the Joint Special Representative
and Joint Chief Mediator ad interim, and Abdul Kamara as Deputy Joint Special
Representative. I wish to express my gratitude for the dedicated service of the
former Joint Special Representative and Joint Chief Mediator, Mohamed Ibn
Chambas, who completed his assignment with UNAMID on 9 October 2014.
Finally, I would like to express my sincere appreciation to the men and women of
UNAMID and all humanitarian aid workers for their tireless efforts in Darfur
towards our common mandate to assist affected and vulnerable populations and
support the achievement of a lasting peace for all Darfuris.

18/18

14-65546
