‘/

UNITED NATIONS

SECURITY
OFFICIAL

RECORDS

THIRTY-FOURTH

YEAR

2182

nd

NEW

COUNCIL

MEETING:

29 DECEMBER

1979

YORK

CONTENTS
Page

....................................

1

Expression
of welcome to Mr. Cyrus R. Vance, Secretary of State of the
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

1

‘Adoption

1

Provisional

agenda (S/Agenda/2

of the agenda

182)

.,..............................*.....,.........

Letter dated 22 December
1979 from the Permanent
Representative
of the
United States of America to the United Nations addressed to the President
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . ..
of the Security Council (S/13705)

WPV.2182

1

NOTE
Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined
with figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United Nations
document.
Documents of the Security Council (symbol S/. . .) are normally published in quarterly Supplements of the Oficial Records ofthe Security Council The date of the document
indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which information about it is given.
The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a system
adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Resolutions and Decisions of the
Security Council. The new system, which has been applied retroactively to resolutions
adopted before 1 January 1965, became fully operative on that date.

2182nd MEETING
Held in New York on Saturdhy, 29 December 1979, at 7 p.m.
President:

3. The PRESIDENT (interpretationfiom
Chinese): The
Security Council is meeting today in response to the letter
dated 22 December from the Permanent Representative of
the United States of America [S.Z3705J addressed to the
President of the Council. Members of the Council also have
before them the text of a letter dated 15 December from the’
Registrar of the International Coti of Jetice addressed to
the Secretary-General [S/Z3~97J and the report of the
Secretary-General concerning implementation of Security
Council resolution 457 (1979) [S/Z3704J.

Mr. CHEN Chu (China).

Present: The representatives of the following States:
Bangladesh, Bolivia, China, Czechoslovakia, France,
Gabon, Jamaica, Kuwait, Nigeria, Norway, Portugal,
Union of Soviet Social& Repriblics, United Kingdom of
Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United States of
America, Zambia.
Provisional agenda (S/AgemW2182)
1. Adoption of the agenda

4.

2. Letter dated 22 December 1979 from the Permanent
Representative of the United States of America to
the United Nations addressed to the President
of the Security Council (S/13705)

5. The SECRETARY-GENERAL:
In its resolution 457
(1979), the Security Council urgently called upon the
Government of Iran to release immediately the personnel of
the Embassy of the United States being held at Teheran, to
provide them protection and to allow them to leave the
country. It further called on the Governments of Iran and
the United States to take steps .to resolve peacefully the
issues remaining between them to their mutual satisfaction,
in accordance with the purposes and principles of the United Nations. It also requested me to lend my good o!lices for
the immediate implementation of the resolution and to take
all measures appropriate to that end.

The meeting was called to order at 7.25 p.m.

Expression of welcome to Mr. Cyrus R. Van~e,
Secretary of State of tbe United States of America
1. The PRESIDENT (interpretationfrom Chinese): I wish,
at the very outset of thii meeting, to acknowledge the
presence at the Council table of Mr. Cyrus Vance, Secretary
of State of the United States of America, to whom I extend a
warm welcome.

I now call on the Secretary-General.

6. In my report of 22 December [ibid], I informed the
Council of my activities up to that time under resolution 457
(1979). I may recall that in my message of 19 December to
Ayatollah Khomeini I stated my willingness to go personally to Iran at any time to discuss the situatran. I need hardly
repeat to the Council that since the beginning of this crisis I
have always made clear my willingness to do that, provided
such a visit would serge a useful and constructive purpose.
On 23 December the United Nations representative at Teheran saw the Foreign Minister on my behalf and reminded
him of my offer.

Adoption of tbe agenda
iThe agenda was adopted.

Letter dated 22 December 1979 from the ,Permaneat
Representative of the United States of America to tbe
United Nations addressed to tbe President of tbe Security
coulKii (S/13705)
2. The PRESIDENT (interpretationporn Chinese): I wish
to inform members of the Council that I have received
letters from the representatives of Australia, Canada; the
Federal Republic of Germany and Singapore, in which they
request to be invited to participate in the discussion of the
item on the agenda. I propose, with the consent of the
Council, to invite those representatives to participate in
the discussion, without the right to vote, in accordance with
the relevant provisions of the Charter and rule 37 of the
provisional rules of procedure.

7. I have also been in contact with the Foreign Minister of
Pakistan, Mr. Agha Shahi, since the early days of the crisis.
Mr. Shahi was in Iran on 26 and 27 December. He, met with
Ayatollah Khomeini and Foreign Minister Ghotbzadeh,
and other members of the Revolutionary Council, during
his stay. In a statement at the conclusion of his visit to
Teheran, Foreign Minister Shahi alsb referred to the usefulness of a personal visit to Iran by the Secretary-General.
8. I wish to express my appreciation for the efforts made
by Mr. Z&&i to assist me in carrying out my mission of
good ofices. I am maintaining contact with the Iranian
authorities and with the Foreign Minister of Pakistan concerning such a visit. Needless to say, I am ready to leave for
Iran at any time.

At the invitation of thePresident. Mr. Anderson (Australia),
Mr. Barton (Canada), Mr. von Wechmar (Federal Republic of
Getiny)
and Mr. Koh (Siltgapore) took the places reserved
for them at the side of the Council chamber.

1

of the world, as long as it refuses to recognii the common
rules of international behaviour, it mustaccept the consequences of its deliberate actions.

9. Let me assure the Council that I shall continue my
efforts to assist in finding a solution to this crisis and, as in
the past, I shall not fail to keep members of the Council fully
informed of further developments.

18. On 25 November the Secretary-General, acting under
Article 99 of the Charter, took the extraordinary step of
requesting an urgent meeting of the Council to deal with
this crisis, stating that “the present crisis poses a serious
threat to international peace and security” [S/136461. In its
resolution 457 (1979), adopted unanimously, the Council
expressed its deep concern at the dangerous level of tension
and spoke of possible grave consequences for international
peace and security.

10. Mr. VANCE (United States of ~America> We meet
tonight at a moment when the principles upon which thii
great international body rests are being sharply challenged
in Iran.
11. More than eight weeks have passed since our embassy
was seized and our people and those from other nations
were taken hostage at Teheran. On three separate occasions
the Security Council has unanimously expressed the will of
the international community that the hostages be released
immediately.

19. These statements, alone with the many statements of
concern by Member States, make clear the judgement of
the international community that Iran’s act of taking and
holding hostages represents a violation of the law of nations
and threatens international peace and security. If Iran continues to hold the hostages after the Security Council and
the world community have unanimously called for their
release, action against Iran under Chapter VII of the Charter is not only justified but required to promote a peaceful
solution to this crisis.

12. From the oursef the Secretary-General, with the full
cooperation of the United States, has laboured unceasingly
for a peaceful solution. The President of the General
Assembly has twice urged Iran to release the hostages. The
International Court of Justice has spoken clearly and
unanimously. Governments and world leaders of varying
political and religious faiths have appealed for the release of
our people. And the United States Government has with
determination, persistence and patience pursued every
peaceful channel available to us.

20. It is therefore incumbent upon all of us as members of
the Council to take the steps necessary to ensure that the
Council’s earlier unanimous decision is implemented. My
Government therefore seeks a resolution which would condemn Iran’s failure to comply with earlier actions of the
Council and of the International Court of Justice calling for
the immediate release of all the hostages. The resolution
would further provide for two additional steps: first, it
would request the Secretary-General to intensify his goodoffices efforts, noting his readiness to go personally to
Teheran, and to report back to the Council by a specified
date; secondly, it would decide that if the hostages have not
been released when the Council meets again at the specified
early date, the Council will at that time adopt specific
sanctions under Article 41 of the Charter.

13. The response of those-who pevtuate this crisis-the
terrorists who have invaded our embassy, and the Govemment of Iran, which supports them-has been defiance and
contempt. They have placed themselves beyond the world’s
law and beyond the moral imperatives that are common to
the world’s cultures and religions.
14. At the heart of this matter are SOmen and womenstill captive, still isolated, still subjected to the most severe
strains. The International Court of Justice, in its unanimous
decision, expressed concern that continuation of these conditions of imprisonment
“exposes the human beings concerned to privation,
hardship, anguish and even danger to life and health and
thus to a serious possibility of irreparable harm’*.r

21. We believe that the continued solidarity of the intemational community will serve to demonstrate that an early
resolution of the problem is to the benefit of all; including
the people and leaders of Iran. The prolongation of this
crisis is in no one’s interest.

Claims that the hostages are well ring hollow, for the international community has been denied either consistent or
comprehensive access to them.

22. We are not unmindful of the grievances of the Iranian
people. We respect Iran’s sovereignty and independence
and the right-of the Iranian people to decide their own form
of government. As we have repeatedly emphasized, once the
hostages are released unharmed, we are prepared, in accordance with the Charter, to seek a resolution of the issues
between us.

15. But let us be clear. It is not only 50 American men and
women who are held hostage in Iran; it is the international
community. This is far more than a conflict between the
United States and Iran. Iran has placed itselfin conflict with
the structure of law and with the machinery of peace all of
us have painstakingly built.
16. The time has come for the world community to act,
firmly and collectively, to uphold international law and to
preserve international peace. We must give practical meaning to the principles and purposes of the Charter.

23. with the hostages’ release, the way will be clear for
Iran to present its grievances in any appropriate forum. The
United States cannot, however, respond to claims of injustice while our citizens are held in unjust captivity in violation of the resolutions and orders of the world’s primary
peace-keeping institutions.

17. As long as Iran remains indifferent to the voices of
reason and mercy that have been raised from every comer

24. As a great American president, Abraham Lincoln-a
man of deep compassion and understanding-once
de-

’ Unffed States Diplomatic and Consular Staflin Teheran, Provisional
Measures, Order of I5 December 1979, Z.C.J.Reports 1979. p. 7. para.42.

2

/

&red, ‘There is no grievance that h.a tit object of redress
by mob law”.

32. But,.sadly, we have seen little, if any, sign of change in
the attitude of the Iranian authorities or of those in occupation of the American Embassy, nor have we detected any
indication that they might be prepared to respond positively
to the various calls made by the international community
for the release of the hostages. Indeed, the implications of
the Secrctary-GcneraPs report of 22 December are that the
Iranian authorities have no interest in mediation at this
time.

25. Our patience and forbearance have been severely
tested in these past weeks. They arc not unlimited. We have
made clear from the beginning that we prefer a peaceful
solution to the other remedies that are available to us under
international law. It is in the interest of such a peaceful
solution that today we call upon this body to act.
26. Let us act now to preserve the web of mutual obligation which binds us together and shields us from chaos and
from disorder. For there can be no evasion of this central
point: if the international community fails to act when its
law is flouted and its authority defied, we not only diminish
the possibility for peace in this crisis; we belittle this institution of peace itself.

33. Nevertheless my delegation wishes at this point to
thank the Secretary-General for the statement which he has
just made and for his clearly expressed resolve to continue
to use his good offices to bring about a solution of the
problem.
34. My country has no quarrel with the Iranian people,
nor, apart from this one issue, with the Iranian authorities.
We have no wish to interfere in the internal affairs of Iran.
We respect the right of Iran, as of any other country in the
world, freely to choose its own system of government. We
recognize that the people of Iran feel a deep sense of grievance towards the previous rEgime in their country. Moreover, we are confident that the Iranian people share with us
a desire to have normal diplomatic, commercial and cultural relations with my country, as would be natural for two
nations with such ancient and historical links.

27. Effective action by the Security Council can breathe
new life into the provisions of the Charter and the decisions
of the Council. It can remind all of us, now and in the future,
of our solemn obligation to heed the judgements of this
body and to preserve its central place in the maintenance of
international peace and security.
28. Let us move together, in a manner that is clear and
convincing, to demonstrate that the rule of law has meaning
and that our machinery of peace has practical relevance. Let
us protect, as we must, the basic process that permits
nations to maintain civil&d relations with one another.

35. I should like to emphasixe here that there is nothing
standing in the way of such a normal and fruitful relationship except the totally unacceptable continuing detention of
the American hostages.

29. Through the decision we urge on the Council, together
we can hasten the day when this ordeal is resolved. And
through our demonstrated commitment to the purposes of
the Charter we will strengthen both the principles and the
institutions that serve world peace and protect us all.

36. I therefore appeal once more to the people and
Government of Iran, in their own interests, in the interests
of the hostages and of their families, in the interests of the
peace and stability of the world immediately to release the
hostages. This act would enable the people of Iran, ifthey so
wished, to uncover the past as they see it to the eyes of the
world. It would enable the people of Iran, if they so wished,
to build their future in concert with the community of
nations. Only by this act can they hope to make a start to
these processes.

30. Sir Anthony PARSONS (United Kingdom): Almost a
month has passed since we last met here in open Council to
consider this problem. On that occasion the Council
unanimously called on the Government of Iran to release
the personnel of the American Embassy held hostage at
Teheran. In the statements made in the Council atthat time
there was equal unanimity in condemning this unique and,
in modem times, unprecedented act. However, notwithstanding the subsequent efforts by the Secretary-General,
notwithstanding the unanimous Order of the International
Court of Justice that Iran should immediately release the
hostages, notwithstanding initiatives taken by other individuals, the deadlock continues. The hostages are still incarcerated. The Iranian authorities remain in flagrant violation of
the Vienna Convention on Diplomatic Relations; of other
United Nations conventions, of general international law
and long-standing practice of States. As day after day
passes with the hostages still in captivity, the crisis deepens.
The international tension that the hostage-taking has generated stretches ever closer to breaking-point.
.’

37. In my statement to the Council on 1 December
[217&h meetixg], I stated the view of my Prime Minister
that we would do anything we could to assist our friends the
Americans in the grievous position in which they and the
hostages now find themselves. My Prime Minister has reiterated this sentiment clearly and unequivocally, both recently
in this country and elsewhere. I state it again now on behalf
of Her Majesty’s Government. This is a time, of all times,
for friends to stand together and the United States may be
assured that the United Kingdom will not be found
wanting.
38. Mr. ALGARD (Norway): Mr. President, on two occasions last month your predecessor, on behalf of all members
of the Council, appealed to the Iranian authorities for the
immediate release of the hostages held at the American
Embassy at Teheran. On 4 December, the Council unanimously called on the Government of Iran to release the
hostages, to provide them with protection and to allow
them to leave the country. A number of countries non-

31. This is not simply a diplomatic crisis, a dispute
between two countries. It touches deep humanitarian
springs. The hostages themselves are suffering the stresses
and privations of long captivity. Their families are suffering
the pangs of doubt and uncertainty. The American people
as a whole are suffering with those families and with their
compatriots immured in Teheran.
3

members of the Council joined us in our appeal. On 15
December, the International Court of Justice ordered the
Government of Iran to release all the hostages immediately.

occasion to state clearly the position of the Portuguese
Government on the matter that again brings us here today. I
stated then that the assault on the United States Embassy at
Teheran, the taking hostage of the American diplomatic
personnel and, above all, the approval of those acts by the
Iranian leaders did constitute, in the view of the Portuguese
Government, a very serious violation of basic principles of
international law-principles of vital importance for the
community of nations and for the very existence of the
United Nations itself. As I then said, the accepted rules of
diplomatic practice and the status of immunity that all
nations of the world have agreed to grant reciprocally to
their diplomatic personnel are indeed the basic conditions
for peaceful discussion and settlement of differences, that
being the reason why their violation constitutes such a
serious threat to peace and security.

39. The response by the Iranian authorities to these
actions by the international community has been one of
continued defiance.
40. The matter before us concerns not only Iran and the
Uriited States but the entire international community. It is
the basic rules and principles of international law and mternational relations which Iran is violating.
41. My Government fully respects the sovereignty and
independence of Iran and the right of the Iranian people to
determine its own future. But as we respect their rights, we
must insist that they respect the rights of others and adhere
to the established rules of behaviour between nations.

48. ‘Discharging itself of its responsibilities and acting, in
accordance with the Charter, on behalf of all Member
States, the Council adopted unanimously on 4 December
resolution 457 (1979), urgently calling on the Government
of Iran “‘to release immediately the personnel of the
Embassy of the United States of America being held at
Teheran”. Less than two weeks later, on 15 December, the
International Court of Justice, also by a unanimous vote,
issued an order along the lines of the resolution of the
Council.

42: The Security Council has a basic responsibility for
upholding the fundamental principles of international law
governing relations between States. Thus we have to act
when these principles are being violated. The prestige and
the authority of the United Nations are at stake.
43. We seem to have reached the end of the road where
mere appeals will do. My Government would be ready to
support, here and now, concrete action by the Council
under Chapter VII of the Charter and to adopt procedures
which would make such sanctions effective. There have
been numerous attempts at mediation by Governments and
individuals of goodwill. So far, it seems as if the Govemment of Iran is rejecting the very concept of mediation. Any
new initiative by the Council once more to test the goodwill
of the Government of Iran needs in the present situation to
be backed up by a firm commitment to take, in the case of
another failure, such appropriate action as that to which I
have referred.

49. Governments of many Member States have also, in
the meantime, been expressing their condemnation of the
continued detention of the hostages, and making pressing
appeals to the Iranian leaders for their immediate release.
50. Throughout this same period the Sccretary-Generalwith the competence, the dedication and the high sense of
his responsibilities which we all acknowledge and admire in
him-has been striving arduously both to find a solution to
the present crisis and to ensure the release of the hostages.
This means that, confronted with a situation which the
conscience of the international community has deemed
unacceptable and unjustifiable, the United Nations has
taken all. possible measures as required by the present
circumstances-lnamely, through the action of the Council,
through the order issued by the International Court of
Justice. and through the good ofices of the SecretaryGeneral,

44. If the Council should want to enlist once more the
good otliccs of the Secretary-General, we would support
this, and I want to assure him of our all-out support in his
continued and dedicated efforts in thii matter, for which we
are all extremely grateful. In that case, the Government of
Iran should know that the Secretary-General speaks with
the full authority not only of his high oflice but also of the
Council. My Government will urge the Government of Iran
to cooperate fully with the Secretary-General in securing
the immediate release of the hostages.

51. Almost a month has now elapsed. All those appeals
and endeavours have been totally ignored by Iran. For a
month, the world has been confronted by all sorts ofcontradictory statements, coming from different Iranian authorities. Whenever a word has been said in Iran that could be
looked upon as implying a possible way out of the crisis,
that word has always turned out to be of no consequence, or
has been immediately rejected by different statements from
other sources of power.

45. An eventual decision to postpone the implementation
of immediate measures should not be taken by the Govemment of Iran as a sign of weakness on the part of the
Council. On the contrary, the Government of Iran should
grasp such an open hand and respond positively to the
repeated appeals by the Council. This would leave us with
an alternative to the immediate implementation of sanctiOilS.

46. Once the hostages have been released, Iran will find
that the international community will provide it with ways
for airing legitimate concerns on its part,

52. The deplorable fact is that the Iranian authorities have
shown so far an attitude of total defiance towards the
community of nations and the very principle on which
international relations are based.

47. Mr. FUTSCHER PEREIRA (Portugal): At the Security Council meeting held on 1 December [ibid.], I had

53. What is now at stake, much more than the freedom
and the dignity of the hostages, important as they are, is,
4

above all, the very foundation of the international order’and
the credibility of the United Nations as a means of ensuring
the survival of that order and of upholding the principles on
which it is based-a fact all the more serious since Iran, at
the moment the crisis erupted, could not even justify its
attitude on the basis of threats to its territorial integrity or
political independence, which were by no means endangered.

actions taken by the Council and the order handed down by
the International Court of Justice, which expressed regret
that those measures had proved ineffective and which called
once again upon Iran to free the hostages.
60. That being the case, my delegation believes that it
would be extremely advantageous for the SecretaryGeneral-to whom I should like to pay a particular tribute
for his tireless efforts ever since the beginning of this crisisto be called upon to continue his good offices and to report
back to the Council, in a fixed period of time, on the results
obtained. Unless the situation improves shortly, there will
be nothing left for the Council to do but resort to the
measures laid down in Chapter VII of the Charter.

54. In those circumstances the Portuguese Government
deems it justified that the Council consider new ways and
means aimed at leading to a negotiated and prompt settlement of the crisis,‘in the spirit of the Charter. Should they
fail, the Iranian Government must then real& that the
Council would have no alternative but to envisage other
measures at its disposal, in accordance with Chapter VII of
the Charter.

61. I should like to voice the hope that the Iranian people
and the Iranian authorities will real& that the entire membership of the United Nations has been asking them for
weeks now, and today urges *em, to abide by the rules of
international law. Only when these rules are observed is it
possible to guarantee normal relations prevailing among
States. It is only thus that we can avoid having to apply the
more stringent measures that may prove to be necessary. I
should like to express the heartfelt hope that this fresh
appeal will be heeded.

55. My delegation still wants t9 believe that the Iranian
authorities will come to reason and heed the international
appeals and injunctions addressed to them.
56. Mr. LEPRElTE
(France) (interpretation from
French): Once again the Security Council has met to consider the situation, of ever growing concern to the intemational community, created by the prolonged detention, in
contempt of international law, of members of the United
States Embassy aFTeheran. It is indeed most regrettable
that the voice of the Council has not been heeded so far and
that the American hostages have not been released, as was
requested in resolution 457 (1979), unanimously adopted, I
would stress, by the Security Council on 4 December.

62. The PR&DENT
(interpretation from Chinese): The
next speaker is the representative of the Federal Republic of
Germany. i in&e him to take a place at the Council table
and to make his statement.
63. Mr. von WECHMAR
(Federal Republic of Germany): Mr. President, at ,tie outset let me thank you and the
other members of the Council for granting us the opportunity to’ speak here tonight.

57. I have had an opportunity to indicate here in the
Council, on 1 December [ibid], France’s position with
respect to-this serious matter. Today I shall confine myself
to recalling the underlying principles of that position. My
country attaches paramount importance to strict respect for
international law, which means that, in our view, no damage must be done to either the independence and sovereignty of States or the right of each and every people freely
to determine its own political, economic and social options.
That is the attitude which France has taken, particularly
since the beginning of the Iranian revolution. But this
means equally that my country considers absolutely unacceptable the taking hostage of diplomatic personnel covered
by conventions and customs respected by the entire community of States. The general ales governing ,relations
among States, particularly those relating to diplomatic
immunities, are in accordance with, universal law; they
should therefore be binding on all, and in all circumstances.
Hence thii is not simply a question of a dispute between two
Member States.

64. The international community faces a serious challenge. Since 4 N&ember, as many as 50 men and women
have been held hostage at Teheran, an act which constitutes
an open breach of universally accepted principles of intemational law and a violation of fundamental human rights.
Both the call for the immediate release of the hostages made
by the Security Council on 4 December and the decision of
15 December to that effect by the International Court of
Justice have been disregarded by those responsible in Iran.
The urgent appeals from political leaders in all parts of the
world and the calls by the Secretary-General, the President
of the Security Council and the President of the General
Assembly for the immediate release of the hostages have
gone unheeded.
65. The flagrant breach of the principle of the inviolability
of the members of diplomatic n;issions-which is recognized by all States-and the open disregard of the decisions
of the competent international bodies are extremely serious
events likely to endanger the maintenance of international
peace and security. This cannot be tolerated any long& by
the international community.

58. In these circumstances mv deleeation considers it
essential that the Security Count& shoild once again take
a&on with respect to this affair and call upon Iran to
respect, without any further delay, its obligations as a
Member of the United Nations. Otherwise the authority
and prestige not only of the Council but also of the entire
Organization would be directly affected.

66. The Security CoUncil is now called upon to take steps
in accordance with the Charter to put an end to this development and ensure the release of the hostages. The Council
is faced with the task of settling a seribtis coriflict with ‘tie
means given to it by the Charter. It therefore has a great

59. My delegation would therefore be prepared to approve any draft resolution which recalled both the previous
5

responsibilty in relation to those directly affected-but
in relation to the international community.

Tabriz and Shiraz, were attacked and occupied. Despite
repeated calls for help, the Iranian authorities did not send
their security forces to protect the premises of the diplomatic missions or to relieve the situation. Since 4 November
the premises of the United States Embassy at Teheran and
of the consulates at Tabriz and Shiraz have remained in the
hands of the persons who seized them.

also

67. The position of the Federal Republic of Germany on
this conflict was and is clear: we respect the right of the
Iranian people to determine its future in free selfdetermination and to give itself an order that is better suited to its
wishes than the past one. We attach due importance to the
accusations about past injustice, but by the same token we
are firmly convinced that past injustice cannot justify new
injustice

75. Gn 4 November the armed invaders of the United
States Embassy seized 63 persons of United States and other
nationalities. On 18 and 20 November, 13 of those persons
were released. The remaining 50 persons have been held
hostage. According to the evidence, 28 of those 50 persons
have the status, duly recognized by the Government of Iran,
of “members of the diplomatic staff’ within the meaning of
the Vienna Convention on Diplomatic Relations of 1961.
Gf the remaining 22 persons, 20 have the status, similarly
recognized by the Government of Iran, of “members of the
administrative and technical staff” within the meaning of
the said Convention. The remaining two persons of United
States nationality do not possesseither diplomatic or consular status. In addition to the persons held hostage in the
premises of the Embassy, the United States Charge d’affaires in Iran and two other United States diplomatic agents
are being detained in the premises of the Iranian Ministry of
Foreign Affairs.

68. The United States Government, as well as the American people, has our full solidarity. In this serious situation
they have shown great determination, restraint and a high
senseof responsibility by doing everything possible to bring
about a peaceful solution. The Government of the Federal
Republic of Germany has in word and deed fully supported
these efforts since the hostage-taking at Teheran. It deeply
regrets that they have not yet led to the release of the
hostages.
69. The Federal Republic of Germany firmly sides with
international law and continues to insist on the immediate
release of the hostages at Teheran. It calls for a settlement of
the conflict in accordance with the Charter and is resolved
to support any decision the Security Council may find
necessary to achieve this aim.

76. The overwhelming evidence suggests not only that the
Government of Iran has failed to prevent the events which I
have described, but that there is clear evidence of its complicity in, and approval of, those events.

70. We wholeheartedly welcome the envisaged mission of
the Secretary-General to go personally to Iran in order to
seek a solution by mediation. The Secretary-General would,
with the mandate of the Council, represent the will of the
family of nations, of which Iran is a member. We urge those
responsible for the holding of the hostages to understand
that this extraordinary measure would indicate the firm
determination of the whole family of nations to restore the
rule of international law and to resolve this crisis, taking
into account the legitimate interests of all concerned. The
mandate that would be given to the Secretary-General by
the Council must be seen as a last chance to achieve this by
the means contained in Chapter VI of the Charter.

77. If the relevant facts are clear, so also are the applicable
principles of international law and of coexistence between
States. One of those principles is the inviolability of diplomatic envoys and embassies. That is a principle which has
been observed in the relations between States from time
immemorial. Indeed, as the judges of the International
Court of Justice have pointed out,
“there is no more fundamental prerequisite for the conduct of relations between States than the inviolability of
diplomatic envoys and embassies, so that throughout
history nations of all creeds and cultures have observed
reciprocal obligations for that purpose”.*

71. We therefore most earnestly appeal to those responsible in Iran to use this opportunity to bring an end to the
present crisis by releasing the hostages immediately, thus
respecting international law, human rights and the will of
the international community. That is also the only way to
secure the understanding and attention of the international
community with regard to the legitimate concerns of the
Iranian people.

That principle, which has long existed in customary intemational law and in the practice of nations, is now codified in
the Vienna Convention of 1961. Both Iran and the United
States are parties to that Convention. The two States are
also parties to the Convention on the Prevention and Punishment of Crimes against Internationally Protected Persons, including Diplomatic Agents, of 1973.

72. The PRESIDENT (inzerprezationfrom Chinese): The
next speaker- is the representative of Singapore. I invite him
to take a place at the Council table and to make his
statement.

78. The application of the relevant principles of international law to the facts before us can lead to only one
conclusion. That is that there is no legal, or any other,
justification for the continued seizure and occupation of the
United States Embassy at Teheran and the holding of the 50
Americans as hostages.

73. Mr. KOH (Singapore): Mr. President, it is fortunate
for the Security Council to have as its president during this
critical month a man of your ability and vast experience.

79. The grievances of the Government of Iran against the
previous regime and against the United States cannot justify

74. The facts which are relevant to our consideration are
not in dispute. On 4 November, the premises of the United
States Embassy at Teheran, as well as its consulates at

‘It&?. para. 38.

6

taken place between 4.November and now. I come now to
the question of what the Security Council should do. I
recommend the following course of action to the members
of the Council: first, the Council should consider issuing a
demand to the Government of Iran for the release, unconditionally and without exception, of the hostages being held
at Teheran and the ending of the occupation of the embassy;
secondly, if a reasonable period of time passes without
compliance by the Government of Iran with that demand,
the Council should meet again on a specified date in order
to consider what appropriate and concrete action it should
take in accordance with the relevant provisions of the
charter.

the breach of the principle of the inviolability of diplomatic
envoys and embassies. I pass no judgement on the validity
of those grievances. They should, however, be pmued by
appropriate action in relevant national and international
forums.
80. On 9 November, four days after the seizure of the
United States Embassy, the President of the Security Council issued a statement on behalf of the members of the
Council [S/l3616J. The statement asked urgently for the
release and protection of American personnel who had been
detained in Iran. On 25 November the SecretaryGeneral,
invoking Article 99 of the Charter, requested an early meeting of the Council and declared the current crisis a serious
threat to international peace and security. The Council met
on 27 November [2172nd meeting], when the President of
the Council reiterated his earlier appeal. Subsequently, the
Council met on 1,2, 3 and 4 December [217%/r to 2178th
meetings]. On 4 December, it unanimously adopted resolution 457 (1979), which, inter alia, urgently called on the
Government of Iran to release immediately the personnel of
the Embassy of the United States being held at Teheran, to
provide them with protection and to allow them to leave the
country. The resolution also requested the SecretaryGeneral to lend his good oflices for its implementation.

84. The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Chinese): The
next speaker is the representative of Australia. I invite him
to take a place at the Council table and to make his
statement.
85. Mr. ANDERSON (Australia): Mr. President, I thank
you, and, through you, the members of the Security Council
for affording me this opportunity of addressing the Council
this evening.
86. As members of the Council will recall from my statement of 2 December 12176th meeting], prior to the unanimous adoption of resolution 457 (1979), Australia attaches
the highest importance to the principles of international law
which govern international relations. We regard the refusal
of the Government of Iran to take steps to implement
resolution 457 (1979) by obtaining the immediate and
unconditional release of the persons held hostage in the
United States Embassy at Teheran as amounting to a grave
violation of international law, coming on top of its earlier
and fundamental breaches of international conventions to
which it is a party.

81. The United States has also taken its case to the International Court of Justice and requested provisional measures. In an extraordinary show of unanimity, the 15judges
of the Court granted the following provisional measures.
First, the Court ordered the Government of Iran to ensure
that the premises of the United States Embassy be restored
immediately to the possession of the United States authorities and to ensure their inviolability and effective protection;
secondly, that the Government of Iran ensure the immediate release? without any exception, of all persons of United States nationality who are being held in the embassy, or
in the Ministry of Foreign Affairs’at Teheran, or elsewhere,
and to afford full protection to all such persons; thirdly, that
the Government of Iran afford to all the diplomatic and
consular personnel of the United States the full protection,
privileges and immunities to which they are entitled, including immunity from any form of criminal jurisdiction and
freedom and facilities to leave the territory of Iran.

87. My Government fully understands and supports the
position of the Government of the United States in this
matter. The fact that the United States has sought to employ
the Charter of the United Nations in order to obtain a
peaceful solution to this problem is, we believe, commendable. The United States has also been given the support of the
great majority of world opinion-not
only the opinion of
the international community as expressed most recently by
the President of the General Assembly, but also public
opinion right around the world.

82. The Secretary-General has submitted a report dated
22 December [VI3704J, describing the persistent and
strenuous efforts he has made in pursuance of his mandate
under Security Council resolution 457 (1979). My delegation joins others in paying a warm tribute to the SecretaryGeneral for the valuable contributions he has made to
defuse the situation and to obtain the release of the hostages. We note, however, in paragraph 11 of that report the
following statement:
“the expectation which had previously arisen for early
progress towards a settlement of the crisis could, for the
time being, not be fulfilled”.

88. The maintenance of international peace and security
depends essentially on co-operation between States. Cooperation between nations is the very foundation of this
Organixation, and all States are bound by the Charter
provisions to work together for peace and friendship.
89. The present situation in Iran is undeniably a most
serious potential threat to international peace and security,
and, as such, it demands the urgent attention of the Council.
If the Council were to fail to exercise its authority, there
could only be a reduction in every country of the trust which
people have chosen to place in the United Nations as an
effective organ working for peace and international law.
The Council must uphold this solemn trust.

In spite of that pessimistic conclusion, we would urge the
Secretary-General to continue to lend his good offices.
83. I have reviewed the facts of the case; I have referred to
the relevant principles of international law which apply to
the facts; I have reviewed the developments which have

90. Australia, for its part, stands willing to join with the
responsible international community in efforts to secure
7

freedom for the American hostages now being held at
Teheran.

tions can be found within the framework of international
relations and international law.
-

91. It follows from all that I have said that Australia does
not see the current situation as one which should be interpreted from a sectarian religious standpoint. Nor do we
consider that there can lx any difference in attitude based
on a country’s political or economic circumstances. What
we are confronting is the flouting of established rules which
have stood the test of war, strife and bitter hatred between
States in the past. The Council is being confronted by an act
of defence, and in Australia’s view there can be no altemative but to take action. That action should be designed with
one end in mind the immediate and unconditional release
of the hostages.

93. For those reasons Australia fully supports the
approach which hasjust been proposed by the United States
Secretary of State. We believe that the Council should
renew and reaflii its demand for the immediate release of
the hostages and for their protection and safe departure
from Iran. We favour the proposal that the SecretaryGeneral, whose untiring efforts to seek a solution deserve
our full commendation, should now proceed to Iran to
facilitate action to this end. This would afiord the Govemment of Iran a further opportunity to return to the path of
international cooperation.

92. Australia has, of course, no wish to see harm and
deprivation come to the Iranian people as a result of action
by the United Nations, and, indeed, there are certain measures which, because of their effect on the people themselves,
should not be contemplated. But it must be brought home
to Iran’s leaders that the system of international relations
which has been so painstakingly devised over the last thousand years cannot be swept away for the sake of domestic
political interests or in pursuit of objectives for which solu-

94. As the United States has noted, the release of the
hostages will clear the way for Iran to present its grievances
in any appropriate forum and, indeed, the United States has
expressed its readiness in that event to seek a resolution of’
the issues between the two Governments. Should the leaders of Iran nevertheless refuse to release the hostages, it is
the firm view of my Government that the Council should
proceed immediately to take effective measures under
Chapter VII of the Charter.
T&e meeting rose at 8.30 p.m.

6.

HOW

TO

OBTAIN

NATIONS

UNITED

United
throughout
Section,

Nations
publications
the world.
Consult
New York or Geneva.

COMMENT

SE PROCURER

may
your

LES

be

PUBLICATIONS
obtained
bookstore

or

PUBLICATIONS

from
bookstores
write
to: United

and

DES

UNIES

NATIONS

Les publications
des Nations
‘Jnies
sont en vente
dans
les librairies
d6positaires
du monde
entier.
Informez-vous
auptis
de votre
libraire
B : Nations
Unies.
Section
des ventes,
New York ou Genbve.
KAIC

COMO

IIOJWYHTh

CONSEGUIR

H3AAHHR

PUBLICACIONES

Las publicaciones
de las
buidoras
en todas
pa&s
Unidas,
Secci6n
de Ventas,

Litho

in United

Nations,

New York

OPl-AHU

3A4HM

DE

LAS

Naciones
Unidas
estin
de1 mundo.
Consults
Nueva
York o Ginebra.

Price: 8U.S.

OlYbEAHHEHHhIX

NACIONES

et les agences
ou adressez-vous

HAIWFl

UNIDAS

en venta
en librerias
a su librero
o dirijase

1.50

distributors
Nations,
Sales

y casas distria: Naciones

79-70002-April

3982-2,250
