A /71/PV.67

United Nations

General Assembly

Official Records

Seventy-first session

67th plenary meeting

Thursday, 22 December 2016, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Thomson . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (Fiji)

Ms. Young (Belize), Vice-President, took the Chair.
The meeting was called to order at 10.15 a.m.
Agenda item 14 (continued)
Culture of peace
Draft resolution (A/71/L.43)
The Acting President: Members will recall that
the General Assembly considered agenda item 14 at its
63rd plenary meeting, on 15 December 2016.
I now give the floor to the representative of Pakistan
to introduce draft resolution A/71/L.43.
Mr. Munir (Pakistan): It is my great pleasure
and honour to join the Mission of the Philippines in
introducing the draft resolution entitled “Promotion of
interreligious and intercultural dialogue, understanding
and cooperation for peace”, contained in document
A/71/L.43. I thank all Member States that took active
part in the negotiations on the draft this year and enriched
this content with their constructive suggestions.
We appreciate the leading role of UNESCO and the
valuable contribution of the United Nations Alliance
of Civilizations in the promotion of interreligious and
intercultural dialogue at the national, regional and
international levels.
First introduced in 2004, the resolution on promotion
of interreligious dialogue is based on our shared belief
that greater understanding of and respect for diversity
are the best way of achieving global peace. The world
today is afflicted with destructive conflicts, both old

and new, which are fuelled by lingering suspicions
and mistrust across religious and civilizational fault
lines. These conflicts not only cause immense human
suffering and economic loss, but also obstruct friendly
interaction and socioeconomic cooperation among the
various regions and nations of the world.
We also witness a growing trend of xenophobia
and religious intolerance and the emergence of new
extremist ideologies in different parts of the world.
Much of the growing mistrust can be traced to a growing
gap in understanding and a lack of tolerance among
the various religions and civilizations. Extremist and
terrorist groups exploit this gap to propogate their own
toxic agenda. It is therefore imperative for all of us to
strengthen mechanisms and actions for the promotion
of dialogue and understanding among all religions and
civilizations with a view to restoring harmony and
strengthening cooperation for peace and development.
Despite differences, religions and cultures have
a lot of commonality that can actually unite us. We
need to build on these shared values. Cultural diversity
can be converted into a positive force for promoting
cooperation, socioeconomic development and harmony.
The draft resolution is also in sync with the 2030 Agenda
for Sustainable Development, which includes among its
goals the promotion of peaceful and inclusive societies
for sustainable development. For this to happen, we will
have to join hands to eliminate prejudices, biases and
stereotypes and engage in a genuine and constructive
dialogue at all levels across the cultural and religious
divide. Dialogue should be pursued in a structured,
multilayered and all-inclusive format. It should include

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of speeches
delivered in other languages. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only.
They should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

16-45858 (E)

*1645858*

A/71/PV.67

22/12/2016

religious and community leaders, civil society and
academic institutions. The ultimate objective of
dialogue should be to prevent conflict and promote
peace and harmony through better understanding,
moderation and a global culture of peace.

“If objection is made to the request for division, the
motion for division shall be voted upon. Permission
to speak on the motion for division shall be given
only to two speakers in favour and two speakers
against.”

It is our belief that, with enhanced dialogue and
better understanding, it is possible to achieve the
objective of a diverse, yet harmonious and peaceful
world, standing firmly on the pillars of peaceful
coexistence and unity in diversity. We hope that the
Assembly will once again lend its unanimous support
to the draft resolution.

Do any members wish to speak on the request for
division?

The Acting President: We shall now proceed to
consider draft resolution A/71/L.43.
I now give the floor to the representative of the
Secretariat.
Mr. Nakano (Department for General Assembly
and Conference Management): I should like to
announce that, since the submission of draft resolution
A/71/L.43, in addition to those delegations listed on
the draft document, the following countries have also
become sponsors of the draft resolution: Austria,
the Bahamas, Bangladesh, Cameroon, Chile, China,
Eritrea, Guatemala, Italy, Lebanon, Madagascar,
Mongolia, Nigeria, Papua New Guinea, Peru, Qatar,
Slovenia, Spain, Suriname, Tajikistan, Timor-Leste,
Togo, Tunisia and the United Kingdom of Great Britain
and Northern Ireland.
I would also like to announce that the Republic of
Korea is not a sponsor of the draft resolution.
The Acting President: The Assembly will now
take a decision on draft resolution A/71/L.43, entitled
“Promotion of interreligious and intercultural dialogue,
understanding and cooperation for peace”.
A separate recorded vote has been requested on
operative paragraph 9 of draft resolution A/71/L.43. Is
there any objection to that request?
The representative of Pakistan has requested the
floor. I now give him the floor.
Mr. Munir (Pakistan): We object to the request
for a separate vote on operative paragraph 9 of draft
resolution A/71/L.43, in accordance with rule 89 of the
rules of procedure of the General Assembly.
The Acting President: In accordance with rule 89,
which I will read:
2/11

I now give the floor to the representative of
Armenia.
Mr. Samvelian (Armenia): Armenia requested a
recorded vote on operative paragraph 9 and, in order
to flag its objection to that paragraph, we will insist on
taking action to put operative paragraph 9 to the vote.
The Acting President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Pakistan.
Mr. Munir (Pakistan): For over a decade, the
Philippines and Pakistan have championed the resolution
on the promotion of interreligious and intercultural
dialogue, understanding and cooperation for peace. One
of the pillars of the resolution is the role of the United
Nations Alliance for Civilizations in promoting greater
understanding and respect for civilizations, cultures,
religions and beliefs. It is therefore unfortunate that
a request for deletion has been made on operative
paragraph 9 of draft resolution A/71/L.43, which relates
to the Seventh Global Forum of the Alliance. I wish
to invite the attention of the Assembly to the fact that
the event was a United Nations event, so the call for
deletion and vote on operative paragraph 9 would be
against what was achieved at the conference itself.
I would like to inform the Assembly that we would
therefore call on all Member States to vote against the
separation of operative paragraph 9.
The Acting President: I give the floor to the
representative of the Philippines.
Mrs. Natividad (Philippines): The Philippines
regrets that the motion for division has been put forward
under rule 89 in reference to operative paragraph 9 of
draft resolution A/71/L.43.
Operative paragraph 9 welcomes the Baku
Declaration, adopted at the Seventh Global Forum
of the United Nations Alliance of Civilizations, held
in April. The Baku Declaration, among other things,
promotes a culture of peace through interreligious
and intercultural dialogue — the very essence of draft
resolution A/71/L.43, before us today.
16-45858

22/12/2016

Paragraph 7 of the Baku Declaration stresses “the
importance of respect and understanding for cultural
and religious diversity”. It encourages activities that
promote tolerance, respect dialogue and cooperation
for promoting a culture of peace and non-violence at the
national, subregional, regional and international levels.
This draft resolution has been adopted by consensus
in past sessions because of a shared belief in and a
commitment to the value of dialogue to foster greater
understanding and tolerance of our cultural, religious,
linguistic and ethnic diversities.
Just as we welcomed the Vienna Declaration from
the fifth Global Forum of the United Nations Alliance
of Civilizations in 2013 and the Bali Declaration from
the sixth Global Forum of the United Nations Alliance
of Civilizations in 2014, so must we welcome the Baku
Declaration issued at the Alliance’s Seventh Global
Forum this year. These Declarations encourage the
implementation of activities that contribute to the
promotion of interreligious and intercultural dialogue
for peace. We must sustain and promote the momentum
created by this Declaration, especially in the midst of
the conflicts and violence we witness every day.
The forums of the United Nations Alliance of
Civilizations, a United Nations event, brings together
Heads of State and Government, Ministers and ranking
officials from 119 Member States, together with many
partner organizations, who make up the Group of
Friends of the Alliance, who will work together towards
a more peaceful and more socially inclusive world by
building mutual respect among peoples of different
cultural and religious identities.
We have endeavoured to accommodate the views,
concerns, contributions, suggestions and input expressed
by many delegations in the consultations, conducted
in an open, inclusive and transparent manner. Let us
therefore welcome all efforts and undertakings that
would contribute to our common goals and aspirations
for achieving and sustaining peace, including the Baku
Declaration referred to in operative paragraph 9 of the
draft resolution.
The Acting President: In accordance with rule 89,
I shall now put to the vote the motion for division.
A recorded vote was taken.
In favour:
Armenia

A/71/PV.67

Against:
Albania, Algeria, Andorra, Argentina, Australia,
Austria,
Azerbaijan,
Bahamas,
Bahrain,
Bangladesh, Barbados, Belgium, Bhutan, Bosnia
and Herzegovina, Brazil, Brunei Darussalam,
Bulgaria, Cambodia, Cameroon, Canada, Chile,
China, Colombia, Costa Rica, Croatia, Cyprus,
Czech Republic, Denmark, Djibouti, Dominican
Republic, Egypt, El Salvador, Estonia, Finland,
Georgia, Germany, Ghana, Greece, Guatemala,
Guinea, Guyana, Honduras, Hungary, Iceland,
India, Indonesia, Iraq, Ireland, Italy, Jamaica,
Japan, Jordan, Kazakhstan, Kiribati, Kyrgyzstan,
Lao People’s Democratic Republic, Latvia, Lesotho,
Libya, Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg,
Malaysia, Maldives, Mali, Malta, Mexico, Monaco,
Mongolia, Montenegro, Morocco, Mozambique,
Myanmar, Namibia, Nepal, Netherlands, Oman,
Pakistan, Panama, Papua New Guinea, Paraguay,
Peru, Philippines, Poland, Portugal, Qatar, Republic
of Korea, Republic of Moldova, Romania, Samoa,
San Marino, Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Serbia, Sierra
Leone, Singapore, Slovakia, Slovenia, Spain, Sri
Lanka, Sudan, Suriname, Sweden, Switzerland,
Thailand, the former Yugoslav Republic of
Macedonia, Timor-Leste, Togo, Tunisia, Turkey,
United Arab Emirates, United Kingdom of Great
Britain and Northern Ireland, United Republic of
Tanzania, Uruguay, Uzbekistan, Viet Nam
Abstaining:
France, Mauritius, Nigeria, Palau
The motion to divide the draft resolution was rejected
by 116 against, 1 in favour and 4 abstentions.
The Acting President: We shall now turn to the
draft resolution as a whole.
May I take it that it is the wish of the General
Assembly to adopt draft resolution A/71/L.43 as
a whole?
Draft resolution A/71/L.43, as a whole, was adopted
(resolution 71/249).
[Subsequently, the delegation of Kuwait informed
the Secretariat that it had intended to vote against.]
The Acting President: Before giving the floor
for explanations of vote, may I remind delegations
that explanations of vote are limited to 10 minutes and
should be made by delegations from their seats.

16-458583/11

A/71/PV.67

Mr. Samvelian (Armenia): Armenia recognizes
and fully understands the importance of resolution
71/249, entitled “Promotion of interreligious and
intercultural dialogue, understanding and cooperation
for peace”, and commends the efforts of its main
sponsors. It strongly believes that such a dialogue would
enhance peace and social stability, respect for diversity
at the global, regional, national and local levels and
foster an environment conducive to peace and mutual
understanding. We are of the view that interreligious
and intercultural dialogue should be aimed at promoting
social cohesion, peace and development, and we strongly
condemn xenophobia, racism and discrimination in all
its forms and manifestations.
Armenia entered the negotiations on the resolution
in good faith and with a cooperative spirit. We spared
no effort to achieve genuine consensus. However, the
negotiations fell short of sharing similar objectives
due to uncompromising points of view. From the
very beginning of informal consultations, Armenia
repeatedly expressed its reservations on operative
paragraph 9, in particular concerning the host country
of the Seventh Global Forum of the United Nations
Alliance of Civilizations.
Armenia has consistently alerted the drafters about
the ongoing hatred for Armenians and the Governmentsponsored Armeniaphobia in Azerbaijan, which
culminated in the large-scale aggression against the
people of Nagorno Karabakh unleashed by Azerbaijan
at the beginning of April, just a few weeks prior to the
opening of the Forum of the Alliance in Baku. The
highest authority of Azerbaijan used the Forum itself as
a platform for disseminating anti-Armenia propaganda,
xenophobia and hatred. The actions and policies of
Azerbaijan are in blatant breach of the purposes of the
Alliance and of this very resolution.
Regrettably, efforts to reach a consensus on the
resolution failed. Given those circumstances, Armenia
requested the recorded vote on operative paragraph 9
of the resolution, and should the vote have taken place,
Armenia would have voted against it. Armenia also
disassociates itself from the resolution.
Mr. Dolbow (United States of America): The
United States strongly believes in encouraging a culture
of peace through the promotion of justice, democracy,
human rights and fundamental freedoms, as well as
by rejecting violence and addressing the root causes
of conflict. We are encouraged by consensus-based
4/11

22/12/2016

efforts to promote tolerance, dialogue, reconciliation
and respect for cultural diversity.
As a multi-ethnic, multicultural and multireligious
nation, we also believe that dialogue, understanding
and cooperation among and between individuals of
diverse backgrounds are important to the development
of peaceful and harmonious relations among all
people and nations. The United States understands
that terrorism and violent extremism have no basis in
religion. Indeed, we believe that religious organizations
and interreligious dialogue that promote a culture of
peace represent elements essential to preventing violent
extremism.
It is therefore unfortunate that resolution 71/249
does not take advantage of the opportunities presented
by the recommendations of the Secretary-General’s
Plan of Action to Prevent Violent Extremism. Member
States endorsed the recommendations of the Plan of
Action to Prevent Violent Extremism in paragraph
40 of resolution 70/291, when they recommended
that Member States consider implementing those
recommendations. Over the past 10 years, Member
States have called for better balance among all the
pillars of the United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism
Strategy, and the recommendations and the Plan of
Action to Prevent Violent Extremism are a practical
framework to implement the first pillar, which
addresses the conditions conducive to the spread of
terrorism. Recognizing the links with issues addressed
in the recommendations of the Plan of Action to Prevent
Violent Extremism would have better enabled Member
States and the United Nations to take advantage of
the investments that are being made to implement
the recommendations of the Plan of Action to Prevent
Violent Extremism.
Separately, we understand that China has organized
some activities under the umbrella of the Belt and
Road Initiative, which, it says, can help to promote
people-to-people ties. As we have previously stated,
all of our available information suggests that that
initiative is primarily an economic strategy focused
on expanding China’s infrastructure investment. If
the Belt and Road Initiative has broader ambitions
to “strengthen people-to-people bonds and promote
mutual understanding and cooperation”, we encourage
China to ensure that that element, including respect for
the cultures, needs and desires of recipient countries
is incorporated into all projects it develops under the
umbrella. As with any initiative of this type, we hope that
16-45858

22/12/2016

China’s projects through the Belt and Road initiative,
whether economic, cultural or both, align with global
standards, China’s human rights commitments and the
needs of recipient countries.
Finally, we understand that this resolution reaffirms
the international community’s recognition that article
19 of the International Covenant on Civil and Political
Rights, in its entirety, provides the international
framework for the protection of freedom of expression.
The United States reaffirms its well-known position
that the exercise of the right to the freedom of
expression should be afforded the maximum possible
protection and our support for the freedoms for religion
and expression, including the respect for the right to
freedom of thought, conscience or belief.
In that regard, we are disappointed that paragraph
10 does not distinguish extremism, a term that may be
subjectively applied to certain groups and could be used
to suppress the exercise of the freedoms of expression
and conscience, as well as other human rights and
fundamental freedoms, from violent extremism, which
we universally oppose. Had the resolution reflected
our edits, we believe that human rights would have
been better protected and that it would have helped to
ensure that Member States actions to counter violent
extremism were not counterproductive.
The Acting President: The General Assembly has
now concluded this stage of its consideration of agenda
item 14.
Agenda item 126 (continued)
Cooperation between the United Nations and
regional and other organizations
(n) Cooperation between the United Nations
and the Organization for the Prohibition of
Chemical Weapons
Draft resolution (A/71/L.46)
The Acting President: Members will recall that the
Assembly considered agenda item 126 and its sub-items
(a) to (z) at its 48th plenary meeting, on 21 November
2016.
I now give the floor to the representative of the
Netherlands to introduce draft resolution A/71/L.46.
Mr. Van Oosterom (Netherlands): I have the
honour to introduce draft resolution A/71/L.46,
entitled “Cooperation between the United Nations

A/71/PV.67

and the Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical
Weapons”. The Netherlands, which is host country
to the Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical
Weapons (OPCW), is introducing the draft resolution
on behalf of approximately 40 sponsors.
The aim of the biennial resolution is to highlight
the importance of continued cooperation between the
United Nations and the OPCW. The OPCW contributes
to international peace and security by verifying
the destruction of chemical-weapon stockpiles; by
working, through industry inspections, to prevent
the re-emergence of chemical weapons; and by
promoting the peaceful use of chemistry for activities
not prohibited by the Chemical Weapons Convention,
through international cooperation and assistance,
among other things.
At present, the OPCW’s member States represent
about 98 per cent of the world’s population and land
mass and 98 per cent of its chemical industry. The
OPCW Technical Secretariat, together with States
parties, will continue to work to achieve its full
universality. Today’s draft resolution is an update of
resolution 69/14, of 11 November 2014, and reflects
factual developments since then.
Although a vote has been requested, it is still
our hope that the draft resolution can be adopted
unanimously. We firmly believe that the draft before
us is factual and represents a balanced reflection of the
various views of Member States. We therefore invite
delegations to support the draft resolution in a spirit of
compromise and cooperation.
The Acting President: We will now proceed to
consider draft resolution A/71/L.46.
I give the
the Secretariat.

floor

to

the

representative

of

Mr. Nakano (Department for General Assembly
and Conference Management): I would like to announce
that since the submission of draft resolution A/71/L.46,
in addition to those delegations listed in the document,
the following countries have become sponsors of
the draft resolution: Andorra, Georgia, Iceland,
Liechtenstein, Malta, Montenegro, New Zealand, the
Republic of Korea, Romania, San Marino, Switzerland,
the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, the United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland and the
United States of America.

16-458585/11

A/71/PV.67

The Acting President: The Assembly will
now take a decision on draft resolution A/71/L.46,
entitled “Cooperation between the United Nations
and the Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical
Weapons”. A recorded vote has been requested. A
separate, recorded vote has been requested on operative
paragraph 4. If there is no objection to that request, I
shall put operative paragraph 4 of draft resolution
A/71/L.46 to the vote.
A recorded vote was taken.
In favour:
Albania, Andorra, Argentina, Australia, Austria,
Azerbaijan, Bahamas, Bahrain, Bangladesh,
Barbados, Belarus, Belgium, Bhutan, Bosnia
and Herzegovina, Brazil, Brunei Darussalam,
Bulgaria, Cambodia, Canada, Chile, Colombia,
Costa Rica, Côte d’Ivoire, Croatia, Cyprus,
Czech Republic, Denmark, Djibouti, Dominica,
Dominican Republic, Egypt, El Salvador, Estonia,
Fiji, Finland, France, Georgia, Germany, Ghana,
Greece, Guatemala, Honduras, Hungary, Iceland,
India, Indonesia, Ireland, Israel, Italy, Jamaica,
Japan, Jordan, Kenya, Kiribati, Kuwait, Lao
People’s Democratic Republic, Latvia, Lesotho,
Libya, Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg,
Malaysia, Maldives, Mali, Malta, Marshall
Islands, Mexico, Micronesia (Federated States
of), Monaco, Montenegro, Morocco, Mozambique,
Myanmar, Namibia, Nepal, Netherlands, Oman,
Palau, Panama, Papua New Guinea, Paraguay,
Peru, Poland, Portugal, Qatar, Republic of Korea,
Republic of Moldova, Romania, Samoa, San
Marino, Senegal, Serbia, Sierra Leone, Singapore,
Slovakia, Slovenia, South Africa, Spain, Sri
Lanka, Sweden, Switzerland, Thailand, the former
Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Togo, Tunisia,
Turkey, Ukraine, United Kingdom of Great Britain
and Northern Ireland, United Republic of Tanzania,
United States of America, Uruguay, Viet Nam
Against:
Saudi Arabia, United Arab Emirates
Abstaining:
Algeria, China, Cuba, Ecuador, Iran (Islamic
Republic of), Iraq, Kazakhstan, Lebanon,
Mauritius, Nicaragua, Nigeria, Philippines, Russian
Federation, South Sudan, Sudan, Suriname, Syrian
Arab Republic, Tajikistan, Venezuela (Bolivarian
Republic of)
6/11

22/12/2016

Operative paragraph 4 was retained by 113 votes
to 2, with 19 abstentions.
[Subsequently, the delegations of Saudi Arabia and
the United Arab Emirates informed the Secretariat
that they had intended to vote in favour.]
The Acting President: I shall now put to the vote
draft resolution A/71/L.46 as a whole.
A recorded vote was taken.
In favour:
Albania, Algeria, Andorra, Argentina, Armenia,
Australia, Austria, Azerbaijan, Bahamas, Bahrain,
Bangladesh,
Barbados,
Belarus,
Belgium,
Bhutan, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Brazil, Brunei
Darussalam, Bulgaria, Burundi, Cambodia, Canada,
Chile, China, Colombia, Costa Rica, Côte d’Ivoire,
Croatia, Cuba, Cyprus, Czech Republic, Denmark,
Djibouti, Dominica, Dominican Republic, Ecuador,
Egypt, El Salvador, Eritrea, Estonia, Ethiopia, Fiji,
Finland, France, Georgia, Germany, Ghana, Greece,
Guatemala, Honduras, Hungary, Iceland, India,
Indonesia, Iran (Islamic Republic of), Iraq, Ireland,
Israel, Italy, Jamaica, Japan, Jordan, Kazakhstan,
Kenya, Kiribati, Kuwait, Kyrgyzstan, Lao People’s
Democratic Republic, Latvia, Lebanon, Lesotho,
Libya, Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg,
Malaysia, Maldives, Mali, Malta, Marshall Islands,
Mauritius, Mexico, Micronesia (Federated States
of), Monaco, Mongolia, Montenegro, Morocco,
Mozambique,
Myanmar,
Namibia,
Nepal,
Netherlands, Nicaragua, Nigeria, Oman, Pakistan,
Palau, Panama, Papua New Guinea, Paraguay, Peru,
Philippines, Poland, Portugal, Qatar, Republic of
Korea, Republic of Moldova, Romania, Russian
Federation, Samoa, San Marino, Saudi Arabia,
Senegal, Serbia, Sierra Leone, Singapore, Slovakia,
Slovenia, South Africa, South Sudan, Spain, Sri
Lanka, Sudan, Suriname, Sweden, Switzerland,
Syrian Arab Republic, Tajikistan, Thailand, the
former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, TimorLeste, Togo, Tunisia, Turkey, Tuvalu, Ukraine,
United Arab Emirates, United Kingdom of Great
Britain and Northern Ireland, United Republic
of Tanzania, United States of America, Uruguay,
Uzbekistan, Vanuatu, Venezuela (Bolivarian
Republic of), Viet Nam
Against:
None
16-45858

22/12/2016

Abstaining:
None
Draft resolution A/71/L.46, as a whole, was
adopted by 145 votes to none, with no abstentions
(resolution 71/250).
The Acting President: Before giving the floor to
those representatives who wish to speak in explanation
of vote on the resolution just adopted, I would like to
remind them that explanations of vote are limited to
10 minutes and should be made by delegations from
their seats.
Mr. Rivero Rosario (Cuba) (spoke in Spanish):
Cuba would like to explain its vote on resolution 71/250,
entitled “Cooperation between the United Nations
and the Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical
Weapons”.
As a State party to the Chemical Weapons
Convention, we support continued and effective
cooperation between the United Nations and the
Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons
(OPCW). The retention of the practice of adopting the
resolution by consensus is beneficial to the existing
cooperative relationship between the two organizations
and will help to restore States’ traditional unity
regarding its text and avoid any attempt to provoke
confrontation and politicization rather than the spirit of
cooperation and support that our Organization brings
to the OPCW. It is not productive, in our view, for the
resolution to include references to Security Council
resolutions or to a particular State. In future we should
strive to preserve this resolution’s purpose and nature.
Mr. Luque Márquez (Ecuador) (spoke in Spanish):
Ecuador, as a State party to the Chemical Weapons
Convention, strongly supports cooperation between the
United Nations and the Organization for the Prohibition
of Chemical Weapons (OPCW), with due respect for
their different areas of competency and the OPCW’s
highly technical nature. For that reason, the delegation
of Ecuador voted in favour of resolution 71/250 as a
whole. However, we abstained in the voting on the
resolution’s paragraph 4 as an expression of our wish
that more flexibility had been shown in drafting it,
opposing as it did a request by another delegation during
the consultations that seemed entirely reasonable to
us, and that did not affect the paragraph’s content.
Including that flexibility in the draft text would very

A/71/PV.67

likely have ensured that we could have adopted the
resolution without having to have a vote.
Ecuador reiterates its regret that contentious
wording is now being inserted into draft resolutions
that are related to universal instruments and that were
traditionally adopted by consensus. Doing so changes
procedural resolutions into political resolutions, which
does not make it possible to adopt them without having
to resort to votes. That is not the way to preserve
consensus. It is necessary to return to language that
reflects all of our views.
Mr. Denktaş (Turkey): Turkey attaches the
utmost importance to the work of the Organization
for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons (OPCW) and
the cooperation between it and the United Nations.
The most recent, relevant — and perhaps the most
substantial — mechanism for cooperation between
the two organizations is the Organization for the
Prohibition of Chemical Weapons-United Nations
Joint Investigative Mechanism. The Mechanism, which
was established to investigate allegations of the use of
chemical weapons in Syria, found that Syrian armed
forces were responsible for the use of such weapons
in three cases; Da’esh was found to be responsible for
their use in one case. The third (S/2013/774, annex) and
fourth (S/2014/52, annex) reports of the Mechanism
include detailed descriptions of how these attacks were
perpetrated.
At the informal consultations on resolution 71/250,
we demanded that a brief description of the mandate of
the Mechanism and a reference to the aforementioned
third and fourth reports be added to the text. The
resolution includes no such description or reference. In
our view, therefore, it does not adequately or accurately
reflect the facts on the ground. Nevertheless, we voted
in favour both on paragraph 4 and on the resolution as
a whole, as a reflection of the importance we attach
to United Nations-OPCW cooperation. However, at
this stage, we wish to put on record our expectation
of a more satisfactory text next time. We also wish
to reiterate our expectation that those responsible for
these crimes be held accountable.
Mr. Sergeev (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): Despite the fact that Security Council
resolution 2209 (2015) was adopted by consensus,
we do not consider the reference to it in resolution
71/250 to be entirely appropriate. Unlike resolution
2235 (2015), resolution 2209 (2015) is not directly

16-458587/11

A/71/PV.67

related to cooperation between the Organization
on the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons and the
United Nations. Moreover, far from being limited to
only the topic of Syria, cooperation between the two
international organizations is multifaceted in nature.
The reference in paragraph 3 to the Joint Investigative
Mechanism renders the inclusion of paragraph 4
unnecessary, as some States — due to their geopolitical
interests — might wish to politicize everything linked
to Syria. The chemical demilitarization process in
Syria has been successfully concluded as a result of the
political will of Damascus and the support of the entire
international community. Conspiracy theories in that
regard are out of place.
Mr. Hallak (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in
Arabic): The Syrian Arab Republic is a member of the
Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons
(OPCW) and has been a consistent participant in its
meetings and debates. Since acceding to the Convention
on the Prohibition of the Development, Production,
Stockpiling and Use of Chemical Weapons and on
Their Destruction (CWC), we have complied regularly
with the conditions of accession and immediately
implemented the decisions of the Executive Council.
We have also cooperated constructively in every
possible manner with the OPCW and United Nations
experts, garnering the praise of both organizations and
international public opinion.
The Government of the Syrian Arab Republic
condemns any use of weapons of mass destruction and
chemical weapons, whenever and wherever it takes
place. We are of the view that such use is unacceptable,
immoral and reprehensible. For that reason, we have
ceaselessly sought to establish a Middle East free of
all weapons of mass destruction, in particular nuclear
weapons. In a demonstration of our commitment to
that goal, we denounced the use of chemical weapons
and adhered to the CWC. During our time as a
non-permanent member of the Security Council in
2003, we also submitted a draft resolution to establish
a Middle East free of weapons of mass destruction and
nuclear weapons. The draft, however, was met with a
veto from a permanent member of the Security Council
in order to protect the weapons of mass destruction and
the nuclear weapons held by Israel.
The text of resolution 71/250 is of a purely routine,
technical and procedural nature and has always enjoyed
consensus. However, the decision of some States to
politicize the text since 2014 means that it is must
8/11

22/12/2016

now always be put to a vote. We are constantly facing
new attempts to politicize standard procedural draft
resolutions through the introduction of controversial
issues. We would ask the following question: is the
goal of those States to adopt a draft resolution by vote
instead of by consensus? It is clear that some States are
conflating different issues, in particular technical and
political ones.
Some States attempt to politicize this resolution in
a hysterical manner in order to have it target specific
States, focusing in a selective manner on Syria. This is
inappropriate because Syria is party to the CWC and
the OPCW. This selective policy and these insidious
allegations, which target some Middle Eastern
States, are a farce. Those who claim to be interested
in the security and the stability of the people of the
region should prove their credibility by opposing the
systematic violations by Israel of international law and
the Charter of the United Nations.
My delegation and other delegations have always
striven to achieve a balanced resolution that enjoys
consensus support and that reflects the positive trend
of seeking to eliminate chemical weapons in Syria, but
the authors of this resolution refused to listen to our
concerns, instead preferring to politicize the resolution.
The authors should have condemned the development,
manufacture and use of chemical weapons by armed
terrorist groups, especially given that some States are
providing unfailing support to such groups to produce
such weapons. That is the real threat to the future
of humankind.
The draft resolutions on cooperation between the
United Nations and other international organizations
have never referred to any State. Why is the Syrian
Arab Republic targeted in this resolution, in particular
given Syria’s achievement, which was unprecedented in
the history of the OPCW and facilitated by the Syrian
Government? Those States should have thanked the
Syrian Government for its cooperation. We reiterate our
request that attempts to politicize this matter cease. We
abstained in the voting on paragraph 4 of the resolution
for the reasons just expressed.
Regarding the explanation of vote made by the
representative of Turkey, it is now well known that
Turkey sponsored the transport of sarin gas into its
territory, in violation of Security Council resolutions.
Nuclear weapons were tested on animals in the Turkish
city of Gaziantep. We would ask the representative
16-45858

22/12/2016

of Turkey to deny the veracity of those allegations,
particularly since 12 terrorists in possession of sarin
gas were arrested in Turkey before being released.
The reports of the technical commissions
responsible for combating terrorism should document
the complicity of Turkish authorities, which contribute
to the transport of chemical weapons into Syria.
Everyone knows that Turkey supports terrorist
groups by providing them with conventional and
non-conventional weapons. In July and August, Turkey
facilitated the transfer of 14 tons of toxic substances
from that country, including yellow phosphorus. The
Turkish Government was involved in several incidents
relating to the use of chemical weapons in my country.
Mr. Robatjazi (Islamic Republic of Iran): It
was our wish that resolution 71/250, on cooperation
between the United Nations and the Organization for
the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons, could have been
adopted without a vote. Unfortunately, this was not
possible because the sponsors of the resolution did not
take on board the views of all concerned delegations in
an inclusive manner. Although my delegation supported
the resolution as a whole, it abstained in the voting
on paragraph 4 because that paragraph takes note of
a Security Council document that is not related to the
subject matter of the resolution. It is unfortunate that that
unacceptable and clearly politically motivated reference
was included in the text despite the reservations and
objections expressed by some delegations. We urge the
sponsors of the resolution to note its technical nature
and to refrain from politicizing it.
Ms. Chan Shum (Bolivarian Republic of
Venezuela) (spoke in Spanish): The Bolivarian Republic
of Venezuela would like to speak in explanation of vote
after the voting on resolution 71/250, on cooperation
between the United Nations and the Organization for
the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons (OPCW).
Venezuela, as a State party to the Convention
on the Prohibition of the Development, Production,
Stockpiling and Use of Chemical Weapons and on Their
Destruction (CWC), reiterates its strong condemnation
of the use of chemical weapons in any circumstance.
That notwithstanding, our delegation decided to abstain
in the voting on paragraph 4 because, as our delegation
expressed during the adoption on 6 March 2015 of
Security Council resolution 2209 (2015), on chemical
weapons in Syria, that resolution prejudices the results
of the investigation undertaken by the OPCW in

A/71/PV.67

conjunction with the United Nations. Accordingly, we
think it is necessary that the investigation be concluded
in order to determine who is responsible for the
commission of those acts, which would make it possible
to determine whether the alleged violations of the CWC
were committed.
In addition, we would also like to stress that our
delegation commends and fully supports cooperation
between the United Nations and the OPCW. However,
we believe that the full implementation of the provisions
of the CWC requires the active participation of all States
parties and the cooperation of the relevant international
organizations. For those reasons, we voted in favour of
the resolution as a whole.
The Acting President: May I take it that it is
the wish of the General Assembly to conclude its
consideration of sub-item (n) of agenda item 126?
It was so decided.
The Acting President: Two delegations have asked
to speak in exercise of the right of reply. May I remind
them that statements made in exercise of the right of
reply are limited to 10 minutes for the first intervention
and to five minutes for the second intervention, and
should be made by delegations from their seats.
Mr. Musayev (Azerbaijan): First of all, I would like
to thank the delegations of Pakistan and the Philippines
and co-facilitators for their dedicated efforts and skilful
steering of the negotiations on resolution 71/249, on the
promotion of interreligious and intercultural dialogue,
understanding and cooperation for peace. We are also
grateful for the strong support of Member States for the
outcomes of the Seventh Global Forum of the United
Nations Alliance of Civilizations, held in Baku earlier
this year.
The Baku Forum, attended by more than 4,000
representatives of 147 countries, including Heads of
State and Government, ministers and other high-level
officials, as well as representatives of international
and civil-society organizations, has definitely achieved
its main objective of highlighting the role of the allies
of civilizations as a global platform for sharing best
practices for living together in inclusive societies and
for developing solutions to challenges.
There is nothing surprising in the unsuccessful and
senseless attempts of Armenia to challenge the Seventh
Global Forum of the United Nations Alliance of
Civilizations, held in Azerbaijan, and its outcomes. We

16-458589/11

A/71/PV.67

hope that Armenia will draw lessons from the results
of the vote on its initiative that has just taken place.
In reality, the ideals and principles of the Alliance
of Civilizations, such as notions of intercultural and
interreligious dialogue and the culture of peace, are
alien to Armenia. Otherwise, it would not have become
a mono-ethnic State by expelling all non-Armenians.
Armenia has applied the same policy and practice of
creating ethnically cleansed areas to the occupied
territories of Azerbaijan.
According to the representative of Armenia, the
April escalation along the front line prevented his
country from participating in the Seventh Global
Forum of the United Nations Alliance of Civilizations.
However, he omitted to add that the April escalation was
a direct result of Armenia’s policy of aggression against
Azerbaijan. In reality, in the early hours of 2 April, the
armed forces of Armenia stepped up fighting from
their positions in the occupied territories, subjecting
the armed forces of Azerbaijan, along the front line and
the adjacent densely populated areas under the control
of Azerbaijan, to intense fire with heavy artillery and
large-calibre weapons.
As a result of Armenia’s attacks and subsequent
hostilities, 34 towns and villages along the front line
were shelled, causing casualties among civilians and
the servicemen of the armed forces of Azerbaijan, as
well as either destroying or substantially damaging
private and public property, including residences,
schools and kindergartens. The actions of Armenia and
the statement made by the delegation of that country
once again demonstrated that instead of being a partner
in peace, it has chosen the path of war.
Mr. Samvelian (Armenia): It was not my intention
to exercise the right of reply, but the representative of
Azerbaijan has given me no other choice. To ensure that
I remain on topic, I shall just read out the statement
made by the Armenian Foreign Ministry in relation
to the Seventh Global Forum of the United Nations
Alliance of Civilizations on 20 April.
“In the early hours of 2 April, Azerbaijan
unleashed a large-scale offensive operation
against Nagorno Karabakh, thus violating the
1994 trilateral ceasefire agreements and the 1995
ceasefire consolidation signed by Azerbaijan,
Nagorno Karabakh and Armenia, which do not
have time limits. Azerbaijan has violated the
basic principles of international law, the decision
10/11

22/12/2016

and declaration adopted by the Organization for
Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE) summit
and ministerial councils, blatantly disregarding the
statements of the President of the OSCE Minsk
Group co-Chairs countries, the Russian Federation,
the United States of America and France on the
Nagorno Karabakh conflict resolution.
“From
the
very
beginning,
civilian
infrastructure and civilian population, including
children and the elderly, became Azerbaijan’s
intentional and indiscriminate targets. Among the
first civilian victims was a 12-year-old boy who
was killed in front of the school building following
a grave missile attack, and two other schoolchildren
were wounded. In one Karabakh village, three
elderly people, including a 92-year-old woman,
were brutally tortured, mutilated and killed. In
addition, three captured soldiers from the Nagorno
Karabakh armed forces were beheaded Islamic
State-style by Azerbaijani forces, an event that was
subsequently celebrated in towns and villages and
publicized on social networks. Furthermore, during
an exchange between Nagorno Karabakh and
Azerbaijan of the bodies of the deceased, carried
out through the mediation of the International
Committee of the Red Cross and the Office of the
Personal Representative of the Chairman in Office
of the Organization for Islamic Cooperation, it
was noted that the bodies transferred from the
Azerbaijani side showed evidence of severe torture
and mutilation.
“Those
barbaric
acts
committed
by
Azerbaijan, which go beyond the basic norms
of civilized behaviour, are violations of core
international instruments, including the Universal
Declaration of Human Rights, the International
Covenant on Civil and Political Rights and other
documents, including the 1949 and 1977 Geneva
Conventions. Azerbaijan continues to demonstrate
its total disregard of international human rights
and humanitarian law. The persistent violations of
human rights inside Azerbaijan include its attacks
on and imprisonment of representatives of civil
society, the media and human rights defenders.
Along with its regular efforts to sow intolerance
and hatred against Armenia, it provides a breeding
ground for the Azerbaijani regime’s criminal
military adventurists.
16-45858

22/12/2016

“As participants were gathering to attend
the Seventh Global Forum of the United Nations
Alliance of Civilizations, Azerbaijan’s armed forces
continued to violate the ceasefire, resulting in more
loss of life. Since the Azerbaijani aggression began,
it has resulted in death and injury for hundreds,
including civilians. It shows the absurdity of
celebrating a more peaceful and socially inclusive
world and building mutual respect among peoples
of different cultures and religious identities, in a
country that has engaged in barbarity and murder
only a few hundred metres from the Forum’s venue.
It is an affront to the image and integrity of the
Alliance. In the circumstances, the convening in
Azerbaijan — a country that grossly violates the
very aims, principles and values of the Alliance
of Civilizations — of the Forum should have been
cancelled. Armenia remains a friend of the Alliance
and committed to its purposes. However, given
the circumstances, Armenia did not join in the
consensus on the Declaration of the Seventh Global
Forum of the Alliance of Civilizations, and in the
absence of a consensus, the Declaration cannot be
adopted. Armenia rejects the Forum held in Baku
in its entirety, including its outcome.”
The Acting President: I give the floor to the
representative of Azerbaijan.
Mr. Musayev (Azerbaijan): The remarks we just
heard from the representative of Armenia are full of
falsifications, distortions and misinterpretations, and
demonstrate how far Armenia is from engaging in a
constructive quest for peace in our region. In reality,
Armenia was preparing for an offensive long before
April of this year, and was doing groundwork aimed
at covering up its provocative actions. There is a great
deal of evidence testifying to those preparations that
we will readily share with all interested delegations.
The allegations that, during the escalation in April,
Azerbaijan targeted civilians and civilian settlements
are groundless and represent yet another attempt to
divert the international community’s attention from
the atrocities and other war crimes committed by the
armed forces of Armenia during the conflict. As is well
known, on 10 April the International Committee of
the Red Cross facilitated a handover between the sides
of the bodies of those killed in action following the
escalation. A medical examination performed thereafter

A/71/PV.67

noted numerous signs of post-mortem mutilation of the
bodies of Azerbaijani servicemen.
The comments made by the representative of
Armenia about human rights and democracy in
Azerbaijan do not stand up to criticism. With a wealth
of experience and skill in carrying out bloody reprisals
against the peaceful Azerbaijani population during the
conflict, on more than one occasion Armenia’s most
senior leaders have resorted to the cruellest possible
methods of dealing with political opponents in their
own country, and more than enough facts exist to prove
that. Rather than commenting on human rights in other
countries, the Government of Armenia should carry
out some degree of self-evaluation, acknowledge the
violent methods for suppressing political opponents
that have been used in its own country and heed the
statements of the relevant United Nations bodies and
other international organizations expressing serious
concern about the spirit of intolerance that prevails in
Armenia and its discriminatory policies and practices
against ethnic and religious minorities, refugees and
asylum-seekers, and women and children.
I am confident that the international community
would be more interested in hearing from the
delegation of Armenia about the real problems that the
country is facing in the socioeconomic area and the
significant decline in major sectors of its economy in
recent years. In reality, by disregarding the resolutions
of the Security Council and the General Assembly,
continuing to unlawfully occupy Azerbaijan’s territory,
deliberately denying the right of more than a million
Azerbaijani refugees and internally displaced persons
to return to their homes, pursuing racist ideologies and
misinterpreting fundamental norms and principles of
international law, Armenia clearly demonstrates who
is actually responsible for undermining regional peace,
security and stability.
The Acting President: I give the floor to the
representative of Armenia.
Mr. Samvelian (Armenia): I will be brief. Armenia
is well prepared for reflection on the meaningless
accusation that was just made against it, but for the sake
of the efficient conduct today of the General Assembly
plenary, which has a completely different purpose, I
will limit myself to the statement I made earlier.
The meeting rose at 11.30 a.m.

16-4585811/11
