VI.

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

10. Appeals to ali States, United Nations organs, the
specialized agencies and international and national nongovernmental organizations to step up their activities in
enhancing public awareness by denouncing the crimes
committed by the racist régime of South Africa;
11. Requests the Secretary-General to intensify his efforts, through appropriate channels, to disseminate information on the Convention and its implementation with a
view to promoting further ratification of or accession to
the Convention;
12. Requests the Secretary-General to include in his
next annual report under General Assembly resolution
3380 (XXX) of 10 November 1975 a special section concerning the implementation of the Convention.
85th plenary meeting
30 November 1987

42/57.

Report of the Committee on the Elimination of
Racial Discrimination

The General Assembly,
Recalling its previous resolutions concerning the reports
of the Committee on the Elimination of Racial Discrimination and resolution 41/104 of 4 December 1986 on the
status of the International Convention on the Elimination
of Ali Forms ofRacial Discrimination, 2 as well as its other
relevant resolutions on the implementation of the Programme of Action for the Second Decade to Combat Racism and Racial Discrimination, 30
Reiterating the importance of the Convention, which is
the most widely accepted human rights instrument
adopted under the auspices ofthe United Nations, as well
as ofthe contribution ofthe Committee to United Nations
efforts to combat racism and ali other forms of discrimination based on race, colour, descent or national or ethnic
origin,
Welcoming the report of the Committee covering its
1986 and 1987 sessions,31
Reiterating once again the need to intensify the struggle
for the elimination of racism and racial discrimination
throughout the world, especially the elimination of apartheid in South Africa and Namibia,
Mindful of the obligation of ali States parties to comply
fully with the provisions of the Convention,
Recalling the urgent appeals made by the SecretaryGeneral, the General Assembly, the eleventh meeting of
States parties to the Convention and the Committee itself
to the States parties to honour their financia) obligation
under the Convention,
Grave/y concerned that, in spite of ali the urgent appeals
for payment of assessed contributions under the Convention, the situation impeding the proper functioning of the
Committee continues to deteriorate,
Having considered the report of the Secretary-General
on the question of financing the expenses of the members
of the Committee on the Elimination of Racial Discrimination, 32
l. Expresses its profound concern at the fact that a
number of States parties to the lnternational Convention
on the Elimination of Ali Forms of Racial Discrimination
have not fulfilled their financia! obligations under the Con-

185

vention, which led to the cancellation of the August 1986
session and the curtailment by two weeks of the August
1987 session of the Committee on the Elimination of Racial Discrimination;
2. Expresses once again its concern that such a situation prevented the Committee from submitting an annual
report to the General Assembly at its forty-first session as
required by the Convention and led to further delay in discharging its substantive obligations under the Convention;
3. Commends the Committee for its work with regard
to the implementation of the Convention and the Programme of Action for the Second Decade to Combat Racism and Racial Discrimination;
4. Takes note with appreciation of the report of the
Committee covering its 1986 and 1987 sessions;
5. Calls upon States parties to fulfil their obligations
under article 9, paragraph l, ofthe Convention and to submit in due time their periodic reports on measures taken to
implement the Convention;
6. Strongly appeals to ali States parties to fulfil without
delay their financia) obligations under article 8, paragraph
6, of the Convention so as to enable the Committee to continue its work;
7. Calls upon States parties to explore, at their next
meeting on 15 January 1988, ali appropriate avenues and
to take a decision that would enable the Committee to
meet regularly in the future;
8. Invites the States parties to consider, pending a fully
satisfactory solution to the current financial difficulties,
the possibility, asan exceptional measure, ofthe Committee holding one extended session per year;
9. Requests the Secretary-General to report to the
General Assembly at its forty-third session on the financia) situation of the Committee;
10. Decides to consider the report at its forty-third session under the ítem entitled "Elimination of ali forms of
racial discrimination".
85th plenary meeting
30 November 1987

42/58.

lmplementation of the World Programme of Action concerning Disabled Persons and United
Nations Decade of Disabled Persons

The General Assembly,
Recalling ali its pertinent resolutions, including resolution 37/52 of 3 December 1982, by which it adopted the
World Programme of Action concerning Disabled Persons, 33 and resolution 37 /53 of 3 December 1982, by
which it, inter alia, proclaimed the period 1983-1992 the
United Nations Decade of Disabled Persons,
Recalling its resolution 41/106 of 4 December 1986 and
reaffirming ali of its provisions,
Taking note of Economic and Social Council resolution
1987 /43 of 28 May 1987, in which the Council, inter alia,
requested the Secretary-General to make ali appropriate
efforts to mobilize international support and action for the
Decade,
Further taking note of the Guiding Principies for Developmental Social Welfare Policies and Programmes in the
Near Future, 21 adopted by the Interregional Consultation

30 Resolution 38/14.
31 Officia/ Records of the General Assembly, Forty-second Session,
Suf¡Iement No. 18 (A/42/18).
A/42/468 and Corr.1 and Add. l.

13 A/37/351/ Add. l
and
recommendation l (IV).

Add.1/Corr.1,

annex,

sect. VIII,

186

General Assembly-Forty-second Session

on Developmental Social Welfare Policies and Programmes, held at Vienna from 7 to 15 September 1987,
Bearing in mind that 1987 marks the mid-point of the
United Nations Decade of Disabled Persons and that, in
the review being conducted on the implementation of the
World Programme of Action, the most important criteria
for evaluation are suggested by the theme of the International Year of Disabled Persons, "Full participation and
equality",
Noting with satisfaction the concrete measures already
carried out by the Governments of Member States, the
bodies and organizations of the United Nations system
and non-governmental organizations to implement the objectives of the World Programme of Action within the
framework ofthe United Nations Decade ofDisabled Persons,
Noting the important work currently being effected by
the Sub-Commission on Prevention ofDiscrimination and
Protection of Minorities on human rights and disability,
which could serve as a useful basis for the continued efforts to ensure for disabled persons the enjoyment of human rights and fundamental freedoms,
Noting with appreciation the steps taken by the United
Nations system and by non-governmental organizations
concerned to monitor the implementation of the World
Programme of Action,
Reiterating the need for greater publicity to revitalize
the United Nations Decade of Disabled Persons,
Recognizing the pivotal role of the United Nations in
promoting the exchange of information, experience and
expertise and closer regional and interregional cooperation towards more effective strategies and policies to
advance the status and welfare of disabled persons,
Stressing that the Centre for Social Development and
Humanitarian Affairs of the Secretariat is the focal point
within the United Nations for the implementation and
monitoring of the World Programme of Action,
Concerned that, at the mid-point of the Decade, the resource base ofthe Voluntary Fund for the United Nations
Decade of Disabled Persons is significantly reduced from
that prevailing during the first half of the Decade, and that
unless this trend is reversed, the resources of the Fund will
be depleted and operational activities will lapse well before
the end of the Decade in 1992,
Mindful that, since developing countries are experiencing difficulties in mobilizing resources, international cooperation should be encouraged to assist in national efforts
to implement the World Programme of Action and to
achieve the objectives of the United Nations Decade of
Disabled Persons,
Taking note with appreciation of the report of the Secretary-General on the implementation of the World Programme of Action concerning Disabled Persons and the
United Nations Decade of Disabled Persons,34
Also taking note with appreciation of the report of the
Secretary-General on the evaluation of the implementation of the World Programme of Action concerning Disabled Persons during the first half of the United Nations
Decade of Disabled Persons, 35
l. Reaffirms the validity of the World Programme of
Action concerning Disabled Persons and urges Member
States to rededicate themselves to its early and effective
implementation;

34 A/42/551.
35 A/42/561.

2. Invites those Member States that have not done so
to establish national committees in consultation with disabled persons and their organizations as focal points for the
United Nations Decade of Disabled Persons;
3. Once again invites Member States to reinforce national committees as focal points for the United Nations
Decade of Disabled Persons, to stimulate activities at the
national level, to mobilize public opinion on behalf of the
Decade, to participate in the implementation of disability
projects with regard to the International Year of Disabled
Persons and to assist in monitoring and evaluating the implementation of the World Programme of Action during
the second half of the Decade;
4. Requests the Secretary-General to consider convening during the second half of the Decade, within existing
resources, an interregional meeting of representatives of
national committees for disabled persons with a view to
enhancing the capabilities of such committees through an
exchange of views and information;
5. Invites Member States to incorporate in their national development plans and strategies projects to assist
disabled persons and to include such projects in the country programmes ofthe United Nations Development Programme;

6. Renews its invitation to all States to give high priority to projects concerning the prevention of disabilities,
rehabilitation and the equalization of opportunities for
disabled persons within the framework of bilateral assistance;
7. Requests the Secretary-General to encourage all organs and bodies of the United Nations system, including
regional commissions, international organizations and the
specialized agencies, to take into consideration the specific
needs of disabled persons when elaborating their programmes and operational activities;
8. Invites the Secretary-General and Member States to
encourage real involvement of disabled persons in United
Nations programmes and activities, ínter afia, through the
provision of employment opportunities;
9. Requests the Secretary-General to consider, within
existing resources, alternative structures so as to ensure
that the issue of disability is accorded high visibility and to
develop the Disabled Persons Unit ofthe Centre for Social
Development and Humanitarian Affairs as a specialized
facilitating agent engaging the available resources of the
United Nations system and relevant networks outside the
United Nations;
10. Invites the Centre to expand its close collaboration
with non-governmental organizations and to consult with
them on a regular and systematic basis on matters relating
to the implementation of the World Programme of Action;
11. Calls upon Member States, national committees,
the United Nations system and non-governmental organizations to assist in a global information campaign to publicize the Decade through ali appropriate means;
12. Recognizes the important role of nongovernmental organizations, especially those representing
disabled persons, in the effective implementation of the
World Programme of Action, in raising international
awareness of the concerns of disabled persons and in
monitoring and evaluating progress achieved during the
Decade;
13. Requests the Secretary-General to continue to administer donated funds, using them for projects under the
present structure of the Voluntary Fund for the United
Nations Decade of Disabled Persons, and, in addition, to

VI.

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

continue to make new provisions in order to otfer a selection of projects to donor countries that may be willing to
finance a particular programme under the "Special Purpose Contributions";
14. Reaffirms that the resources of the Voluntary
Fund should be used to support catalytic and innovative
activities in order to implement further the objectives of
the World Programme of Action within the framework of
the United Nations Decade of Disabled Persons, with priority given, as appropriate, to programmes and projects of
the least developed countries;
15. Invites Governments and non-governmental organizations to continue their contributions to the Voluntary
Fund, and calls upon Governments and nongovernmental organizations that have not yet done so to
consider contributing to the Fund so as to enable it to respond effectively to the growing demand for assistance;
16. Expresses its appreciation to the Government of
Sweden for having acted as host to the Global Meeting of
Experts to Review the Implementation ofthe World Programme of Action concerning Disabled Persons at the
Mid-Point ofthe United Nations Decade ofDisabled Persons, held at Stockholm from 17 to 22 August 1987, and to
the experts who participated;
17. Requests Member States and all relevant organs
and bodies of the United Nations system to submit to the
Secretary-General their comments on the recommendations outlined in paragraphs 10 to 39 of the report of the
Global Meeting of Experts, 36 as well as on the report of
the Secretary-General on the evaluation of the implementation of the World Programme of Action concerning
Disabled Persons during the first half of the United Nations Decade of Disabled Persons35 and requests the Secretary-General to submit a report thereon to the Economic and Social Council at its first regular session of
1988;
18. Requests the Secretary-General to report to the
General Assembly at its forty-third session on the implementation of the present resolution;
19. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its
forty-third session the item entitled "Implementation of
the World Programme of Action concerning Disabled
Persons and the United Nations Decade of Disabled Persons".
85th plenary meeting
30 November 1987

42/59.

Crime prevention and criminal justice

The General Assembly,
Recalling the responsibility assumed by the United Nations in the field of crime prevention and criminal justice
under Economic and Social Council resolution
155 (C) (VII) of 13 August 1948 and General Assembly
res?lution 415 (V) of 1 December 1950, the importance of
wh1ch was reaffirmed by the Assembly in its resolution
41/107 of 4 December 1986,
Bearing in mind the objectives ofthe United Nations in
the field of crime prevention and criminal justice, inter afia, the reduction of criminality, encouragement of
more efficient and effective administration of justice, observance of ali human rights and promotion of the highest
standards of fairness, humanity and professional conduct,

36 See CSDHA/DDP/GME/7 of I September 1987.

187

Recognizing the crucial functions of the Committee on
Crime Prevention and Control in developing practical
crime prevention and criminal justice policies and strategies as a standing expert body of the Economic and Social
Council and as a preparatory body for the quinquennial
United Nations congresses on the prevention of crime and
the treatment of offenders,
Noting with concern that the significant increase in the
work-load of the Crime Prevention and Criminal Justice
Branch of the Centre for Social Development and
Humanitarian Atfairs ofthe Secretariat, particularly in relation to the follow-up to the Seventh United Nations
Congress on the Prevention of Crime and the Treatment
of Offenders, has not been matched by corresponding adjustments in the level of resources needed to discharge this
work-load and to implement properly the additional work
mandated by the policy-making bodies,
Acknowledging that the serious constraints on the human and financia! resources available to the Secretariat for
work in the field of crime prevention and criminal justice
may jeopardize the progress achieved to date, as well as future activities,
Reaffirming that the quinquennial congresses on the
prevention of crime and the treatment of offenders are of
fundamental importance to progress in the field of crime
prevention and criminal justice and provide unique opportunities for focusing on specific priority problems, as well
as for assessing general trends and sharing perspectives,
establishing norms and standards and evaluating their implementation, monitoring the results of the United Nations programme ofwork as a whole and setting priorities
for action in the following quinquennium,
Recognizing the pivota! role of the United Nations,
through its programme activities and congresses on the
prevention of crime and the treatment of offenders, in promoting the exchange of expertise and experience and
closer international co-operation in this field,
1. Takes note of the note by the Secretary-General on
crime prevention and criminal justice;37
2. Urges Member States and the Secretary-General to
make every effort to translate into action, as appropriate,
the respective recommendations, policies and conclusions
stemming from the Milan Plan of Action and other relevant resolutions and recommendations adopted unanimously by the Seventh United Nations Congress on the
Prevention of Crime and the Treatment of Offenders38 and
to accord priority attention to the forms of crime identified
in the Milan Plan of Action through strengthening international co-operation;
3. Welcomes the results of the comprehensive review
of the functioning and programme of work of the United
Nations in the field of crime prevention and criminal justice conducted by the Secretary-GeneraJ39 and considered
by the Economic and Social Council and the Committee
on Crime Prevention and Control;
4. Approves the recommendations contained in Economic and Social Council resolutions 1986/11 of21 May
1986 and 1987/53 of28 May 1987, and requests the Secretary-General and the relevant bodies to take appropriate
measures for their full and prompt implementation, pay-

37 A/42/453.
38 See Seventh United Nations Congress on the Prevention o/Crime and
the Treatment of Offenders, Milan, 26 August-6 September 1985: report
prepared by the Secretaria/ (United Nations publication, Sales No.
E.86.IV. I ).
39 E/1987/43.
