United Nations

S/PV.6236

Security Council

Provisional

Sixty-fourth year

6236th meeting
Thursday, 10 December 2009, 10.50 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Kafando . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Burkina Faso)

Members:

Austria . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Costa Rica . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Croatia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Japan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Libyan Arab Jamahiriya . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Mexico . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Turkey . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Uganda . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . .
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Viet Nam . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Mr. Mayr-Harting
Mr. Liu Zhenmin
Mr. Hernández-Milian
Mr. Vilović
Mr. De Rivière
Mr. Takasu
Mr. Dabbashi
Mr. Heller
Mr. Shcherbak
Mr. Apakan
Mr. Rugunda
Mr. Quarrey
Ms. Rice
Mr. Hoang Chi Trung

Agenda
The situation in Burundi
Sixth report of the Secretary-General on the United Nations Integrated Office
in Burundi (S/2009/611)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-506.

09-64223 (E)

*0964223*

S/PV.6236

It is so decided.

The meeting was called to order at 10.55 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in Burundi
Sixth report of the Secretary-General on the
United Nations Integrated Office in Burundi
(S/2009/611)
The President (spoke in French): I should like to
inform the Council that I have received a letter from
the representative of Burundi, in which he requests to
be invited to participate in the discussion of the item
on the Council’s agenda. In conformity with the usual
practice, I propose, with the consent of the Council, to
invite that representative to participate in the
consideration of the item, without the right to vote, in
accordance with the relevant provisions of the Charter
and rule 37 of the Council’s provisional rules of
procedure.
There being no objection, it is so decided.
At the invitation of the President, Mr. Nsanze
(Burundi) took a seat at the Council table.
The President (spoke in French): On behalf of
the Council, I wish to extend a warm welcome to His
Excellency Mr. Augustin Nsanze, Minister for Foreign
Relations and International Cooperation of Burundi.
In accordance with the understanding reached in
the Council’s prior consultations, I shall take it that the
Security Council agrees to extend an invitation under
rule 39 of its provisional rules of procedure to
Mr. Youssef Mahmoud, Executive Representative of
the Secretary-General and head of the United Nations
Integrated Office in Burundi.
It is so decided.
I invite Mr. Mahmoud to take a seat at the
Council table.
In accordance with the understanding reached in
the Council’s prior consultations, I shall take it that the
Security Council agrees to extend an invitation under
rule 39 of its provisional rules of procedure to His
Excellency
Mr.
Peter
Maurer,
Permanent
Representative of Switzerland and Chairperson of the
country-specific configuration on Burundi of the
Peacebuilding Commission.

2

I invite Mr. Maurer to take a seat at the Council
table.
The Security Council will now begin its
consideration of the item on its agenda. The Council is
meeting in accordance with the understanding reached
in its prior consultations.
I wish to draw the attention of members to
document S/2009/611, which contains the sixth report
of the Secretary-General on the United Nations
Integrated Office in Burundi.
At this meeting, the Security Council will hear
briefings by Mr. Mahmoud and Mr. Maurer. I now give
the floor to Mr. Mahmoud.
Mr. Mahmoud: It is an honour for me to speak
on the occasion of the review of the sixth report
(S/2009/611) of the Secretary-General on the United
Nations Integrated Office in Burundi (BINUB). The
report before the Council provides an account of the
main advances over the past six months and the
challenges that lie ahead for the Government and
people of Burundi. It also describes the main activities
of BINUB in support of the Government’s peace
consolidation efforts, in accordance with the mandate
entrusted to it by the Council.
The report before the Council is self-explanatory.
I shall therefore not summarize its main points. I would
merely wish to bring to the Council’s attention the
most significant developments that have occurred since
its publication, venturing some thoughts on their
overall significance for peace consolidation in Burundi.
As outlined in the report, the period under review has
witnessed significant advances in the peace process
and in the preparations for the 2010 elections, despite
some enduring challenges.
As regards the peace process, members may
recall that the mandate of the Partnership for Peace in
Burundi, established in May under the chairmanship of
Ambassador Dumisani Kumalo of South Africa, will
come to an end at the end of this month, as will the
Political Directorate that acted in its support.
On 20 November, the South African Facilitator,
Mr. Charles Nqakula, presented his final report on the
Burundi peace process to the leaders of the Regional
Initiative for Peace in Arusha, Tanzania. At that
meeting, he reaffirmed his country’s decision to

09-64223

S/PV.6236

withdraw on 31 December the last elements of the
African Union (AU) Special Task Force, composed of
South African soldiers, charged with the close
protection of the top leaders of the Forces nationales de
libération (FNL).
On 30 November, the Partnership for Peace held
its third formal meeting in Bujumbura and decided, as
part of its exit strategy, to entrust the FNL close
protection to a joint Government-FNL unit to be
selected from the national defence and security forces.
Work has already begun to put this joint unit in place,
with the help of BINUB and the outgoing Special Task
Force. Other residual tasks of the peace process were
also discussed at the 30 November meeting. They
include the assignment of the remaining Government
posts to the FNL and the release of additional political
and war prisoners. These were also entrusted to the
Government and the FNL to finalize.
Another new development related to the peace
process was the FNL party general congress, held on
29 November. The congress confirmed its Chairperson,
Agathon Rwasa, as leader of the party and officially
designated him the FNL presidential candidate for the
2010 elections.
Still under the heading of recent developments, I
wish to inform the Council that on 23 November, the
Burundi
configuration
of
the
Peacebuilding
Commission (PBC) held an informal meeting at which
the Government of Burundi presented its national
strategy for the socio-economic reintegration at the
community level of demobilized soldiers, adults
associated with former political armed movements,
returnees, displaced persons and other conflict-affected
groups. This is an important step in the right direction.
Every effort must be made to ensure the sustainable
reintegration of these groups in order to prevent them,
as stated in the Secretary-General’s report, from
becoming an added source of concern. It is my hope
that under the dynamic leadership of the Burundi
configuration Chair, Ambassador Peter Maurer, this
strategy will benefit from the meaningful support of
the wider membership of the PBC, as well as that of
other international partners.
As indicated in the Secretary-General’s report,
the elections have become a major focus for Burundian
political actors. Despite the positive developments in
the electoral preparations outlined in the report, one of
several immediate challenges is the funding of the

09-64223

electoral process. The pledges made so far by
international partners have yet to be disbursed in a
timely manner. An amount of $3 million still needs to
be urgently mobilized before the end of December to
help the National Independent Electoral Commission to
attend to the most pressing tasks under its mandate. I
wish to thank all those countries who have already
made firm pledges or signed memorandums of
understanding with the United Nations Development
Programme (UNDP).
Another election-related challenge is the
significant number of potential voters who cannot
afford the administrative costs related to acquiring a
national identity card. I recently received a letter from
the Minister of the Interior requesting financial and
material support for issuing and distributing those
cards. BINUB and UNDP are currently looking into the
practical modalities for such support as a matter of
urgency. A rapid response would help alleviate the
concerns of some political parties, who allege that the
cards were being distributed in a way that favours the
ruling party. Recent public statements by government
officials, including the Minister of the Interior, have
refuted those allegations.
In response to a repeated request by President
Nkurunziza, BINUB is exploring, along with regional
and subregional organizations both in Africa and
outside the continent, the possibility of their sending to
Burundi long-term observers who would come a few
months before the elections and stay for several weeks
after. We are working with the Independent National
Electoral Commission and the Ministry of the Interior
on how best to implement the President’s request.
In a related development, and in order to help
ensure that women played their rightful roles in the
upcoming elections, BINUB and other national and
international partners have helped the Independent
National Electoral Commission to develop a gendersensitive strategy to enable women to be informed
voters and motivated candidates. That strategy and the
related sensitization activities were launched earlier
this week.
In that connection, we have prepared for Council
members, as per our past practice, a separate note on
the contributions, over the past six months, of BINUB
and the United Nations system at large in the
implementation of resolution 1325 (2000). I believe
that note has already been distributed.

3

S/PV.6236

As to the concern raised in the SecretaryGeneral’s report (S/2009/611) on the intimidation
activities of youth groups associated with certain
political parties, I wish to report that President
Nkurunziza and the Minister of the Interior, in separate
statements on 17 and 18 November, urged political
leaders to put an end to those potentially destabilizing
practices. While it seems those statements have been
heeded, the situation bears continuous scrutiny by the
Minister of the Interior and all political parties and
civil society organizations.
As noted in the Secretary-General’s report,
overall, Burundi is making commendable progress
despite the remaining challenges that afflict most
countries emerging from conflict. BINUB, if its
mandate is renewed, will continue to support the
Government and the people of Burundi in meeting
those challenges.
In concluding, I wish to emphasize the critical
role that socio-economic development can play in
consolidating peace. I therefore urge development
partners to redouble their efforts to help Burundi meet
its anti-poverty goals and develop the main sectors that
can generate growth.
The President (spoke in French): I thank
Mr. Mahmoud for his presentation. I now give the floor
to Ambassador Peter Maurer.
Mr. Maurer (spoke in French): I would like to
thank you, Mr. President, for the invitation to address
the Council at today’s meeting in my capacity as Chair
of the Peacebuilding Commission’s country-specific
configuration for Burundi. I would also thank the
Secretary-General for his report (S/2009/611), which
addresses the pertinent aspects of peacebuilding in
Burundi in a comprehensive and balanced way.
Burundi has come a long way since the end of the
civil war that ravaged the country for more than a
decade. All the political actors recognize today that a
return to arms is not an option, that it must be avoided
at all costs and that it would destroy the country’s
hard-won opportunities to return the country to the
path to sustainable development.
I am also pleased to note the lively political
debate and the professed willingness of all parties to
resist the temptations of petty politicking. Indeed, party
politics or individual political purposes must not be

4

allowed to jeopardize fundamentals such as the
elections and the integrity of the electoral process.
Burundi is entering a crucial stage of
peacebuilding. Elections will be held at all levels of
government in 2010, and they will enable us to assess
the progress achieved. If the elections are carried out in
a free, fair and peaceful manner and lead to universally
accepted results, the peace process will be made more
durable. It will then become possible to focus even
further on the underlying causes of conflict and
poverty. However, if the opposite happens, the peace
process will be jeopardized, new wounds will be
opened and the old ones will be more difficult to heal.
It is therefore imperative that an environment
conducive to free, fair and peaceful elections be
created. The prospects for this are encouraging. The
necessary legal framework is in place and the
preparatory process is almost on track. In addition, the
legitimacy of the Independent National Electoral
Commission is broadly accepted. Its independence is
indeed crucial to its ability to fulfil its role as a
guarantor of free and fair elections. Finally, a
promising start has been made on drawing up a
national strategy for the socio-economic reintegration
of vulnerable groups. However, significant challenges
remain.
First, there is still widespread fear of violence.
Many of the interlocutors I met during my most recent
stay in Burundi mentioned instances of intimidation,
limitations of civil rights, threats or even physical
attacks. Many times, groups of youths were identified
as the perpetrators of such acts. Under no
circumstances should the political debate — no matter
how lively it is — lead to violence.
Despite the success of the Government’s
disarmament programme, too many small arms remain
in circulation. All the political parties should commit
themselves to participating peacefully in the election
process and avoiding provocative acts. As Chair of the
country-specific configuration on Burundi, I believe
that one of the configuration’s priorities will be to
closely monitor the security conditions in which the
elections will be held and the implementation of the
Government’s zero-tolerance policy.
Secondly, there are fears concerning the
deterioration of trust between the opposition and the
ruling party. Although a formal mechanism has been
established, the ruling party is accused of being

09-64223

S/PV.6236

increasingly reluctant to engage in dialogue. It is
crucial that all parties reach political consensus in their
pursuit of power. That is the only way to successfully
address the root causes of the conflict. In my opinion,
encouraging such a dialogue must be another priority
for the country-specific configuration on Burundi.
There have been substantial achievements in
peacebuilding. However, the Burundian authorities
must remain fully committed to this process. In the
same vein, it is essential that the international
community not leave the people of Burundi to face
their fate alone during this decisive phase.
International support must be maintained. That support
takes various forms. The first of these ways will be
financial support for organizing the elections. In that
regard, I regret that — as indicated by the SecretaryGeneral in his report — of the total $43 million
needed, only $2.7 million in funds is available as of
now for the financing of the elections.
Long-term electoral observation is a second form
of support that the international community could
provide. During my recent visit to Burundi, I noted a
preference for electoral observation by regional and
subregional entities. It is an encouraging sign that the
African Union appears willing to become involved.
Following up on that issue will be a matter of priority
for the country-specific configuration on Burundi.
A third form of assistance is investing in longterm economic development. Donors are generally
reluctant to become involved in development
cooperation in post-conflict contexts, and international
investors tend to hold back until situations are fully
stabilized. That is understandable, but immediate
assistance and investment would contribute greatly to
further stabilizing Burundi. Another important role of
the country-specific configuration on Burundi is
therefore to encourage local entrepreneurship and
international investment.
I very much appreciate the Council’s invitation to
speak today. I suggest that we continue to hold regular
exchanges of view between the Council and the
Peacebuilding Commission in the coming months.
Furthermore, it would be greatly appreciated if the
Council were willing to consider consulting
systematically with the Peacebuilding Commission in
the preparation of Council documents regarding
Burundi.

09-64223

The President (spoke in French): I thank
Ambassador Maurer for his briefing.
I now give the floor to His Excellency
Mr. Augustin Nsanze, Minister for External Relations
and International Cooperation of Burundi.
Mr. Nsanze (Burundi) (spoke in French): On the
occasion of the presentation of the sixth report of the
Secretary-General on the United Nations Integrated
Office in Burundi (S/2009/611), allow me, first of all,
on behalf of the Government of the Republic of
Burundi, to thank the Secretary-General for the
steadfast support that the United Nations is continuing
to provide to Burundi in its effort to consolidate peace
at last and relaunch development.
With regard to the sixth report on the United
Nations Integrated Office in Burundi, my Government
appreciates the fact that the report acknowledges the
additional progress that has been made since the fifth
report (S/2009/270) in most of the areas that are likely
to contribute to stabilizing the country in a lasting way.
Among other things — and without attempting to give
an exhaustive list — I should like to mention the
approval of the Forces nationales de libération (FNL)
and the Mouvement pour la solidarité et la démocratie
(MSD) as new political parties, the establishment of
independent provincial electoral commissions, the
singing of agreements with the United Nations
Development Programme (UNDP) on electoral
assistance projects and the decree by the Minister of
the Interior establishing the Permanent Forum for
Dialogue among political parties. In addition, a revised
electoral code has been promulgated, and a new law
has been put in place to regulate the carrying of
weapons by civilians in Burundi. The Parliament has
also adopted a law amending the functions of the
National Commission for Land and Other Assets. In
cooperation with UNDP, the Government has also just
completed its preparations for the national strategy for
the sustainable reintegration of ex-combatants and
persons affected by the conflict. The Government of
Burundi would also like to take this opportunity to
inform the Security Council that the draft revised law
on communes and the draft law on an ombudsman will
be adopted by Parliament during the session that is
now under way.
Moreover, the Government of Burundi is pleased
with the obvious progress that has been made in the
work of Parliament in reforming the public and

5

S/PV.6236

territorial administration, combating corruption,
professionalizing the defence and security services and
in carrying out the disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration process. We also welcome the
observations contained in the Secretary-General’s
report with regard to the advances in the national
consultations on a transitional justice mechanism,
which have now been expanded to include Burundians
living abroad, and the fight against the proliferation of
small arms and light weapons.
The Government is especially grateful to the
drafters of the report for having pointed out that there
is no evidence of the presence in Burundi of armed
members of the Forces démocratiques de libération du
Rwanda (FDLR). That is no small detail, given the lies
about our country — of which all of us are aware —
that the experts of the sanctions Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1533 (2004) on the Democratic
Republic of the Congo have recently propagated in that
connection. Nevertheless, the existence of a
clandestine movement among Burundi’s population
that are sympathetic to certain rebel movements in the
eastern part of that country — which take advantage of
the porousness of the borders — does not bode well for
future peace in region. That should be a matter of
concern to the Security Council.
With regard to our concerns, the member
countries of the Economic Community of the Great
Lake Countries have just established a commission
comprised of ministers for defence and security that
will serve as a forum for dialogue between Burundi,
Rwanda and the Democratic Republic of the Congo.
Along the same lines, the governors of border
provinces in all three countries have agreed to
strengthen border control, both on the ground and on
lake borders. Those steps will strengthen the already
existing Tripartite Plus mechanism. However, it would
also be useful for the Department of Political
Affairs — which already provides support for the
implementation of the Pact on Security, Stability and
Development in the Great Lakes region — to confine
its analyses within the scope of its mandate to prevent
conflicts.
The Government of Burundi would also like to
commend the recommendations of the assessment
mission on security needs for the upcoming elections.
In that regard, the Government would like specifically
to request sufficient and adequate transportation means
to facilitate the movement of police units, who will

6

provide security for the voting, as well as to distribute
elections materials throughout the country with as little
delay as possible. Our experience in 2005 demonstrates
that it is preferable to purchase such equipment, as
opposed to leasing it.
Other progress has been made, even though the
report does not refer to it. With regard to combating
corruption, the decision by the Government of Burundi
to place Burundi’s revenue office under the control of
an international expert for the first five years is a
resounding illustration of the Government’s political
will to clean up the collection of taxes. The
establishment of a value-added tax seeks to do the
same thing. Through the country, the project to provide
support for anti-corruption efforts has made it possible
to hold awareness-raising workshops in every
commune for local anti-corruption committees on the
negative consequences of this scourge. Lastly, the fact
that the World Bank has admitted Burundi into the
Heavily Indebted Poor Countries Debt Initiative is
further proof of the fact that the Government has
improved the management of public finances.
In terms of security, it is incomprehensible that
Burundi remains under security phase III even though
ex-combatants of the last rebel movement have been
disarmed and there has been significant success in the
disarmament of the civilian population. The
Government of Burundi deplores, obviously, the
isolated acts of murder and assassination related to
certain accounts settlements or quarrels over land
ownership issues, as well as looting. While that type of
insecurity exists almost everywhere, the role of rabblerousers intending to discredit the Government must not
be discounted in the case of Burundi.
The report discusses demonstrations by former
BINUB staff, yet unfortunately it omitted the fact that
that question was submitted to the competent sections
of the Secretariat for resolution, while knowing full
well that even the national legislation does not permit
an employee to work more than six months without a
contract.
If it is compared to a number of other countries
that are not even at war yet where a murder occurs
every hour, Burundi’s security situation is far from
justifying its remaining under security phase III. That
is obvious and could not be understood otherwise,
since even the United Nations system has called for a

09-64223

S/PV.6236

five-year support programme for Burundi, believing
that the country is now peaceful.

women’s leagues exist within all of the political parties
and should not cause undue worry.

The World Bank followed suit by organizing the
first meeting of the Burundi Consultative Group on
26 and 27 October to help the country attract foreign
investment. In the same vein, other developmental
partners such as Switzerland and Japan have decided to
resume projects within the country. And at the same
time that the Partnership for Peace in Burundi was
deciding to end its activities, it agreed that the African
Union would withdraw South African troops because
there was no further reason for their presence in
Burundi.

As for the rule of law, Burundi’s Constitution and
specific laws guarantee all civil and political freedoms.
However, enjoyment of those freedoms is subject to
respect for the law and to certain regulations, in order
to guarantee public order. The few restrictions existing
here and there have resulted from misunderstandings in
interpreting provisions in the laws or statutory texts.
The Government reiterates that, given its responsibility
for public security, it will never authorize the
convening of meetings that are not in accordance with
the law.

Although the omissions we just listed could be
attributed to forgetfulness, the same cannot be said for
the recurring gratuitous assertions or incomplete
information. The first such concerns the administrative
posts that were promised to the FNL, which were
mentioned in the report. Yet, as the Government
representative explained at the last session of the
Partnership for Peace in Burundi, the country’s
authorities were still waiting for FNL candidates who
fit the profiles of the proposed posts.

The Government also shares a certain number of
the concerns expressed in the report on, among other
issues, human rights and the situation of women and
children. However, the Government believes that it is
unfair when a certain opinion indicates that the
Government is doing nothing to improve the situation
in various areas.

The second is the reaction of the opposition
parties to the establishment of the electoral department
and to the congress of the FNL dissidents. Not only did
the Minister of the Interior reaffirm the independence
of the Independent National Electoral Commission, but
he pointed out that the department was established to
facilitate any necessary contacts between the
Commission and the territorial administration.
As for dissidents within the FNL, allow me to
recall that that party is not the first to undergo a
partition. In this case it is the third split in the history
of that former armed political movement. Earlier splits
engendered the FNL-Icanzo and the Parti pour la
libération du peuple hutu (PALIPE)-Agakiza. Trying to
identify, at any cost, the hand of the party in power in
the new schism is simplistic and unjust.
The Government has already taken in hand the
issue of the youth wing of the Conseil national pour la
défense de la démocratie-Forces nationales pour la
défense de la démocratie (CNDD-FDD). At a meeting
of provincial governors, the Interior Minister formally
banned any political behaviour that does not respect
the freedom and rights of others. That does not mean
those young people must cease their activities as a
party-affiliated league. Furthermore, youth and

09-64223

The Government has established, or is in the
process of establishing, appropriate mechanisms
everywhere. The process of establishing the national
independent human rights commission is under way.
The new version of the commission, which
incorporates the Paris principles, has been analysed by
the Council of Ministers, which asked the Minister in
charge of the matter to clarify certain concepts. The
draft will soon return to the Council of Ministers for a
final analysis before it is submitted to Parliament for
adoption.
As for women’s rights, the provision in the Penal
Code for the repression of sexual and sexist violence
has created an environment conducive to fighting those
crimes. We must now make all national partners aware
of the social importance of that struggle. Civil society
is already involved in that area, and sensitivity training
for the defence and security corps, as well as
disarmament of the civilian population, should promote
progress in the fight against sexual violence. But that
success will be possible only if the families or relatives
of the victims understand that silence, which
supposedly protects their honour, in fact encourages
impunity.
As for the protection of children, the Government
has established a brigade in charge of protecting
minors, but it does not yet have sufficient resources.

7

S/PV.6236

Here as well, efforts by the police and the judiciary
must be complemented by civil society.
The report dwells on the insufficient judicial
resources and so-called lack of independence. Besides
the Government’s choice to devote more than 15 per
cent of the peacebuilding funds to the judiciary, the
Government has also increased the budget devoted to
that field to further motivate legal professionals.
Peacebuilding funds have made it possible to renovate
and to build several resident tribunals, to execute
thousands of outstanding warrants and judgments and
to equip the Special Anti-Corruption Court. In that
regard, public opinion should bear in mind that the
justice sector has been identified in the course of the
Arusha negotiations as being dominated by a single
ethnic group. That imbalance must be corrected before
other reforms can be undertaken.
As for the killing of the Vice-President of the
Observators for the Struggle against Corruption and
Economic Embezzlement, the interrogation of the
presumed guilty parties in custody is now under way.
We hope that it will help the investigation to continue,
which is to benefit from the contributions of the
Federal Bureau of Investigation and INTERPOL,
which are assisting Burundi in this case.
The Government of Burundi is once again forced
to condemn certain irregularities with respect to form
as well as certain errors in the report. The National
Commission for Land and Other Assets was not
established in the course of this semester, as the report
claims in paragraph 13. The law adopted by the
Parliament extended its mandate and identified its
jurisdiction vis-à-vis other State bodies involved in the
management of land disputes.
With respect to the issue addressed in paragraph
29, the so-called Ministry of Civil Service is properly
called the Ministry of Public Service, Labour and
Social Security. Similarly, in paragraph 55, the
ministry referred to is in fact the Ministry of
Agriculture and Livestock. The report should have
pointed out that the Consultative Strategic Committee
and the Technical Coordination Committee that
coordinates electoral assistance initiatives are
co-chaired by the Government. Further, the Political
Forum of the Partners Coordination Group is not a
monitoring body, but rather a forum for dialogue.
Finally, the Government of Burundi would like to
share its understanding of the future mandate of
BINUB. Given the stage we have reached on the road
to peace, the Government of Burundi believes that

8

BINUB’s future mandate should be limited to the
following fields: assistance in the election cycle;
support for democratic governance, by which we mean
the capacity-building of Parliament, the ombudsman
and the town councils and the operation of the
Permanent Forum for Dialogue among accredited
political parties; continuing peacebuilding, by which
we mean support for the national independent human
rights commission and for transitional justice; and,
finally, raising awareness of the gender dimension in
all public programmes.
A paragraph of the report refers to the absolute
need to carry out the election process according to the
principle of fairness, and our Government welcomes
that recommendation. In this regard, I recall that the
success of the process will depend in part on respect
for the principle of fairness in the implementation of
the BINUB mandate.
The Government of Burundi has observed that,
for some time now, the principle of fairness highlighted
in the report has, regrettably, not been upheld on the
ground. The desire of some to incriminate the ruling
party as if it did not have the same rights as the other
political parties in the coming election, and to assert
that, having been entrusted with the mission of
organizing elections, the Independent National
Electoral Commission’s is mandated to replace the
authority in charge of territorial administration,
represent two good examples of the lack of respect for
the principle of fairness. It would be unfortunate and
greatly damaging for the United Nations-Burundian
Government partnership if the latter partner asks for
the replacement of the sitting representatives.
Before concluding my statement, I wish to thank
the Regional Initiative, the African Union, the
secretariat of the International Conference on the Great
Lakes Region, the South African facilitation, the
Peacebuilding Commission and all the special envoys
for their contribution to progress in the peace process
in Burundi. I should also like to thank the international
community as a whole for its valuable contribution to
the peace process in Burundi.
The President (spoke in French): There are no
further speakers on my list. In accordance with the
understanding reached in the Council’s prior
consultations, I now invite Council members to
informal consultations to continue our discussion on
the subject.
The meeting rose at 11.40 a.m.

09-64223
