A

UNITED
NATIONS

General Assembly
Distr.
GENERAL
A/RES/54/180
24 February 2000

Fifty-fourth session
Agenda item 116 (b)
RESOLUTION ADOPTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY
[on the report of the Third Committee (A/54/605/Add.2)]
54/180. Human rights and mass exoduses
The General Assembly,
Deeply disturbed by the scale and magnitude of exoduses and displacements of people in many regions
of the world and by the human suffering of refugees and displaced persons, a high proportion of whom are
women and children,
Recalling its previous relevant resolutions, as well as those of the Commission on Human Rights, in
particular Commission resolution 1998/49 of 17 April 1998,1 and the conclusions of the World Conference
on Human Rights, held at Vienna from 14 to 25 June 1993,2 which recognized that gross violations of human
rights, persecution, political and ethnic conflicts, famine and economic insecurity, poverty and generalized
violence are among the root causes leading to mass exodus and displacements of people, and also recalling
the second open debate that was held in the Security Council on the protection of civilians in armed conflict
on 16 and 17 September 1999,3

1

See Official Records of the Economic and Social Council, 1998, Supplement No. 3 (E/1998/23), chap. II,
sect. A.

2

A/CONF.157/24 (Part I), chap. III.
See S/PV.4046, S/PV.4046 (Resumption 1) and Corr.2 and S/PV.4046 (Resumption 2). For the final text,
see Official Records of the Security Council, Fifty-fourth Year, 4046th meeting.

3

/...

A/RES/54/180
Page 2

Recalling with satisfaction its endorsement, in its resolution 41/70 of 3 December 1986, of the call upon
all States to promote human rights and fundamental freedoms and to refrain from denying these to individuals
in their population because of nationality, ethnicity, race, gender, age, religion or language,
Recalling all relevant human rights standards, including the Universal Declaration of Human Rights,4
the principles of international protection for refugees and the general conclusion of the Executive Committee
of the Programme of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees on international protection5 and
the fact that asylum applicants should have access to fair and expeditious status-determination procedures,
Stressing the importance of adherence to international humanitarian, human rights and refugee law in
order to avert mass exoduses and to protect refugees and internally displaced persons, and expressing its deep
concern at the lack of respect for those laws and principles, especially during armed conflict, including the
denial of safe and unimpeded access to the displaced,
Noting, in this regard, the entry into force of the Convention on the Safety of United Nations and
Associated Personnel of 9 December 1994,6 urging States to consider ratifying or acceding to the Convention,
and condemning attacks and the use of force against United Nations and associated personnel, as well as
personnel of international humanitarian organizations,
Reaffirming the primary responsibility of States to ensure the protection of refugees and internally
displaced persons,
Recognizing the contribution of the establishment of the International Criminal Court to ending impunity
for perpetrators of certain crimes, as defined in the Rome Statute of the International Criminal Court,7 which
lead to, or result from, mass exoduses,
Noting with satisfaction the efforts by the United Nations system to develop a comprehensive approach
to addressing the root causes and effects of movements of refugees and other displaced persons and the
strengthening of emergency preparedness and response mechanisms,
Recognizing that the human rights machinery of the United Nations, including the mechanisms of the
Commission on Human Rights and the human rights treaty bodies, has important capabilities to address
human rights violations that cause movements of refugees and displaced persons or prevent durable solutions
to their plight,
Recognizing the complementarity between the systems for the protection of human rights and for
humanitarian action, in particular the mandates of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights
and the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees, as well as the work of the representative of the
Secretary-General on internally displaced persons and the Special Representative of the Secretary-General

4

Resolution 217 A (III).

5

Official Records of the General Assembly, Fifty-fourth Session, Supplement No. 12A (A/54/12/Add.1),
chap. III, sect. A.1.
6

Resolution 49/59, annex.

7

A/CONF.183/9.
/...

A/RES/54/180
Page 3

for Children and Armed Conflict and that cooperation between them, in accordance with their respective
mandates, as well as coordination between the human rights, political and security components of United
Nations operations, make important contributions to the promotion and protection of human rights of persons
forced into mass exodus and displacement,
1.

Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General;8

2. Strongly deplores ethnic and other forms of intolerance as one of the major causes of forced
migratory movements, and urges States to take all necessary steps to ensure respect for human rights,
especially the rights of persons belonging to minorities;
3. Reaffirms the need for all Governments, intergovernmental bodies and concerned international
organizations to intensify their cooperation and assistance in worldwide efforts to address human rights
situations that lead to, as well as the serious problems that result from, mass exoduses of refugees and
displaced persons;
4. Emphasizes the responsibility of all States and international organizations to cooperate with those
countries, particularly developing ones, affected by mass exoduses of refugees and displaced persons, and
calls upon Governments, the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights, the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees and other relevant parts of the United Nations system to continue to respond to
assistance needs of countries hosting large numbers of refugees until durable solutions are found;
5. Urges the Secretary-General to give high priority to and to allocate the necessary resources within
the regular budget of the United Nations for the consolidation and strengthening of emergency preparedness
and response mechanisms, including early warning activities in the humanitarian area, for the purpose of
ensuring, inter alia, that effective action is taken to identify all human rights abuses that contribute to mass
exoduses of persons;
6. Invites the special rapporteurs, special representatives and working groups of the Commission on
Human Rights and the United Nations human rights treaty bodies, acting within their mandates, to seek
information, where appropriate, on human rights problems that may result in mass exoduses of populations
or impede their voluntary return home and, where appropriate, to include such information, together with
recommendations thereon, in their reports and to bring such information to the attention of the United
Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights for appropriate action in fulfilment of her mandate, in
consultation with the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees;
7. Requests all United Nations bodies, acting within their mandates, the specialized agencies and
governmental, intergovernmental and non-governmental organizations to cooperate fully with all mechanisms
of the Commission on Human Rights and, in particular, to provide them with all relevant information in their
possession on the human rights situations creating or affecting refugees and displaced persons;
8. Requests the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights, in the exercise of her mandate,
as set out in General Assembly resolution 48/141 of 20 December 1993, to coordinate human rights activities
throughout the United Nations system and, in cooperation with the United Nations High Commissioner for

8

A/54/360.
/...

A/RES/54/180
Page 4

Refugees, to pay particular attention to situations that cause or threaten to cause mass exoduses or
displacements and to contribute to efforts to address such situations effectively through promotion and
protection measures, emergency preparedness and response mechanisms, early warning and information
sharing, technical advice, expertise and cooperation in countries of origin as well as host countries;
9. Welcomes the efforts of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights to contribute
to the creation of an environment viable for return in post-conflict societies through initiatives such as the
rehabilitation of the justice system, the creation of national institutions capable of defending human rights
and broad-based programmes of human rights education and the strengthening of local non-governmental
organizations through field presences and programmes of advisory services and technical cooperation;
10. Welcomes with appreciation the ongoing contributions of the United Nations High Commissioner
for Refugees to the deliberations of the Commission on Human Rights and to other international human
rights bodies and mechanisms, and also welcomes the invitation extended to her by the Commission to
address the Commission at each of its future sessions;
11. Encourages States that have not already done so to consider acceding to the 1951 Convention9 and
the 1967 Protocol10 relating to the Status of Refugees and to other relevant regional instruments concerning
refugees, as applicable, and relevant international instruments of human rights and humanitarian law, and
to take appropriate measures to disseminate and implement those instruments domestically to encourage
compliance with provisions against arbitrary and forcible displacement and greater respect for the rights of
those who flee;
12. Notes with appreciation that a number of States not parties to the 1951 Convention and the 1967
Protocol continue to maintain a generous approach to asylum;
13. Encourages States parties to the 1951 Convention to provide information to the Office of the
United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees, in accordance with article 35 of the Convention;
14. Calls upon States to ensure effective protection of, and assistance to, refugees and internally
displaced persons, consistent with international law, inter alia, by respecting the principle of nonrefoulement, ensuring full, safe and unhindered access by humanitarian workers to displaced populations and
ensuring the security and civilian and humanitarian nature of camps and settlements for refugees and
internally displaced persons;
15. Requests the Secretary-General to prepare and submit to the General Assembly at its fifty-sixth
session a report on the implementation of the present resolution as it pertains to all aspects of human rights
and mass exoduses, including detailed information on the programmatic, institutional, administrative,
financial and management efforts instituted to enhance the capacity of the United Nations to avert new flows
of refugees and other displaced persons, to tackle the root causes of such flows, to protect those who have
become displaced during mass exoduses and to facilitate their return and reintegration;
16. Decides to continue its consideration of this question at its fifty-sixth session.

9

United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 189, No. 2545.

10

Ibid., vol. 606, No. 8791.
/...

A/RES/54/180
Page 5

83rd plenary meeting
17 December 1999
