General Assembly-Seventeenth Session

RESOLUTIONS ADOPTED ON THE REPORTS OF THE SIXTH COMMITTEE
CONTENTS
Page

1765 ( XVII). Report of the International Law Commission on the work of its
fourteenth session (20 November 1962) (item 76).. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1766 ( XVII). Question of extended participation in general multilateral treaties
concluded under the auspices of the League of Nations (20 November 1962)
(item 76) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1813 (XVII). International conference of plenipotentiaries on consular relations
(18 December 1%2) (item 74).........
.. . .. . .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .
1814 (XVII). Question of the publication of a United Nations juridical yearbook
(18 December 1962) (item 73) .......................................
1815 ( XVII). Consideration of principles of international law concerning friendly
relations and co-operation among States in accordance with the Charter of
the United Nations (18 December 1962) (item 75).....................
1816 (XVII). Technical assistance to promote the teaching, study, dissemination
and wider appreciation of international law ( 18 December 1962) ( item 7 5) . .

65
65
66
66

66

67

(a) Continue the work of codification and progressive development of the law of treaties, taking into
account the views expressed at the seventeenth session
of the General Assembly and the comments which may
be submitted by Governments, in order that the law
of treaties may be placed upon the widest and most
secure foundations ;
( b) Continue its work on State responsibility, taking
into account the views expressed at the seventeenth
session of the General Assembly and the report of the
Sub-Committee on State Responsibility and giving due
consideration to the purposes and principles enshrined
in the Charter of the United Nations;
( c) Continue its work on the succession of States
and Governments, taking into account the views expressed at the seventeenth session of the General Assembly and the report of the Sub-Committee on the
Succession of States and Governments, with appropriate reference to the views of States which have
achieved independence since the Second World War ;
4. Requests the Secretary-General to forward to
the International L,w Commission the records of the
discussions at the seventeenth session of the General
Assembly on the report of the Commission ;
5. Further requests the Secretary-General to provide
the Commission with the necessary technical services
referred to in paragraphs 84 and 85 of its report.
1171st plenary meeting,
20 November 1962.

1765 (XVII). Report of the International Law
Commission on the work of its fourteenth
session
The General Assembly,
Having considered the report of the International
Law Commission covering the work of its fourteenth
session, 1
Recalling resolution 1686 (XVI) of 18 December
1961 by which the General Assembly recommended
that the Commission should consider its future programme of work and report its conclusions to the
Assembly,
Emphasizing the need for the further codification and
progressive development of international law with a
view to making it a more effective means of implementing the purposes and principles set forth in Articles 1
and 2 of the Charter of the United Nations,
Noting that, as regards State responsibility and the
succession of States and Governments, the International
Law Commission, in order to expedite its work, has
established two sub-committees, which are to meet at
Geneva in January 1963 and report to the Commission
at its fifteenth session,
Bearing in mind that the sub-committees are to study
the scope of, and approach to, these topics, and that
the work of the Sub-Committee on State Responsibility
is to be devoted primarily to the general aspects of
that topic,
l. Takes note of the report of the International Law
Commission covering the work of its fourteenth session;
2. Expresses its appreciation to the Commission for
the work accomplished at its fourteenth session, especially with regard to the law of treaties;
3. Recommends that the Commission should:

1766 (XVII). Question of extended participation
in general multilateral treaties concluded
under the auspices of the League of Nations

The General Assembly,
Taking note of paragraph 10 of the commentary to
articles 8 and 9 of the draft articles on the law of

1 Official

Records of the General Assembly, Se1Jenteenth
Session, Supplement No. 9 (A/5209 and Corr.l).

65
