UNITED
NATIONS

S
Security Council
Distr.
GENERAL
S/1999/1169
15 November 1999
ORIGINAL:

ENGLISH

LETTER DATED 12 NOVEMBER 1999 FROM THE SECRETARY-GENERAL
ADDRESSED TO THE PRESIDENT OF THE SECURITY COUNCIL

I have the honour to convey the attached communication, dated
11 November 1999 (see annex), which I have received from the Permanent
Representative of Australia to the United Nations.
I should be grateful if you would bring the present letter and its annex to
the attention of the members of the Security Council.

(Signed)

99-34859 (E)

151199

Kofi A. ANNAN

/...

S/1999/1169
English
Page 2

Annex
Letter dated 11 November 1999 from the Permanent
Representative of Australia to the United Nations
addressed to the Secretary-General

In accordance with Security Council resolution 1264 (1999) of
15 September 1999, I attach the fourth periodic report on the operations of the
International Force, East Timor (INTERFET) (see appendix). I would appreciate
your making the report available to the Security Council.

Penny WENSLEY
Ambassador
Permanent Representative

(Signed)

/...

S/1999/1169
English
Page 3

Appendix
Fourth periodic report to the United Nations on the
operations of the International Force, East Timor
27 October to 10 November 1999

I.

INTRODUCTION

1.
In the period since the last report to the Security Council, the
International Force, East Timor (INTERFET) has consolidated its control over the
entire territory of East Timor. The main challenge to INTERFET progress
throughout its deployment has been the hostile activity of militia groups. The
continuing resolve shown by INTERFET in countering the militia, combined with
the steadily declining support offered by elements of Tentara Nasional
Indonesia (TNI), has now succeeded in deterring and undermining militia
activity. While this situation remains, it is very unlikely that the militia
will be able to pose a significant continuing threat to the security of East
Timor, though it is possible that the militias could re-emerge as a low-level
threat. In summary, INTERFET has made very significant progress in restoring
peace and security to East Timor.
2.
The main challenges for the remainder of 1999 are humanitarian: the return
of internally displaced persons to East Timor (particularly from West Timor),
their successful reintegration into East Timorese society and the commencement
of reconstruction. The United Nations Transitional Administration in East Timor
(UNTAET) has the primary responsibility in meeting these challenges: INTERFET
has a supporting role, within its force capabilities. For INTERFET, the focus
moves to preparing for an early transition to a United Nations peacekeeping
operation, without any degradation in peace and security.

II.

COOPERATION WITH THE GOVERNMENT OF INDONESIA

3.
Throughout the reporting period, INTERFET dealings with Indonesian
authorities, including TNI, have continued to be cordial and cooperative.
4.
The remaining TNI contingent and Indonesian Government task force officials
withdrew from East Timor on 31 October.
5.
On 29 October, INTERFET, TNI and the Polisi Republik Indonesia (POLRI)
completed a joint report on the 10 October shooting incident at Motaain (see
S/1999/1052, S/1999/1055 and S/1999/1072, para. 14). The report has been
forwarded to the Secretary-General. It contains a range of recommendations for
preventing accidental or unintentional encounters between INTERFET and TNI/POLRI
in border regions. It also recommends that the United Nations and Indonesia
reach agreement on the land and maritime boundaries separating East and West
Timor, including the enclave. Discussions on these issues have taken place
between INTERFET and TNI officers at the local level, although these have been

/...

S/1999/1169
English
Page 4

hampered by the absence of direct contact between the Commander of INTERFET and
his Indonesian counterpart.
6.
Following Indonesia’s declaration that East Timor was no longer part of
Indonesia, INTERFET notified the Government of Indonesia on 2 November that it
would commence aerial reconnaissance flights by RF-111 aircraft over East Timor
to provide an accurate assessment of infrastructure damage and to verify the
accuracy of INTERFET maps. The first flights took place on 5 and 7 November.
7.
TNI has confirmed that the INTERFET status of forces arrangement providing
for sea and air access to the Oecussi enclave remains in force now that the
enclave has passed from Indonesian control. The Government of Indonesia does
not place any restrictions on, or seek diplomatic clearances for, air and sea
travel via designated routes between East Timor and the Oecussi enclave (and
Atauro Island).
8.
Support for militias by TNI elements has continued to decline throughout
the period of the report, and INTERFET welcomes this. There are some
indications that militia groups are redirecting their efforts to the political
sphere.
9.
Indonesia has established its own inquiry into possible crimes and human
rights abuses in East Timor (the "Komnasham Inquiry") and has sought the
cooperation of UNTAET and INTERFET in conducting investigations in East Timor.
Discussions on this issue are continuing.

III.

PROGRESS AGAINST THE MANDATE OF INTERFET

10. INTERFET includes forces from 17 countries: Australia, Brazil, Canada,
France, Germany, Ireland, Italy, Malaysia, New Zealand, Norway, the Philippines,
Portugal, the Republic of Korea, Singapore, Thailand, the United Kingdom of
Great Britain and Northern Ireland and the United States of America.
Contingents from Denmark and Kenya will deploy before the end of November, and a
number of other countries are finalizing arrangements to deploy after that. The
total number of INTERFET personnel in East Timor as at 10 November was over
9,400 (approximately 5,300 Australians and 4,100 other nationals).
11. There have been no significant security incidents in East Timor since the
last report. INTERFET troops have continued to conduct patrols, staff
checkpoints and escort convoys and facilitate humanitarian operations.
12. Dili continues to show signs of stability and a return to life as normal.
More than 70,000 displaced residents have returned, bringing the city’s
population to roughly half its pre-ballot level. Refugees are now returning to
Dili from West Timor and other parts of East Timor, but also from other parts of
Indonesia and from Darwin, Australia. Work on rebuilding the city’s
infrastructure has begun. The lack of suitable accommodations, resulting from
the post-ballot destruction, remains an impediment to the return of more
displaced residents. The onset of the wet season has reinforced the urgent need
for camp accommodation and construction stores. INTERFET and the East Timor
Public Works Department are jointly coordinating the cleaning out of the main
/...

S/1999/1169
English
Page 5

drains in Dili. The quality of health and sanitation will remain of concern
over the coming months.
13. In the eastern districts, Thai forces based at Baucau and Viqueque,
Philippines forces based at Manatuto and Lacluber, and Korean forces based at
Los Palos have consolidated their security presence and expanded their
humanitarian and civic action activities.
14. INTERFET forces in the west have maintained a high tempo of border patrols,
despite deteriorating road conditions with the onset of the wet season. The New
Zealand, Canadian and Irish contingents have expanded their operations into the
border area of Kova Lima district and the neighbouring Ainaro district. At the
local level, INTERFET and TNI are working together to institute appropriate
local arrangements for border management, including for the transfer of
displaced East Timorese.
15. INTERFET has also consolidated its presence throughout the Oecussi enclave.
The militia threat against the enclave is greater than the threat against other
parts of East Timor, but it is still assessed as being low. INTERFET, UNTAET
and TNI have agreed that the mass return of displaced East Timorese from West
Timor into the enclave is a high priority, and INTERFET anticipates a steady
increase in the number of returnees. INTERFET will deploy additional elements
into the enclave to ensure that the stable security environment is not affected
by a large influx of East Timorese. These additional forces will conduct
patrols and assist with the provision of humanitarian aid.
16. INTERFET estimates that there are between 150,000 and 200,000 displaced
East Timorese remaining in West Timor. The Government of Indonesia has
indicated that those wishing to return to East Timor should be able to do so.
Militia intimidation in the refugee camps continues, but TNI appears to be
moving to counter this. Informal liaison between INTERFET and TNI commanders
along the East Timor-West Timor border and the borders of the Oecussi enclave
has led to the negotiation of border crossings for some displaced persons. This
is expected to continue on an ad hoc basis until a broad blanket agreement is
reached between INTERFET and TNI for border crossing. INTERFET and the Office
of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR) sponsored
transportation of displaced persons by sea and air is continuing. The Office
for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs predicts that the successful return
of refugees by land could cause far greater numbers of displaced persons to
attempt land crossings without direct INTERFET support.
17. INTERFET understands that UNHCR and the International Organization for
Migration have not been advised by the Indonesian authorities of all refugee
camps in West Timor and only have access to some camps. It is imperative that
these organizations have access to all camps to expedite the return of displaced
persons to East Timor so as to minimize the impact of the relocation on the
local infrastructure. Within the limits of its force capability, INTERFET is
working with UNHCR to achieve this goal, with the cooperation of the Government
of Indonesia.

/...

S/1999/1169
English
Page 6

18. With the restoration of peace and security in East Timor, the majority of
INTERFET forces are now conducting activities more aligned with a policing
function than the military tasks outlined in the mandate of INTERFET.

IV.

TRANSITION TO UNTAET

19. The appointment of Sergio Vieira de Mello as Special Representative of the
Secretary-General and Transitional Administrator for East Timor has given
impetus to planning for UNTAET. It is warmly welcomed by INTERFET. His
anticipated arrival in East Timor in mid-November will be an important milestone
in the transition process.
20. Since the adoption of Security Council resolution 1272 (1999) on
25 October, UNTAET has established a presence in Dili and started to develop
relationships with INTERFET and with the East Timorese, including leaders of the
National Council of Timorese Resistance. UNTAET relations with INTERFET have
been productive and cooperative.
21. With the continued success of INTERFET, conditions are moving towards the
point where the transition to a peacekeeping operation under UNTAET can take
place. Australia, as the leading contributor to INTERFET, and the United
Nations Department of Peacekeeping Operations have agreed that the preferred
transition period is mid-January. The Commander of INTERFET advises that, on
the basis of current and anticipated security conditions, this date is
reasonable.
22. To achieve a timely transition to a United Nations peacekeeping operation,
it is important that the planning process be accelerated. INTERFET would
welcome the early deployment of the advance headquarters of the peacekeeping
operation and early discussions between UNTAET and INTERFET on the conditions
for and requirements of the transition.
23. The early appointment of the senior leadership of the peacekeeping
operation, including the Force Commander, will also facilitate an early
transition date and assist the United Nations efforts to secure firm commitments
of forces from contributing countries.
24. A transition in January-February roughly accords with the resources
available from the INTERFET Trust Fund to sustain non-self-funding INTERFET
contingents. Delay beyond this period would necessitate additional Trust Fund
contributions. This further underscores the importance of an early transition.

V.

OUTLOOK

25. INTERFET has made significant progress in restoring peace and security
throughout East Timor in advance of a January transition to an UNTAET
peacekeeping operation. Future operations will facilitate further improvements
in the overall security and humanitarian situation. INTERFET has successfully
marginalized the militias and their capacity to threaten the safety of the East
Timorese people.
/...

S/1999/1169
English
Page 7

26. In view of the increasingly benign security environment, the focus of
attention should now turn to improving the humanitarian situation in East Timor,
facilitating the return of internally displaced persons, expanding and deepening
the UNTAET presence and ensuring an early transition to a peacekeeping
operation.

-----
