S/PV.7666

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-first year

7666th meeting

Wednesday, 6 April 2016, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Liu Jieyi . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(China)

Members:

Angola. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Egypt. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Japan. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Malaysia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
New Zealand. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Senegal . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Spain. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ukraine. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Uruguay. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Lucas
Mr. Aboulatta
Mr. Bertoux
Mr. Yoshikawa
Mr. Ibrahim
Mr. Van Bohemen
Mr. Iliichev
Mr. Barro
Mr. González de Linares Palou
Mr. Yelchenko
Mr. Rycroft
Mr. Pressman
Mr. Rosselli
Mr. Ramírez Carreño

Agenda
Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan
Report of the Secretary-General on the African Union-United Nations Hybrid
Operation in Darfur (S/2016/268)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

16-09695 (E)
*1609695*

S/PV.7666

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

The meeting was called to order at 10.05 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and
South Sudan
Report of the Secretary-General on the African
Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in
Darfur (S/2016/268)
The President (spoke in Chinese): In accordance
with rule 37 of the Council’s provisional rules of
procedure, I invite the representative of the Sudan to
participate in this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite Mr. Hervé
Ladsous, Under-Secretary-General for Peacekeeping
Operations, to participate in this meeting.
The Security Council will now begin its consideration
of the item on its agenda.
I wish to draw the attention of Council members
to document S/2016/268, which contains the report of
the Secretary-General on the African Union-United
Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur.
I now give the floor to Mr. Ladsous.
Mr. Ladsous (spoke in French): I thank you,
Mr. President, for this new opportunity to brief the
Security Council on the situation in Darfur and
the activities of the African Union-United Nations
Hybrid Operation in Darfur (UNAMID). The report
of the Secretary-General (S/2016/268), which you have
before you, Sir, provides an update and analysis of the
political and security situation in Darfur. The report
also charts the operational context in which UNAMID
is currently functioning, as well as the activities being
carried out by the mission within the framework of the
implementation of its mandate. I would like to limit my
remarks today to a few key points of this report, while
also addressing some of the major developments that
have occurred since its publication last month.
Since my previous briefing to the Council (see
S/PV.7608), on 25 January 2016, the security situation
in Darfur has essentially been marked by fighting
between Government forces and those of the Sudan
Liberation Army/Abdul Wahid (SLA-Abdul Wahid)
in the Jebel Marra region, which straddles three
2/6

06/04/2016

States of Darfur — North Darfur, Central Darfur and
South Darfur. The fighting, whose warning signs and
preparations were visible at the end of the rainy season
last year, in October, intensified in mid-January this
year following an apparent ambush by SLA-Abdul
Wahid rebels against a convoy of Government forces in
early January. In response to the attack, the Sudanese
Government launched a large-scale — it must be
said — military operation against rebel positions across
the entire Jebel Marra region.
(spoke in French)
In late February, the Government announced that
the military operation had been a success and made
possible the dismantling of most of the bases of the
Sudan Liberation Army/Abdul Wahid, the surrender of
hundreds of its fighters and some of its military leaders
and the taking of control by Government forces of the
Jebel Marra region, with the exception of some residual
pockets of resistance. For its part, the Sudan Liberation
Army/Abdul Wahid contradicted that assessment and
stated that its forces had repelled the Government
offensive and that it continued to maintain a strong
presence in Jebel Marra.
As noted in the report, it is difficult for us, at this
stage, to establish an objective assessment of the fighting
because of access restrictions imposed on UNAMID
in Jebel Marra. However, from various sources of
information we have received confirming this, what
we can say at present is that clashes and air strikes are
continuing. For instance, fighting was still reported to
be taking place on 11 March in various localities north
of Kass, South Darfur. Additional fighting took place
Sorong, Central Darfur, on 17 and 23 March, as well
as in Kadingo and Kwila on 19 March. We continue to
receive reports of Government troop reinforcements in
Golo and Guldo, Central Darfur, which by all accounts
is the epicentre of clashes.
(spoke in English)
The security situation in other parts of Darfur
remained fragile, with underlying tensions among and
between local tribes over access to, the use and the
management of land, water and other resources, leading
to persistent outbreaks of intercommunal conflict
despite the measures taken by the local authorities to
contain the clashes. UNAMID continues to support
the efforts by the Government to mediate these
conflicts and consistently advocates for comprehensive
measures that seek to address their root causes. But the
16-09695

06/04/2016

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

proliferation of small arms and the presence of various
militia groups have meant an increase in criminality
and various types of banditry against civilians. In spite
of some improvements, the general weakness of the rule
of law across Darfur results in such violations largely
going unpunished.
The escalation of fighting in Jebel Marra has led to
large-scale displacement, especially from mid-January
to late March. Humanitarian organizations estimate
that, as of 31 March, at least 138,000 people from Jebel
Marra had been newly displaced in North, Central and
South Darfur. Due to the access restrictions imposed
by the Government, the exact number of civilian
casualties from the recent wave of belligerence cannot
yet be ascertained. Those restrictions, particularly in
Central Darfur, have further prevented UNAMID and
humanitarian actors from responding to needs of the
displaced for protection and humanitarian support.
Despite the volatile security situation and the
considerable challenges described in the report,
UNAMID has remained steadfast in the implementation
of its strategic priorities and in addressing key
challenges to the implementation of its mandate. With
the new outbreak of fighting in Jebel Marra, the mission
has focused its efforts on ensuring the protection of
civilians and the displaced. In that regard, UNAMID
has established protective areas near displacement
sites in Sortony, Kabkabiya, Tawila and Nertiti, where
a total of approximately 103,000 persons have sought
refuge. That led UNAMID to reinforce its military
and police presence in the area and to intensify dayand-night patrols in order to maintain security and law
and order. The mission has further been supporting the
coordination of, and provided security and logistical
support for, the delivery of humanitarian assistance,
while also engaging the parties to immediately cease
hostilities and for the Government to allow immediate,
full and unhindered access.
Concurrent to that volatile security environment,
the political process to settle the Darfur conflict remains
polarized. The referendum on the administrative status
of Darfur — to determine whether Darfur would become
a single region or retain the current five subregional
divisions as provided by the Doha Document for Peace
in Darfur — is scheduled to take place from 11 to
13 April. The criteria for voter eligibility have proved
to be controversial, as many stakeholders argue that
all Darfuris should be allowed to participate in the
voting. Some Sudanese political parties participating in

S/PV.7666

the National Dialogue Conference in Khartoum have
also expressed concern about what they describe as
the unsuitable timing of the process given the current
fighting and the additional displacement in Jebel Marra.
Despite several meetings that took place under
the auspices of the African Union High-level
Implementation Panel, progress in political efforts to
reach a sustainable resolution of the conflict through
inclusive dialogue remained elusive. While the SLAAbdul Wahid rejected the talks with the Government,
the recent informal meetings between the Government
and the Justice and equality Movement-Gibril Ibrahim
and the Sudan Liberation Army/Minni Minawi in
Debre Zeit, Ethiopia, ended without an agreement.
Following strategic consultations in Addis Ababa on
21 March on the cessation of hostilities in Darfur and
the two Areas and on the way forward on the national
dialogue, the Government signed a draft road map
presented by the High-level Implementation Panel,
while the representatives of the opposition refused
and asked for more time, arguing that the road map
endorsed the non-inclusive national dialogue taking
place by qualifying it as “national”. On 28 March,
the Secretary-General welcomed the road map, which
would constitute a valuable step towards ending the
war, provide assistance to communities in need and
enhance the environment for an inclusive national
dialogue. Furthermore, the Secretary-General called
on the Government to fully abide by the road map and
urged the other parties to sign it as well.
Let me now turn briefly to the relationship between
UNAMID and the Government of the Sudan. I would
like to highlight the importance of a renewed partnership
in that context. Since their arrival in the Sudan, both
the Joint Special Representative and his Deputy have
actively engaged with the Sudanese authorities, who
have indicated their readiness to improve cooperation
with the mission and to re-engage in discussions on the
exit strategy.
On 22 March here in New York, the United Nations,
the African Union and the Government of the Sudan
held a strategic tripartite meeting, which I co-chaired
with the African Union Commissioner for Peace and
Security, Mr. Smail Chergui, and the Under-Secretary
of the Foreign Ministry of the Sudan, Mr. Abd Elghani
Elnaiem Awad Elkarim. In accordance with the outcome
of the meeting, concrete steps by the Government are
required in terms of lifting restrictions on the mission’s
operations, including customs clearances, visas and

16-096953/6

S/PV.7666

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

access to Darfur overall, including conflict areas. I can
report that some significant steps have been taken by
the Government of the Sudan since then.
Next week, the African Union, the United Nations
and the Government of the Sudan will resume
their engagement on the exit strategy based on the
parameters set by the Security Council and by the
African Union Peace and Security Council. A critical
step in that process will be the development of agreed
criteria for measuring progress towards UNAMID’s
benchmarks as defined by resolution 2228 (2015) and
the communiqués of the African Union Peace and
Security Council of 22 June and 31 July 2015.
It is important that the members of the Council
impress upon all the parties to the conflict in Darfur
that a political solution remains the only viable option.
The pursuit of political objectives through military
means over the past decade has only contributed to
the prolonged suffering of the civilian population. I
therefore reiterate the call of the Secretary-General to
the Government of the Sudan and the SLA/Abdul Wahid
to cease hostilities immediately in Jebel Marra and to
commit to peaceful negotiations, without preconditions.
The stability and recovery of the region is a
time-bound process, and it should be based on durable
solutions, including for the 2.6 million displaced
persons. Security is an essential element in addressing
this issue. Persistent insecurity, the presence of militia
groups and the threat of the closure of camps and forced
returns place internally displaced persons at risk of
violence and harassment. In that regard, I am concerned
by the Government’s continued narrative that displaced
persons would need to leave their camps. Such is not
possible without durable solutions based on security
and the necessary socioeconomic prerequisites for the
internally displaced persons and returning refugees to
begin new lives in their areas of origin or in whatever
location they choose to settle. Within its protection of
civilians mandate, UNAMID remains committed to
supporting the Government of the Sudan in that regard.
The President (spoke in Chinese): I thank
Mr. Ladsous for his briefing.
I now give the floor to the representative of
the Sudan.
Mr. Mohamed (Sudan) (spoke in Arabic): At
the outset, allow me to extend our congratulations to
you, Sir, on your assumption of the presidency of the
4/6

06/04/2016

Council for this month. I wish also to congratulate
your predecessor, the Permanent Representative of
Angola, for his wise and effective stewardship of the
Council’s proceedings last month. Furthermore, I
would like to thank the Secretary-General for his report
(S/2016/268). As the report is lengthy, I would ask for
your indulgence, Sir, to take the time necessary to
comment on its contents.
I had hoped that the African Union-United Nations
Hybrid Operation in Darfur (UNAMID) and the
Secretariat would have assisted the Secretary General
by avoiding the inclusion of certain matters. We are
surprised to see certain paragraphs of the report that are
in clear contradiction of incontestable facts. We see, in
the assessment of the national dialogue currently under
way in the Sudan, an obvious contradiction between
certain paragraphs of the report and the statements
made by the Head of the African Union, the Special
Envoy of the Secretary-General for the Sudan and South
Sudan, and the Joint African Union-United Nations
Special Representative for Darfur — a situation that
causes us consternation.
The report states that,
“[w]ith the exception of the Popular Congress
Party ... all major opposition parties ... as well as
major Sudanese armed movements, continue to
boycott the process.” (S/2016/268, para. 20)
That conclusion reached in the report, which is presented
in the name of the Secretary-General, runs counter
to the statement delivered by the Secretary-General
himself on 28 March, in which he invited those who had
rejected the dialogue to join it, as well as the road map
agreement proposed by the African Union High Level
Implementation Panel. Not only does that necessitate
denunciation, Sir, it also requires investigation. Our
faith and trust in the Secretary-General requires that
we call upon him to take this matter seriously.
The overwhelming majority of the Sudanese
parties — approximately 81 of them — including the
armed movements as well as the majority of the Sudanese
people, who do not belong to any political party, took
part in the national dialogue. The President of the
Republic is obliged to implement the recommendations
that the participants adopted unanimously — or nearly
so, by a 90 per cent majority — as binding resolutions.
Such an important matter cannot be subject to
individual political whims because such would lead
only to continued conflict. It would also give the armed
16-09695

06/04/2016

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

movements a license to continue to commit acts that
lead to the deterioration of the security situation, and
to target and kill civilians. In that connection, I would
like to stress that the Sudan Liberation Army/Abdul
Wahid (SLA/AW), as per paragraph 36 of the report,
launched an attack with heavy weapons on 1 January
against UNAMID forces near the Kutum region. We
possess documented evidence that Abdul Wahid and his
movement threatened to kill citizens in Jebel Marra if
they refused to pay the ransom imposed on them under
duress. We have audiovisual documentation of that
incident, and can transmit that to you, Mr. President.
No dialogue anywhere in the world should serve
as an instrument for criminals. Regretfully, we note
that all noble endeavours being made to overcome
infighting in Darfur, including the Doha Document for
Peace in Darfur, which belongs to the United Nations
and the entire international community, including the
national dialogue, are being sacrificed and questioned.
That should — rather must — come to an end.
Most of the contents of this report visibly and
indelibly clash with the conclusions of the two
technical meetings between the Government of the
Sudan and UNAMID, held in Khartoum on 13 January
and 23 February. That leads us to demand complete
transparency with regard to the preparation of this
report. The offices of the Department of Peacekeeping
Operations and the Department of Field Support ought
to advise us on the stages of preparation of the report,
as well as on the role of the Secretariat in New York.
That is the only way to eliminate those contradictions.
Sir, you have already seen how the practical
agreement on the exit strategy elaborated by the joint
tripartite panel composed of the Government of the
Sudan, the African Union and the United Nations has
been thwarted here in New York. In the light of such
evidence, you would excuse us, Sir, if we felt that there
is a hidden agenda behind the continued presence
of UNAMID that is contrary to the provisions of
resolution 1769 (2007), which authorized and mandated
its establishment.
Throughout Darfur, large numbers of internally
displaced persons (IDPs) have managed to return to
their villages and to cultivate and harvest their crops.
To date, 300 IDPs have returned to their places of
origin, and preparations are under way for the return of
100,000 IDPs to their villages in East and West Darfur.
I should like briefly to shed light on the displacement

S/PV.7666

of citizens as a result of armed Abdul Wahid movement
activity in the area of Jebel Marra, which is located next
to two other areas in West Darfur. The report states that
there was displacement from that region. Unfortunately,
while the report refers to an area — Darfur — that is
equal in size to the Republic of France, it makes no
mention whatsoever of the cases of repatriation to
which I have just referred.
With regard to Jebel Marra, by way of example, we
would like to recall that in a statement on 18 February,
the United States Department of State asserted that
initial attacks by the rebel Abdul Wahid movement had
prompted a response by the Sudanese armed forces.
Control by Abdul Wahid over the livelihoods of
Sudanese citizens in Jebel Marra has ended, and the
roads have been opened between Jebel Marra and
other main areas in Darfur as well as other parts of the
Sudan. For the first time in 13 years, primary-school
students sat for general examinations. Levies have
ceased to be paid. So I would like to know how this
could possibly clash with the objectives of the United
Nations. How does this run counter to international
law and its categorical provisions, and how does this
contravene the Doha Document for Peace in Darfur? Is
there any cogent justification for such a report to place
the Government of the Sudan, whose people exercise
their sovereignty through it, on a par with an armed
movement that uses terrorism and violence to achieve
its political goals, and invite both of them to seek a
peaceful settlement?
We categorically reject the contents of paragraph
16 of the report, on the Sudanese judiciary. The
Sudanese judiciary has taken a number of exceptional
measures with regard to the five states of Darfur.
It redeployed judges in the municipalities that had
suffered from insecurity. It also carried out a project
involving a prosecutor for each municipality, with the
intent of extending justice throughout Darfur. The
judiciary cooperated with UNAMID and provided it
with information and statistics as per the contents of
paragraph 63 of the report.
This could be a perfect opportunity for the Council
to ensure that UNAMID does not allow its personnel to
enjoy impunity in the criminal cases that we reported
to them by memorandums from the Permanent Mission
of the Sudan in New York, as well as in the briefings
we made to the UNAMID representative at our last two
meetings in Khartoum, in January and February. We
do not want to address this any further. However, if the

16-096955/6

S/PV.7666

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

Department of Peacekeeping Operations asks us to do
so, we will definitely comply.
We wish to express our concern over the frequent
references contained in the report to the racial
dimension of the conflict in Darfur. This can only lead
to interference and to the fuelling and intensifying
of feelings of hatred. All the people of Darfur
without exception suffer from the horrendous climate
degradation afflicting Africa’s western coasts up to the
Sudan. Along the same lines, the conflict is integrally
connected with the various means of livelihood. For
instance, according to the report, shepherds are fighting
with farmers.
Here we would like to thank the European Union
for its recently announced endeavours to cooperate
with the Government of the Sudan with a view to
achieving stability, particularly in Darfur. That is why
we believe that the negative references contained in the
report stand in the way of accomplishing that goal and
only deepen the conflict.
In conclusion, despite the inaccurate information
contained in many of the report’s paragraphs, it
cannot avoid mentioning the positive developments
emanating from the conclusion and implementation
of the Doha peace agreement, and does so in the
following paragraphs.

6/6

06/04/2016

First, in paragraph 2, it points to the decrease in
intercommunal conflicts; secondly, in paragraph 35, it
mentions the reduction in the number of criminal attacks
and the increasing coordination between security
agencies and UNAMID in pursuing the perpetrators of
attacks against UNAMID; thirdly, in paragraph 40, it
refers to the release of all containers in Port Sudan by
29 February.
Here we would like to make an important remark:
that progress in releasing the containers is contingent
upon the resumption of technical cooperation in
Khartoum and the regular holding of technical
meetings between the relevant Government organs and
UNAMID in Khartoum, which we requested last year
upon reviewing UNAMID’s third report for 2015.
Fourthly, paragraph 41 notes that criminal attacks
against humanitarian organizations decreased to a great
extent during the reporting period; fifthly, paragraph 56
touches on efforts to protect human rights; and sixthly,
and lastly, the national human rights commission is
setting up branches in the states of Darfur.
The President (spoke in Chinese): I now invite
Council members to informal consultations to continue
our meeting on the subject.
The meeting rose at 10.35 a.m.

16-09695
