United Nations

Security Council

S/PV.8906 (Resumption 1)
Provisional

Seventy-sixth year

8906th meeting

Tuesday, 16 November 2021, 3 p.m.
New York

President:

Mr. De la Fuente Ramírez/Mr. Ochoa Martínez . . . . . . . . .

(Mexico)

Members:

China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Estonia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
India . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ireland. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kenya. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Niger. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Norway . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Saint Vincent and the Grenadines. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Tunisia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Viet Nam . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Gui Dan
Ms. Mägi
Mr. Murugasu
Ms. Bhat
Mr. McSwiney
Mr. Bailari
Mr. Paraiso Souleymane
Mr. Heines
Mr. Suprunenko
Mr. Phillips
Mr. Cherif
Mr. Weld-Blundell
Mr. Park
Mr. Phan

Agenda
Maintenance of international peace and security
Peace and security through preventive diplomacy: a common objective to all the
principal organs of the United Nations
Letter dated 19 October 2021 from the Permanent Representative of Mexico to
the United Nations addressed to the Secretary-General (S/2021/888)

In accordance with the procedure set out in the letter by the President of the Security Council
addressed to Permanent Representatives of Security Council members dated 7 May 2020
(S/2020/372), which was agreed in light of the extraordinary circumstances caused by the
COVID-19 pandemic, this official record of the Security Council will be supplemented by
a compilation of annexes (S/2021/952) containing the statements submitted by interested
non-members of the Council.

21-34173 (E)
*2134173*

S/PV.8906 (Resumption 1)

Maintenance of international peace and security

The meeting resumed at 3 p.m.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I wish to remind
all speakers to limit their statements to no more than
four minutes in order to enable the Council to carry
out its work expeditiously. Flashing lights on the collars
of the microphones will prompt speakers to bring their
remarks to a close after four minutes.
I now give the floor to the representative of Croatia.
Mr. Šimonović (Croatia): We express our gratitude
to Mexico for convening this open debate. We thank
the President of the General Assembly, the President
of the Economic and Social Council, the President of
the International Court of Justice and the SecretaryGeneral for their briefings (see S/PV.8906).
The United Nations provides the only universal
framework for finding common solutions to peace
and security challenges in order to save succeeding
generations from the scourge of war. For the purposes
of maintaining and sustaining international peace
and security, all principal organs should perform and
coordinate their preventive activities within their
respective mandates.
According to the Charter, the Security Council has
the primary responsibility for maintaining international
peace and security. However, in some cases it is unable
to prevent conflicts and atrocity crimes due to divisions
among its permanent members and the use of veto.
Therefore, Croatia welcomes and supports efforts to
restrain the veto power in case of atrocity crime threats,
including the so-called code of conduct and the FrenchMexican initiatives.
The General Assembly should utilize its own
powers to prevent conflicts and atrocity crimes more
effectively and respond to them when they occur,
especially when the Security Council fails to do so. It
should also use the annual debates on the responsibility
to protect to give the opportunity to all Member States
to address their concerns.
The Economic and Social Council can help to
address the root causes of instability, conflicts and
atrocity crimes. By helping to reduce inequality
within and between States and by furthering the
economic, social and environmental dimensions of
sustainable development, it can provide more stability
and resilience.
2/26

16/11/2021

The International Court of Justice plays an important
role in the peaceful settlement of international disputes
and in upholding and promoting the rule of law through
its judgments and advisory opinions. Member States,
as well as the principal United Nations organs, should
therefore seek its very helpful services.
Finally, the Secretary-General and the Secretariat
should further increase their involvement in conflict
prevention and atrocity crimes prevention diplomacy.
While conflict prevention diplomacy relies on classical
diplomatic efforts, the essence of atrocity crimes
prevention diplomacy is to convince people of influence
to refrain from committing atrocity crimes and to help
prevent them. Those involved in this specific kind of
prevention should be impartial, but not neutral; they
should always be siding with the victims, no matter
who they are and to which side they belong.
As previously mentioned, we need to improve the
activities of the main United Nations organs aimed
at conflict and atrocity crimes prevention and their
coordination. However, we should not rely on the
main United Nations organs only. The Peacebuilding
Commission should further develop its potential to
prevent the deterioration of situations in countries at
risk, as well as to build peace after the conflict and
prevent its relapse. Through the Universal Periodic
Review process, its recommendations and their
implementation, the Human Rights Council can do
more in terms of structural prevention and in making
countries more resilient to conflict and atrocity crime
risks. Its mechanisms, including special procedures,
can provide the Security Council with a timely warning;
they should therefore have better access to the Council.
Finally, regular meetings of heads of principal United
Nations organs as well as the Peacebuilding Commission
and Human Rights Council would contribute to better
coordinated and more efficient preventive work on the
part of the United Nations.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Ecuador.
Mr. Espinosa Cañizares (Ecuador) (spoke in
Spanish): As the Council recognized in presidential
statement S/PRST/2021/22, which resulted from
the fruitful debate of 9 November on exclusion,
inequalities and conflicts (see S/PV.8900), there can
be no sustainable development without peace or peace
without sustainable development. Furthermore, as Kofi
Annan put it, there will be no development without
21-34173

16/11/2021

Maintenance of international peace and security

security and no security without development, and
neither of the two without respect for human rights.
Now, when we focus on how to achieve those
goals, we must put United Nations system synergies
into practice so that efforts include all existing
interrelationships. In that regard, I am grateful for the
briefings made this morning by the Secretary-General
and all the Presidents of the principal organs of the
United Nations (see S/PV.8906). Ecuador endorses the
sixth paragraph of the presidential statement, in which
the Council reaffirms that
“sustaining peace requires coherence, sustained
engagement, and coordination between the General
Assembly, the Security Council, and the Economic
and Social Council, consistent with their mandates
as set out in the Charter of the United Nations”.
To that I would add the International Court of Justice,
especially when we refer to efforts towards the peaceful
settlement of disputes, which are part of preventive
diplomacy. Synergy between those bodies and the
Secretariat is also needed.
Here I pause to acknowledge the impetus that
Secretary-General António Guterres continues to give
to the preventive approach, focusing on the work of the
Organization in peace and security. I agree with the
approach contained in the report entitled Our Common
Agenda, which reminds us that the main promise of
the Charter of the United Nations is peace. Preventive
diplomacy is vital to the modernization of the United
Nations and multilateralism.
That brings me to my next point. As a result of
the process of revitalizing the work of the General
Assembly, Member States have unanimously and by
consensus maintained the invitation to the Security
Council, in accordance with General Assembly
resolution 58/126, to pursue initiatives to improve the
quality of its annual report with substantive, analytical
and material information. Without implementation,
the recommendations, requests and proposals for
interaction between the main organs of the system
become mere academic exercises and can erode the
system or turn it into an empty shell. That is why I
acknowledge the efforts of the members of the Council
to make progress in the implementation of the existing
recommendations. I believe, however, that still more
can be achieved.

S/PV. 8906 (Resumption 1)

Ecuador highlights and supports the continuation
of monthly meetings between the heads of the principal
organs and calls for the results of those meetings to
be circulated for the information of all delegations.
However, the synergy between the principal organs
is not limited to the close relationship between
their Presidents, but instead implies an ongoing and
constructive relationship on the part of all its members,
which in the case of the Security Council, the Economic
and Social Council and the General Assembly include
the Member States of the Organization. That is why
I welcome once again more open and participatory
debates like this.
For Ecuador, today’s debate is closely related to
what was discussed exactly a week ago (see S/PV.8900),
and I congratulate Mexico for organizing these debates,
as well as for supplementing the Council’s agenda with
significant and integrated discussions. The debate on
22 November on small arms and light weapons will
present a good opportunity to address the disastrous
consequences of illicit arms trafficking and diversion
to unauthorized actors.
In that context, I wish to announce that my country
is deeply shocked by the unprecedented violence that is
plaguing our prison system as a product of transnational
organized crime and disputes between gangs. Citizen
security is our first priority. Our national police and
armed forces are making efforts, under the coordination
of Government institutions and in full compliance with
human rights, to support pacification and prevention
efforts. We are grateful for the expressions of solidarity
and support received from various countries with which
we are willing to work, as well as the United Nations.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of the Bolivarian Republic
of Venezuela.
Mr. Moncada (Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela)
(spoke in Spanish): The Bolivarian Republic of
Venezuela is honoured to take the floor on behalf of
the delegations of Algeria, Angola, Belarus, Bolivia,
Cambodia, China, Cuba, the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea, Equatorial Guinea, Eritrea, Iran, the
Lao People’s Democratic Republic, Nicaragua, the State
of Palestine, Russia, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines,
Syria, Zimbabwe and my own country, all of which
are members of the Group of Friends in Defence of the
Charter of the United Nations. We thank the delegation
of Mexico for convening this open debate.

21-341733/26

S/PV.8906 (Resumption 1)

Maintenance of international peace and security

The Group of Friends considers the Charter of the
United Nations to be a milestone and a true act of faith
in the best of humankind. It is the code of conduct that
has ruled international relations among States for the
past 76 years, on the basis of such timeless principles
as the self-determination of peoples, the sovereign
equality of States, non-interference in the internal
affairs of States, and refraining from the threat or use
of force against the territorial integrity or political
independence of any State. Those are all basic norms
and principles that, in addition to being the foundation
for modern-day international law, remain as relevant
today as they were in 1945.
In that context, we express our serious concern
at the current and growing threats to the Charter
of the United Nations, which is the motivation and
reason for the very existence of our Group. We refer,
among others, to the growing resort to unilateralism,
attacks on multilateralism, claims of non-existent
exceptionalisms, attempts to ignore and even substitute
the purposes and principles contained in the Charter
with a new set of so-called rules that have never been
discussed in an inclusive or transparent manner, and
selective approaches or accommodative interpretations
of the provisions of the United Nations Charter. Those
practices contribute in no way to addressing, through
peaceful means and cooperation, the complex, emerging
and common challenges currently faced by humankind.
Quite to the contrary, they contribute to an increase in
uncertainty, distrust, instability and tensions around
the world.
The Group of Friends agrees that prevention is
at the heart of the United Nations, as reflected in our
pledge to save succeeding generations from the scourge
of war, and to that end, both the Security Council and
the United Nations as a whole have a responsibility,
as envisaged in Article 1, paragraph 1 of the Charter,
which provides for the adoption of
“effective collective measures for the prevention
and removal of threats to the peace, and for the
suppression of acts of aggression or other breaches
of the peace”.
The pursuit of peace is, indeed, a common
aspiration of humankind and a noble ideal that must be
a priority for the entire United Nations system and for
the international community as a whole. We therefore
support efforts in that regard. Nevertheless, we caution
against the invocation of the ideals of prevention
4/26

16/11/2021

for interfering in the internal affairs of States or
for undermining their sovereignty, their political
independence or the right to self-determination of
their peoples, including through resort to the use or
threat of use of force against their territorial integrity.
Such adventuristic approaches not only go against the
very letter and spirit of the Charter, but also have the
potential to undermine the credibility of the United
Nations. In that context, we also underline the primary
responsibility of States for preventing conflicts and
ensuring the wellbeing and protection of their peoples.
It is important to emphasize that prevention must
be based on the tools provided by the United Nations
Charter, particularly those referred to in Chapter VI on
the pacific settlement of disputes. In that regard, we
must also understand that there is no one-size-fits-all
solution to each and every situation, and that, if we
truly agree on the premise that there is no peace without
development and no development without peace,
then the root causes and structural drivers of crisis
or conflicts must be comprehensively and effectively
addressed, in the interest of world peace and stability.
Unilateral coercive measures of an economic
or financial nature or involving trade, which are not
in accordance with international law or the Charter
of the United Nations, impede the full achievement
of economic and social development, particularly in
developing countries, and have a negative impact on the
full enjoyment and realization of human rights. In other
words, such arbitrary actions and unilateral approaches
not only foster the conditions for poverty and inequality
but also represent a deliberate attack on the right to
development. Interference in the internal and sovereign
affairs of States, coupled with the imposition of socalled sanctions, apart from representing a massive
violation of human rights and producing great suffering
and pain on entire populations, foster the deliberate
exacerbation of conflicts and crises.
Therefore, all organs of the United Nations, the
United Nations system in general and the international
community as a whole must unfailingly reject the
promulgation and application, in all circumstances and
in the interest of prevention, particularly in conflict
situations, of those illegal measures. They must call for
their complete and immediate termination, mindful of
the fact that they have become structural factors and
fundamental drivers of contemporary crises.
21-34173

16/11/2021

Maintenance of international peace and security

In conclusion, the Group of Friends vows to spare
no effort in preserving, promoting and defending the
prevalence and validity of the Charter of the United
Nations. We reiterate our firm and principled position of
support and adherence to its very tenets, which not only
are the legally binding and agreed rules by all members
of the international community to govern our system
of international relations but are also indispensable for
fostering international peace and security, the rule of
law, economic development and social progress. We
must not lose sight of that as we mobilize to redouble
our collective efforts to advance our common agenda
and ensure that no one is left behind, while delivering
on the promise of the Charter that starts with “We the
peoples of the United Nations”.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of the Netherlands.
Mr. Zellenrath (Netherlands): The Kingdom of
the Netherlands thanks Mexico for organizing this
open debate on peace and security though preventive
diplomacy, which is certainly an essential objective for
all United Nations organs and the Member States.
Peace remains elusive in many parts of the world,
and the cost of conflict is staggering in terms of human
suffering, victims of violence, refugees and people
depending on aid. The financial costs of conflict are
also unsustainable. A famous study by the World Bank
has shown us that investing in prevention can save up
to $70 billion per year in costs incurred by conflict.
As the Secretary-General mentioned this morning
(see S/PV.8906), the United Nations system needs to
be able to address the cross-cutting issues of security,
climate change, health, development, gender equality
and human rights from a prevention perspective, with
greater effectiveness and accountability. Allow me to
make three points in that regard.
First, prevention and sustaining peace requires
an integrated and comprehensive approach across the
United Nations system, based on coherence among
economic, social and cultural activities. For structural
prevention across the pillars of the United Nations,
we need to address the root causes of conflict and the
prevention of large-scale human rights violations, which
could potentially lead to violent conflicts. Through the
good offices of the Secretary-General, communication
and coordination of the principal United Nations organs
could be strengthened in that regard. The visibility
of interaction and coordination among the principle

S/PV. 8906 (Resumption 1)

United Nations organs could also be improved, and we
call on all United Nations organs to further utilize the
information produced by United Nations bodies and
adopt a forward-looking strategy on prevention.
That leads me to my second point: the rule of law and
strong justice systems. The rule of law is indispensable
for upholding peace and security, as well as sustainable
development and human rights. As pointed out by the
Secretary-General in Our Common Agenda, a new
vision of the rule of law is direly needed to rebuild
trust among people, communities and the institutions
that serve them. Justice is an essential dimension
of the social contract, and we remain committed to
transforming justice systems to put people and their
needs at the centre.
The Netherlands is proud to host the International
Court of Justice, the principal judicial organ of the
United Nations. Accountability and the fight against
impunity are among the top priorities of Dutch foreign
policy. It is crucial for victims to know that, in the end,
the most serious crimes will not go unpunished and
that justice will prevail, because as we know, there can
be no peace without justice, and justice prevents the
resurgence of conflict.
My third point concerns the role of the
Peacebuilding Commission (PBC). When it comes to
prevention, the Kingdom of the Netherlands strongly
supports strengthening and expanding the role of the
Peacebuilding Commission, as is proposed by the
Secretary-General in Our Common Agenda. The PBC
brings together crucial actors to discuss prevention and
peacebuilding, including United Nations organizations
and Member States, regional organizations, international
financial institutions, non-governmental organizations
and, crucially, local peacebuilders. Therefore, the PBC
is strategically placed to support preventive measures
related to climate change, health, gender, equality,
development and human rights. Furthermore, the PBC
can further enhance Sustainable Development Goal
16. Now is the time to further capitalize on the PBC’s
advisory, convening and bridging roles.
As the United Nations instrument of first resort
to conflict prevention and response, the Peacebuilding
Fund has also proven to be an important vehicle to
bridge actors at the country level while incentivizing
cross-pillar coordination among the principal United
Nations organs. In order to enhance coordinated
impact on the ground, we need to make sure that there

21-341735/26

S/PV.8906 (Resumption 1)

Maintenance of international peace and security

is adequate, predictable and sustainable financing
for peacebuilding. That is why the Kingdom of the
Netherlands supports the Secretary-General’s call for
a dedicated amount to the Peacebuilding Fund from
assessed contributions.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Switzerland.
Mrs. Baeriswyl (Switzerland) (spoke in French):
Switzerland thanks Mexico for convening this
important debate.
Without inclusion, the puzzle of peace remains
incomplete, with many gaps to be filled. The SecretaryGeneral pointed that out last week. Similarly, preventive
diplomacy draws its strength from the linkages among
the different pillars of the United Nations, namely,
peace and security, development and human rights.
Strengthening cooperation among all United
Nations agencies and bodies is key to better preventing
conflict and building more equal and inclusive
societies. We have important instruments to prevent
crises and maintain peace and security. Let us use them
in a systematic and innovative way. Let me illustrate
that with three examples.
First, to improve the effectiveness and sustainability
of solutions to situations of crisis and violent conflict,
development and humanitarian actors must work in
partnership. Switzerland has made this the guiding
topic during our chairmanship of the Humanitarian
Liaison Working Group for the period 2020–2021. The
humanitarian affairs segment of the Economic and
Social Council has identified increased collaboration
among humanitarian, development and peace actors
in addressing food insecurity. That will not only save
lives in the short term, but also reduce vulnerabilities
and prevent the re-emergence of needs in the future. A
joint approach should be applied in specific contexts,
such as Afghanistan, to address the dramatic increase
in food insecurity.
Secondly, respect for human rights helps to prevent
conflict and promote sustainable peace. The new agenda
for peace outlined by the Secretary-General in Our
Common Agenda makes reference to that. Switzerland
is working to anchor human rights more systematically
in peace and security efforts, for example through the
Human Rights and Conflict Prevention Caucus, a crossregional group we chair together with Germany. Digital
cooperation can strengthen predictive analysis of root
6/26

16/11/2021

causes of conflict, including human rights violations.
The flow of information between New York and Geneva,
including between the Security Council and the Human
Rights Council, should be continuously strengthened.
Thirdly, coherent action by the United Nations,
its Member States and partners must build on national
priorities and strengthen local initiatives. The
Peacebuilding Commission helps to strengthen the
participation of women working for peace, civil society
and youth. An expanded role for the Commission could
strengthen coherence within the United Nations system
to unlock its prevention potential. We encourage the
Commission to fully assume, according to its mandate,
its role as a bridge-builder and to engage with all
entities that contribute to sustaining peace, including
the Human Rights Council and regional organizations.
The peace puzzle will never be complete without
the central role of the Security Council. A lack of
unity will lead to more suffering, lost lives and missed
opportunities for a better future. By speaking with one
voice, the Council can strengthen the common political
will to respond to the warning signs of violence and
armed conflict. As a candidate for the Security Council
and a member of the Peacebuilding Commission,
my country remains committed to prevention, early
warning and synergies between United Nations bodies.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Slovakia.
Mr. Mlynár (Slovakia): I would like to thank the
Mexican presidency for organizing this important
debate on such a timely issue.
The Charter of the United Nations establishes,
among others, that one of its purposes is to be a centre
for harmonizing the actions of nations in the attainment
of common ends. That means that the purposes of
the United Nations established in the Charter will be
achieved only through real harmonization, cooperation
and mutually reinforcing collaboration among its organs
and, through them, with the rest of the system. In that
sense, the issue of the maintenance of international
peace and security through preventive diplomacy has
to be at the heart of the work of all the principal organs,
within their respective mandates.
Slovakia attaches great importance to a
comprehensive approach to sustaining peace,
particularly through the prevention of conflict and
addressing its root causes, national reconciliation
21-34173

16/11/2021

Maintenance of international peace and security

and unity, including through inclusive dialogue
and mediation, gender equality, and respect for and
protection of human rights and fundamental freedoms.
I would like to seize the opportunity to once again
stress the importance that we place on the principle of
rule of law, which we consider to be the heart of the
international order. Emphasizing the impact of the rule
of law on safeguarding stable democracy and domestic
peace and fostering social development, we would like
to encourage all Member States to intensify their efforts
to uphold this basic principle of governance, which is a
prerequisite for tackling the root causes of conflicts.
Furthermore, the success of the Security Council
in fulfilling its responsibility relies, to a great degree
not only on the success of the General Assembly, but
also on that of other bodies, such as the International
Court of Justice. The work of the International Court
of Justice and the efforts of the Secretary-General in
adjudicating disputes among States are just a few of the
essential components for the prevention of conflicts and,
therefore, for the maintenance of international peace
and security. Slovakia believes that the International
Court of Justice fulfils that role not only through its
function of adjudication of international disputes but,
far more often, disputes that are an element of the routine
interaction of international relations. The connectivity
of the broader United Nations system is at the heart
of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development, as
the United Nations needs to be able to address crosscutting issues from a prevention perspective with
greater effectiveness and accountability. Sustainable
Development Goal 16 in particular is at the centre of
our attention.
Allow me to conclude by also focusing on the
Peacebuilding Commission (PBC) and the coordinated
and horizontal cooperation between the Security
Council and the PBC, an intergovernmental advisory
body that supports peace efforts. The two can respond
as an integrated unit to the challenges that are currently
threatening international peace and security. Slovakia
has proudly served these past two years as a member of
the PBC and this year also as a Vice-Chair, and we have
dedicated a great deal of effort to promoting people’s
participation and a partnership approach. We have also
focused a great deal of attention on security sector reform,
which is one of the key elements for effective conflict
prevention and successful post-conflict rebuilding and
stabilization. Direct experience clearly shows that a
nationally led, gender-sensitive and inclusive security

S/PV. 8906 (Resumption 1)

sector reform process can progressively deal with the
root causes of insecurity and fragility and create an
enabling environment for sustainable development and
peace to take place. Today we even have empirical data
that shows a direct link between security sector reform
efforts and the prevention of conflict.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Nepal.
Mr. Rai (Nepal): At the outset, I would like to
thank the Mexican presidency for organizing this
open debate on peace and security through preventive
diplomacy. I also thank the briefers who spoke this
morning (S/PV.8906).
The maintenance of international peace and
security lies at the core of the Charter of the United
Nations. To that end, all the principal organs and
machinery of the United Nations system must work in
a synchronized and coordinated manner. Peace can be
sustained only when its root causes are addressed. In
most cases, the root causes of conflict include systematic
discrimination and inequalities, poverty, deprivation of
freedom, denial of human rights and justice and lack of
rule of law, among others. Addressing those root causes
not only averts potential conflicts but also enables us
to achieve sustainable peace and development. In that
context, I would like to highlight the following points
for impactful preventive diplomacy.
The General Assembly should provide a normative
framework and adequate resources for preventive
diplomacy and hold meaningful interactions with
the Security Council, with a view to coordinating
sustainable preventive and peacebuilding strategies.
The Security Council should assess and examine the
evolving cases to address situations on time before they
escalate into armed conflict. Similarly, the Economic
and Social Council should continue to work closely
with both the General Assembly and the Security
Council for better coordination to ensure the effective
implementation of sustainable development. The role
of the International Court of Justice in promoting the
settlement of international disputes by peaceful means
is highly valued. The advisory legal opinion of the
Court should be utilized.
We should fully utilize the good offices of the
Secretary-General to promote preventive diplomacy.
My delegation acknowledges the role of the SecretaryGeneral and his representatives in mediation, facilitation
and dialogues to prevent conflict and secure peace. We

21-341737/26

S/PV.8906 (Resumption 1)

Maintenance of international peace and security

emphasize greater coherence and coordination within
the United Nations systems and its agencies, including
the Peacebuilding Commission and the Department
of Political and Peacebuilding Affairs. As one of the
largest troop- and police-contributing countries, Nepal
has been supportive of the integration of peacebuilding
components into peacekeeping operations from the
very beginning and at every stage. The Bretton Woods
institutions and regional organizations could also
play a significant role in addressing the root causes
of conflicts, which are prerequisites of preventive
diplomacy. Collaboration with those organizations
should be further enhanced.
In conclusion, strategies for preventive action should
be as comprehensive as the root causes of conflicts are
complex. We need the sustained political will of the
Member States to advance preventive diplomacy for
sustainable peace and development. Reinvigorating the
close cooperation among Member States, United Nations
principal organs, United Nations agencies, international
financial institutions and regional organizations are
critical for the maintenance of international peace and
security through preventive diplomacy.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Malaysia.
Mr. Aidid (Malaysia): Let me start by thanking
Mexico for convening this open debate. I would also
like to thank all the heads of the principal organs for
sharing their insights on this important topic (see
S/PV.8906).
Despite the appeal for a global ceasefire, we
continue to witness protracted conflicts and the
emergence of new conflicts across the continents. We
are all familiar with the devastating impacts of armed
conflict, especially the enormity of human suffering.
Last year, we committed ourselves to promoting
peace and preventing conflict as we commemorated
the seventy-fifth anniversary of the Organization.
Today’s debate is therefore an important reaffirmation
of our collective resolve to strengthen cooperation and
synergy towards the cohesive prevention, management
and resolution of conflict. Malaysia wishes to briefly
share four points on the subject before us.
First, with respect to the relationship between the
General Assembly and the Security Council, as the
Security Council acts on behalf of the General Assembly,
we underscore the importance of greater coordination
and transparency between the Council and the General
8/26

16/11/2021

Assembly, including with the latter’s subsidiary
organs, such as the Disarmament Commission, the
Peacebuilding Commission and the Human Rights
Council. We also stress the importance of ensuring the
full implementation of Security Council resolutions by
all members of the General Assembly. Accountability
is pivotal in ensuring justice and reconciliation and in
preventing future conflict.
Secondly, with respect to the relationship between
the Security Council and the Economic and Social
Council, there can be no sustainable development
without peace and no peace without sustainable
development. On that premise, my delegation believes
that the Economic and Social Council could play an
imperative role in supporting peace efforts and in
preventing conflict. The 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development provides the path to address the root
causes of and relapse into conflict. Its implementation
could reduce or eliminate vulnerability, fragility and
inequality, which could subsequently prevent conflict.
In that context, the partnership between special political
missions mandated by the Security Council and the
Economic and Social Council is critical to realizing a
comprehensive approach that links security with social
and economic development in building lasting peace.
We also encourage the Council to make greater use of
Article 65 of the Charter of the United Nations, which
provides that the Economic and Social Council may
furnish information to the Council and shall assist it
upon its request.
Thirdly, on the relationship between the Security
Council and the International Court of Justice, Malaysia
remains convinced that deliberations on contentious
political and security issues can be more effective when
they are reinforced by authoritative legal opinions.
We therefore urge the Security Council to seriously
consider Article 96 of the Charter and to make greater
use of the Court as a source of advisory opinions and
of interpretation of relevant norms of international law,
particularly with regard to long-standing issues that
affect international peace and security.
Fourthly, on the relationship between the Security
Council and the Secretariat, we urge the latter to use
all of the tools within its mandate to ensure the full
implementation of resolutions concerning peace and
security, including by undertaking investigations and
using mediation. In that regard, we also call for it to
make greater use of the country teams and the regional
offices. We also encourage the Secretary-General
21-34173

16/11/2021

Maintenance of international peace and security

to appropriately invoke Article 99 of the Charter,
which empowers him to bring to the attention of the
Council any matter that in his opinion may threaten the
maintenance of international peace and security.
Revitalizing and strengthening the interaction and
coordination among the principal organs is essential
to safeguarding international peace and security. We
hope that further improvement can be undertaken
collectively to rally the entire United Nations system
and all partners around the common cause of peace, as
we build stronger towards a new agenda for peace.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Egypt.
Mr. Mahmoud (Egypt) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I would like to congratulate Mexico on assuming
the presidency of the Security Council and for convening
this important debate on preventive diplomacy. I also
wish to thank the heads of the principal organs of the
United Nations for their extensive briefings.
Egypt believes that the best way to achieve peace
and stability in the world consists both in addressing
the root causes of issues that threaten peace and
security and preventing conflicts and crises from
happening in the first place. That is done in particular
by using preventive diplomacy to settle disputes that
may arise within or among countries and preventing
disputes from escalating into conflicts. We also value
the important roles of the principal organs of the
United Nations in preventive diplomacy and conflict
prevention in accordance with their respective mandates
and competencies.
The establishment in 2005 of the Peacebuilding
Commission (PBC), which Egypt currently has the
honour to chair, was an important addition to the tools
and efforts at the disposal of the United Nations to
achieve sustainable peace in situations of conflict. The
expansion of the role and scope of the Commission’s
work, along with the increase in requests for support
that it has received from Member States over the past
decade and half, demonstrates its important contribution
to supporting peace worldwide and averting relapses
into conflict. In that context, I would like to share
five points.
First, we reaffirm the importance of investing in
preventive diplomacy and conflict prevention efforts,
as emphasized by the Secretary-General in his report
entitled Our Common Agenda. Investing in the

S/PV. 8906 (Resumption 1)

prevention of conflict is a smart, low-cost and highyield investment. It must also respect the national
sovereignty and ownership of the parties concerned.
Secondly, we stress the importance of the concerted
efforts and coordination of the principal organs of the
United Nations to ensure that they work in harmony
and complementarily to prevent outbreaks of conflict,
in accordance with their respective mandates. The
principal organs can use the PBC as a forum to
build bridges among each another on the issues the
Commission is considering. The PBC currently holds
interactive dialogues and joint meetings separately,
each with the Security Council, the General Assembly
and the Economic and Social Council. However, holding
an annual meeting collectively among all the principal
organs and the PBC with a view to strengthening
coordination is an idea that could be worth considering.
Thirdly, we call on the Security Council to continue
to benefit from the advisory role of the Peacebuilding
Commission in order to prevent conflict and build
peace in many countries and regions. The Commission
also provides a forum for the exchange of expertise and
lessons learned.
Fourthly, we must enhance partnerships in conflict
prevention efforts among the United Nations, regional
and subregional organizations and international
financial institutions in a complementary manner
that leverages the comparative advantages of each
organization. Therefore, we would suggest that those
partnerships include joint analyses of the root causes of
conflict in order to foster solutions based on common
understanding and sharing roles and burdens.
Fifthly, we stress the importance of maintaining
peacebuilding gains in countries that are emerging
from conflict. We must also provide United Nations
teams in the field with the resources they require to
support building national institutions and capacities
and providing basic services to citizens.
Egypt reiterates its belief in the priority of
preventing conflicts and crises through preventive
diplomacy. In compliance with its obligations to the
United Nations, Egypt has resorted to the Charter
under Chapter Vi, Article 35, on the pacific settlement
of disputes, to bring to the attention of the Council the
issue of the Grand Ethiopian Renaissance Dam. That
issue constitutes a threat to regional peace and security
due to its direct impact on the lives of 150 million
people in Egypt and the Sudan, the two downstream

21-341739/26

S/PV.8906 (Resumption 1)

Maintenance of international peace and security

countries, as a result of the Ethiopian unilateral course
in the construction of a giant dam on the Nile River
without reaching an agreement on filling and operating
the dam, or informing the downstream countries of the
studies on security and safety, or completing studies
of the cross-border environmental, economic and social
impacts of this huge project
In that regard, we welcome the fact that the Security
Council shouldered its responsibilities in its adoption
of presidential statement S/PRST/2021/18, which
encourages the parties to resume negotiations to finalize
an acceptable and binding agreement on the filling and
operation of the dam within a reasonable time frame.
Egypt has accepted its obligations under presidential
statement S/PRST/2021/18. We expect the Ethiopian
side to adopt a constructive approach and abide by
the relevant Security Council directives, instead of
continuing its procrastination and intransigence, as we
have noticed a negative attitude from the Ethiopian side
towards the Security Council statement.
In conclusion, I thank you again, Mr. President,
for convening this important debate, to which I wish
every success.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Bangladesh.
Mr. Hossain (Bangladesh): I thank Mexico for
organizing yet another thought-provoking open debate
during its presidency. I also thank the heads of the
General Assembly, the Economic and Social Council
and the International Court of Justice for their remarks.
The idea behind establishing the United Nations
was based on preventive diplomacy. That concept is
well recognized in the Charter of the United Nations.
While the Security Council is specifically entrusted
with the responsibility for maintaining international
peace and security, it is the collective responsibility of
the United Nations to avert threats to peace. The other
principal organs, namely, the General Assembly and
the Economic and Social Council, take a broader view
to preventing conflict by taking actions that address the
underlying causes of conflict, such as socioeconomic
inequality, discrimination and weak governance.
Carrying out such structural preventive measures
requires the coherent and coordinated performance of
all organs of the United Nations in an integrated manner.
Over the years, the United Nations approach to
peace has shifted from a reaction-based approach to
10/26

16/11/2021

one of prevention. Successive Secretaries-General
have made valuable contributions in articulating that
concept. Addressing the drivers of conflict lies at the
heart of such an approach.
The world today faces many challenges to
international peace and security. Various new and
emerging challenges — such as climate change, poverty
and inequality, terrorism and violent extremism and
human displacement — have also added new dimensions
to traditional global threats. In such a complex scenario,
the importance of preventive diplomacy, which would
place all United Nations organs under a single umbrella,
cannot be overemphasized.
Bangladesh has always supported the United
Nations focus on prevention for ending and resolving
conflicts, including by leveraging the 2030 Agenda for
Sustainable Development, strengthening the rule of law
at the global level and bolstering the authority of the
General Assembly.
Operationalizing the concept of One United Nations
requires coherence, coordination and complementarity
among the principal organs, including the governing
bodies of United Nations entities. In that regard, close
and seamless communication in a horizontal manner
among the key organs is essential. Allow me to share
some ideas in that regard.
First, the Peacebuilding Commission (PBC) is
uniquely positioned to support the General Assembly,
the Security Council, and the Economic and Social
Council through its advisory and bridging role in the
sustaining peace agenda. We would like to see enhanced
communication between the PBC and the Security
Council with regard to addressing multidimensional
security challenges.
Secondly, as the principal entity responsible for
enforcing the decisions of the International Court of
Justice, the Security Council needs to fulfil its role
in a transparent and non-discriminatory manner,
including by supporting monitoring mechanisms where
they exist. It is equally important for there to be more
interactions between the Court and the other organs,
with a particular focus on implementing the decisions
of the Court.
Thirdly, the Organization’s presence in the field,
through its administration of funds and programmes,
can provide critical input regarding emerging challenges
and threats, as well as recommendations for their
21-34173

16/11/2021

Maintenance of international peace and security

early settlement. We welcome the briefings that the
representatives of those funds and programmes deliver
to the Peacebuilding Commission and the Council.
Fourthly, the United Nations needs to increase
the visibility of its principal organs vis-à-vis the
global community in order to demonstrate their joint
cooperation and coordination on the prevention of
conflict. A useful way to show that would be for the
Presidents of the Assembly, the Economic and Social
Council and the Council to organize joint media
stakeouts on a quarterly basis.
Finally, the Secretary-General’s recent report
Our Common Agenda calls for the reform of the three
principal organs to make the Security Council more
representative, revitalize the work of the General
Assembly and strengthen the Economic and Social
Council with a view to enabling the Organization to
address from a prevention perspective the cross-cutting
issues of security, climate change, health, development,
gender equality and human rights. We look forward
to implementing those important recommendations
through an inclusive and participatory process.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Turkey.
Mrs. Kocyigit Grba (Turkey): I thank you,
Mr. President, for convening this open debate. I would
also like to thank the Secretary-General, the President
of the General Assembly, the President of the Economic
and Social Council and the President of the International
Court of Justice, for their informative briefings.
We welcome the Security Council’s increased
focus on prevention at a time when our world faces
unprecedentedly complex challenges. Strong and
effective multilateralism based on the purposes and
principles of the Charter of the United Nations is a
prerequisite for security, stability, peace and prosperity.
Preventive diplomacy plays a particularly crucial role
in fostering dialogue and trust and managing security
challenges. We must remember that multilateralism is
more than a mere concept. The actions of Member States
determine its fate. When we succeed at multilateralism,
it is often hard-earned; when we fail at multilateralism,
we all fail together.
Therefore, as we reflect on the unacceptable levels
of human suffering in the world while we carry out our
discussions today, we must acknowledge the simple fact
that we, the Member States, have the power to mobilize

S/PV. 8906 (Resumption 1)

all the principal organs to uphold our duties under the
Charter of the United Nations. The Charter confers
the responsibility for the maintenance of international
peace and security to the Security Council. The General
Assembly, as the most representative and deliberative
policymaking body, is tasked to reflect the aspirations
of the people we serve.
The Security Council has on many occasions been
divided and unable to fulfil its responsibilities. It is
impossible to deny that the gap between the Council’s
responsibilities and its performance continues to grow.
The Council’s shortcomings can often be attributed
to the differences that exist between its members, in
particular its permanent members. The reform of the
Security Council is therefore an issue that requires
serious attention. As we begin a new round of
negotiations, we can work together to strengthen this
organ. We firmly believe that a more representative,
accountable and transparent Council would reinforce
global solidarity and cooperation at this critical juncture.
Moreover, we trust that the Council and the membership
at large will work to strengthen the implementation
of the Charter to formulate rules and processes that
expedite justice for those who violate the rule of law.
The lack of accountability for serious crimes signifies
our collective failure to mobilize all the mechanisms
and tools of the multilateral system available to prevent
violations from occurring and recurring.
The maintenance of peace and security is the
primary raison d’être of the United Nations, and the
General Assembly has a critical role to play in that
regard. Let us not forget that, when the Security Council
fails to fulfil its responsibility, the General Assembly
serves as a critical backstop for the maintenance of
peace and security. The relationship between the two
organs is therefore an important element of preventive
diplomacy. In that context, we expect the Security
Council to work closely with the General Assembly
to advance peace and security without encroaching on
their respective mandates. That would not only enhance
the accountability and transparency of the Council but
would also promote greater cohesion throughout the
system. After all, members of the Council are first
and foremost members of the General Assembly, and
non-permanent members are elected by, and accountable
to, the General Assembly. Neither the Council nor the
Assembly can achieve results it we neglect the symbiotic
relationship between the two organs.

21-3417311/26

S/PV.8906 (Resumption 1)

Maintenance of international peace and security

My region has borne witness to the Security
Council’s failure to effectively prevent conflict, which
has led to some of the worst humanitarian tragedies in
the history of the Organization. The Security Council’s
inability to take preventive action has led to the
outbreak of protracted conflicts, which leave Member
States with little option but to safeguard their security
through national measures. The internal dynamics and
decisions of the Council have reduced the role of the
United Nations to one of intervention during conflict
resolution, after the damage has already been done. If
we are to save succeeding generations from the scourge
of war, the Council must focus more on preventive
diplomacy and mediation in order to address the root
causes of conflict. Conflicts do not emerge out of
nowhere; neither do they evolve in a vacuum. Mediation
is an important tool throughout different phases of the
peace continuum. Timely interventions to mediate
among parties can avert hostilities. To put it simply:
preventive diplomacy can save lives.
The coronavirus disease pandemic has taught us
that multilateral action in an increasingly complex
environment requires innovation, flexibility and greater
cooperation between nations. Parallel threats caused by
conflict, as well as deepening inequalities resulting from
climate change, famine and technological developments,
are now combined with non-conventional security risks.
In that context, we welcome the Secretary-General’s
efforts vis-à-vis Our Common Agenda. It is clear that
the traditional approaches will not suffice. We call on
all the organs of the United Nations to work together to
protect the people we serve and, in doing so, enhance
our collective security. I assure you, Mr. President, that
Turkey will continue championing multilateralism and
upholding the Charter.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Liechtenstein.
Mr. Wenaweser (Liechtenstein): Liechtenstein
firmly agrees that the Security Council must work in
concert with the principal organs of the United Nations
in order to be effective in its efforts towards preventive
diplomacy. While the Council has the primary
responsibility for upholding peace and security, the
task of sustaining peace must be an effort carried
out the three pillars of the United Nations system.
We appreciate in particular, Mr. President, that you
highlighted in your concept note (S/2021/888, annex)
the role of the International Court of Justice. By
adjudicating disputes between States and upholding
12/26

16/11/2021

the rule of law at the international level, the Court
provides an essential platform for the maintenance of
international peace and security through the peaceful
settlement of disputes.
Unfortunately, we know from recent experience
that the Council is not always able to uphold the
mandate given to it by the Charter in Article 1. Political
disagreement concerning the fundamentals runs deep,
and the blocking power of the veto often looms large.
Where the Council is unable to carry out its tasks, other
bodies must be able to backstop its efforts.
To that end, along with the representative of
Turkey, we support a strong and active role by the
General Assembly as the central deliberative and
decision-making organ of the United Nations and the
guardian of international law. In recent years, the
Assembly has demonstrated in a number of instances,
most notably in connection with the situations in
Myanmar and the Syrian Arab Republic, that, where the
Council cannot fulfil its role, the Assembly is indeed
capable of stepping in. Liechtenstein will continue to
pursue initiatives aimed at underscoring the General
Assembly’s role in upholding peace and security,
including the possibility of mandating a debate every
time a veto is cast in the Security Council, without
prejudice to the outcome of such a debate.
We also reiterate the importance of the
Accountability, Coherence and Transparency (ACT)
group code of conduct, whose signatories commit to
taking measures to end and prevent atrocity crimes
when serving on the Council and undertake to not vote
against credible draft resolutions put forward to that
effect. The ACT code of conduct has been signed by
122 States, including 10 Council members, a majority
in any procedural decision. We encourage members to
change the political culture in the Council when faced
with the risk of occurrence of atrocity crimes.
Liechtenstein encourages the Council to make sure
its work with the other principal organs of the United
Nations to ensure conflict prevention is inextricably
linked to a human security perspective. That is put
forward both in the Sustainable Development Goals
and the Secretary-General’s recent report Our Common
Agenda, in which the insecurity of individuals is seen
as relevant to the Council’s mandate. Taking on such
a perspective would also help the Council to prevent
the kinds of conflict situations already on its agenda.
For example, the Council could focus on the potential
21-34173

16/11/2021

Maintenance of international peace and security

S/PV. 8906 (Resumption 1)

effects of climate change before it brings farmers and
herders into conflict.

turn, achieving sustainable peace. Transitional justice
is also a priority for the African Union.

A human security perspective would be a much
broader lens through which the Council could view
its mandate. Climate change, corruption, small arms,
pandemics and human rights violations would all
become relevant as and when they affect the security of
individuals. Obviously, the Council cannot be expected
to take on such a task alone. That is why working together
with the other principal organs of the United Nations is
so important. Other relevant bodies could also be key
partners in that regard. For example, the Council should
deepen its coordination with the United Nations human
rights bodies in Geneva. Human rights violations not
only manifest themselves in armed conflict, but they
are also frequently the root and proximate causes of
situations on the Council’s agenda. In particular, the
Council should hear from the High Commissioner for
Human Rights whenever applicable.

(spoke in English)

We also highlight the work of the Peacebuilding
Commission and the Peacebuilding Fund, which
together play an indispensable role in the work of
implementing many of the thematic agendas outlined
by the Council and can also provide an essential
bridging function in situations where peacekeeping
operations are discontinued or scaled down. We hope
to see that valuable collaboration increase in breadth
and scope, notably in the area of transitional justice
and on the climate-security nexus. It would strengthen
the United Nations ability to carry out effective
preventive diplomacy.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Belgium.
Mr. Kridelka (Belgium) (spoke in French): I want
to thank you, Mr. President, and your country, Mexico,
for giving me this opportunity to speak on the theme
of today’s debate, given that conflict prevention was
one of the most important priorities for Belgium during
our recent Security Council presidency. I would like to
focus on three points today.
First, I wish to underscore the importance of
combating impunity, in particular through transitional
justice, which can make a powerful contribution to
conflict prevention and peacekeeping. Establishing
accountability for human rights violations and the
most serious crimes is crucial. That means restoring
people’s confidence in inclusive institutions and, in

During our time on the Council, Belgium tried,
together with our South African friends, to bring
about the adoption of a draft resolution on transitional
justice. Transitional justice is one of the major lessons
that Africa has taught the rest of the world. There was
a very interesting policy document from the African
Union in 2019. We worked very hard with South Africa
but, unfortunately, the political context prevented us
from adopting the draft resolution.
(spoke in French)
The Security Council should play a greater role in
the area of preventive diplomacy. The entire system
of the United Nations, including its peacekeeping
operations, special political missions and country teams,
should all unite around a comprehensive and common
strategy. Transitional justice must be adapted to local
contexts, victim-centred, human rights-based and
gender-sensitive. It is important for the Organization to
speak with one voice on transitional justice in order to
help States to build their capacity, reform their public
institutions and, in turn, strengthen the rule of law.
Secondly, Belgium encourages cooperation
between the United Nations and regional organizations,
including through an ongoing dialogue between the
African Union Peace and Security Council and the
Security Council. Regional organizations such as
the European Union can contribute to preventive
diplomacy by engaging in joint context analyses and
information exchange mechanisms. We support the
initiatives outlined by the Secretary-General in his
Action for Peacekeeping framework, which aims to
foster coherent cooperation between different actors
within the same context.
Thirdly, we need to strengthen the early-warning
mechanism, in particular through the exchange of
information between the Security Council and the
Peacebuilding Commission (PBC), in accordance with
their respective mandates. The Commission should
fully exercise its advisory role by providing short,
focused, specific and actionable recommendations.
We encourage dialogue among the PBC and regional
organizations, international financial institutions and
the High Commissioner for Human Rights. We also
welcome the Commission’s adequate inclusion in its

21-3417313/26

S/PV.8906 (Resumption 1)

Maintenance of international peace and security

discussions of local and civil society actors, including
women’s rights organizations and young people’s
groups.
The Secretary-General has called for predictable,
flexible and long-term funding for the Peacebuilding
Fund, including in his report Our Common Agenda.
Belgium supports the Secretary-General’s call in that
regard. Ms. Sophie Wilmès, Minister for Foreign Affairs
of Belgium, recently agreed to allocate an additional
€2 million to the Peacebuilding Fund, bringing our
total contributions to the Fund since it was created to
$10.5 million. That contribution is testament to the
importance that Belgium accords to that instrument,
especially in the area of prevention.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Qatar.
Ms. Al-Thani (Qatar) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, we would like to commend you, Mr. President,
for inviting the heads of the principal organs of the
United Nations to discuss preventive diplomacy, a
matter of great importance to all of the organs and a
crucial element of the Charter of the United Nations.
I thank you as well, Mr. President, for convening this
open debate. I would also like to thank the SecretaryGeneral, the President of the General Assembly, the
President of the Economic and Social Council and the
President of the International Court of Justice for their
presence today in the Security Council and for their
informative briefings.
Combining preventive diplomacy efforts and
acting early to address the root causes of conflict is the
most efficient way to achieve lasting peace and avoid
the terrible consequences of conflict and its long-term
impact on peoples and States. Ensuring the primacy
of the principles of international law, the Charter of
the United Nations, friendly relations, the non-use or
threat of use of force, respect for the sovereignty and
independence of States and refraining from intervention
in their internal affairs all constitute essential elements
in conflict prevention.
Given the extent to which peace and security are
inherently linked to the development of rights, human
rights and the rule of law, it should always be a priority
to do everything possible to achieve these foundations,
on which the United Nations was built, and to avoid risk
factors such as poverty, injustice, exclusion, inequality
and discrimination at different levels. It is imperative
that preventive diplomacy efforts keep pace in a holistic
14/26

16/11/2021

manner with the evolution, diversity and complexity
of the factors leading to conflicts. Here, we see the
importance of the complementarity of the mandates
of the main United Nations organs and the need for
effective communication and cooperation among them
to ensure that the Organization’s efforts encompass
the various aspects of conflict prevention. This is one
of the purposes of the United Nations Charter. We
agree that the maintenance of international peace and
security through preventive diplomacy is at the heart
of the work of all the principal organs of the United
Nations, each according to its mandate. Accordingly,
it is encouraging to note the increased interest in this
necessary coordination, which is embodied in several
instances, such as the Peacebuilding Commission.
Qatar attaches high priority in its foreign policy
to the principle of consolidating international peace
and security by encouraging the peaceful settlement
of international disputes, and has adopted this
approach as an integral part of the country’s permanent
constitution. On this basis, preventive diplomacy and
mediation in settling disputes have become hallmarks
of Qatari diplomacy. The State of Qatar has become
one of the most active countries at the regional and
international levels in providing the groundwork for
mediation and the prevention of conflicts and their
escalation. In this context, the State of Qatar has made
intense diplomatic efforts and hosted many peace
talks to settle differences and disputes, which have
resulted in multiple tangible achievements. Among the
most prominent of those in recent times are the Qatari
mediation efforts in Afghanistan, which facilitated an
agreement to bring peace to Afghanistan in February
2020 is still continuing in the current circumstances.
Prior to that, the mediation efforts of the State of
Qatar and its preventive diplomacy in situations of
conflict and tensions in many regional files were praised
internationally, including by the Security Council,
and it was able to achieve constructive agreements,
such as the Doha Document for Peace in Darfur.
Recognizing the close link between sustainable peace
and development, the realization of human rights, the
empowerment of women and the rule of law, the State
of Qatar’s mediation efforts have been accompanied
by intensive humanitarian and development efforts in
order to strengthen the appropriate groundwork for
establishing and sustaining peace. In this context, the
State of Qatar has been providing relief support in the
Gaza Strip to meet emergency and development needs
21-34173

16/11/2021

Maintenance of international peace and security

S/PV. 8906 (Resumption 1)

and to develop infrastructure, amounting to more than
$1 billion, in order to improve deteriorating living
conditions and thereby contribute to creating conditions
conducive to peace.

emerging that are difficult to address in a traditional
manner, such as transnational criminal networks,
the evolution of weapons technology and the use of
cyberspace for nefarious purposes.

Qatar is also making significant efforts aimed at
addressing the humanitarian and economic difficulties
that Afghanistan is currently facing in order to help put
that country on the path of peace, security and stability.

Against that backdrop characterized by constantly
evolving conflicts, preventive diplomacy has had to
adapt and reinvent itself. Preventive diplomacy today is
conducted by a wider range of actors who use a wider
range of tools. In the context of the United Nations, the
preventive diplomacy actions that were traditionally
carried out by the Secretary-General now depend on
dialogue among the principal organs, which enables
crises and conflicts to be addressed from different
angles and in a cooperative manner.

In conclusion, the State of Qatar, while stressing
the importance of preventive diplomacy remaining an
essential element in the efforts of all the principal organs
of the United Nations, will work as a State Member of
the Organization to strengthen that principle in the
framework of the work of these major organs, as it is a
fundamental and influential principle in implementing
the purposes of the United Nations to maintain peace
and security and spare the peoples of the world the
scourge of conflicts
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Argentina.
Ms. Squeff (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish): First
of all, I would like to thank you, Mr. President, and
the delegation of Mexico for convening this important
open debate.
The term “preventive diplomacy” was first coined
by former Secretary-General Dag Hammarskjöld. Since
then, the good offices of successive Secretaries-General
have contributed to the peaceful resolution of different
types of conflicts, such as international conflicts,
internal conflicts, electoral disputes or border disputes.
The timely intervention of Secretaries-General has been
in many cases the main way to prevent the escalation of
conflicts and to defuse existing conflicts.
The nature of conflict and violence has changed
substantially since the United Nations was established
more than 75 years ago. While the number of wars
between States has decreased dramatically since 1946,
at the same time, intra-State conflict and violence
continues to increase. The vast majority of conflicts
today are internal in nature, fought between non-State
actors of different kinds, such as political factions,
terrorist groups or organized crime groups. Regional
tensions, the breakdown of the rule of law, absent or
co-opted State institutions, illicit economic gains and
resource scarcity aggravated by climate change have
become the main drivers of conflict. In addition, there
are new threats to international peace and security

The Charter of the United Nations makes it clear
that conflict prevention is a fundamental responsibility
of the Security Council and the United Nations system
as a whole. The Security Council has a crucial role to
play in supporting preventive diplomacy. Indeed, in
recent years, the Council has increased its engagement
and flexibility to address emerging threats before
they escalate and are included on the formal agenda
of the Council. Through its actions, the Council can
send important signals that can help to ease violence
and open a channel for dialogue between warring
parties, facilitating, for example, the work of the
Secretary-General or that of his Special Envoys in good
offices missions.
While the Security Council has generally focused
on operational prevention, the other principal organs of
the United Nations have pursued a broader approach to
conflict prevention by focusing on long-term structural
prevention, such as building resilience by adopting
measures to address the underlying causes of conflict,
such as hunger and poverty, lack of employment
opportunities, discrimination or lack of inclusive
policies. In that context, I wish to highlight the role
of the Economic and Social Council in the structural
prevention of conflicts. There are two initiatives that
have worked successfully to date that we can mention
as concrete examples, namely, the Ad Hoc Advisory
Group on Haiti, of which my country is a member, and
the Ad Hoc Working Group on Conflict Prevention and
Resolution in Africa.
In accordance with Articles 10 and 11 of the
Charter, the General Assembly has broad authority
to consider conflict prevention in all its aspects,
develop recommendations and bring to the attention

21-3417315/26

S/PV.8906 (Resumption 1)

Maintenance of international peace and security

of the Security Council situations that may endanger
international peace and security. The Assembly thereby
also plays a central role in the preventive diplomacy
architecture. Through its normative capacity and
deliberative functions, the General Assembly
contributes to creating an environment conducive to
conflict prevention.
Operational and structural prevention actions
are interdependent and complementary. That is why
preventive diplomacy cannot take place without
involving all the elements of the United Nations system.
In particular, we would like to highlight the role that the
Peacebuilding Commission has played in that regard.
The Commission, which is an intergovernmental
advisory body of the Security Council and the General
Assembly, ensures sustained attention is given to
those countries emerging from conflict, including in
their reconstruction and institution-building efforts
vital for post-conflict recovery. Those peacebuilding
tasks are crucial to prevent a relapse into violence,
hence why the Commission’s mandate is central to the
preventive system.
The United Nations is the entity that is best equipped
and prepared to carry out preventive diplomacy as it
has the necessary bodies and mandates to address all
dimensions of conflict in an interdisciplinary manner.
It is up to us to make it effective.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Germany.
Mr. Sautter (Germany): I would like to start
by expressing my gratitude to Mexico for this
important initiative.
Prevention should be at the core of our common
efforts for the maintenance of international peace and
security. Conflict prevention requires a whole-ofUnited Nations approach. At the same time, it is up
to all of us, as Member States, to support the United
Nations in fostering conflict prevention. Diplomacy,
mediation, the promotion of human rights, social
inclusion and respect for the rule of law are all critical
to prevent disputes from evolving into conflicts.
Conflict prevention, resolution and peacebuilding
efforts build a continuum and should not be considered
in isolation, yet too often that continues to be the case,
including within the Council. Today’s open debate
offers a good opportunity to recall a key instrument that
helps foster coordination, namely the Peacebuilding
16/26

16/11/2021

Commission and its mandate to “serve a bridging role
among the principal organs and relevant entities of the
United Nations”.
I share the Secretary-General’s conviction that
the Peacebuilding Commission has the potential to
mobilize the entire United Nations system for conflict
prevention and sustaining peace. To maximize its
impact, the Commission needs to freely interact and
coordinate with all relevant United Nations bodies. It
must be in a position to brief United Nations bodies on
its work, as intended in the twin resolutions (resolution
2558 (2020) and General Assembly resolution 75/201).
While the Commission’s interconnectedness with
the Council, the General Assembly and the Economic
and Social Council has continuously increased, other
relevant United Nations bodies are yet to be involved.
Both the Security Council and the General Assembly
rightly commended the Peacebuilding Commission’s
activities in 2016 by stating that “security, development
and human rights are closely interlinked and mutually
reinforcing” (resolution 2282 (2016), para. 4 (b)).
I would like to highlight the centrality of human
rights in conflict prevention. Respect for human
rights is essential to building resilient and inclusive
societies and to protecting all of its different segments,
including the most vulnerable groups. Systematic
violations of human rights, on the other hand, often
serve as precursors of violent conflict. Germany,
together with Switzerland, is co-chairing the Human
Rights and Conflict Prevention Caucus in New York.
That cross-regional group is dedicated to strengthening
collaboration between all three pillars of the United
Nations. We also put a clear focus on strengthening
human rights and conflict prevention during our term
on the Security Council in 2019 and 2020, including by
inviting the High Commissioner for Human Rights to
brief the Security Council.
Our common goal should be to make expertise
available to all United Nations actors in conflict
prevention and peacebuilding. Therefore, Germany
advocates dialogue and exchange between all three
United Nations pillars, including by providing the Chair
of the Peacebuilding Commission with the opportunity
to brief the Human Rights Council.
Let me conclude by stating that Germany’s
commitment to preventive diplomacy and conflict
prevention is unwavering. Both lie at the heart of the
21-34173

16/11/2021

Maintenance of international peace and security

United Nations and both require comprehensive action
by the entire United Nations system.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Azerbaijan.
Mr. Aliyev (Azerbaijan): I have the honour to
deliver this statement on behalf of the Movement of
Non-Aligned Countries.
At the outset, we would like to congratulate Mexico
on its assumption of the presidency in the Security
Council for the month of November. We would also like
to express our gratitude to the delegation of Mexico for
having convened this open debate and for submitting
the concept note on the topic (see S/2021/888, annex).
We thank the President of the General Assembly,
the President of the Economic and Social Council, the
President of the International Court of Justice and the
Secretary-General for their briefings.
Promoting and sustaining international peace
is a key issue for the Non-Aligned Movement. The
Movement and its member States have historically
opposed war and supported peace. At the eighteenth
Summit of the Non-Aligned Movement, held in Baku
in October 2019, the Heads of State and Government of
member States reaffirmed the validity of the purposes
and principles of the Charter of the United Nations
and the principles and norms of international law as
indispensable to preserving and promoting peace and
security, the rule of law, economic development, social
progress and all human rights for all.
The faithful observance of the principles of
international law concerning friendly relations and
cooperation among States and the fulfilment in
good faith of the obligations assumed by States, in
accordance with the Charter of the United Nations,
are of the greatest importance for the maintenance of
international peace and security. The Non-Aligned
Movement is committed to supporting and promoting
the purposes and principles of the Charter of the United
Nations and the principles and norms of international
law, including those relating to the territorial integrity
of States and the inviolability of their international
borders, the inadmissibility of the use of force,
non-interference in the internal affairs of States and
the right to self-determination of peoples under foreign
occupation and colonial or alien domination.
The Movement denounces and demands the repeal
of unilateral coercive measures against Member States

S/PV. 8906 (Resumption 1)

that are not authorized by the Security Council in
accordance with the Charter of the United Nations or
are inconsistent with the principles of international law
or the Charter, given their extraterritorial implications
and illegal character and as they violate human rights
and prevent the full economic and social development
of the peoples subjected to them.
Multiple, complex and newly emerging threats
and challenges to international peace and security
necessitate the renewal of our collective commitment
to the values of multilateralism and international
cooperation, which underpin the Charter of the
United Nations and the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development. Preserving and strengthening those
values is fundamental to promoting and supporting the
three pillars of the United Nations, namely, peace and
security, development and human rights.
The Movement reiterates its grave concern at the
increased and continued encroachment by the Security
Council on issues that clearly fall within the functions
and powers of other principal organs of the United
Nations and their subsidiary bodies. In that sense, the
Movement recalls that the principal organs of the United
Nations have distinct and separate roles, in accordance
with the Charter of the United Nations, and reaffirms
that they have to carry out only those functions and
powers that are established in their respective mandates.
Close cooperation and coordination among those organs
is highly indispensable in order to enable the United
Nations to remain relevant and capable of meeting the
existing, new and emerging threats and challenges.
In that context, at the eighteenth Summit of the
Movement, the Heads of State and Government urged
all States to uphold the primacy of and full respect for
the provisions of the Charter of the United Nations
pertaining to the functions and powers of the General
Assembly. They also called on the Presidents of the
General Assembly, the Economic and Social Council
and the Security Council to conduct regular discussions
and coordination among themselves regarding the
agenda and programme of work of the respective
principal organs in order to establish increased
coherence and complementarity among those organs
in a mutually reinforcing manner, respectful of each
other’s mandates, and with a view to generating a
mutual understanding among them, as the members of
the respective organs have vested, in good faith, their
trust and confidence in them.

21-3417317/26

S/PV.8906 (Resumption 1)

Maintenance of international peace and security

The Movement emphasizes the significant role played
by the International Court of Justice — the principal
judicial organ of the United Nations — in promoting
and encouraging the settlement of international disputes
by peaceful means in accordance with the relevant
provisions of the Charter of the United Nations and the
Statute of the Court. The Movement urges the Security
Council, the General Assembly and other organs of the
United Nations, as well as its specialized agencies that
are duly authorized to do so, to make greater use of the
International Court of Justice as a source of advisory
opinions and interpretation of international law within
the scope of their activities.
Faithful to its commitment to strengthening
its role as an anti-war and peace-loving force, the
Movement reaffirms its determination to work for
the establishment of a peaceful and prosperous world
and a just and equitable world order. We also renew
our determination to work for a multipolar world
through the strengthening of the United Nations and
its multilateral processes, which are indispensable to
our efforts to promote the interests of our nations and
humankind as a whole.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Albania.
Mr. Hoxha (Albania): Since first articulated by the
then Secretary-General of the United Nations, Mr. Dag
Hammarskjöld, the concept of preventive diplomacy has
undergone substantial changes. Preventive diplomacy
relates to the core of our profession, our collective work
and our continued efforts, as it aims to prevent disputes
and, more particularly, escalation into conflicts.
Preventive diplomacy remains highly relevant in
efforts to preserve peace and security. Today it is being
conducted by a broader array of actors, using a wider
range of tools. As mentioned in the Secretary-General’s
recent report Our Common Agenda, the United Nations
should focus more on system-wide cooperation and its
prevention efforts.
Preventive efforts should be seen as a most valuable
investment. The biggest return clearly comes in lives
saved. However, prevention may also have a strong
economic impact. The World Bank has calculated that
the average cost of a civil war is equivalent to more
than 30 years of gross domestic product growth for a
medium-sized developing country.
Let us take an example. The economic cost of the
conflict in Syria after 10 years is estimated to be more
18/26

16/11/2021

than $1.2 trillion. Even if the conflict were to end today,
its cost would continue to accumulate, if not double,
for another decade. Ten years of war has reduced the
overall life expectancy of Syrian children by 13 years.
That is staggering. Every effort invested in prevention,
however difficult or slow in producing the desired
results, is therefore far less costly and has the potential
of a multiplier effect for a positive outcome.
In order to put prevention at the heart of its work,
the United Nations should improve its mechanisms to
identify and consider the warning signs of potential
conflicts, and to act in advance. In that regard, as the
United Nations organ with the primary responsibility
for the maintenance of international peace and security,
the Security Council has a key role to play in prevention.
Over years, the Council has considerably improved
its work through greater engagement and flexibility
in addressing emerging threats before they are placed
on the Council’s formal agenda and promoting a more
proactive approach to preventive diplomacy. But that is
not always the case. It took the Council several months
to convene an open meeting on the conflict in Ethiopia,
where, unfortunately, every horrible and reprehensible
act on the books is taking place, with huge consequences
for the population and bleak prospects for the country.
Let me highlight a few key important points that we
think will help to improve the prevention capacities of
the United Nations.
First, the Peacebuilding Commission, as a dedicated
intergovernmental platform to oversee and guide the
United Nations system’s approach to sustaining peace,
should be empowered. A more effective Peacebuilding
Fund is needed, and we should explore innovative ways
to increase the contributions to the Fund as one of
the most important instruments to finance preventive
action on the ground.
Secondly, human rights and human rights
information are, and should be, seen as a valuable
set of tools for conflict prevention, peacebuilding
and sustaining peace. Human rights violations and
the escalation of conflicts are strongly interlinked.
Experience has shown that respect for human rights has
proved to be instrumental in setting countries on the
path to peace and development and averting escalation
to violent conflict. Human rights violations are always
a serious warning of a conflict to come.
21-34173

16/11/2021

Maintenance of international peace and security

Thirdly, we need to increase the meaningful
participation of women in United Nations peace
operations, including peacekeeping operations.
Women are promoters of positive change and they
can significantly contribute to efforts to increase the
preventive abilities and capacities of the Organization.

S/PV. 8906 (Resumption 1)

organs. Insufficient preventive measures at early stages
can only encourage an instigator to expand violence
in terms of both intensity and geographical scope.
The armed aggression against Ukraine serves as a
powerful example.

Fourthly, a strong and active partnership of the
United Nations with regional organizations plays an
important role in ensuring early warning, engaging
national networks and coordinating regional responses.
It is imperative to devise strategies on synergies that
can be created between the United Nations and other
international regional organizations in order to increase
efficiency and avoid overlap.

In some countries, a lack of democracy, no
accountability and the absence of the rule of law make
regimes prone to aggression. Restoring democracy
and respect for human rights are therefore crucial to
prevention. Since 2010, in the Human Rights Council
Ukraine has been promoting the initiative on the
role of prevention in the promotion and protection of
human rights violations. The relevant resolution on our
proposal was adopted.

As an incoming member of the Security Council
and as a member of the human rights and conflict
prevention caucus, Albania will support a broad
inclusion of human rights on the Council’s agenda. We
will work closely with all Council members, especially
like-minded countries, to increase the synergies
between the Security Council and the Human Rights
Council, as well as to strengthen the role of the Office
of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human
Rights in the activities of the Security Council.

I hope that events such as today’s open debate will
contribute to overcoming the long-standing ideological,
and even physical, separation of human rights issues in
Geneva, on the one hand, and security issues in New
York, on the other hand. The Security Council should
demonstrate a holistic approach to ensuring respect for
human rights and responding to their violations as an
essential element of efforts to prevent conflicts and
crisis situations.

To that end, Albania will engage to increase the
number of regular briefings to the Security Council
by the High Commissioner for Human Rights, as well
as civil society representatives active in the field of
human rights and conflict prevention. Albania will also
advocate for a greater use of the human rights reports
by the Security Council.
In conclusion, Albania will remain seriously
engaged in improving and strengthening United
Nations capacities for preventive diplomacy, as a wise
investment for peace and development and a must in
order to prevent the worst from occurring and being
endlessly repeated.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Ukraine.
Mr. Kyslytsya (Ukraine): Ukraine highly
appreciates the initiative of the Mexican presidency to
hold this important open debate, and we express our
gratitude to the briefers for their presentations.
As the concept note (S/2021/888, annex) rightly
points out, the maintenance of international peace and
security through preventive diplomacy is an issue at
the heart of the work of all United Nations principal

I commend the Presidents of the General Assembly,
the Economic and Social Council and the International
Court of Justice for their commitment to ensuring a
viable contribution by the respective principal organs
to strengthening preventive activities. Ukraine also
believes that the Secretary-General should use his
authority, as envisaged in Article 99 of the Charter
of the United Nations, more often and more explicitly
by proposing actionable recommendations to resolve
conflicts, protect civilians and ensure accountability
for serious violations of international humanitarian law
and international human rights law.
We commend the focus on prevention in the report
Our Common Agenda. We are ready to constructively
engage in a follow-up process, in line with General
Assembly resolution 76/6, adopted yesterday.
From our point of view, it is critical to explore
the preventive diplomacy toolbox for discouraging an
instigator from new flare-ups of violence, Imposing
sanctions and other restrictive measures against an
aggressor is a legitimate and adequate response aimed
at restoring respect for the norms and principles of
international law. It should not be blanketly regarded as
an illegitimate coercive unilateral measure, especially

21-3417319/26

S/PV.8906 (Resumption 1)

Maintenance of international peace and security

16/11/2021

when, from a permanent seat, an aggressor blocks any
preventive actions by the Security Council.

security that are below the threshold of outright
military conflict.

Preventive diplomacy must not lag behind
developments on the ground. The current situation on
the European Union border with Belarus serves as a test
of our ability to ensure efficient prevention. Attempts to
weaponize migration pose a serious threat to the entire
region, and Ukraine may be among the most affected.
We have no choice but to take additional prevention
measures and reinforce the protection of our border,
in line with the decision of the National Security and
Defence Council of Ukraine.

A good example of a serious challenge in this
context is the recent weaponization of civilians who
are currently trapped in the territory of Belarus. For
months, the Belarusian authorities have issued these
people visas and tricked them into the flying thousands
of kilometres — from countries that do not even share
a border with Belarus — on the false promise that they
would be travelling to a better future.

Strong preventive diplomacy is not optional.
However, it is successful if it delivers practical results.
Discussions, such as the one we have had today, must
be followed up on by concrete actions to break the cycle
of impunity and hold violators accountable.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Poland.
Mr. Szczerski (Poland): Let me begin by thanking
Mexico for organizing today’s timely and important
debate. Poland expresses its appreciation to all the
briefers for their insightful and inspiring remarks.
Conflict prevention efforts do not make the
headlines, but their main objective is for conflicts
themselves not to become headlines. This is what all
of us are striving to accomplish at the United Nations.
Making preventive diplomacy work should therefore be
right at the heart of twenty-first century multilateralism,
building upon the rule of law and human rights.
In this vein, Poland welcomes the focus of the
Secretary-General’s report entitled Our Common
Agenda, on the system-wide coordination of prevention
efforts. Effective preventive diplomacy requires crosspillar commitment from the entire United Nations
system, and it is key that the United Nations adopts the
preventive mindset in all its activities.
Today’s conflicts have become more complex and
fluid, often spreading across borders to affect broader
regions. Their multifaceted character requires taking
into account not only political military but also social,
cultural, economic and environmental aspects of
growing tensions and unrest. Investing in preventive
diplomacy is especially urgent today because the
international community needs to have the capabilities
to identify and tackle some grave risks to our common
20/26

Let me stress again that all those people were
admitted to Belarus with the consent and knowledge of
the Belarusian authorities. In so doing, the Belarusian
regime has unscrupulously engaged the country’s
apparatus to destabilize the situation in neighbouring
countries, which qualifies as a hybrid attack against
the European Union and NATO through their
eastern borders.
Belarus must assume its full responsibility for
people whose arrival on its territory it itself had
organized. Unfortunately, the Belarusian response is a
mix of denials, accusations and open threats. Minsk is
not interested in reducing tensions or in providing access
to humanitarian assistance for people it legally admitted
to its territory. The inhuman instrumentalization of
people by Belarus is detrimental to finding effective
solutions to the existing real, not artificially created,
refugee crisis.
Poland strongly believes that the time for preventive
diplomacy is now. We need to act before the situation
spins out of control and the security and stability of
the whole region deteriorates further. We therefore
call on the international community, first, not to
participate in the Belarusian disinformation campaign;
secondly, to withdraw its support for Belarusian policy
in international forums; and, thirdly, to assist in the
process of dismantling the human trafficking network
that contributed to triggering the crisis in the first place.
We must do all we can to prevent this type of hybrid
action from becoming a new practice of authoritarian
regimes to achieve their political goals. These actions
cannot be allowed to become a new form of triggering
international crises anywhere in the world. I would ask
that all of us think about that.
We call on all those who stand behind the Belarusian
regime to abandon the policy of building tensions and
support a policy of relieving tensions. This shows how
21-34173

16/11/2021

Maintenance of international peace and security

urgent and clear the need is for more coherent, sustained
cooperation among the principal United nations bodies.
Poland calls for the Security Council’s engagement
in advancing proactive, integrated and forwardlooking preventive diplomacy in collaboration with the
General Assembly, the Economic and Social Council
and the International Court of Justice. We stand ready
to endorse any initiative within the United Nations
framework aimed at strengthening conflict prevention.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Morocco.
Mr. Hilale (Morocco) (spoke in French):
Mr. President, the Kingdom of Morocco would like to
thank and commend you for organizing today’s debate
on the prevention of conflicts, a matter which is crucial
for the maintenance of international peace and security.
We would like to thank the briefers for their briefings
and detailed thoughts.
We welcome the fact that preventive diplomacy, the
prevention of conflicts and other forms of preventive
action are coming into focus within the United Nations.
In fact, preventive diplomacy is at the heart of the
United Nations mandate. Enshrined in Article 1 of the
United Nations Charter, the prevention of conflicts is
not so much a choice as an international obligation.
Collective action based on investment in efforts to
reach agreements through negotiation and mediation is
crucial to avoid a posteriori actions that increase the
risk of aggravating conflicts.
The Security Council has a key responsibility
in preventing conflicts given its mandate to uphold
international peace and security. It focuses on the
management of crises and conflicts in the immediate
term. However, preventive action means combining,
on the one hand, short-term actions that show the
efficacy of principles that we defend, with, on the
other hand, investments in structural policies for the
long term, hence the importance of coherent action
within the United Nations system as a whole towards
conflict prevention.
In this regard, we should acknowledge the important
role played by the Peacebuilding Commission, which
makes valuable contributions to the Security Council
on issues examined by the two bodies. Coherence in
United Nations action is also clearly reflected in the
vision of the Secretary-General for the future of the
Organization, notably in his report Our Common
Agenda. Accordingly, we would like to express our

S/PV. 8906 (Resumption 1)

appreciation for the Secretary-General’s commitments
to preventing conflict as well as his focus on the need
for cooperation across the entire United Nations system
in terms of prevention, which involves important
issues linked to peace and security, the environment,
climate change, health, new technologies, economic
development and human rights.
We welcome the adoption yesterday by the
General Assembly of a procedural resolution on the
implementation of Our Common Agenda (General
Assembly resolution 76/6). We express our willingness
to work diligently and constructively on it in order to
implement the recommendations that require a mandate
from the General Assembly.
To better to strengthen the capacity of the
Organization to prevent conflicts, it is crucial that,
first of all, we make the analyses of the different bodies
coherent in order to better anticipate conflicts and crises
and overcome difficulties in adapting to the evolving
nature of conflicts. Secondly, we must strengthen the
consistency of action among different United Nations
bodies and, from that, rationalize mandates and
initiatives on cross-cutting issues and appropriately
prioritize attention and resources, focusing on
pragmatic high-impact solutions, while scrupulously
respecting the mandates and prerogatives of each body,
in line with the United Nations Charter, in particular
Article 12, paragraph 1. Thirdly, we must invest more
in the humanitarian-development-peace nexus so
as to build societies on more robust foundations and
guarantee lasting peace.
In conclusion, I would like to underscore the fact
that Morocco, which has made conflict prevention one
of the main aspects of its foreign policy, will continue
to work with commitment and determination for
the maintenance and building of peace, as well as to
promote the values of tolerance, dialogue, consultation
and coexistence and to strengthen mediation as a tool
for the prevention of conflicts.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Portugal.
Mr. Ferreira Silva Aranda (Portugal): Allow me
to join others in congratulating Mexico for convening
today’s timely debate.
The use of preventive diplomacy to maintain
international peace and security is increasingly crucial
to facing emerging risks and dangerous trends, as the

21-3417321/26

S/PV.8906 (Resumption 1)

Maintenance of international peace and security

16/11/2021

report by the Secretary-General entitled Our Common
Agenda underscores.

The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Armenia.

We echo the call for the international community
to act as one in addressing the root causes of conflicts.
That will only be possible if, as the concept note
(S/2021/888, annex) rightly sets out, all the principal
United Nations organs work together to strengthen
the rule of law, eradicate poverty, promote sustainable
development and solve disputes, all of which pave the
way to more effective conflict prevention.

Mr. Margaryan (Armenia): I would like to thank
the delegation of Mexico for convening the open debate
on the topic of peace and security through preventive
diplomacy. I also thank the Secretary-General, the
President of the General Assembly, the President of the
Economic and Social Council and the President of the
International Court of Justice for their presentations on
the role of the principal organs of the United Nations in
the promotion of peace and security.

Shifting the Organization’s focus from conflict
management to conflict prevention is more necessary
than ever and it has been one of the main tenets of the
Secretary-General’s reforms. We need to break down
silos at the heart of the United Nations system in order
to foster greater coordination and efficiency in the
Organization’s intervention.
We acknowledge the role of the Standing Principals’
Group in enabling more efficient communication
between departments and between the Headquarters
and the operations in the field.
The Department of Political and Peacebuilding
Affairs and, in particular, the Peacebuilding Support
Office, are crucial to ensuring this cross-cutting
approach, as they were designed to serve as a hinge
between the pillars of peace and security, human rights
and development.
The Secretary-General’s High-Level Advisory
Board on Mediation is also contributing to preventive
diplomacy while increasing the effectiveness of the
Organization’s work with regional organizations,
non-governmental groups and others involved in
mediation around the world.
Despite those important steps, more and can be done.
The United Nations system should better anticipate,
identify and adapt to new peace and security risks.
We also support an expanded role for the
Peacebuilding Commission (PBC) to ensure that it can
address the multiple threats to peace and security in
a coherent, cross-cutting and preventive manner. The
Council and the PBC should increase their cooperation
in conflict prevention.
Finally, we must ensure the full, equal and
meaningful participation of women and youth in
preventive efforts. That is fundamental if we are to
increase effectiveness and maintain social cohesion.
22/26

The coordinating role of the principal organs,
within their respective mandates, is also of the
utmost importance for the transparency, inclusivity
and conflict-sensitivity of the activities of United
Nations specialized agencies, programmes and funds
in humanitarian response and peacebuilding, in
particular in the light of the attempts to manipulate
and instrumentalize their work to advance one-sided
conflict narratives or legitimize the consequences of
the use of force.
In his report Our Common Agenda, the SecretaryGeneral stresses that:
“our collective peace and security is increasingly
under threat as a result of emerging risks and
dangerous trends for which traditional forms
of prevention, management and resolution are
ill suited”.
Strengthening cooperation between the United
Nations and regional organizations is key for identifying
early warning signs and ensuring timely responses
to challenges such as military build-ups in violation
of legally binding commitments in the field of arms
control, as well as military posturing, the recruitment
and use of foreign terrorist fighters, racial profiling and
hate crimes on ethnic and religious grounds.
The consolidated support of the international
community is paramount for the comprehensive, just
and lasting settlement of the Nagorno-Karabakh conflict
on the basis of principles and elements developed over
the years, including the principle of equal rights and
self-determination of peoples. Armenia values the
unwavering support by the Security Council and the
Secretary-General to the efforts of the co-Chairs of the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe
Minsk Group, the internationally agreed mediation
format for resolving the Nagorno-Karabakh conflict.
21-34173

16/11/2021

Maintenance of international peace and security

We also underscore the key role of the International
Court of Justice, the principal judicial organ of the
United Nations, in ensuring accountability for gross
violations of international human rights law and
international humanitarian law in conflict situations.
If we are to contribute to efforts to achieve the
common goal of sustainable peace, we cannot avoid
addressing specific situations that, if not publicly
condemned and adequately contained, have the potential
of turning into a major catastrophe in our region.
In recent days, Azerbaijan has been conducting
armed attacks against the territorial integrity of
Armenia, in utter disregard of the Charter of the United
Nations and the provisions of the trilateral statement of
9 November 2020, on the establishment of a ceasefire
and cessation of hostilities, following the 44-day war.
Azerbaijan’s ongoing attacks against the Republic of
Armenia are being carried out from territories that
came under its control as a result of the implementation
of that trilateral statement. Such aggressive actions
are detrimental to the efforts of the international
community to de-escalate the situation and are severely
undermining the prospects for peace in our region.
A strong and unequivocal reaction to Azerbaijan’s
illegal actions is critical for preventing further major
escalations of the security situation in the region and
beyond. The relevant international actors need to
undertake urgent and effective steps aimed at preventing
further escalation and demanding the unconditional and
complete withdrawal of the Azerbaijani armed forces
from the territory of the Republic of Armenia.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of South Africa.
Ms. Joyini (South Africa): We thank you,
Mr. President, for convening this timely debate. We
also thank the President of the General Assembly, the
President of the Economic and Social Council, the
President of the International Court of Justice and the
Secretary-General for their briefings.
A July 2020 letter from the group of independent
eminent persons to the Secretary-General on
peacebuilding and sustaining peace, underlined that:
“[t]oday’s conflicts are multidimensional, marked
to varying degrees by persistent exclusion,
inequalities and grievances, including refugee
flows, internal displacement and humanitarian
spillovers of conflict, weak governance and State

S/PV. 8906 (Resumption 1)

capacity, and compounded by climate change,
violent extremism and the perverse use of new
technologies” (S/2020/678, annex II).
Those multiple threats and risks to international peace
and security require the renewal of our collective
commitment to the values of multilateralism and
international cooperation, which underpin the Charter
of the United Nations and the 2030 Agenda for
Sustainable Development.
To address those challenges, we need innovative and
proactive approaches and the collaborative efforts of
all relevant entities of the United Nations. The primacy
of preventive diplomacy in averting the escalation of
conflict and providing opportunities for inclusive
dialogue and negotiations that lead to settlements and
pave the way to peaceful and stable societies is well
known by the Council.
Resolving conflict in its early stages will prevent
countless deaths, the destruction of infrastructure
and psychological turmoil. For that reason, we need
to enhance our efforts to adopt preventive diplomatic
methods in our approaches to addressing rising tensions
and conflicts.
The primary organs of the United Nations must work
in synergy if we are to achieve the goal of preventive
diplomacy. The Economic and Social Council, the
International Court of Justice and the General Assembly
all have the potential to play a greater role in supporting
the Security Council in preventing conflict. That is
why regular interaction, coordination and collaboration
between the Security Council and other primary organs
of the United Nations in fulfilling the Council’s mandate
cannot be overemphasized. That would establish
increased coherence and complementarity among those
organs in a mutually reinforcing manner, respectful of
each other’s mandates, and with a view to generating a
mutual understanding among them.
Similarly, we urge the Council to strengthen
its interactions with regional and subregional
organizations in preventive diplomacy initiatives, and
in this context strive towards effectively utilizing the
good offices of the Secretary-General, in collaboration
with regional organizations.
South Africa has consistently advocated for
peaceful settlements of international disputes and
conflicts, in line with Chapter VI of the Charter
of the United Nations, and reaffirms the validity

21-3417323/26

S/PV.8906 (Resumption 1)

Maintenance of international peace and security

of the purposes and principles of the Charter and
international law as indispensable to preserving and
promoting international peace and security, the rule
of law, socioeconomic development and all aspects of
human rights.
We wish to emphasize the important role played
by the International Court of Justice, the principal
judicial organ of the United Nations, in promoting and
encouraging .the settlement of international disputes
by peaceful means, in accordance with the relevant
provisions of the Charter of the United Nations. We
encourage the Security Council to interact regularly
with the International Court of Justice and draw from.
its legal advisory expertise pertaining to the prevention
of conflicts and settling disputes that may have
catastrophic implications for countries concerned.
In conclusion, according to the United Nations
Charter, preventive diplomacy should be at the core
of the United Nations system. However, due to the
prevailing unbalanced power distribution, effective
responses are often undermined. We therefore wish to
reiterate that reform that takes into account the equality
of States within the United Nations system can foster
proactive approaches to rising tensions and improve
preventive diplomacy methods. In taking this mandate
seriously, we must work collectively towards reform
that results in effective responses to conflict situations,
including through preventive diplomacy.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of the United Arab Emirates.
Ms. Shaheen (United Arab Emirates): At the outset,
we would like to thank Mexico for organizing today’s
open debate and directing our attention to preventative
diplomacy. We also extend our thanks to our briefers
today for their valuable insights.
Peace and security are multifaceted concepts linked
to sustainable development, women’s empowerment and
the rule of law. If we do not approach them holistically,
they are elusive. That is why the Security Council must
enhance its coordination with other United Nations
organs. A Council that is more open and receptive to
coordination with other United Nations bodies, as well
as with external stakeholders, is also a Council with
more effective outcomes.
In our collective mission to make the United Nations
and its organs better deliver on its mandates, we must
shift gears in our approach from a strategy that mostly
24/26

16/11/2021

focuses on conflict management to one that prioritizes
prevention. We welcome the Secretary-General’s focus
on prevention in the Our Common Agenda report,
particularly the proposal for a new agenda for peace.
Without a doubt, addressing the root causes of conflict
will yield long-term benefits that foster a culture of
peace and resilience.
We would like to draw attention today to the
emerging challenges that have been identified in recent
years and are clear examples of why the Council should
collaborate with the rest of the United Nations system
to achieve shared goals.
The Security Council would benefit from enhancing
and standardizing its analysis of climate change-driven
security implications. That includes building on the
work of the climate security mechanism and the
Council’s Informal Expert Group on Climate and
Security. During our upcoming term on the Security
Council, the United Arab Emirates will champion
innovative approaches, such as using satellite imagery,
predictive modelling and access to early data in order
to allow the Council to act sooner and more effectively.
Additionally, we are all clear that a world where
women are empowered is a world where peace and
prosperity are more durable. It is critical that the
international community ensure their full, equal and
meaningful participation across all sectors of society
to build resilience, guarantee stability and promote
prosperous and peaceful societies. To respond to these
cross-cutting issues, we need to supplement nearterm strategies with approaches that strengthen longterm resilience.
Maintaining
regular
communication
and
transparency between the Council and wider United
Nations membership is vital. It cannot be limited to an
annual report submitted to the General Assembly. The
United Arab Emirates supports regular engagement on
shared priorities with the Economic and Social Council
and the Peacebuilding Commission, as well as with the
incoming President of the Council and the President of
the General Assembly.
The United Arab Emirates also supports greater
interaction between the Council and the International
Court of Justice, in accordance with its mandates under
the Charter of the United Nations. The International
Court of Justice plays a vital role in the peaceful
resolution of disputes, as evidenced by the geographical
diversity and wide variety of cases currently before it.
21-34173

16/11/2021

Maintenance of international peace and security

The Court also contributes positively to the rule of
law at the international level and plays a key role in
defusing tensions among States.
We want to emphasize the critical role of regional
organizations in conflict prevention. With crises in
the Middle East occupying a significant portion of the
Security Council’s agenda, the Council and the League
of Arab States would benefit from closer cooperation
in conflict prevention, peacekeeping, peacebuilding
and sustaining peace. In this regard, we support the
holding of an annual briefing on cooperation between
the United Nations and the League of Arab States.
In conclusion, we hope that today’s open debate
will help further efforts on this organ’s cooperation
with other United Nations organs to better deliver on its
mandate. The United Arab Emirates will be a reliable
partner in this journey, particularly when we take a seat
at this table in 2022.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Indonesia.
Mr. Situmorang (Indonesia): Let me begin
by thanking Mexico for its initiative in convening
this meeting.
Indonesia has consistently called for a stronger early
warning system, supported by the multilateral system,
to prevent conflict and enhance peacebuilding efforts.
On that note, allow me to share the following points.
First, we must strengthen coordination among all
United Nations bodies. As current security challenges
are closely interlinked, addressing the root causes of
conflict and instability requires concerted efforts.
All United Nations bodies must be able to respond
in a coherent manner, harnessing the strengths of
its different organs. The key words are “division of
labour” and “coordination with a clear road map”.
United Nations missions on the ground have the
capacity to identify drivers of conflict and serve as an
early warning system, while United Nations agencies,
funds and programmes have the technical capacities to
address specific conflict drivers.
The Peacebuilding Commission also plays a vital
role in coordination responses across the United
Nations principal organs and beyond. To achieve such
harmonious coordination, all United Nations bodies
need to effectively and efficiently exercise their
respective mandates, under the guidance of the Charter
of the United Nations and the relevant resolutions.

S/PV. 8906 (Resumption 1)

Secondly, on the importance of regional
organizations, Indonesia believes that our efforts
to prevent conflict could be further enhanced with
strong cooperation between the United Nations and
regional organizations, which have deep knowledge,
unique perspective and strong local connections,
which are crucial to supporting peacebuilding efforts
and preventing conflicts. We believe that regional
organizations could further leverage their role in
preventing, managing and resolving conflicts, as well
as collectively addressing their root causes. We all for
the Security Council to continue supporting efforts
by regional and subregional organizations. Regional
organization are also essential in building a security
architecture that provides an avenue for the peaceful
resolution of conflicts.
My final point is on nurturing the culture of trust
and dialogue. We can learn from the South-East Asia
experience, which has today become among the fastestgrowing economy and an engine of global growth.
The Association of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN)
was established exactly to deal with disputes and the
distrust that marred our region at the time. That does
not mean that the region is free from troubles, yet the
key to ASEAN’s success is our collective efforts and
our culture of dialogue and consensus-building — or
what we call the ASEAN Way — which enables regions
to settle differences in a constructive manner. For that
to succeed, trust is essential, along with mechanisms
to build confidence among all parties. We call for
the Council to support efforts to further nurture
trust-building and dialogue to support peacebuilding
processes in conflict-prone and conflict-affected areas.
In conclusion, Indonesia would like to underscore
that strengthening conflict prevention cannot be done
by a single organization. All United Nations bodies and
international and regional organizations must work in a
coordinated manner.
The President (spoke in Spanish): The
representative of Azerbaijan has asked for the floor to
make a further statement. I now give him the floor.
Mr. Aliyev (Azerbaijan): Our delegation requested
the floor in its national capacity for a further statement
in connection with the false and patently misleading
statement made by the Armenian representative.
My country has seriously suffered from the
devastating effects of the war unleashed against it
by Armenia in the early 1990s. A significant part

21-3417325/26

S/PV.8906 (Resumption 1)

Maintenance of international peace and security

of the sovereign territory of Azerbaijan was seized
and remained under occupation for nearly 30 years,
notwithstanding resolutions 822 (1993), 853 (1993), 874
(1993) and 884 (1993).
Serious violations of international humanitarian
law were committed in the course of the occupation,
resulting in the killing of tens of thousands of civilians
and the ethnic cleansing of the occupied territories of
Azerbaijan, involving more than 700,000 Azerbaijanis.
Most captured cities, towns and villages of Azerbaijan
were razed to the ground. Last fall, another act of
aggression by Armenia became a logical consequence
of the impunity it enjoyed for 30 years. Armenia’s
armed attacks involved the use of military force against
densely populated Azerbaijani cities far outside the
theatre of active hostilities, killing and wounding
hundreds of civilians and destroying or damaging
numerous civilian objects.
Azerbaijan launched a counter-offensive operation
to liberate its occupied territories, protect its people
and allow the internally displaced persons to return
to their homes — while acting in full accordance
with international law and the Charter of the United
Nations. The three-decades-long armed conflict has

26/26

16/11/2021

been resolved. Azerbaijan has expressed its readiness
for the normalization of inter-State relations with
Armenia, including through the signing of a peace
treaty. Ensuring lasting peace, development, progress
and good-neighbourliness is the basis of Azerbaijan’s
vision for the future. However, Armenia has failed to
reciprocate the peace agenda put forward by Azerbaijan.
Today’s large-scale armed provocations by Armenia
against Azerbaijan in the border area between the two
States, to which armed forces of Azerbaijan adequately
responded, as well as Armenia’s continued territorial
claims, are the results of irresponsible actions on the
State level and of dangerous revanchist ideas overtly
propagated in Armenia.
In conclusion, Azerbaijan is confident that there is
no alternative to the normalization of relations between
the two countries, based on mutual recognition and
respect for one another’s sovereignty and territorial
integrity within their internationally recognized
borders. Azerbaijan is determined to advance the
peacebuilding
agenda,
reconciliation,
peaceful
coexistence and development.
The meeting rose at 5.15 p.m.

21-34173
