TWENTY-EIGHTH

YEAR
th
MEETING: 14 MAY 1973

NEW

YORK

CONTENTS
Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/l7 12) . . , , . . , . , , , . , , , , . . . , . , . , . , . . . .

Page
1

Expression of thanks to the retiring President , . . , , . , . . . . . . . . . . . . I . . . .

1

Adoption of the agenda . . . . , . . . . . . . . . , . . . , . . , . . . , . , . . . . , , . . . .

1

Question concerning the situation in Southern Rhodesia:
(al Letter dated 8 May 1973 from the representatives of Guinea and Kenya to
the President of the Security Council (S/10925);
(b) Second special report of the Committee established in pursuance of Security
Council resolution 253 (1968) concerning the question of Southern Rhodesia
(S/l0920 alId Corr.1) . . . . . * . . , , . . . . . . . . , . , . . . . . , . . . . . . . , . .

1

S/PV. 1712

NOTE
Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined with
figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United Nations document,
Documents of the Security Council (symbol S/. . .) are normally published in quarterly
Supplements of the Official Records of the Security Council. The date of the document
indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which information about it is given.
The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a system
adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Resolutions and Decisions of the
Security Council. The new system, which has been applied retroactively to resolutions
adopted before 1 January 1965, became fully operative on that date.

c

SEVENTEEN

HUNDRED

Held in New York

AND

on Monday,

MEETING

14 May 1973, at 10.30 a.m.

representatives of Guinea and Kenya, in a letter dated
8 May 1973 /S/10925],
that the Council consider the
second special report of the Security Council Committee
established in pursuance. of resolution 253 (1968) concerning the question of Southern Rhodesia [S/10920 and

President: Mr. Rahmatalla ABDULLA (Sudan).
PreseW The representatives of the following States:
Australia, Austria, China, France, Guinea, India, Indonesia,
Kenya, Panama, Peru, Sudan, Union of Soviet Socialist
Republics, United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern
Ireland, United States of America and Yugoslavia.

Corr.lj.

3. I should now like to call upon the representative of
Guinea, Mrs. Jeanne Martin C&B, the Chairman of the
Committee, to introduce the Committee’s report.

Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/ 17 12)

1. Adoption of the agenda.

4. Mrs. Jeanne Martin CISSE (Guinea) (interpretation
from French): Mr. President, before I speak on the agenda
item allow me to congratulate you on your accession to the
presidency of the Security Council for the month of May.
Being familiar with your qualities as a skilled diplomat and
as a great African who is concerned with the probIems of
Africa and, more particularly, with the problems of
southern Africa, my delegation, which has ties of friendship
and brotherhood and frank co-operation with you and your
mission, feels certain that, despite the complexity of the
item before us, we shall arrive at satisfactory conclusions. I
should like also to extend my congratulations to your
predecessor, Mr. Perez de CuBllar, Ambassador of Peru, for
the skilful manner in which he guided our work during the
month of April.

2, Question concerning the situation in Southern Rhodesia:
(a] Letter dated 8 May 1973 from the representatives
of Guinea and Kenya to the President of the
Security Council (S/10925);
(b) Second special report of the Committee established
in pursuance of Security Council resolution
253 (1968) concerning the question of Southern
Rhodesia (S/ 10920 and Corr.1).
7Re meeting was called to order at 11.10 a.m.
Expression

TWELFTH

of thanks to the retiring President

1I The PRESIDENT: I should like to start by taking this
opportunity to pay tribute to my predecessor in the Chair
during the month of April, my friend and colleague
Mr. Perez de CuelIar of Peru. I am sure that members will
agree with me that he conducted the business of the
Council during his term of office with remarkable objectivity and firmness, blended with the diplomatic finesse for
which he is known. So, on behalf of the Council, I take
pleasure in extending our congratulations to him.

5. It is I, as Chairman of the Committee established in
pursuance of Security Council resolution 253 (1968) concerning the question of Southern Rhodesia, who have the
honour to present to the Council the second special report
of the Committee. Nevertheless, may I at the outset say
that the completion of the report is due equally to the great
experience and devotion of the two Vice-Chairmen of the
Committee, Mr. Soegomo of Indonesia and Mr. Job of
Yugoslavia, who, during my absences, were so good as to
take over the chairmanship of the Committee and guide it
in its efforts, In saying this I am thinking not only of the
actual meetings of the Committee, but also of the work of
the drafting group directed by Mr. Soegomo with the
authority and competence with which we are all acquainted. I am most grateful to him and to Mr. Job.

Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Question concerning the situation in Southern Rhodesia:
(a) Letter dated 8 May 1973 from the representatives of
Guinea and Kenya to the President of the Security
couIlcil (S/10925);
(b) Second special report of the Committee established in
Pursuance of Security Council resolution 253 (1968)
concerning the question of Southern Rhodesia (S/
10920 and Corr.1)

6. This second special report has been prepared at the
request of the Council under the terms of its resolution

320 (1972) of 29 September 1972. The object wasto seek,
in response to the urgent appeal of the African members of
the Council, methods which would make it possible to put
an end to the scandalous situation which, before the
incredulous eyes of the international community, is
unashamedly being allowed to continue in the very heart of
our Africa.

2. The PRESIDENT: This meeting of the Security Council
has been convened in response to the request made by the
1

-

7. And since I am speaking here both as Chairman of the
Committee and on behalf of the delegation of my country,
it seems to me to be worth while to recall the hopes placed
by the Africans in the Security Council when, by its
resolution 253 (1968) of 29 May 1968, it decided that the
sanctions provided for by the Charter would be applied
against the racist rigime of Southern Rhodesia. That was
the first time that the Council had used its right to apply
sanctions and our faith was boundless. Alas, five years have
elapsed since then-five years during which we have waited
in vain for justice for our brothers. You will then readily
realize what bitterness, what profound bitterness, envelops
us when we continue to hear people equivocating about the
means of obtaining that justice,
8. As is to be seen from a 24-point document submitted by
the delegations of Guinea, Kenya and the Sudan, we would
have wished to try to plug these leaks which defeat the
Council’s efforts and encourage the regime of Ian Smith.

their friendship and foresight, those proposals did not win
unanimous support in the Committee. Members will there.
fore find them relegated to section IV of the report, where
they are set quite apart, either as dangerous elements
or-and this is the sincere hope of my delegation-like
certain fruits of my country whose acidity takes a bit of
getting used to.
16. The African proposals are not, however, in bad
company: alternative proposals by the United States,
France, the United Kingdom and the Soviet Union are there
alongside them. And if, in that context, the positions
expressed by certain delegations in section V of the report
are studied, it cannot be denied that there is in the
Committee profound concern regarding the situation prevailing in Southern Rhodesia.
17. I am submitting this report rather hapazardly. Leaving
sections I and II, which are little more than introductory,
we have gone through section IV and have recalled
section V.

9. Our requests were not exorbitant. We sought to have
exports from South Africa, Angola, and Mozambique
closely controlled so that firms cheating through the
intermediary of those countries would see their risks
increase.

18. I am sure the Council will not hold it against me when
I inform them that I have left until last section III, which
was adopted unanimously. It is entitled “Recommendations
and suggestions” and comprises paragraphs 10 to 22 of the
report. It envisages measures to be taken by Governments,
by the Committee or by the Secretary-General. Moreover,
the terms of reference frequently overlap.

10. We would have wished all States to refuse landing
rights to the national carriers of countries continuing to
grant landing rights to aircraft coming from Rhodesia or
having air services with that territory as their destination.

19. I shall mention only the most important proposals.
11. We would have wished all States that had not yet done
so to adopt legislative measures forbidding insurance
companies to cover flights to or from Rhodesia. We would
have wished States to adopt legislative measures also
forbidding shipping companies to carry Rhodesian goods or
goods intended for Rhodesia and forbidding insurance
companies to insure either those goods or the vessels
transporting them. We would have wished States to adopt
legislative measures imposing on insurance companies the
obligation to include in every contract a clause of nullity
specifying that no goods coming from Southern Rhodesia
would be covered by that contract.

20. Among those addressed to Governments, one cannot
overlook paragraph 10, which emphasizes the importance
of States that have not already done so urgently instituting
effective procedures at the point of import to ensure that
goods imported from South Africa, Mozambique and
Angola are not cleared through customs until they are
satisfied that the documentation is in order and complete
and to ensure that, if need be, procedures provide for the
recall of goods cleared through customs for custody if it is
subsequently established that they are of Southern Rhodesian origin.

12. We would have wished the blockade of Beira to be
extended to include Lourengo Marques and to cover
Rhodesian goods and products, and we would have wished
that Member States prepared to do so would contribute to
British patrols.

21. Paragraph 21 should be understood in the same way:
States trading with South Africa, Mozambique and Angola
should be informed of the existence of certain discrepancies
concerning goods originating in southern Africa. Those
discrepancies appear in the amounts indicated for export by
South Africa, Mozambique and Angola and the amounts
indicated for import by their trading partners. That
anomalous situation should therefore be clarified, and the
States concerned should take precautions to make sure of
the real origin of the goods in question. Paragraph 14
recommends that goods be seized in the event that they are
of Southern Rhodesian origin.

13. We would have wished States to communicate to the
Committee their present sources of supply for products
they imported from Rhodesia before the application of
sanctions.
14. Finally, we would have wished the Security Council,
this lofty international body, to call on the United States of
America to rescind the senseless law which, by officially
authorizing the violation of sanctions, ruins our hopes and
its prestige.

22. In order to facilitate the often difficult task of
national authorities in conducting enquiries, the Corn.
mittee, as is indicated in paragraph 1 1, has considered the
publication of a manual setting forth documentation and
clearing procedures necessary to determine the true origin
of products of doubtful origin. Furthermore, as is indicated
in paragraph 12, it envisages public-tion of a list of experts

1.5. Who will tell us that those proposals were unreasonable? Who can tell us they were excessive? Yet, despite the
support of certain delegations to which we pay a tribute for
2

whose names are put forward to the Committee
Governments.

by

the Council was one of paramount importance and in
making to it the full. contribution expected of them. In
their efforts they were assisted by a Secretariat team which
my delegation-and here I believe I am speaking also on
behalf of all members of the Committee-holds in the
highest regard. That team, composed of excellent people
whose devotion is total and whose impartiality has never
been questioned, was the mainspring of our work.

23. Furthermore, the Committee was concerned over the
inadequate information it received. It is out of a desire to
remedy that situation that in paragraph 13 the Committee
recommends enlistment of the assistanceof individuals and
non-governmental organizations. In paragraph 16 the Committee says that Member States should draw the attention
of the public to the importance of the relevant United
Nations resolutions. And paragraph 17 recommends that
Member States, especially those with extensive consular
services in southern Africa, should be urged to assist the
Committee in the collection of information on sanctions
violations.

29. But cases of suspected violation multiply and correspondence mounts unceasingly. Futhermore, the Committee
is in ever-increasing need of research work and analysis. It
therefore desires that the present team from the Secretariat
which assists it should be considerably reinforced, not only
for routine work but also at the technical level and, in
particular, by the inclusion in it of a person with practical
experience in international commerce. That is the unanimous recommendation expressed by the Committee in
paragraph 19 of the report, and I wish to draw the
Secretary-General’s attention to this particularly.

24. All those measures may lead to expendituresparticularly the use of experts and the measures the
Committee may have to take to encourage the public to
channeI useful information. In paragraph 15 the Committee
therefore envisages establishment of a special fund to be
financed by voluntary contributions, especially by the
proceeds of the sale of Southern Rhodesian cargo which has
been seized. In this regard it may be worth while to recall
that, in one casementioned in the fifth annual report of the
Committee,’ the Government of Egypt, acting on the basis
of information supplied by the Committee, confiscated the
cargo in question. Furthermore, in a stroke of African
solidarity, the Government spontaneously sent the cash
receipts of the sale of that cargo to the Organization of
African Unity in order to assist the liberation efforts of
Africa. That is an example the Committee should encourage.

30. That is what the Committee has included in this
report. My delegation has sought to introduce it quite
objectively, with due respect for the wisdom which cannot
but flow from a unanimous decision which we hope will be
endorsed by the Council.
31. But everything depends, of course, on the manner in
which these recommendations are implemented. Knowing
that politics is the art of the possible, the African
delegations that have participated so closely in the preparation of this report have accepted a compromise. But too
many companies are still cheating, too many authorities
close their eyes, too many Governments allow themselves
to be taken by surprise.

25. As regards the publicity to be given to the work of the
Committee-and here there is a plan similar to that of the
mobilization of public opinion-paragraph 20 says the
Committee should circulate lists of all goods that Rhodesia
is currently known to export so as to establish by .comparison the extent to which South African, Mozambique
and Angola exports have increased since the unilateral
declaration of independence.

32. We should like nssurances from those who have led us
to accept this compromise. We should like them to tell us
and affirm that they will do everything within their power
to see to it that at least these over-modest recommendations will be totally implemented. Thus perhaps it will be
possible for the question of Southern Rhodesia to be
considered of itself, in itself, free from any distorting
reflections of political friendships, military alliances and
trade interests.

26. Furthermore, in paragraph 18 the Committee considers the release of quarterly lists containing names of
companies found guilty of sanctions violations and Governments that have not responded within the prescribed period
of two months to an inquiry from the Committee regarding
casesof possible sanctions violations.

33. The Security Council is the noblest of our councils
because it is the council of peace. But there is no peace
without justice. What we ask of the Council, in its great
strength, as laid down in the Charter, is freedom for our
brothers, dignity for men, and justice for an oppressed
people.

27. As the Council is certainly aware, the programme of
work that the Commitee has thus drawn up for itself is vast.
but it simply adds to and completes the programme already
set out in previous reports-in particular in the third annual
report2 and in the first special report [S/10632 of 9 May
19721.

34. Mr. MOJSOV (Yugoslavia): Mr. President, first of all I
should like to congratulate you most cordially on your
assumption of the presidency of the Council. for the month
of May. My delegation is very happy to see you presiding
over this meeting, as the representative of an African and
non-aligned country with which my country has always
enjoyed the best of relations, and one whose devotion to
the struggle for changing the shameful conditions under
which part of the African people in the south of Africa still
live, is very well known. All of us here will certainly recall
your personal, as well as your delegation’s, unreserved

L

28. The members of the Committee were unanimous-and
we did not deem it necessary to include this in the
report-in considering that the task entrusted to them by
1 OffKal Records of the Security Council, Twenty-seventh Year,
Special Supplement No. 2.
2 Ibid; Twenty-fifth Year, Special Supplement No. 3 and 3A.
3

--

efforts in promoting the sanctions policy against the racist
regime .in Southern Rhodesia within the framework of the
Security Council Committee established in pursuance of
resolution 253 (1968) concerning the question of Southern
Rhodesia, whose second special report is now before us.

Committee’sfifth report-between the quantities of certain
commoditiesreported to have been imported from South
Africa, Moz‘ambique and Angola and the quantities reported to have been exported by those countries clearly
indicatethe flagrant and widespreadviolations of sanctions,
It is clear that it is not done only by South Africa and
Portugal through Mozambique and Angola, which is a very
35. May I also express my delegation’s admiration for the
well-known fact, but also by many countries, especially
able and decisive way in which the representative of Peru,
some big and industrialized ones. The figures shown in
Mr. PBrez de CuBlIar, conducted the active work of the
annexV indicate that Southern Rhodesianexports have
Security Council for the month of April.
almostreached the pre-sanctionslevels ($399 million in
1965 comparedto $379 million in 1971) andthat imports
3G. Before turning to the subject on our agenda, I wish
have surpassedthe pre-sanctionslevel ($334 million in
also to congratulate the representative of Guinea,
1965, compared to $395 million in 1971). The United
Mrs. Jeanne Martin Ciss6, Chairman of the Committee,
States
is continuing to import chrome and nickel from
under whose guidance that Committee has adopted its
Southern Rhodesiain open contravention of the provisions
present report.
of the relevant Security Council resolutionsand contrary to
the specificobligationsassumedby all Governmentsunder
37, As the main themeof our meetingis the consideration Article 25 of the Charter.According to an article published
of the secondspecialreport of the Committee, I am going in The Times of London, on 24 February 1973, that
to limit my remarks to questionswhich are dealt with in
country has imported more than $13 million worth of
the report, although, of course,the whole complex of the
“strategic and critical commodities” from Southern Rhoproblemsof sanctionscannot be removed from the general desiasincethe adoption of the “Byrd amendment”.Despite
framework of the situation in Southern Rhodesia,whichis all appeals,there are still no signsthat legislationnow in
becomingincreasinglyseriousand disturbing. It is,however, force will be repealed or even that the appropriate
our understandingand hope that the Security Councilwill
authorities are undertaking the necessarysteps in that
soon take up, at an appropriate time, this aspectof the
direction. Not only that, but the sanctions loop hole
Southern Rhodesianissue,too.
createdby the Byrd amendmentis usedfor the purposeof
importing, at present, a variety of Rhodesianproducts
38. Preciselyowing to the grave and dangeroussituationin
-beryllium ore, asbestosand others. Unfortunately, ships
Southern Rhodesia, my delegation attaches particular from a score of States, somemembersof the Council,
significanceto this latest report of the Committee andto
participate in this illegal trade. Recently three Boeing 707
the whole sanctions policy in general. This report is jet aircraft were delivered to the illegal regime through
presentedfor the attention of the Council in a situation clandestinecommercialand complicated financial transaccharacterized by the continued and intensified oppression tions. The latest information indicates that three locomoof the people of Zimbabwe by the illegal racist minority
tives produced by the Simmering-Graz-Paukercompany
re’gime,by the arbitrary and unlawful imprisonmentand havealsofound their way into Rhodesia.
detention of the legitimate representativesof the Zimbabwe
people and the continued denial of fundamental human 40. At the beginningof this year an analysiswasmadeof
rights including, especially, the recent abhorrent measures all casesof suspectedor possibleviolations of sanctions
of collective punishment. This situation clearly constitutes which were brought to the attention of the Committee
a threat to regional and international peace and security sinceits inception. The number of such casestotalled 135.
and provokes the legitimate struggle of the Zimbabwe Of these,in 14 casestransactionswere conducted with the
people and their national liberation movement against knowledge of Governments, which meansthat, first, the
oppressionand againsttile policy of apartheid in Southern violations were verified and, second, the Governments
Rhodesia. The illegal regime is continuing its apartheid permitting the transactionstook no punitive action aIn only
policy, especially by the establishmentof so-called“tribal
27 casesone or more Governments reported punitive or
trust homelands”, copying thereby the practice of apart- preventive measuresfollowing requestsor inquiries by the
heid, imported from South Africa. The illegal presenceof
Committee.Five caseswere closedbecausethe Committee
South African forces in Southern Rhodesiais continuing. decidedthat no further action wasnecessary.This leavesus
This seriously threatens the sovereignty and territorial
with approximately 90 casesin which no conclusive
integrity of neighbouring independent African States, as evidence has as yet been evinced that the reported
ws clearly shown in the case of Zambia, which was suspectedviolations of sanctionsdid or did not occur. In alI
recently the subject of the Council’s deliberations.So far
these casesthe Committee sent inquiries to the Covcrnthe administering Power has failed to take effective
merits involved but it was unable to reach any decision,
measuresto put an end to the illegal re’gimeand to
primarily, because:(a) some Governmentshave failed to
dischargeits primary responsibility by enabling the people reply; (b) the replies of someGovernmentswere elusive,
of Zimbabweto exercisefreely their right to self-determina- incomplete or did not relate to the matter at all; (cl the
tion and independence.Furthermore, no stepstowardsthe
conduct of an investigation was indicated, but the results
political solution of the problem have been maderecently,
have never been made known to the Committee; and
(d) certificates of origin issued by Portuguese colonial
39. Turning now, more specifically, to the question of
authoritieswere offered asproof that the goodswere not of
sanctions,we note that the situation remainsgloomy and
Southern Rhodesian origin, which certainly should be
disturbing. The discrepancies-revealedin annex V of the
regardedasinvalid and insufficient. Some >f thesecasesare
4

four years old and yet the truth could not be established,
let alone the violators prosecuted.

agreedrecommendationsconcerning the type of action that
could be’taken in view of the open andpersistentrefusalof
South Africa and Portugal to implement sanctionsagainst
Southern Rhodesia, although it wasexpresslyinstructed to
do so in paragraph4 of Security Council resolution
320 (1972). The African proposal, contained in paragraph
23 of the report, that the Security Council decide that all
States limit their purchasesof certain commodities-which
are at the same time the main Southern Rhodesian
exports-from South Africa, Mozambique and Angola to
the pre-sanctions levels, and their proposalscontained in
paragraphs24, 25 and 3 1, whoseaimwasmerely to render
more difficult the contraband to and from Southern
Rhodesia through those territories, were not agreedupon,
becauseof opposition on the part of a very few delegations.

41. If we consider that the 135 reported suspected
violations of sanctions represent merely a small fraction of
all the transactions with Southern Rhodesia which are
carried out on a world-wide scale, we will have a pretty
clear picture of the present situation of the sanctions policy
and of the Committee’s ability to deal effectively with
widespread violations.
42. But precisely because of the gloomy picture portrayed
here, of which we all are very well aware, and because of
the fact that the imposed sanctions have not yet brought
the racist regime of Ian Smith to an end, we must not allow
any relaxation in all the efforts to assure the effectiveness
of the sanctions; we must not allow a feeling of indifference
or resignation to take over. We must thus continue to lend
full political support to the people of Zimbabwe, as has
already been done in so many resolutions of the General
Assembly, of the Security Council and of the Committee of
Twenty-Four.3
By doing so, we give heart to the people of
Zimbabwe to continue their struggle against oppression and
colonialist rule. We must exert all-out efforts in the
sanctions Committee and in the Security Council with a
view to improving the effectiveness of sanctions and their
strict application to finding new measures that may prove
to be useful in this respect and to rendering the violators’
job more difficult. We must pursue these efforts firmly
until the present Southern Rhodesian regime comes to an
end. Recent information to the effect that the foreign
currency reserves situation in Rhodesia is seriously deteriorating despite all illegal trade is an encouraging sign
showing that the effects of our sanctions policy, incomplete
as they are, are still proving to be at least partially effective.

46. The remaining African proposals, placed in the
unagreed part of the report, especiallythose dealingwith
the question of insurance-paragraphs28 and 29-and the
one containing the recommendationthat the United States
be requestedto co-operatewith the United Nationsand to
revoke its existing legislation permitting the importation of
minerals from Southern Rhodesia-paragraph33-are all
very reasonableand useful and indeedmerit the attention
of the Council. It is the opinion of the Yugoslavdelegation,
therefore, that the Council should seriously consider
approving all the remaining African proposals too, as
essentialfor the effective implementationof sanctions.
47. The Yugoslav delegation,togetherwith the delegations
of India, Indonesia, Panamaand Peru, continuesto support
the African proposalsand positionscontained in sectionIV
of the report, as expressedin paragraph 44. We shall,
therefore, support every motion that the Council endorse
the African proposalscontained in section IV, together
with the proposalsembodiedin sectionIII of the report.

43. A further step in this direction is now before US: it is
incorporated in the report of the Committee, on which I
Should like now to comment brizfy.

In addition, the Yugoslav Government’s position, as
poinrcd out in paragraph 60 and expressed on previous
occasions,is that sanctionsagainstSouthern Rhodesiacan
be fully effective only if they are applied againstPortugal
and South Africa aswell. That is why we fully agreewith
the delegations that have expressedthe sameview in the
report.
48.

44. The Yugoslav delegation has supported, from the very
beginning, all the proposals contained in the document
submitted by the delegations of Guinea, Kenya and the
Sudan, which has been accepted as a basis for the
preparation of the report. Out of 24 proposals that the
African document contains, 11 were accepted and included
in the agreed portion of the report, with some modifications which, in our opinion, have detracted from their
intended effectiveness while making them more palatable to
some members of the Committee. But, even with those
modifications, the agreed proposals, if applied in practice,
could constitute an important and substantive step forward
in the sanctions policy. There is, perhaps, no need for me to
list them here, even briefly, as we have all no doubt read
section III of the report, and we have just listened to the
able presentation of those points by the representative of
Guinea.

49. Let me conclude with a few wordsabout the problem
of Southern Rhodesia in general, of which the sanctions
constitute an inseparable part. This is a grave problem
which makes it imperative for us constantly to improve,
widen and tighten the sanctions.
50. The basic elementsof the solution of this problem are
outlined in numerousresolutionsof variousUnited Nations
organs, including the Security Council. The people of
Zimbabwe have the inalienable right to self-determination,
freedom and independenceand also to securethe enjoyment of this right by all availablemeansat their disposal.
There should be no independencebefore majority rule in
Zimbabwe, and any settlement relating to the future of
the Territory must be worked out with the full participation of genuine political leadersand leadersof the national
liberation movements, who are the true representativesof
the people of Zimbabwe. The Government of the administering Power should not transfer or accord, under any

45. It should be noted, however, that the Committee was
not able to come up with stronger and more meaningful
j Specjal Committee on t11eSituation with regard to the Imple-

mentation of the Declarationon the Granting of Independence to
Colonial Countries and Peoples.

5

circumstances, to the illegal regime any of the powers or
attributes of sovereignty. Instead it should bring about the
conditions necessary to enable the people of Zimbabwe to
exercise freely and fully their right of self-determination
and independence, and it should convene, as soon as
possible, a national constitutional conference where the
genuine representatives of the people as a whole would be
able to work out a settlement relating to the future of the
Territory.
51. These are the only principles and courses of action
which, if strictly observed and followed, are liable to bring
a just solution to the peopIe of Zimbabwe. That is why we
have always supported them and will continue to do so.
Furthermore, we think that the continuation and strengthening of the direct support and assistance of the United
Nations and all its organs and agencies, as well as of all
peaceful, progressive and anti-colonialist forces in the

world, to the struggle of the Zimbabwe people is indispensable. For its part, Yugoslavia will continue to lend its
support and assistance in keeping with its progressive
anti-colonial non-aligned policy, to the liberation and
independence of all African nations.
52. We are convinced that the forthcoming tenth anniversary meeting of the Organization of African IJnity in
Addis Ababa and the Conference of Heads of State or
Government of Non-aligned Countries in Algiers, which will
be held this year in September, will bring some new
elements and adopt some new decisions aimed at the final
solution of this problem. It is in this general context that
we shall continue to approach the issues of a better and
more effective application of sanctions.
The meeting rose at 12 noon.
