A/RES/75/246

United Nations

General Assembly

Distr.: General
7 January 2021

Seventy-fifth session
Agenda item 149
United Nations pension system

Resolution adopted by the General Assembly
on 31 December 2020
[on the report of the Fifth Committee (A/75/669, para. 6)]

75/246.

United Nations pension system
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 70/238 A of 23 December 2015, 73/274 of 22 December
2018 and section VIII of its resolution 74/263 of 27 December 2019,
Having considered the report of the United Nations Joint Staff Pension Board
for 2020, 1 the reports of the Secretary-General on the investments of the United
Nations Joint Staff Pension Fund and measures undertaken to increase the
diversification of the Fund 2 and on the administrative and financial implications
arising from the report of the United Nations Joint Staff Pension Board, 3 the financial
report and audited financial statements for the year ended 31 December 2019 and the
report of the Board of Auditors on the United Nations Joint Staff Pension Fund 4 and
the recommendations contained therein, the report of the Chief Executive of Pension
Administration and the Representative of the Secretary-General for the investment of
the assets of the Fund on the implementation of the recommendations of the Board o f
Auditors contained in its report for the year ended 31 December 2019 on the Fund, 5
the report of the Office of Internal Oversight Services on the audit of governance
mechanisms and related processes in the Office of Investment Management of the
United Nations Joint Staff Pension Fund 6 and the related report of the Advisory
Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions, 7

__________________

Official Records of the General Assembly, Seventy-fifth Session, Supplement No. 9 (A/75/9).
A/C.5/75/2.
3
A/C.5/75/3.
4
Official Records of the General Assembly, Seventy-fifth Session, Supplement No. 5P
(A/75/5/Add.16).
5
A/75/318.
6
A/75/215.
7
A/75/7/Add.18 and A/75/7/Add.18/Corr.1.
1
2

21-00051 (E)

080121

*2100051*

A/RES/75/246

United Nations pension system

1.

Takes note of the report of the United Nations Joint Staff Pension Board;

2.
Also takes note of the reports of the Secretary-General on the investments
of the United Nations Joint Staff Pension Fund and measures undertaken to increase
the diversification of the Fund and on the administrative and financial implications
arising from the report of the United Nations Joint Staff Pension Board;
3.
Further takes note of the report of the Chief Executive of Pension
Administration and the Representative of the Secretary-General for the investment of
the assets of the Fund on the implementation of the recommendations of the Board of
Auditors contained in its report for the year ended 31 December 2019 on the Fund;
4.
Endorses the conclusions and recommendations of the Advisory
Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions;
5.
Emphasizes the existing prerogative of the General Assembly on matters
pertaining to the Fund;
6.
Stresses the need for the Fund to address all the recommendations
identified by the Board of Auditors and the Office of Internal Oversight Services,
including in relation to vacancies in key positions, risk management, investment
management, management of external fund managers, benefits payments
management and other administrative processes;
7.
Recalls paragraph 15 of section VIII of its resolution 74/263, and reiterates
its request that the Secretary-General and the Pension Board ensure that the staff
composition of the Office of Investment Management and of the Pension
Administration is based on as wide a geographical basis as possible, bearing in mind
Article 101, paragraph 3, of the Charter of the United Nations, and to make every
effort to provide an update on progress achieved in the context of their next reports;
8.
Also recalls paragraph 29 of the report of the Advisory Committee, and
requests the Pension Administration and the Office of Investment Management to
ensure that all vacancy announcements advertised before approval of the
corresponding resources by the General Assembly indicate clearly that the
recruitment is subject to a decision of the Assembly, and to review all the general
temporary assistance positions of the Fund with a view to identifying potential
duplication of functions and efficiencies, while ensuring that their establishme nt and
management comply with the applicable Assembly resolutions and the Staff
Regulations and Rules of the United Nations, 8 notably in terms of responding to peak
workload;
Actuarial matters
9.
Stresses the importance of continuing to achieve the necessary 3.5 per cent
annual real rate of return on a long-term basis for the future solvency of the Fund;
Governance matters
10. Recognizes that the Financial Regulations and Rules of the United
Nations 9 remain the highest framework governing all aspects related to the
administrative services provided by the Secretariat, including the procurement of
goods and services, the management of property and internal and external audit
arrangements;

__________________
8
9

2/7

ST/SGB/2018/1.
ST/SGB/2013/4 and ST/SGB/2013/4/Amend.1.
21-00051

United Nations pension system

A/RES/75/246

11. Recalls paragraph 61 of the report of the Advisory Committee, and stresses
that the recruitment of all posts and positions of the Fund shall be done in accordance
with the relevant Staff Regulations and Rules;
12. Emphasizes that the Office of Internal Oversight Services shall remain the
sole internal oversight body of the secretariat of the Fund and its investments, in line
with the mandate of the Office, as set out by the General Assembly its resolution
48/218 B of 29 July 1994, and stresses that any change to the mandate in this regard
remains the sole prerogative of the Assembly;
13. Recalls paragraph 8 of section VIII of its resolution 74/263, including
subparagraphs (a) to (e), in which it called for a comprehensive and objective analysis
of pension fund governance matters, notes the decision of the Pension Board to
request the Governance Working Group to review and analyse the report of the
independent external entity, and looks forward to further considering the report
together with the recommendations of the Board, noting the significant variances
from best practices in respect of the governance of the Fund as reflected in the report
of the independent external entity, while respecting the unique nature of the Fund;
14. Notes that the key focus of this review in the context of best practices in
respect of the governance of the Fund should be aimed, in particular, at the size,
composition and frequency of meetings of the Pension Board, in order fo r its members
to fulfil their fiduciary responsibilities in the best interest of the participants and the
beneficiaries of the Fund;
15. Recognizes the need for the Governance Working Group to collaborate
closely with the independent external entity, as appropriate, and for the Pension Board
to take into account governance best practices in providing its comments on the report
of the independent external entity, and looks forward to receiving updates, including
concrete reform proposals and plans, taking into account the recommendations of the
independent external entity as mentioned in paragraphs 13 and 14 of the present
resolution, in the context of the first part of the resumed seventy -fifth session and the
next annual report of the Board to the General Assembly;
16. Recalls its resolutions 73/274 and 74/263, in which it decided that the
Secretary of the Pension Board should be fully independent of the Chief Executive of
Pension Administration, and requests the Board to include the terms of reference and
related reporting lines for both the Secretary and the Chief Executive in the context
of the next report;
17. Welcomes the decision of the Pension Board to recognize, mutatis
mutandis, the Regulations Governing the Status, Basic Rights and Duties of Officials
other than Secretariat Officials, and Experts on Mission, 10 adopted by the General
Assembly by its resolution 56/280 of 27 March 2002, as the code of conduct for the
Board, without prejudice to the legal status, privileges and immunities of those
attending sessions of the Board or any of its committees or working groups;
18. Recalls paragraph 16 of section VIII of its resolution 74/263, and decides
that the proposed amendment to article 6 of the Regulations of the Pension Fund, as
recommended by the Pension Board, should be considered in the context of the review
of the recommendations of the Board on the report of the independent external entity
and upon submission of further proposals, including change s to the Regulations and
Rules of the Fund to ensure adherence to the code of conduct;

__________________
10

21-00051

ST/SGB/2002/9.
3/7

A/RES/75/246

United Nations pension system

Pension Board
19. Notes the progress made in order to eliminate all delays in payments of
benefits, encourages the Pension Board to continue to enhance cooperation between
the Fund and the member organizations in this regard, and requests the Pension
Administration to establish and fully implement a procedure for following up on cases
with missing or invalid documents and to report thereon, including on statistics, the
entities involved and progress made, at the seventy-sixth session of the General
Assembly;
20. Requests the Pension Board to provide in its future reports detailed updates
for any recommendation of the Board of Auditors that has not been agreed upon or
implemented;
21. Recalls paragraph 35 of section VIII of its resolution 74/263, and requests
the Pension Board to clarify the functional responsibilities and reporting lines of the
New York and Geneva offices and to submit, in the context of its next report,
information on specific measures to ensure the efficiency of the Geneva office in
rendering services to clients;
22. Requests the Pension Board to conduct proper monitoring through annual
reports regarding the status of implementation of the Integrated Pension
Administration System, specifically the challenges experienced with regard to the
implementation of the system, including granting of other forms of assistance, as well
as the enhancements made to address these challenges;
23. Emphasizes the need for the Pension Board to ensure that the Fund takes
appropriate measures to use existing internal capacities and keeps the use of
consultants in its operations to a minimum;
24. Encourages the Secretary of the Pension Board to restructure and
streamline the report of the Board with the aim of making it more co ncise and to the
point and presenting the rationale of financial and administrative proposals in a more
comprehensive manner;
25. Highlights the importance attached by the General Assembly to continuing
to ensure accountability by the Pension Board, and requests the Board to provide
follow-up on all aspects of the implementation of the present resolution in the context
of its report to be submitted to the Assembly at its seventy-sixth session;
Pension Administration
26. Welcomes the three strategic goals established by the Chief Executive of
Pension Administration;
27. Requests the Pension Administration to continue to adhere to the target
benchmark of 75 per cent of initial benefit processing in 15 business days and to
eliminate the practice of postponing the benchmark for additional documentation
requirements, according to the recommendation of the Board of Auditors in its report,
and to report the actual time for completion of the processing of initial benefits,
including those without proper documentation, as well as the reasons for exceeding
the 15 business-day target benchmark as appropriate, in the context of the next report
of the Pension Board;
28. Recalls paragraph 35 of the report of the Advisory Committee, welcomes
the proposal to establish a new Business Transformation and Accountability Unit in
the Pension Administration, stresses the importance of developing key performance
indicators to assess its efficiency and its impact on the work of the Fund, and requests

4/7

21-00051

United Nations pension system

A/RES/75/246

the Pension Board to provide updated information thereon in the context of its next
report;
Investments of the United Nations Joint Staff Pension Fund
29. Notes the restructuring of the Office of Investment Management, including
the change of the reporting lines of the Risk and Compliance Section and the
Operations Service to the Representative of the Secretary-General, and requests the
Representative to report on the achievements of those offices;
30. Reaffirms that the Secretary-General serves as fiduciary for the investment
of the assets of the Fund;
31. Supports all recommendations as contained in the report of the Office of
Internal Oversight Services, including the critical recommendations 1 and 10, and
requests the Secretary-General to report on their implementation in detail at the main
part of its seventy-sixth session;
32. Recalls paragraph 26 of the report of the Advisory Committee, and
requests the Secretary-General to address all matters related to preventing and
addressing actual or perceived conflicts of interest in all areas of the Fund, including
implementing the recommendations of the Board of Auditors on personal securities
trading policy in respect of all personnel who may be involved in investment
operations, and at all levels of the Fund’s activities;
33. Notes the report of the Representative of the Secretary-General on the
proposal of the Pension Board to engage, for the first time, in a range of derivative
instruments available to the Fund, to effectively manage the Fund’s investments and
address the increasing complexity of the global capital markets environment, and in
this context requests the Secretary-General to submit more detailed proposals to the
General Assembly at its seventy-sixth session, including information on the use of
derivative instruments, engagement in margin trading and participation in securities
lending, as well as compliance measures, with a view to ensuring strict adherence to
the existing policies and accountability framework and a cost-effective investment
strategy, and authorizes the Secretary-General to conduct margin trading for the
limited purpose set out in paragraphs 43 and 44 of his report 11 on a trial basis for two
years;
34. Requests the Secretary-General to report on the use of these expanded
investment strategies, including on their impact on the diversification of the Fund, in
the context of his next report on the investments of the Fund, and to review the use
of these expanded investment strategies and to report thereon to the General Assembly
at its seventy-seventh session in order to determine whether to continue these
strategies;
35. Also requests the Secretary-General, as fiduciary for the investment of the
assets of the Fund, to continue to diversify its investments among developed,
developing and emerging markets, wherever this serves the interests of the
participants and the beneficiaries of the Fund, and further requests the Secretary General to ensure that decisions concerning the investments of the Fund in any market
are implemented prudently, taking fully into account the four main criteria for
investment, namely, safety, profitability, liquidity and convertibility;
36. Recalls paragraphs 10 and 13 of the report of the Advisory Committee,
and notes that emerging and frontier markets, including markets in Africa, are
increasingly important to the investment strategy of the Fund;
__________________
11

21-00051

A/C.5/75/2.
5/7

A/RES/75/246

United Nations pension system

37. Also recalls paragraph 45 of the report of the Advisory Committee, and
requests the Secretary-General to provide updated information on vacant posts and
the granting of special post allowance in the Office of Investment Management in the
next report of the Pension Board;
Other matters
38. Approves the admission of the Wassenaar Arrangement on Export Controls
for Conventional Arms and Dual-Use Goods and Technologies to membership in the
Fund, with effect from 1 January 2021; 12
39. Recalls paragraph 17 of section VIII of its resolution 74/263, and requests
the Pension Board to provide further analysis of and clarification on the proposed
amendment to article 48 of the Regulations of the Pension Fund in the context of its
next report;
40. Approves the proposed amendments to articles 4 and 8 of the Regulations
of the Fund as proposed by the Pension Board;
41. Decides to defer consideration of the amendments to article 7 of the
Regulations and paragraph 19 of the pension adjustment system of the Fund to its
seventy-sixth session;
Budget estimates for 2021
42. Recalls paragraph 14 of the report of the Advisory Committee, and stresses
the importance of the Fund’s improving its budgeting accuracy and presentation of costs;
43.

A.

Approves the changes to the staffing table as set out in the table below:

Pension Administration
Action

Title of post

Category

New post

Chief of Business Transformation and
Accountability Unit

P-5

1

Conversion

Programme Management Officer (Risk)

P-3

1

Conversion

Benefits Assistant (Operations)

GS (OL)

2

Total net changes

Number

4

Reclassification

Benefits Officer

P-3 to P-4

1

Reclassification

Accounting Assistant

GS (OL) to GS (PL)

1

Redeployment (from executive direction
and management to programme of work)

Programme Management Officer

P-3

1

Redeployment (from programme of work
to executive direction and management)

Risk Officer

P-4

1

Redeployment (from programme of work
to executive direction and management)

Legal Officer (Compliance)

P-3

1

__________________
12

6/7

The admission of the Wassenaar Arrangement to membership in the United Nations Joint Staff
Pension Fund on the recommendation of the Pension Board does not amount to recognition of the
Wassenaar Arrangement by Member States that are not participating States of the Arrangement.
21-00051

United Nations pension system

B.

A/RES/75/246

Office of Investment Management
Action

Title of post

Category

Number

Abolishment

Investment Assistant (Fixed Income)

GS (OL)

(1)

Abolishment

Risk Assistant

GS (OL)

(1)

Total net changes

(2)

Reclassification

Accountant – Middle Office

P-2/P-1 to P-3

1

Redeployment (from executive direction
and management to programme of work)

Senior Programme Officer

P-5

1

Redeployment (from executive direction
and management to programme of work)

Administrative Officer

P-4

1

Redeployment (from executive direction
and management to programme of work)

Senior Administrative Assistant

GS (PL)

1

Redeployment (from executive direction
and management to programme of work)

Administrative Assistant

GS (OL)

3

Redeployment (from programme of work
to executive direction and management)

Risk Officer (Portfolio Construction)

P-4

1

Abbreviations: GS (OL), General Service (Other level); GS (PL), General Service (Principal level).

44. Recalls paragraphs 40 (c) and 51 of the report of the Advisory Committee,
and requests the Pension Administration and the Office of Investment Management
to seek to further optimize premises occupation and rental costs in the light of, inter
alia, the lessons learned during the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic, and
to report thereon in the context of the next budget submission;
45. Approves the estimates of 111,212,700 United States dollars for the
administration of the Fund for 2021;
46. Also approves expenses, chargeable directly to the Fund, totalling
103,217,600 dollars net for 2021;
47. Further approves the amount of 7,995,100 dollars as the United Nations
share of the cost of the administrative expenses of the Fund for 2021, of which
4,885,000 dollars would represent the share of the regular budget and the balance of
3,110,100 dollars would represent the share of the funds and programmes;
48. Approves the decrease of 71,300 dollars in the United Nations share of the
cost of the administrative expenses of the central secretariat of the Fund under section 1,
Overall policymaking, direction and coordination, of the proposed programme budget
for 2021;
49. Authorizes the Pension Board to supplement the voluntary contributions to
the Emergency Fund for 2021 by an amount not to exceed 112,500 dollars.
48th (resumed) plenary meeting
31 December 2020

21-00051

7/7
