S/2017/695*

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
10 August 2017
Original: English

Report of the Secretary-General on developments in
Guinea-Bissau and the activities of the United Nations
Integrated Peacebuilding Office in Guinea-Bissau
I. Introduction
1.
The present report is submitted pursuant to Security Council resolution 2343
(2017), by which the Council extended the mandate of the United Nations
Integrated Peacebuilding Office in Guinea-Bissau (UNIOGBIS) until 28 February
2018 and requested that I report every six months on the situation in Guinea -Bissau
and on progress made in the implementation of the resolution and the mandate of
UNIOGBIS. The report provides an update on key political, security, human rights,
socioeconomic and humanitarian developments in Guinea -Bissau since my report of
7 February 2017 (S/2017/111).

II. Major developments in Guinea-Bissau
A.

Political situation
2.
Since my last report, the political impasse in Guinea -Bissau has persisted, with
no progress made towards implementation of the Conakry Agreement signed on
14 October 2016. The impasse at the National Assembly and the consequent
non-approval of the Government’s programme and State budget have further
polarized positions in the country. Despite various initiatives aimed at genuine
dialogue to resolve the institutional crisis, there has been no sign of a breakthrough.
3.
On 6 February, the Government of Prime Minister Umaro Sissoco Embaló
submitted its programme to the National Assembly. On 22 February, the 15 -member
Permanent Commission of the Assembly rejected the scheduling of an ordinary
session to consider the programme on the grounds that the Government had not been
formed in compliance with the Conakry Agreement, and that the programme was
not submitted within the 30-day deadline set out in the Agreement. Only the nine
members of the Commission from the African Party for the Independence of Guinea
and Cabo Verde (PAIGC) participated in the vote, while the remaining six members,
from the Party for Social Renewal (PRS), abstained.
4.
On 23 February, PRS, which is the second largest party in Parliament after
PAIGC, submitted a petition to the Speaker of the National Assembly, Cipriano
Cassamá, requesting the nullification of the Permanent Commission ’s decision and
the convening of a plenary meeting of the National Assembly to consider the
* Reissued for technical reasons on 15 August 2017.

17-13088* (E)

160817

*1713088*

S/2017/695

Government’s programme. On 3 March, the Speaker issued a decision rejecting the
request, arguing that the party lacked the legal standing to appeal the decisions of
the Commission. On 12 April, the PRS parliamentary group announced its decision
to participate only in plenary sessions of the National Assembly.
5.
Meanwhile, in the light of the lack of progress in the implementation of the
Conakry Agreement, the Mediator of the Economic Community of West African
States (ECOWAS) for Guinea-Bissau, President Alpha Condé of Guinea, sent his
Minister of State and Secretary-General of the Presidency, Naby Youssouf Kiridi
Bangoura, to Bissau, on 8 and 9 March. Mr. Bangoura held consultations with the
political leaders of the country and with members of the international community to
discuss the Mediator’s proposal for a reconciliation meeting in Conakry between the
PAIGC leadership and the group of 15 parliamentarians who had been expelled from
the party in January 2016. The proposed meeting did not materialize, however,
owing to lack of consensus within the group of 15 parliamentarians.
6.
From 10 March to 18 May, the President of Guinea-Bissau, José Mário Vaz,
carried out a nationwide tour to seek the views of local stakeholders on national
affairs. Throughout the tour, the President focused on three priorities: peace and
stability; appropriate management of public funds; and the implementation of his
“Mon na Lama” (“All hands on deck”) agriculture project towards the achievement
of food self-sufficiency. The tour ended in Bissau, where both the President and the
Minister of the Interior stated that the Government of Prime Minister Sissoco
Embaló would “not be dismissed because of international pressure”.
7.
A series of demonstrations marked the reporting period. On 9 March, a
movement called “The Citizen” organized a protest in Bissau, demanding the
resumption of the National Assembly’s activities and expressing support for the
President and the Government. On 11 March, the “Movement of Conscientious and
Nonconformist Citizens” held a counter-demonstration in Bissau, calling for the
resignation of the President. Although PAIGC did not express public support for the
protest, many party militants reportedly participated in it. On 8 April , the Movement
organized a vigil, which was attended by approximately two dozen people, urging
the President to find a solution to the political crisis or call for early general
elections. Police used tear gas against the demonstrators, arrested seven peop le and
subsequently released them. On 22 April, the Movement and other civil society
organizations held another demonstration, gathering approximately 1,000 people,
which was conducted peacefully. However, during a demonstration organized by the
same movement on 27 May, which involved about 800 participants, law
enforcement personnel and demonstrators clashed, causing injuries to 18
demonstrators and police officers, according to hospital sources.
8.
In the light of these developments, the group of internat ional partners based in
Guinea-Bissau, composed of representatives of the African Union, the Community
of Portuguese-speaking Countries, ECOWAS, the European Union and the United
Nations, issued a press release on 26 May, noting with concern the rise of te nsions
in the country, fuelled by inflammatory rhetoric, strikes and threats of violent street
demonstrations. The group recalled previous declarations by ECOWAS, the United
Nations Security Council and the European Union, urging political actors to show
restraint.
9.
On 2 April, the Executive Secretary of the Community of Portuguese -speaking
Countries, Maria do Carmo Silveira, arrived in Bissau for a four -day visit to consult
with national and international stakeholders on the crisis. After her meeting wit h
President Vaz on 5 April, the Executive Secretary stated that she had received
assurances from the President that he would do everything possible to set up a
platform for dialogue among the citizens of Guinea -Bissau.
2/17

17-13088

S/2017/695

10. On 23 April, following consultations in Conakry with the ECOWAS Mediator,
President Alpha Condé, an ECOWAS ministerial mission arrived in Bissau, with the
support of UNIOGBIS. The mission was led by the Minister for Foreign Affairs of
Liberia and included the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Sierra Leone, the Minister
of State and Secretary-General of the Presidency of Guinea, the Chief of Staff of the
Minister for Foreign Affairs of Senegal and the President of the ECOWAS
Commission.
11. The ministerial mission consulted with international partners based in GuineaBissau during a meeting co-facilitated by my Special Representative and the
ECOWAS Special Representative in Guinea-Bissau. On 24 April, the ECOWAS
delegation met with civil society representatives, the Prime Minister, leaders of the
political parties represented in Parliament, the group of 15 parliamentarians
expelled from PAIGC and the President. The mission underscored the urgent need to
implement the Conakry Agreement and to hold peaceful and credible legislative and
presidential elections in 2018 and 2019, respectively. It also informed stakeholders
about plans to withdraw the ECOWAS Mission in Guinea-Bissau (ECOMIB),
starting from 28 April 2017, in compliance with the decision taken by the ECOWAS
Authority of Heads of State and Government at the summit held on 17 December
2016 in Abuja. During consultations, the conflicting parties reaffirmed their
commitment to the implementation of the Agreement, while national stakeholders
and representatives of civil society expressed fears that the withdrawal of ECOMIB
could have a detrimental impact on security and stability in the country.
12. On 25 April, prior to leaving Bissau, the mission issued a final communiqué in
which it recommended that, in the event of non-compliance with the Conakry
Agreement, or lack of concrete steps to implement it within 30 days, the ECOWAS
Authority of Heads of State and Government impose targeted sanctions on
individuals and entities that obstruct its smooth implementation.
13. The strong stance taken by the ECOWAS ministerial mission led to efforts to
promote consultations among national stakeholders. On 5 May, the Government
issued a statement indicating that the Prime Minister had invited political parties
with parliamentary seats to consultations, on 2 and 3 May, within the framework of
the Conakry Agreement. The statement noted that only PRS had accepted the
invitation and added that the National Assembly was the appropriate forum for
debating the crisis. Furthermore, the Government reiterated its dete rmination to find
solutions to the crisis and to ensure the normal functioning of the National
Assembly.
14. On the same day, PAIGC issued a communiqué inviting members of the group
of 15 parliamentarians expelled from membership in the party to confirm to its
Commission on Dialogue and Reconciliation their interest in being reintegrated as
members. On 17 May, following a meeting with the Commission, former Prime
Minister Baciro Djá expressed his willingness to be reintegrated into PAIGC.
During a press conference held on the same day in Bissau, several other members of
the group of 15 parliamentarians confirmed their readiness to engage in dialogue
with the party’s leadership, provided that discussions would take place outside
PAIGC headquarters.
15. On 15 May, representatives of PRS, the group of 15 parliamentarians expelled
from PAIGC and representatives of the New Democratic Party (PND) submitted a
petition to the President reaffirming their support for both the Prime Minister and
the President. However, in a letter dated 22 May addressed to President Alpha
Condé, the president of PND, Iaia Djaló, clarified that the person who had signed
the petition on behalf of the party had not been authorized to do so.

17-13088

3/17

S/2017/695

16. On 25 May, PRS held a rally in Bafatá, the capital of the Bafatá region. On the
same day, in an interview with a local radio, the party’s president, Alberto N’bunhe
Nambeia, stated that international sanctions against political actors would not
resolve but rather worsen the critical situation in the c ountry.
17. On 1 June, a group of 18 political parties without parliamentary representation
issued a press release blaming PAIGC and its president, as well as the Speaker of
the National Assembly, for the situation in the country. The group called on
ECOWAS to impose sanctions on PAIGC, its leader, the Speaker and their
supporters for not complying with the Conakry Agreement.
18. On 24 May, my Special Representative convened a meeting with a newly
established independent group of women’s organizations, known as the women’s
facilitation group, to discuss concrete steps for women ’s engagement in the search
for a consensual solution to the crisis. On 27 May, the Forum delivered a
memorandum to UNIOGBIS, expressing the need to resolve the protracted division s
among political leaders and called for steps to end the continued exclusion of
women in political processes. My Special Representative encouraged them to
reclaim their rightful place in the national decision-making and peacebuilding
arenas, including by enhancing their participation in the facilitation of dialogue
among political stakeholders. In response, the women ’s facilitation group requested
that UNIOGBIS provide technical and financial support for its engagement towards
the resolution of the crisis. The Mission has provided such support.
19. The women’s facilitation group subsequently met with the President, on
30 May, to advocate for genuine and direct dialogue with key political leaders. On
the same day, the Forum issued a press release, appealing to political parties to
engage in constructive dialogue for conflict resolution. On 2 June, representatives of
the Forum met with my Special Representative to brief him on progress made in
their facilitation efforts.
20. On 4 June, ECOWAS held the fifty-first ordinary session of its Authority of
Heads of State and Government in Monrovia. In its final communiqué, the
Authority: urged all stakeholders to comply with the provisions of the Conakry
Agreement; extended the mandate of ECOMIB for three months to allow for the full
implementation of the Accord; and affirmed its determination to institute, if needed,
targeted sanctions against all entities acting to obstruct the smooth implementation
of the Agreement. The Authority commended the continued non -interference of the
Army in the political impasse, urging it to continue to maintain that posture; and
directed the ECOWAS Commission to regularly assess, through a high -level
ministerial committee, progress made towards implementation of the Agreement.
21. From 13 to 15 June, the Chair of the United Nations Sanctions Committee
established pursuant to Security Council resolution 2048 (2012), Ambassador Elbio
Rosselli of Uruguay, visited Bissau. His visit aimed at gathering first-hand accounts
about the implementation and effectiveness of the sanctions measures imposed by
the Security Council and to discuss related political developments. The Chair met
with the President, the Speaker, the Prime Minister, the Ministe rs for Foreign
Affairs and the Interior, military officers under sanctions, the President of the
Supreme Court of Justice, leaders of political parties, the group of 15 expelled
PAIGC parliamentarians and representatives of civil society, women ’s and youth
organizations. He also held discussions with UNIOGBIS staff and other
international partners. Addressing the media on 15 June, Ambassador Rosselli
welcomed the exemplary behaviour of the military and noted that he would present
his conclusions to the Sanctions Committee and the Security Council for
assessment.

4/17

17-13088

S/2017/695

22. On 19 June, PAIGC, on behalf of the political parties represented in
Parliament, with the exception of PRS, submitted a document to the Guinea -Bissaubased group of international partners putting forward modalities for the
implementation of the Conakry Agreement. The document reiterated the proposal
made by the Speaker in February 2017, which included a schedule for the
implementation of the Agreement.
23. From 22 to 24 June, PAIGC held its first national convention in Bissau,
gathering about 600 delegates. Former Prime Minister Baciro Djá, who held the
position of third Vice-President of PAIGC prior to the crisis, participated in the
event as an ordinary member of the party. The Convention adopted several
recommendations, including the need to: clarify, through constitutional reform, the
power and prerogatives vested in the Executive, the Legislature and the Judiciary,
while maintaining the semi-presidential system; reform the electoral law and the
political parties law; and minimize the recurrence of internal conflicts. The PAIGC
convention also recommended that the president of the party have a say in the
selection of the party’s candidates for presidential and legislative elections, and
reiterated the call for the appointment of Augusto Olivais as the consensus choice as
Prime Minister within the framework of the Conakry Agreement. The Convention
took place amidst heightened tensions between the mainstream membership of
PAIGC and a faction of the group of 15 expelled parliamentarians, who accused the
party’s leadership of excluding all militants and senior members of the party
suspected of supporting the group.
24. During a meeting with religious leaders on 26 June, President Vaz called for
unity among all nationals of Guinea-Bissau and stressed that national stakeholders
should do their best to overcome the country’s challenges within the following 90
days. He called upon PAIGC, PRS and the group of 15 parliamentarians expelled
from PAIGC to come to an agreement and to facilitate the adoption of the
Government’s programme and State budget, adding that, in the event of
non-agreement, he would call for early elections.
25. From 5 to 10 July, as a result of the advocacy efforts led by the women ’s
facilitation group, the President held bilateral talks with the Speaker, the Prime
Minister, the President of the Supreme Court of Justice as well as the leaders of
PAIGC and PRS. The facilitation group informed my Special Representative that
key political leaders had agreed to resume regular consultations and consider
options to resolve the crisis in line with the Constitution and the Conakry
Agreement. The group seized the opportunity to request further advisory and
programmatic support from UNIOGBIS.
26. On 17 July, the African Union Peace and Security Council issued a
communiqué expressing support for ECOWAS mediation efforts and urging the
President to lead the way forward in the implementation of the Conakry Agreement.
It further urged all parties to refrain from actions or statements that could escalate
tensions and incite violence, and called for respect for human rights and freedom of
expression. The Council also expressed concern over the planned withdrawal of
ECOMIB by September 2017, calling on the international community to mobilize
financial resources to support the continuation of the mission, and decided to
undertake a mission to Guinea-Bissau within 2017 to follow up on the
implementation of the decisions of the African Union and ECOWAS and to enga ge
with national stakeholders on the way forward.

17-13088

5/17

S/2017/695

B.

Security situation
27. Overall, the security situation has remained stable, but tense. The protracted
political crisis led to an intensification of demonstrations and, although most of
them remained peaceful, the reporting period was marked by increased
confrontations between law enforcement authorities and protesters.
28. On 5 May, ECOMIB initiated a withdrawal to barracks in anticipation of a full
withdrawal from the country at a later stage. On 4 June, 65 members of the Nigerian
contingent were repatriated. However, the ECOMIB withdrawal was subsequently
halted by the decision of the ECOWAS Authority of Heads of State and Government
to extend the mandate of the mission for three months, until 30 Se ptember 2017.

C.

Human rights situation
29. During the reporting period, there was no significant progress in ensuring
compliance of the National Human Rights Commission with the Paris Principles,
notably the principle of independence from the Government. No significant progress
was observed with respect to the investigation of past gross human rights violations
and the creation of related accountability mechanisms.
30. On a positive note, UNIOGBIS recorded progress in a legal process initiated
by national authorities following the illegal arrest, torture and subsequent death of a
34-year-old citizen at a police station in Bissau on 23 January. The Prosecutor
General charged eight police officers with grievous bodily harm on 22 February and
on 9 June, one police officer was sentenced to three years and three months in
prison and was instructed to pay compensation to the victim’s family. The other
seven suspects were acquitted owing to lack of evidence.
31. On 9 June, the Government of Guinea-Bissau undertook a self-assessment of
its record in implementing international recommendations in the area of human
rights, stimulating national dialogue among State institutions and civil society
actors, youth and women representatives and other key stakeholders, with the
support of UNIOGBIS. The event included representatives of the judiciary, the
National Assembly, the Presidency, the concerned ministries and secretariats of
State, and representatives of civil society and the international community.
32. On 27 June, the National Council for Social Communication and an
association of journalists issued statements denouncing attempts to restrict freedom
of speech and press freedom through intimidation. On 30 June, the Government
suspended the broadcasting by the public service broadcasting organization of
Portugal (Rádio e Televisão de Portugal). In response, the Guinea-Bissau Human
Rights League issued a statement condemning the decision and calling for a solution
through dialogue.
33. UNIOGBIS documented incidents, including instances of detentions and the
disproportionate use of force by law enforcement officials during a demonstration
held on 27 May, which were condemned by Guinea -Bissau’s Human Rights League.
Following a protest organized on 8 April by the Move ment of Conscientious and
Nonconformist Citizens, the police briefly detained seven demonstrators on the
basis of a law that prevents the holding of meetings or demonstrations in public
places located at a specific distance from certain institution buildin gs. The police
later released them, following efforts at facilitation by UNIOGBIS.
34. On 1 June, the Ministry of the Interior issued a press release, forbidding the
organization of demonstrations planned for 3 and 4 June by the Movement of
Conscientious and Nonconformist Citizens and “The Citizen” movement, on the

6/17

17-13088

S/2017/695

ground that the events could threaten public order and peace. On 2 June, the
Guinea-Bissau Human Rights League condemned the position of the Secretariat of
State and urged the Government to abstain from acts likely to restrict the right to
hold demonstrations.

D.

Social, economic and humanitarian situation
35. The period under review was marked by continued positive economic
performance. Growth in the gross domestic product (GDP) for 2017 is projected at
about 5 per cent, slightly lower than the 5.1 per cent level of 2016, but much higher
than the Sub-Saharan African average of 2.6 per cent. This is the combined result of
an increase in cashew nut production and exports, growth in the construc tion sector,
a more stable macroeconomic framework, increased public revenues (by 32.4 per
cent), and enhanced discipline in the management of public finances. Total
production of cashew nuts is estimated to exceed 170,000 tons, with prices at
historically high levels (producers were being paid an average of 1,050 CFA francs
($1.75) per kilogram as at the end of June 2017). Despite the continued suspension
of direct budget support, the Government has paid salaries on a regular basis and
has covered some basic expenditures.
36. The Treasury Committee, which was established in 2016, and on which the
United Nations Development Programme (UNDP), the European Union, the
International Monetary Fund (IMF) and the World Bank sit as observers, has
improved its public expenditure management oversight role. The Committee has
also provided a useful space for information sharing between the Government and
its main development partners, focusing on greater fiscal discipline and
transparency. However, additional and sustained efforts are needed to achieve
greater efficiency in the allocation of public expenditure.
37. In May, IMF assessed the country’s performance as being satisfactory overall,
with tangible progress in the implementation of economic and financial reforms.
Consequently, IMF approved an Extended Credit Facility arrangement in the
amount of $3.03 million in special drawing rights. In addition, the World Bank
Group endorsed the New Country Partnership Framework for Guinea -Bissau in an
indicative amount of $90 million for the period from 2018 to 2021.
38. Despite the relatively positive economic performance, overall welfare and
social conditions among the population remain challenging. Poverty remains high
and pervasive, and there is limited improvement in the bro ader human development
outcomes. In order to improve the availability and quality of data on poverty and to
enhance understanding of the various dimensions of poverty, UNDP and the United
Nations Children’s Fund (UNICEF) launched a multidimensional poverty analysis
in April 2017. The study is expected to be completed by the end of 2017.
39. During the reporting period, strikes by labour unions in the justice and
education sectors over delays in the payment of subsidies and salary arrears led to
negotiations between the Government and the Union of Court Clerks, as well as
with the two main teachers’ unions. The agreements reached in both cases helped
appease social tensions.
40. From February to April, UNICEF supported the Ministry of Education in
printing and distributing primary school textbooks to 310,000 school -age children
nationwide, in cooperation with the Global Partnership for Education, to improve
quality of education in the country.
41. The World Health Organization (WHO) provided support to a joint mission
organized by the Global Alliance for Vaccines and Immunization, the Global Fund

17-13088

7/17

S/2017/695

to Fight AIDS, Tuberculosis and Malaria and the World Bank from 3 to 7 April. The
mission assessed the conditions for the country’s eligibility to new funding models
for the next three years.
42. From 31 May to 4 June, the Ministry of Health, United Nations actors (WHO,
UNICEF and UNDP) and other partners jointly conducted a national campaign for
the distribution of long-lasting insecticide-treated nets. About 1 million such nets
were distributed to protect more than 2 million adults and children from malaria.
Malaria deaths in Guinea-Bissau are over 30 per cent higher than in other West
African countries, accounting for 15.8 per cent of all deaths. Children under five
years of age are disproportionately affected, accounting for around 41 per cent of all
cases and 45 per cent of all deaths.

III. Status of implementation of the mandate of the
United Nations Integrated Peacebuilding Office in
Guinea-Bissau
A.

Fostering inclusive political dialogue and supporting national
reconciliation processes
43. During the reporting period, UNIOGBIS focused on helping to prevent the
escalation of tensions and violence, improve the political climate, restore
confidence among political leaders and to open the space for dialogue and
consensus. My Special Representative worked closely with the group of
international partners based in Guinea-Bissau and consulted with key stakeholders,
including the political parties, representatives of civil society, religious, traditional
and other leading opinion makers, urging them to advocate for dialogue and a
peaceful resolution of the crisis.
44. In the light of the polarized political situation and the lack of genuine dialogue
among key stakeholders, my Special Representative sought to promote the
consensus-building efforts of a group of women opinion makers. UNIOGBIS
provided strategic guidance and support, while ensuring that the women ’s
facilitation group retained full ownership of the initiative. As a result, the group
took the decision to inform all key stakeholders of the need for an urgent and
consensual resolution of the political stalemate. Their determination and genuine
commitment have led to bilateral talks between the President, the Speaker, the
Prime Minister and the President of PAIGC for the first time since the crisis erupted
in August 2015.
45. From 8 to 11 February, with the support of UNIOGBIS and the Peacebuilding
Fund, the organizing commission for the national conference towards the
consolidation of peace and development in Guinea-Bissau organized an
international symposium on the theme “Facing the past to build the Guinea -Bissau
of tomorrow”. Over 250 participants attended, including the President, the Speaker,
political leaders, representatives of national institutions, defence and security
forces, civil society and academia. The organizing commission presented the results
of consultations held at previous regional conferences and with nationals living in
the diaspora from 2009 to the present date. At the end of the discussions,
participants made several recommendations, including the need for the political
leadership to engage in frank and open dialogue to unlock the current political
impasse.
46. On 22 June, with the support of UNIOGBIS, the National Institute for Studies
and Research launched a series of seven conferences on State reform. At the first

8/17

17-13088

S/2017/695

conference a debate was held on “The historical and sociological approach of the
struggle for power in Guinea-Bissau”. On 6 July, the National Institute held its
second conference on “Political parties and the challenges of social cohesion and
national political stabilization”. About 50 scholars and students from Guinea-Bissau
attended the first conference, and the nu mber increased to 110 for the second
conference. Both events were broadcast live on a local radio.

B.

Review of Guinea-Bissau’s Constitution
47. During the reporting period, national stakeholders made no progress in
implementing the Conakry Agreement as it relates to the review of the Constitution.
In view of the political and institutional crisis, the ad hoc commission on
constitutional reform of the National Assembly did not convene.

C.

National security sector reform and rule of law strategies
48. UNIOGBIS continued to work in cooperation with the African Union,
ECOWAS and the European Union to assist national stakeholders in reviewing the
country’s strategy for security sector reform, adopted in 2006, to include maritime
security sector reform. The mission assisted national defence authorities to advance
civil-military relations, including through support to the civil -military relations
programme of the National Defence Institute and in the development of a national
strategy for civil-military relations.
49. UNIOGBIS supported efforts by the Ministries of Defence and the Interior and
the Chief of General Staff of the Armed Forces, including a sensitization initiative
launched on 25 May to provide guidance to military and security personnel to
prevent interference in the political process and ensure subordination to the legal
chain of command.
50. Consultations are ongoing between UNIOGBIS and the Government to
address challenges related to the security sector reform, the demobilization and
socioeconomic reintegration of military and security personnel.

D.

Mobilization, harmonization and coordination of
international assistance
51. My Special Representative has convened regular meetings of the international
and regional partners based in Guinea-Bissau aimed at fostering a shared
understanding of the evolving situation and ensuring a coordinated approach and
messaging by the international community.
52. At the regional level, my Special Representative stepped up his good offices to
help facilitate and support a sustained, inclusive and coordinated engagement by
ECOWAS. He travelled to Monrovia, Conakry and Dakar to discuss the objectives,
timing and modalities of the ECOWAS ministerial mission to Bissau. Shortly after
the ECOWAS summit in Monrovia, on 16 June, my Special Representative visited
Lomé where he met President Faure Essozimna Gnassingbé in his capacity as the
new Chair of the ECOWAS Authority of Heads of State and Government. They
discussed short-term prospects, possible scenarios and support modalities for the
conduct of a successful ECOWAS mediation process in Guinea -Bissau.
53. On 13 April, a visiting delegation of the International Organization of
La Francophonie met with representatives of UNIOGBIS and the diplomatic
community in Bissau. The delegation informed participants of its exchanges with

17-13088

9/17

S/2017/695

national stakeholders and reaffirmed the need to impress on stakeholders the
importance of urgently implementing the Conakry Agreement.
54. On 12 May, the Guinea-Bissau configuration of the Peacebuilding Commission
released a statement on the situation in Guinea-Bissau, commending the diplomatic
efforts of ECOWAS and encouraging its leaders to continue the mediation process
to end the political deadlock. The configuration reiterated support for the ECOWASbrokered six-point road map and the Conakry Agreement, and expressed hope that
the withdrawal of ECOMIB would be conducted in a way that would not undermine
political stability. It strongly urged all key political actors to engage in dialogu e and
urged restraint, moderation and commitment to resolve the political crisis.

E.

Strengthening democratic institutions and enhancing the capacity
of State organs
55. The political and institutional stalemate hampered UNIOGBIS efforts to assist
national authorities in strengthening democratic institutions and enhancing the
capacity of State organs, including the National Assembly. UNIOGBIS
commissioned the International Institute for Security Studies to support national
stakeholders in implementing the provisions of the Conakry Agreement relating to
institutional reforms. The Institute carried out a technical mission to Bissau from
20 to 24 March to prepare the groundwork for the holding of consultations with
national and international experts on a stability pact. It is hoped that the completion
of the process will help create a climate conducive to peaceful and credible
elections and lead to strengthened State institutions.
56. On 25 March, UNIOGBIS held two separate meetings in Bafatá, with the
acting Governor of the region, Alfa Djaló, and representatives of civil society
organizations and traditional leaders. The Governor and civil society representatives
expressed support for the organization of local elections, which they viewed as a
key step towards decentralization and local development, while also emphasizing
the need to resolve the political impasse ahead of the elections.

F.

Law enforcement, criminal justice and penitentiary systems
57. Against the backdrop of growing political tensions, UNIOGBIS advised
relevant national authorities about the responsible use of force and best practices in
the maintenance of public order, and on citizens’ rights during demonstrations.
UNIOGBIS also provided technical support and advice to the National Gua rd on the
review and development of conduct and discipline policies, as well as appeal
procedures and standards.
58. In addition, UNIOGBIS provided technical assistance to a conference on
international police and judicial cooperation held in Bissau in May. Sponsored by
the Portuguese rule of law consolidated assistance project and facilitated by experts
from Brazil and Portugal, the event brought together about 100 law practitioners
from Guinea-Bissau to discuss, inter alia: the linkages between the rule of law and
criminal justice; the need for efficient inter-agency and transnational police and
judicial assistance cooperation; the importance of combating serious transnational
organized crime; and migrant smuggling. UNIOGBIS and the United Nations Office
on Drugs and Crime (UNODC) supported the engagement of the National Audit
Court with stakeholders on discussions of impunity and corruption in the public
sector. UNIOGBIS and UNODC supported the National Audit Court in the
organization of a workshop, on 27 April, on fighting impunity and corruption in the
public sector.

10/17

17-13088

S/2017/695

59. UNIOGBIS helped reinforce the investigative capabilities of 34 National
Guard Officers. The mission also contributed to strengthening the capabilities of
Public Order Police officers in the collection and use of crime statistics to guide
focused patrols. It further provided strategic and technical guidance for the
development of strategic plans by law enforcement agencies.
60. During the reporting period, UNIOGBIS worked closely with the Su perior
Council for Police and Internal Security Coordination to improve national
inter-agency coordination of law enforcement agencies on methods to curb drug
trafficking, sexual exploitation of children and trafficking in persons, the safety of
maritime passengers and crime prevention strategies.
61. To extend the provision of justice services throughout the country, UNIOGBIS
has initiated, together with the Supreme Court, the development of mobile criminal
justice teams.
62. UNIOGBIS contributed to increased awareness of the United Nations Standard
Minimum Rules for the Treatment of Prisoners (the Nelson Mandela Rules) through
support for technical evaluation visits by the Director General of Prisons to the
detention facilities in Mansôa, in the Oio region, and in Bafatá. Working with the
Director General, UNIOGBIS developed recommendations for the rehabilitation of
the Mansôa facility.

G.

Promotion and protection of human rights
63. Following regular monitoring and assessment of detention conditions b y the
UNIOGBIS Human Rights Section, the mission advocated increased compliance
with human rights standards, including through dissemination to State officials and
other stakeholders of a guide on the rights of detainees elaborated by UNIOGBIS, in
partnership with the Ministry of Justice. Monitoring activities also covered
conditions in medical facilities and the demonstrations and strikes organized during
the reporting period.
64. From 21 to 29 February, UNIOGBIS trained 30 police officers, 30 National
Guard officers and 45 military officers in Bissau and in the regions of Bafatá and
Buba on the protection of human rights and gender equality. From 5 to 9 June,
UNIOGBIS, in collaboration with the UNDP -funded Judicial Training Centre,
concluded a series of training courses on human rights and the administration of
justice for 40 civil and military judges and prosecutors, lawyers and members of the
Judiciary Police, including five women. The training workshop focused on: women
and children’s rights in the administration of justice; the role of courts in protecting
economic, social and cultural rights; the protection of freedom of thought,
conscience, expression and religion; and the right to peaceful assembly.
65. On 8 June, UNIOGBIS and the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Human Rights (OHCHR) released a joint report on the right to
health in Guinea-Bissau. In the joint press release issued on the occasion, my
Special Representative stressed that the realization of the right to health has a strong
link with the peacebuilding process in Guinea-Bissau. The United Nations High
Commissioner for Human Rights, Zeid Ra’ad Al Hussein, underscored the duty of
the State to ensure the right to health, and called on donors to continue supporting
the activities of the Government of Guinea-Bissau in this regard.
66. From 17 March to 9 June, UNIOGBIS helped enhance national capacity for
the protection and promotion of respect for human rights and gender equality
through the dissemination of recommendations made by international human rights
mechanisms, including the universal periodic review, the treaty bodies and the

17-13088

11/17

S/2017/695

special procedures of the Human Rights Council, to Government officials,
parliamentarians, judges, prosecutors, civil servants, civil society organiz ations and
international non-governmental organizations.
67. From 19 to 23 June, UNIOGBIS concluded a series of training sessions for
human rights focal points in the Army by providing a training workshop in Cacheu,
capital of the Cacheu region, to 35 military officials, including one woman.

H.

Combating drug trafficking and transnational organized crime
68. During the reporting period, UNODC and UNIOGBIS supported the actions of
Guinea-Bissau’s Transnational Crime Unit in order to strengthen its ability to
conduct intelligence-based drug trafficking investigations, including through
enhanced regional and international cooperation, as part of the West Africa Coast
Initiative. They also supported the Anti-Trafficking Cell, within the framework of
the international Airport Communication Programme.
69. In conjunction with training provided by the Brazilian Federal Police in the
context of the Airport Communication Programme, UNIOGBIS and UNODC trained
members of the Judiciary Police, the Public Order Police, the Immigration and
Customs Services and INTERPOL on the threats of organized crime, drug -related
issues, human trafficking, as well as corruption and its linkage to other crimes.
70. On 21 April, UNIOGBIS and UNODC provided strategic and technical
guidance to enable verification, transportation and incineration of 46.3 kilograms of
cocaine, 2 litres of liquid cocaine and 584.03 kilograms of marijuana, which were
held by the Judiciary Police. Since the beginning of 2017, the Judiciary Police and
the Transnational Crime Unit have reported seizures of 2.9 kilograms of cocaine and
392 kilograms of marijuana.
71. On 9 May, UNIOGBIS was informed of the approval by the National Guard of
the report on the assessment of the terrestrial and maritime border posts, w hich had
been prepared with UNIOGBIS support. Its approval enabled the Inter -Agency
Security Sector Reform Task Force to proceed with the refurbishment and equipping
of select border posts. The mission also supported mentoring and training visits to
the National Guard border posts to strengthen national technical capabilities for
customs and migration.
72. UNODC supported the improvement of law enforcement capacities for
maritime border control and patrols, including through the delivery, in June, of two
boats, to be made available to Transnational Crime Unit, the Judiciary Police and
the National Guard. UNODC also provided individual officers of the Crime Unit
with ballistic protection equipment and a thermal night vision camera for
undercover surveillance, as well as police uniforms and other individual items of
police equipment.
73. On Bubaque island in the Bijagós archipelago in the Bolama region,
UNIOGBIS provided technical assistance for working meetings between business
stakeholders and law enforcement agencies in order to address weak border control,
drug trafficking, illegal immigration and human trafficking. UNODC also supported
the assembly of a prefabricated outpost for the Judiciary Police in Bubaque, which
helped to increase its operational presence.

12/17

17-13088

S/2017/695

I.

Incorporating a gender perspective into peacebuilding
74. From 27 February to 1 March, in the regions of Bafatá, Buba, and Quinara,
UNIOGBIS, in partnership with the Ministries of Defence and the Interior,
organized a training session on women’s human rights and gender equality for 105
members, including 40 women, of the country’s defence and security institutions.
The training workshop focused on gender perspectives and the introduction of
gender quotas in the recruitment process within the fr amework of the defence and
security sector reforms.
75. On 8 March, the Government and civil society organizations celebrated
International Women’s Day, with the support of the United Nations Entity for
Gender Equality and the Empowerment of Women (UN -Women) and in partnership
with all United Nations agencies. On the occasion, the Institute for Women and
Children presented the National Gender Policy and its action plan to the Ministry of
Women, Family and Social Solidarity. On the same day, the Ministry of Women,
Family and Social Solidarity officially launched its Gender Department, in
partnership with UN-Women.
76. From 28 to 31 March, UNIOGBIS and five members of the national Women ’s
Political Platform participated in a joint mission to the Gambia with th e Working
Group on Women, Peace and Security in West Africa and the Sahel, organized with
the support of ECOWAS, the United Nations Office for West Africa and the Sahel,
UN-Women, UNDP and the United Nations Population Fund. The women leaders
met with the national authorities and expressed solidarity with the people of the
Gambia, especially women and girls, after the country’s post-election crisis.
77. On 19 and 20 April, UN-Women organized a national conference on women’s
participation in decision-making processes to discuss the challenges facing women,
and women in Guinea-Bissau society in general, in the current political situation
and to make recommendations for peace and stability in the country. The
conference, which was facilitated by the Women’s Political Platform and the
women’s parliamentary caucus, brought together 198 participants, including 49
men, from women’s organizations, the National Assembly and former female
Ministers. On the occasion, UNIOGBIS delivered a training session on women and
resource control to women parliamentarians and representatives of civil society
organizations.

J.

Preparation for legislative and presidential elections in 2018
and 2019
78. On 28 March, the National Electoral Commission officially released the final
report on the 2014 legislative and presidential elections in Guinea -Bissau. The event
was preceded by a seminar on outstanding challenges ahead of the upcoming
elections. During the seminar, the Executive Secretary of the Commission, Idrissa
Djaló, informed participants of the intention of the Commission to draft relevant
draft laws to submit to the National Assembly. He also stressed the urgency of
updating the voters’ register and the mapping of electoral constituencies, with a
view to ensuring the smooth and timely conduct of legislative and local elections.
Participants discussed the pros and cons of holding legislative and local elections
separately or simultaneously. While some expressed preference for combined
elections in the interest of time and cost, others favoured separate ballots, observing
that civic education efforts would be required ahead of the local elections.
79. A United Nations electoral needs-assessment mission to Guinea-Bissau was
undertaken from 25 April to 2 May, pursuant to a request by the Prime Minister for

17-13088

13/17

S/2017/695

technical and financial assistance to update the constituency delimitation and the
voters’ register ahead of the legislative and local elections. The members of the
mission, who held consultations with representatives of the cou ntry’s electoral
management bodies and a wide range of national and international stakeholders,
concluded that delays in the implementation of the Conakry Agreement had
negatively affected efforts to advance dialogue and review the legal framework
ahead of the legislative and presidential elections in 2018 and 2019.
80. On 17 May, the group of international partners based in Guinea -Bissau met
with President Vaz to convey their concerns over delays in implementing the
Conakry Agreement. Addressing the media on behalf of the group, the Special
Representative of the African Union in Guinea-Bissau reported that the issue of the
legislative elections had been raised, including the preparatory steps required to
ensure their integrity, fairness and transparency. He added that a resolution of the
political impasse was necessary to enable preparations for the elections.
81. On 7 June, the Interim President of the National Electoral Commission
submitted a proposed timeline to President Vaz for the 2018 legislative elec tions.
When addressing the press at the end of the meeting, he refrained from publicly
discussing details of the electoral calendar, but stated that local elections would take
place 6 to 12 months after the holding of legislative elections.
82. On 17 July, the African Union Peace and Security Council issued a statement
on the situation in Guinea-Bissau in which it underlined the urgent need for
“institutional arrangements” to enable the timely holding of elections.

IV. Cross-cutting issues
A.

Integration of the United Nations system
83. During the reporting period, UNIOGBIS initiated the implementation of the
recommendations of the United Nations inter-agency strategic review mission to
Guinea-Bissau, which was led by the Department of Political Affairs in December
2016 and outlined in my last report to the Security Council ( S/2017/111,
paras. 68-75). As recommended by the strategic review mission, and approved by
the Council, in June, I appointed a new Deputy Special Representative for Guinea Bissau and Deputy Head of UNIOGBIS, David McLachlan-Karr. The Deputy
Special Representative will provide leadership and oversight of the Rule of Law and
Security Institutions Section of UNIOGBIS and will lead the United Nations
Country Team in Guinea-Bissau, in his capacity as United Nations Resident
Coordinator. Mr. McLachlan-Karr presented his credentials to the President on
19 July. In line with the mission’s recommendations, UNIOGBIS has initiated steps
to redeploy staff to the Political Affairs Section to support the good offices of my
Special Representative, as well as to ramp up the mission’s rotational presence
outside Bissau and to strengthen synergies with the United Nations country team.
84. Under the leadership of my Special Representative, UNIOGBIS and the United
Nations country team continued to work with national authorities within the
framework of the 2016-2020 Guinea Bissau-United Nations Partnership Framework.
85. On 12 April, UNIOGBIS and the secretariat of the Peacebuilding Fund
organized a one-day retreat with the United Nations country team to reflect on the
peacebuilding priority plan for Guinea-Bissau. The retreat was part of a larger effort
to update and realign the priority plan to the politi cal context and to develop short
and medium-term perspectives for the country’s peacebuilding portfolio, based on
lessons learned and system-wide good practices.

14/17

17-13088

S/2017/695

86. In June, the joint programme on police, justice and corrections in Guinea Bissau was finalized within the framework of the Global Focal Point arrangement.
Following endorsement by the Government, the joint programme is expected to
strengthen system-wide assistance to rule of law institutions, with the support of
UNIOGBIS, UNDP, UNODC, UNICEF and UN-Women.
87. On 18 June, the World Bank and the United Nations adopted a plan to support
national government capacity for the delivery of basic services. The plan aims to
improve coordination and information sharing and to promote joint analysis,
planning and programming between the two institutions.

B.

Public information
88. During the reporting period, UNIOGBIS adjusted its political communication
strategy and, together with the United Nations country team, developed a joint
United Nations communication strategy in line with the recommendations of the
strategic review mission. It also strengthened its outreach in the Bubaque region
through the deployment of one national United Nations Volunteer as a Public
Information Assistant.
89. In addition, the mission: produced and broadcast 14 radio programmes in
Bissau-Guinean creole language, focusing on its mandate, peacebuilding efforts,
cultural diversity, malaria prevention and freedom of the press, among other issues;
expanded the 50-minute live United Nations radio programme to include with a
human rights segment and a 20-minute call-in session; issued a total of 30 press
releases on United Nations activities; and translated into Portuguese and
disseminated 12 relevant press statements from United Nations Headquarters.
UNIOGBIS also drafted and posted 30 articles in English and Portuguese on its
website. The mission also published about 180 posts in English and Portuguese on
its Facebook page describing United Nations activities in Guinea -Bissau, including
the good offices of my Special Representative. On 23 March, an external newsletter
featuring the work of the United Nations in Guinea-Bissau (“I Kuma”) was
launched, and a total of 3,000 copies were distributed throughout the country.
90. From 12 April to 10 May, UNIOGBIS, in partnership with civil society
organizations, completed a round of community outreach meetings across the
country to raise awareness of notions of citizenship, the rule of law, democracy and
human rights, including the screening of a film, “The citizen and the State”,
produced by UNIOGBIS in 2016, and the dissemination of a guide on human rights
elaborated by UNIOGBIS.
91. UNIOGBIS also supported an international conference on the negative impact
of corruption organized by the national judges’ association on 15 June, as well as
outreach activities on the prevention of drug abuse and trafficking organized by the
National Observatory on Drug Abuse from 27 June to 1 July.

C.

Staff safety and security
92. The overall security situation in Guinea-Bissau remained calm despite the
prolonged political stalemate. No significant incidents involving United Nations
personnel were reported, except for one road traffic accident in which a pedestrian
was injured.

17-13088

15/17

S/2017/695

V. Observations
93. The political crisis in Guinea-Bissau has continued over the last two years,
with no immediate end in sight. In the absence of a settlement, there is a risk of
further deterioration of the political and security situation, particularly as the 2018
legislative elections draw near. I urge the President, the Speaker of the National
Assembly, the leaders of PAIGC and PRS, as well as all other political leaders to
demonstrate genuine political will and sincerity and to act decisively to end the
crisis through dialogue and consensus. These leaders are responsible for ensuring a
durable solution, based on the ECOWAS road map and the Conakry Agreement. The
United Nations remains committed to support their efforts in implementing the key
reforms outlined in the Conakry Agreement before the elections.
94. I commend the mediation efforts led by ECOWAS, including its Mediator,
President Alpha Condé of Guinea, and the outgoing Chair of the ECOWAS
Authority, President Ellen Johnson-Sirleaf of Liberia. I congratulate President Faure
Essozimna Gnassingbé of Togo on his designation as the new Chair of the
Authority, and encourage him to continue the indispensable support of ECOWAS for
a swift resolution of the crisis. I further welcome the extension by ECOWAS of the
mandate of ECOMIB for three months, until September 2017.
95. I take note of the determination of the ECOWAS Authority to institute, if
needed, targeted sanctions against those who obstruct the smooth implementation of
the Conakry Agreement. In line with the ECOWAS position, I request that the
Security Council consider all necessary means to ensure the speedy resolution of the
crisis, should it persist.
96. I also take note of the continued non-interference in the political affairs of the
country by the defence and security institutions of Guinea-Bissau, particularly the
armed forces, and encourage them to maintain that posture while playing their
constitutionally mandated role.
97. I welcome the increasing engagement of women in Guinea -Bissau in the
political process and congratulate them on their role in facilitating dialogue between
President Vaz and key political leaders. I encourage national authorities to increase
efforts to reach equal participation of women in the country’s decision-making
processes.
98. I welcome the steps taken by relevant national authorities to assess the
country’s record in implementing international human rights treaty obligations and
to follow up on the recommendations of the joint UNIOGBIS -OHCHR report on the
right to health. I encourage the authorities to finalize the ratification of pending
human rights instruments and to ensure that the statute of the National Human
Rights Commission is aligned with the Paris Principles, including the principle of
independence of the Commission from the Government.
99. In the context of multidimensional global and regional threats to peace and
stability, I urge the national authorities to remain vigilant and to intensify their
efforts for improved border management and maritime security. There is also a need
for better operational capacity of law enforcement and criminal justice systems to
fight drug trafficking and transnational organized crime. I call on international
partners to support the country in this regard. International support is also required
to extend community policing throughout the country.
100. I am concerned that progress on the reform of defence and security institutions
has been delayed, hampering their modernization. I urge political leaders in Guinea Bissau to resolve the institutional crisis and to facilitate reforms, and I call on all
partners to support the country in implementing the changes required in this regard.
16/17

17-13088

S/2017/695

I also believe that a police academy and a military academy, which are to be
established in the future, will act as critical enablers for the professionalization of
defence and security personnel, and encourage partners to support the development
of such national institutions.
101. Assistance in the functioning of the country’s essential public services,
especially in the education and health sectors, is indispensable. I welcome the
sustained engagement of all international partners present in the country and their
concerted efforts, in particular the African Union, the Community of Portuguese Speaking Countries, ECOWAS, the European Union, the West African Economic
and Monetary Union, the African Development Bank, the West African
Development Bank and the Bretton Woods institutions, as well as bilateral donors. I
encourage them to continue supporting Guinea -Bissau’s national strategic and
operational plan for the period from 2016 to 2020, and to honour the commitments
made in the March 2015 donor round table in Brussels.
102. My Special Representative will continue to work closely with national,
regional and international stakeholders to mobilize and invest financial, human and
technical resources in designing and implementing programmes and projects to
build greater resilience and better equip Guinea-Bissau to address challenges related
to the implementation of the Sustainable Development Goals.
103. To ensure the scaled up support of the international community for the
political, development, security and human rights challenges in Guinea Bissau, I
exhort the country’s key political actors to demonstrate a high sense of
responsibility by swiftly ending the ongoing political stalemate.
104. I wish to express my appreciation to the staff of UNIOGBIS and the United
Nations country team, under the leadership of my Special Representative, Modibo
Ibrahim Touré, for their commitment and hard work, as well as to bilateral, regional
and international partners for their continuing contributions to peacebuilding in
Guinea-Bissau.

17-13088

17/17
