S/PV.8605

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-fourth year

8605th meeting

Tuesday, 27 August 2019, 3 p.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Lewicki. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Poland)

Members:

Belgium. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Côte d’Ivoire . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Dominican Republic. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Equatorial Guinea. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Germany . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Indonesia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kuwait. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Peru. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
South Africa . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Pecsteen de Buytswerve
Mr. Wu Haitao
Mr. Bieke
Mr. Singer Weisinger
Mrs. Mele Colifa
Mrs. Boniface
Mr. Schulz
Mr. Djani
Mr. Alotaibi
Mr. Ugarelli
Mr. Kuzmin
Mr. Van Shalkwyk
Mr. Allen
Mr. Cohen

Agenda
Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts
Ninth report of the Secretary-General on the threat posed by ISIL (Da’esh)
to international peace and security and the range of United Nations efforts in
support of Member States in countering the threat (S/2019/612)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

19-26347 (E)
*1926347*

S/PV.8605

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

The meeting was called to order at 3.05 p.m.

General on the threat posed by the Islamic State in Iraq
and the Levant (ISIL/Da’esh) to international peace
and security and the range of United Nations efforts
in support of Member States in countering the threat
(S/2019/612), as mandated by resolution 2368 (2017).

Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Threats to international peace and security caused
by terrorist acts
Ninth report of the Secretary-General
on the threat posed by ISIL (Da’esh) to
international peace and security and the range
of United Nations efforts in support of Member
States in countering the threat (S/2019/612).
The President: In accordance with rule 39 of
the Council’s provisional rules of procedure, I invite
the following briefers to participate in this meeting:
Mr. Vladimir Voronkov, Under-Secretary-General,
United Nations Office of Counter-Terrorism, and
Ms. Michèle Coninsx, Executive Director of the
Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive Directorate.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I wish to draw the attention of Council members
to document S/2019/612, which contains the ninth
report of the Secretary-General on the threat posed by
the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL/Da’esh)
to international peace and security and the range of
United Nations efforts in support of Member States in
countering the threat.
I now give the floor to Mr. Voronkov.
Mr. Voronkov: I would like to express my
sincere condolences to Member States where recent
terrorist attacks have claimed hundreds of innocent
lives — Afghanistan, Egypt, Kenya, New Zealand,
Somalia, Sri Lanka, the United States of America and
others. My heartfelt words of deepest sorrow go to the
families who lost their relatives.
Last week, we commemorated the second
International Day of Remembrance of and Tribute to
the Victims of Terrorism, reaffirming that their needs,
rights and resilience must be at the centre of our efforts.
This topic will be an integral part of the counterterrorism week at the United Nations in the summer of
2020, with the organization of the first global congress
of victims of terrorism.
I thank members for the opportunity to brief the
Security Council on the ninth report of the Secretary2/21

27/08/2019

The report was prepared by the Counter-Terrorism
Committee Executive Directorate (CTED) and the
Analytical Support and Sanctions Monitoring Team of
the Committee pursuant to resolutions 1526 (2004) and
2253 (2015) concerning ISIL (Da’esh), Al-Qaida and
the Taliban and associated individuals and entities, in
close collaboration with my Office, with contributions
from other United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism
Coordination Compact entities. I am grateful to
Mr. Fitton-Brown and Ms. Coninsx for their valuable
contribution to the report. It is a comprehensive
analytical document on the threat that ISIL continues
to pose today at the global and regional levels.
The report outlines how, despite its territorial
defeat in the Syrian Arab Republic in March, ISIL
continues to aspire to a global relevance. It capitalizes
on its affiliates and inspired attacks and has an
estimated residual wealth of up to $300 million dollars
at its disposal.
Acute concerns also remain about the challenges
posed by foreign terrorist fighters (FTFs), returnees and
relocators, of whom between 24,000 and 30,000 have
survived out of the initial estimate of 40,000. Member
States must also contend with the threat posed by
frustrated travellers, whose number is hard to estimate.
The report highlights the relevant activities conducted
by United Nations entities over the past six months to
support Member States. Those efforts are in line with the
requirements under resolution 2396 (2017), as well as the
newly adopted resolutions 2462 (2019), on countering the
financing of terrorism, 2467 (2019), on sexual violence
in armed conflict, and 2482 (2019), on the links between
international terrorism and organized crime.
I would like to give the Council an overview of
the global and regional situations concerning the ISIL
threat. In the Middle East, ISIL’s military defeat in the
Syrian Arab Republic was a watershed, bringing to
an end the dystopia of the so-called caliphate, which
cost the people of Syria and Iraq so much. Yet the fall
of Baghouz was not a fatal blow. ISIL continues to
evolve into a covert network, with attacks increasing
in areas controlled by the Government of the Syrian
Arab Republic. That follows the same pattern that we
19-26347

27/08/2019

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

have seen in Iraq since 2017, where ISIL insurgency
activity, reportedly designed to prevent normalization
and reconstruction efforts, continues.
Turning to Africa, there has been a striking
increase in ISIL- and Al-Qaida-linked recruitment
and violence in the West of the continent. The Islamic
State’s West Africa Province is now one of the strongest
ISIL affiliates, with approximately 4,000 fighters. The
evolving threat posed by ISIL in Central Africa also
calls for vigilance.
In Europe, radicalization in prisons and the
risk posed by returnees upon release from prison
remain major concerns, which compound the risk
of home-grown terrorism and domestically inspired
attacks at a time when ISIL finds it difficult to send
fighters to Europe.
In Asia, the threat posed by ISIL continues despite
military pressure. The group is estimated to have
between 2,500 and 4,000 fighters, including FTFs.
In Southeast Asia, ISIL affiliates remain capable of
launching attacks with two worrying developments:
first, the role of women in planning and executing
attacks; and secondly, the explicit targeting of places
of worship, as we saw on Easter Sunday in Sri Lanka,
which may indicate a new trend.
Over the past six months, thousands of suspected
ISIL fighters, together with their families, have been
detained in Iraq and the Syrian Arab Republic. Many
are stranded in overcrowded camps in dire conditions,
generating acute security and humanitarian concerns.
There are as many as 70,000 people in Al-Hol camp
in Syria alone, including women and children with
potential links to United Nations-listed terrorist groups.
The Secretary-General recognizes in his report
that Member States face significant, multifaceted
challenges related to the repatriation of their nationals,
including women and children, from territories
previously controlled by ISIL. At the same time, the
report recalls that Member States have the primary
responsibility for their own nationals, and that policies
and actions that lead to statelessness should be avoided.
In that regard, I would like to highlight that several
Member States, including Azerbaijan, Kazakhstan, the
Russian Federation, Tajikistan and Uzbekistan, have
repatriated women and children, including orphans,
from Iraq and Syria.

S/PV. 8605

At the direction of the Secretary-General, in April,
my Office, together with other United Nations entities,
developed a set of key principles for the United Nations
system for the protection, repatriation, prosecution,
rehabilitation and reintegration of women and children
with links to United Nations-listed terrorist groups. We
have shared those principles with Member States, as we
believe that they can assist them in designing their own
policies and actions in accordance with international
law and human rights standards.
We are now following up with the practical
implementation of the key principles. The United
Nations Counter-Terrorism Centre of my Office is
developing a global programme in partnership with other
United Nations entities and regional and field presences
to provide tailored support to requesting Member
States on the screening, prosecution, rehabilitation and
reintegration of individuals suspected or convicted of
committing terrorist acts, as well as their families and
associates. On 30 September, we will launch a handbook
on ensuring a child rights-based approach to addressing
the situation of children affected by the foreign fighter
phenomenon, which will support the implementation of
the key principles.
Let me just highlight my Office’s key new
initiatives, which are mentioned in the report.
First, on law enforcement and border security, in
May we launched our Counter-Terrorism Travel
Programme — a multi-year, multimillion, multi-agency
programme with CTED, the United Nations Office
on Drugs and Crime, the Office of Information and
Communications Technology and the International
Civil Aviation Organization. As of today, INTERPOL
has also joined the programme, which I think is a very
promising development.
The programme seeks to enhance the capacity
of Member States to prevent, detect, investigate
and prosecute terrorist offences, human trafficking
and other forms of organized crime by using travel
information such as advance passenger information
and passenger name record data in accordance with
resolutions 2178 (2014) and 2396 (2017). I would like
to thank the Kingdom of the Netherlands for their
continuous technological and financial contributions
that enabled the programme, as well as the State of
Qatar and other countries and the European Union for
their support, including financial support.

19-263473/21

S/PV.8605

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

Secondly, on the protection of vulnerable targets,
my Office will soon launch a comprehensive fouryear global programme with a focus on safeguarding
religious sites from terrorism-related threats, which is a
worrying trend. The programme will be implemented in
close coordination with CTED and the United Nations
Alliance of Civilizations in line with resolution 2341
(2017). I am grateful to Ms. Coninsx and Mr. Moratinos
for the excellent cooperation in that regard.
Thirdly, on countering the financing of terrorism,
the United Nations Counter-Terrorism Centre of
my Office is expanding a global capacity-building
programme to include technical assistance on terroristasset freezing, protecting the non-profit sector, sharing
financial intelligence and promoting public-private
partnerships, inter alia, in response to resolution 2462
(2019). I am grateful to the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia for
its generous financial contribution to this programme.
Lastly, I would like to thank all Member States that
have been partnering with my Office to organize highlevel regional conferences, sustaining the momentum
for international cooperation and laying the groundwork
for the second United Nations High-level Conference
of Heads of Counter-Terrorism Agencies of Member
States next year. We have already completed three
such conferences in partnership with Member States,
namely, in April with the Government of Tajikistan;
in June with the Government of Mongolia and the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe;
and in July with the Government of the Republic of
Kenya, which was our biggest regional conference yet.
With close to 1,500 participants, the Kenya conference
galvanized the international community’s support for
counter-terrorism efforts in Africa. It is very important
that all three conferences were organized with the
active engagement of civil society organizations. Next
week, we will organize our fourth conference in Minsk
with the Government of Belarus, focusing on the risks
and opportunities posed by new technologies in the
fight against terrorism.
The Secretary-General stressed in his report that
the current lull in attacks directed by ISIL may be only
temporary. We need to remain vigilant to mitigate the
risk posed by the evolution of ISIL and its affiliates,
deny it new recruits and prevent its resurgence. It is
essential that Member States keep a comprehensive
and long-term perspective in that fight. This requires
urgent political leadership and a principled approach
based on international law and human rights standards.
4/21

27/08/2019

The United Nations system remains fully committed
to supporting Member States in countering terrorism.
The President: I thank Mr. Voronkov for
his briefing.
I now give the floor to Ms. Coninsx.
Ms. Coninsx: I thank you, Mr. President, for the
opportunity to brief the Council on the ninth report of
the Secretary-General on the threat posed by the Islamic
State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL) and United Nations
efforts in support of Member States in countering
the threat (S/2019/612). I would like to thank UnderSecretary-General Voronkov for providing an overview
of the report, as well as the United Nations Office of
Counter-Terrorism and the Analytical and Sanctions
Monitoring Team for their collaboration with my team
in preparing the report.
The ninth report demonstrates that, while welcome
progress has been made, most significantly in the
military defeat of ISIL in the Syrian Arab Republic,
the challenges involved in responding to the aftermath
of that defeat and the threat posed by its affiliates
around the world remain substantial. In particular, as
we heard from Under-Secretary-General Voronkov,
Member States and the international community
should pay urgent attention to the fate of the thousands
of individuals, including large numbers of women
and children, who are currently detained owing to
their suspected association with ISIL. The CounterTerrorism Committee Executive Directorate (CTED)
will continue to support United Nations efforts to assist
Member States to address this issue in full respect for
international law and human rights.
In parallel with possible repatriation efforts, States,
with the support of the United Nations system, should
also prepare to deal with the post-repatriation phase,
issues of accountability and the challenges involved
in rehabilitation and reintegration. In that regard,
Member States have reiterated to CTED their concerns
at the potential risks posed by the imminent release of
imprisoned foreign terrorist fighters — men and women
alike — in the absence of appropriate rehabilitation
and reintegration programmes. In the light of the short
sentences given to many returnees, owing to evidentiary
and jurisdictional challenges, there might be limited
opportunities to engage them in rehabilitation and
reintegration programmes prior to their release. In
turn, extended periods of pretrial detention without
guarantees of due process can undermine the
19-26347

27/08/2019

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

effectiveness of rehabilitation measures and increase
the potential risk that such individuals might radicalize
others within prison systems to violence.
It is therefore essential that post-repatriation
strategies include short-, medium- and long-term
components relating to prosecution, rehabilitation and
reintegration. It is also essential that such strategies be
human rights-compliant and gender sensitive and take
into consideration the special needs of children. That
is not easy and, of course, there is no one-size-fits-all
policy. Programmes should instead be tailored to local
conditions and allow for a case-by-case approach, while
still meeting applicable international law and upholding
human rights.
CTED remains fully engaged, together with its
partners, in assisting States address these challenges.
One example of that is our work in the Lake Chad
basin, where we have been working with the United
Nations Office on Drugs and Crime (UNODC), the
International Organization for Migration, the United
Nations Development Programme and other United
Nations entities to help States develop regional
approaches to screening, prosecution, rehabilitation
and reintegration as part of the Regional Stabilization,
Recovery and Resilience Strategy for Areas Affected
by Islamic State West Africa Province.
Our dialogue with Member States has revealed that
many other gaps and challenges remain in our efforts
to understand, address and counter-terrorism and
violent extremism. Addressing the gender dimensions
of terrorism and violent extremism is a particular
challenge. In February, CTED published a trends
report entitled Gender Dimensions of the Response
to Returning Foreign Terrorist Fighters. Significant
knowledge gaps remain regarding the number and
profiles of women who travelled to and returned from
ISIL-held territory. It also noted that women tended to
receive more limited rehabilitation and reintegration
support, potentially putting them at greater risk of
marginalization and recidivism.
Furthermore, as terrorists continue to exploit the
Internet, social media and messaging apps, practitioners
need improved skills and updated tools to access
critical evidence and help prosecute and secure the
conviction of terrorist suspects in judicial proceedings.
To help Member States address those challenges,
CTED, UNODC and the International Association
of Prosecutors have developed the Practical Guide

S/PV. 8605

for Requesting Electronic Evidence Across Borders,
which helps practitioners at the national level to
gather, preserve and share electronic evidence, with
the overall aim of ensuring efficiency in mutual legal
assistance matters.
Terrorists also continue to demonstrate their interest
in carrying out attacks targeting critical infrastructure
and civilian or soft targets, including places of worship.
CTED has identified the need for States to develop or
expand existing national strategies and action plans to
take into account the risk and threat to such targets.
Government and private-sector partnerships are
particularly essential to the protection of soft targets
against terrorist attacks. This has been a topic of
concern for the Security Council. In June, the CounterTerrorism Committee held an open briefing on this
topic with Member States, civil society and the private
sector. Participants discussed ways to work together to
prevent, protect, mitigate, respond to and recover from
terrorist attacks against soft targets and their victims.
It was noted that the development of responses, from
prevention to recovery, should also involve close
engagement with local leaders and communities. The
Secretary-General, also concerned by this trend, has
tasked the Alliance of Civilizations to develop an
action plan that supports Member States in their efforts
to protect religious sites.
Another critical issue is victims of terrorism. As
we have heard, last week, the United Nations held its
second annual International Day of Remembrance of
and Tribute to the Victims of Terrorism. For too long,
victims of terrorism have struggled to have their voices
heard and their rights upheld. It is imperative that
we recognize and honour the victims and survivors
of terrorism. That requires that we ensure that the
perpetrators of terrorist attacks be held to account.
As the report makes clear, the United Nations
Investigative Team to Promote Accountability for
Crimes Committed by Da’esh/ISIL (UNITAD) has
already made considerable progress in that regard
in less than one year, including the first excavations
of mass grave sites and the exhumation of victims’
remains in Sinjar, in north-western Iraq.
In April 2019, the Council adopted resolution 2467
(2019), on sexual violence in armed conflict, which
recognizes the victims of sexual violence perpetrated
by terrorist groups as victims of terrorism. It is
essential to address the needs of survivors of conflict-

19-263475/21

S/PV.8605

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

related sexual violence. In the immediate term, that
includes upholding victims’ rights and addressing
their humanitarian needs. But it also requires the
development and implementation of prosecution,
rehabilitation and reintegration strategies that
strengthen victim-centred approaches across a range of
issues and recognize communities as key partners in
the process of reintegration.
As noted by the Secretary-General in his ninth
report (S/2019/612), ISIL maintains significant residual
wealth, estimated to be in the hundreds of millions of
dollars. Preventing ISIL and its supporters from raising,
using and moving funds to support terrorist acts around
the world remains a key component of international
efforts to counter the group’s threat. Therefore, over
the past six months, the Security Council, supported
by the Counter-Terrorism Committee and its Executive
Directorate, undertook numerous activities aimed at
countering the financing of terrorism. Following the
January 2019 Arria Formula meeting on preventing
and countering the financing of terrorism, the Council
adopted resolution 2462 (2019), which is the first
resolution focused solely on preventing and suppressing
terrorism financing. Furthermore, the United Nations
system, including CTED, has also sought to better
understand the linkages among international terrorism,
organized crime and terrorism financing. In February,
CTED published a study entitled Identifying and
Exploring the Nexus between Human Trafficking,
Terrorism and Terrorism Financing. And, of course,
just last month, the Council adopted resolution 2482
(2019), which requires Member States to address
those linkages.
Despite their military defeat, ISIL and its affiliates
remain a significant threat. We must therefore
remain vigilant, innovative, adaptive and proactive
in our response. CTED will continue to work with its
implementing partners, including Member States, other
United Nations entities, international and regional
organizations, civil society, academia and the private
sector, to ensure a holistic and effective approach to
this complex threat to international peace and security.
The President: I thank Ms. Coninsx for her briefing.
I shall now give the floor to those Council members
who wish to make statements.
Mr. Kuzmin (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): I would like to thank you, Sir, for having
convened this meeting. We also wish to thank
6/21

27/08/2019

Mr. Voronkov and Ms. Coninsx for their in-depth
analysis of the situation regarding the fight against the
Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL).
Recent reports have focused, quite rightly, on
fundamental changes in the situation in Syria and
the transformation of contemporary international
terrorism against the backdrop of the military defeat
and significant weakening of ISIL positions. A
decisive contribution to the dismantling that terrorist
group was made by the Syrian army and allied forces
operating in Syria on legitimate grounds, including the
Russian Federation.
We share the Secretary-General’s concerns about
ISIL’s ongoing attempts to establish a firm foothold
in other regions. ISIL clearly intends to shore up its
positions in Afghanistan, to establish a branch in South
Asia and to step up its presence in the Asia-Pacific
region. It is cooperating with Islamists in North and
West Africa, while Europe is being eyed as a stage for
terrorist attacks.
Our common goal is to prevent ISIL from having
even the slightest opportunity to rear its head, gain
strength, regroup and find additional ideological and
human resources in different countries and among
different population groups. In that regard, we must
closely monitor the efforts of certain groups that have
helped spawn the emergence of today’s terrorist leaders
to reformat ISIL and create a new, more sophisticated
terrorist organization. We caution against playing into
the hands of terrorists and their accomplices, applying
double standards to them and making distinctions
between bad, not-so-bad and, even, good terrorists.
We should like to share our assessment of the
terrorist threats in key regions. Presently, the total
number of ISIL members and their affiliates in Syria
is about 3,000 people. In addition, there are many
other terrorist groups present, the most combat-ready
of which is still Jabhat Al-Nusra, which is particularly
active within and around Idlib governorate. More than
1,500 militants have returned from combat zones to
their homes or have gone to other residential areas
under the guise of internally displaced persons.
In Iraq, despite the end of the military campaign
against ISIL and the announcement of a drawdown of
the international coalition, the ground remains fertile
for further destabilization. Jihadists have turned to
sabotage and terrorist tactics and are now banking
on fuelling the Sunni-Shia conflict in the country.
19-26347

27/08/2019

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

Currently, ISIL combat units in Iraq comprise as
many as 2,000 fighters from about 40 States, mainly
from the Middle East, Central and South East Asia,
as well as the Russian Federation and countries from
the Commonwealth of Independent States. The main
hotbeds of ISIL’s subversive activity are concentrated
in the Sunni triangle zone, as well as in the governorate
of Diyala and Kirkuk. In addition, south-eastern Iraq,
particularly the Shiite governorates of Babil, Wasit,
Dhi Qar, Maysan and Basra, is also at risk.
In Libya, ISIL is increasing its activity and is
capitalizing on the collapse of the State and the effective
fracturing of the country. The group is strengthening its
position near oil ports along the Mediterranean shore to
the east of Sirte, the so-called oil crescent, and in the
cities of Tripoli, Benghazi and Derna. The situation in
the south of the country is further complicated by the
massive infiltration of Chadian Islamists.
In Egypt, there is an active presence of up to
1,500 fighters belonging to Ansar Beit Al-Maqdis.
The terrorists are engaged in hostilities in the northeast and south of the country and regularly attack
security forces.
ISIL is focusing on the deployment of an extensive
underground terrorist network in the Sahelo-Saharan
zone, the formation of staging grounds and the
mounting of frequent intimidation and sabotage attacks
against national law enforcement agencies, United
Nations peacekeepers and civilians. Militants are also
establishing contacts with local criminal groups that
control arms smuggling, drug trafficking and illegal
migration. That threat is compounded by terrorist
groups that have declared their alliance and cooperation
with ISIL, especially the Islamic State’s West Africa
Province and the Islamic State in the Greater Sahara.
In particular, the Islamic State’s West Africa Province
is currently engaged in terrorist activities along the
borders of Cameroon, Nigeria, the Niger and Chad. The
group consists of 3,500 people, mostly from the local
population. The Islamic State in the Greater Sahara
has up to 700 members, and another ISIL branch, the
Islamic State in Somalia, has up to 900 members.
Members of ISIL are actively seeking to transform
Afghanistan into a staging ground for infiltrating other
parts of the region. The core of terrorist structures is
approximately 4,000 militants, concentrated largely
in the provinces of Kunar and Nangarhar. In addition,
members of ISIL are active in the northern and eastern

S/PV. 8605

parts of the country. The Islamic State in Iraq and the
Levant-Khorasan Province has solidified its position in
Afghanistan, with the support of the Islamic Movement
of Uzbekistan and the Eastern Turkistan Islamic
Movement. Young people and field commanders from
local and regional terrorist groups, including the Taliban
and Hizb ut-Tahrir, are being actively recruited, as are
militants from combat zones in the Middle East. The
most dangerous situation is unfolding in the areas of
Afghanistan that border Tajikistan and Turkmenistan,
with approximately 1,300 ISIL affiliates. At the same
time, ISIL leaders seek to expand their presence in the
north and east of the country by taking control of areas
traditionally controlled by the Taliban.
Unfortunately, ISIL continues to receive funds
from foreign sponsors disguised as charitable
foundations, religious organizations and other
non-governmental organizations.
During the discussion of the seventh (S/2018/770)
and eighth (S/2019/103) reports of the Secretary-General
(see S/PV.8330 and S/PV.8460, respectively), the
Russian delegation drew attention to flagrant violations
of the ISIL arms embargo. That remains relevant and
pressing. The document under discussion today in no
way addresses the issue of the provision of military
goods to terrorist organizations. It is unacceptable to
turn a blind eye to such glaring gaps in the fight against
international terrorism. It is important to publish
information about all funding channels for ISIL and the
efforts undertaken to eradicate them. Possible solutions
to that problem will be discussed in detail at the second
International Conference on Countering Illicit Arms
Trafficking in the Context of Fighting International
Terror, to be held in Moscow on 5 and 6 September.
We speak about this regularly, however, I wish to
emphatically reiterate today that collective action by
the international community is necessary to counter
international terrorism. It is necessary to take advantage
of the conditions emerging after the elimination of
the terrorist staging grounds in the Middle East. It is
necessary to pool efforts in order to suppress the further
spread of the terrorist threat, forestall spiralling tensions
in the region and find political and diplomatic solutions
to all existing issues based on international law and
under the central coordination of the United Nations.
Mr. Schulz (Germany): First of all, I thank
Mr. Vladimir Voronkov and Ms. Michèle Coninsx for
their briefings. I also thank the various United Nations

19-263477/21

S/PV.8605

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

entities and the Analytical Support and Sanctions
Monitoring Team for preparing an excellent report of
the Secretary-General (S/2019/612).
As the report states, the threat posed by the Islamic
State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL/Da’esh) remains
imminent and substantial, albeit in a different manner.
It is crucial that we continue our efforts to prevent
the continuation of ISIL as an underground network.
Terrorist groups like ISIL and Al-Qaida have proven that
they are quick at adapting to changing circumstances.
In that context, I want to commend the Ombudsperson
of the ISIL/Da’esh and Al-Qaida Sanctions Committee,
Mr. Daniel Kipfer Fasciati, for his work, which is vital
for the credibility, fairness and effectiveness of the
sanctions regime. The fight against terrorism is not
a sprint but, obviously, a marathon. Let me focus on
four, although by no means exhaustive, key elements
in fighting terrorism and conducting counter-terrorism
operations from the point of view of Germany.
First, measures must also include countering the
financing of terrorism. As the current holder of the
vice-presidency of the Financial Action Task Force,
Germany is particularly committed to supporting its
work as the international standard-setter in that regard.

27/08/2019

should also become a priority in our agenda. By way of
example, Germany supports the reintegration of female
Al-Shabaab defectors in Somalia through psychosocial
counselling and gender-appropriate vocational training.
Female Al-Shabaab members are rarely active as armed
fighters but play a vital role in supporting the structure
and organization of Al-Shabaab.
Looking ahead a little more strategically, we
have, of course, to vigourously fight terrorism, but at
the same time, we need to do much more on conflict
prevention. Respect for human dignity is vital in that
regard. Creating jobs, developing an environment in
which young people in particular can earn a living
and support a family and providing opportunities
for social, economic and political participation are
crucial. For example, the Sahel Alliance was created
precisely to achieve those aims, and the nexus between
development and security has been on the agenda of the
Group of Seven Summit taking place in Biarritz, where
recent developments in, and international support for,
the Sahel region have also been discussed.

Secondly, we must also ensure that human rights,
international humanitarian law and the rule of law in
general are always adequately considered in the fight
against terrorism and that trust in State institutions is
strengthened. Disrespecting these values is a factor that
can lead marginalized persons to violent extremism
and into the hands of terrorist networks.

Before I conclude, I would like to stress a truism that
seems to be so true as to almost not need to be mentioned
but is often lacking in practice — international
corporation across the board. Such cooperation is key
to our success, and going it alone means playing into
the terrorists’ hands. That is why we are convinced
that we must keep prevention, foreign terrorist fighters,
terrorist financing, information-sharing, terrorist use
of the Internet, aviation security and cooperation on
border protection on the international agenda.

Thirdly, we also need to address concerns about the
adverse and unintended consequences that sanctions and
counter-terrorism measures can have on the delivery of
humanitarian aid. The measures taken must not impair or
hinder humanitarian activities carried out by impartial
humanitarian actors, in keeping with international
humanitarian law and humanitarian principles.

Mr. Wu Haitao (China) (spoke in Chinese):
China thanks Under-Secretary-General Voronkov and
Executive Director Coninsx for their briefings and
welcomes the ninth report (S/2019/612) of the SecretaryGeneral on the threat posed by the Islamic State in Iraq
and the Levant (ISIL/Da’esh) to international peace
and security.

Fourthly, and lastly, Germany has repeatedly stressed
the importance of including a gender perspective in the
work of the Council. As the Secretary-General’s report
shows, the gender dimension plays an important role in
countering the terrorist threat on a number of different
levels. For instance, women find themselves under
horrific conditions in violent conflict situations and are
particularly affected by violence. However, women are
not only victims of terrorism: female radicalization and
women linked to, and operating for, terrorist groups

The recent spate of attacks in Afghanistan, Egypt,
Somalia and elsewhere has inflicted colossal damage on
those countries. As noted in the report of the SecretaryGeneral, despite having suffered military defeats, ISIL
remains an international terrorist organization that
poses a global threat. Issues such as how to deal with
returning foreign terrorist fighters and their family
members and the resettlement and reintegration of
released members present challenges for Member
States. Member States must remain vigilant and keep

8/21

19-26347

27/08/2019

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

a watchful eye on the global terrorism threat. The
international community should foster awareness of
the need to build a community of a shared future for
humankind and step up results-based cooperation in
the joint fight against the threat of terrorism.
First, it is imperative to uphold the purposes and
principles of the Charter of the United Nations and
allow the United Nations and the Security Council to
play a central role in coordinating counter-terrorism
efforts. The fight against terrorism must be based on
unified standards, a zero-tolerance policy, respect
for the sovereignty of the countries concerned, the
primary responsibility of Member States for counterterrorism and fully implementing the Council’s relevant
resolutions and the United Nations Global CounterTerrorism Strategy. That is the only way to stay united,
coordinate effectively and work synergistically.
Secondly, it is important to take a holistic approach
by addressing the root causes as well as the symptoms
of terrorism, including by focusing on the elimination
of the root causes themselves. The international
community should push for a political settlement of
hotspot issues, resolve differences through peaceful
means, assist Member States in their poverty reduction
and eradication efforts and in achieving sustainable
development and encourage dialogue and harmonious
coexistence among the various civilizations and
religions on an equal footing. Assistance should be
given to developing countries to boost their counterterrorism and de-radicalization capacity.
Thirdly, it is necessary to step up international
judicial cooperation and adopt tailored counterterrorism measures in the light of emerging trends
in, and new features of, terrorism. That requires
us to focus on the following prominent issues: the
movement of foreign terrorist fighters, the diversified
means of terrorist financing, the collusion of terrorist
organizations with organized crime and the misuse
of the Internet and communication technologies by
terrorists. Support should be given to Member States
with the aim of enhancing coordination on border
control and law enforcement, intelligence sharing and
results-based cooperation.
Fourthly, the strength and expertise of the United
Nations Office of Counter-Terrorism (UNOCT), the
Counter-Terrorism Committee, the Security Council
Committee pursuant to resolutions 1267 (1999),
1989 (2011) and 2253 (2015), and other mechanisms

S/PV. 8605

should be fully leveraged so that they can continue
to contribute to terrorist threat assessments, the
capacity-building efforts of Member States and
terrorist sanctions, among other things. UNOCT
should be given support to organize regional counterterrorism meetings. In the course of their work, all of
the counter-terrorism mechanisms should act in strict
accordance with the relevant resolutions and rules of
procedure, increase coordination among themselves
and enhance communication with Member States with
a view to maintaining the authority and effectiveness
of the counter-terrorism and sanctions regimes and
making a greater contribution to international counterterrorism efforts.
As an important player on the international counterterrorism front, China is deeply involved in counterterrorism cooperation within the framework of, inter
alia, the United Nations and the Shanghai Cooperation
Organization. China has been supporting Member
States to build their counter-terrorism capacity through
the China-United Nations Peace and Development Trust
Fund and carrying out fruitful cooperation with many
Member States in such areas as counter-terrorism,
intelligence sharing and combating terrorist financing,
transnational organized crime and cyberterrorism,
thereby making a remarkable contribution to the global
fight against terrorism. Together with the community
of nations, China stands ready to fight the threat of
terrorism through concerted efforts in the joint quest
for world peace and stability.
Mr. Cohen (United States of America): I thank
Under-Secretary-General Voronkov and Executive
Director Coninsx for their briefings today.
The latest report of the Secretary-General
(S/2019/612) on the threat posed by the Islamic State
in Iraq and the Sham (ISIS) demonstrates the hard-won
progress that we have made over the past several years,
culminating in the territorial defeat of ISIS in Iraq and
Syria in March. This accomplishment is a testament to
the work of the global coalition to defeat ISIS, which
now has 81 members. Coalition military efforts removed
scores of ISIS leaders from the battlefield, including
ISIS so-called ministers of war, information, finance,
oil, gas and its chief external operations strategist
and propagandist.
Beyond its military successes, the global coalition
takes on ISIS in four main non-military lines of effort
through counter-financing, counter-messaging and

19-263479/21

S/PV.8605

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

27/08/2019

public affairs, the detention and repatriation of foreign
terrorist fighters and the stabilization of areas liberated
from ISIS. The United States recognizes that the
international community’s work to defeat ISIS is far
from complete, even after the territorial defeat of ISIS
in Iraq and Syria, and the coalition remains committed
to continuing the fight against ISIS.

resolution 2462 (2019) are significant developments, but
Member States must act on them in order to make them
meaningful. The United States urges all Member States
to fully implement their 1267 sanctions obligations,
resolution 2462 (2019) and all of the relevant Security
Council counter-terrorism resolutions in support of the
ultimate defeat of ISIS.

The Secretary-General’s report highlights the large
number of ISIS fighters and dependents in displacement
camps and detention facilities in northern Syria and
Iraq. The United States remains concerned about the
concentration of those fighters in what are otherwise
civilian displacement camps, and the potential for
radicalization to violence where they are present. The
United States encourages Member States to repatriate
and prosecute their citizens as appropriate in order to
bring those responsible for ISIS crimes to justice. We
also support efforts to protect displaced persons and
help them return to their communities.

Finally, while today’s briefing focuses on ISIS,
we must not overlook the ongoing threat of Al-Qaida.
As we approach the eighteenth anniversary of the
11 September attacks, Al-Qaida-linked groups continue
to threaten stability in Syria, the Sahel and elsewhere.
We must work together and employ all of our available
tools to ensure that Al-Qaida does not consolidate
power and once again threaten the United States, our
allies and our partners. We have achieved substantial
success against ISIS in Iraq and Syria. We cannot
relent. The United States will continue to work with its
partners to pursue, degrade and ultimately defeat ISIS
and Al-Qaida.

The coalition is committed to preserving the
successes that we have achieved. To date, coalition
partners have pledged more than $1 billion in
stabilization programming in Iraq, which is key to
securing military gains and stabilizing liberated terrain,
in part by addressing drivers of violent extremism.
Beyond Iraq and Syria, ISIS affiliates continue
to threaten other regions of the globe. The SecretaryGeneral’s report makes it clear that ISIS affiliates
pose a serious threat from West Africa to South-East
Asia and that, in some cases, those affiliates can serve
as a hub for the further regional expansion of ISIS.
For that reason, we are pleased with the decision of
the Analytical Support and Sanctions Monitoring
Team in May to designate ISIS-Khorasan. Beyond
highlighting the threat that ISIS regional affiliates
pose, that designation allows the Committee pursuant
to resolutions 1267 (1999), 1989 (2011) and 2253 (2015)
to target regional facilitators who otherwise have no
link to the ISIS core. The United States looks forward to
working with members of the Committee to designate
more affiliates.
In addition to designations, there have been other
important advances in recent months. In March, the
Security Council adopted resolution 2462 (2109), which
reinforced in advance the framework for countering the
financing of terrorism. We express our appreciation
to France for spearheading that important effort. The
designations of ISIS affiliates and the adoption of
10/21

Mr. Singer Weisinger (Dominican Republic)
(spoke in Spanish): We underscore the importance
of this topic and are grateful for the holding of this
afternoon’s meeting on the constant and pernicious
threat of terrorist acts to international peace and
security, which overwhelming justifies the reason that
it is indeed a priority for the Security Council. In that
regard, I thank Under-Secretary-General Voronkov and
Executive Director Coninsx for updating us.
Absolutely nothing justifies the barbaric and
inhuman criminal acts of such scale against the
lives of innocent people, for whom the dark rational
underpinning of such acts is foreign and used as
an instrument to spread fear and insecurity. The
Dominican Republic condemns in the strongest terms
all terrorist acts in all their forms and manifestations.
We remain united in the face of the collective suffering
of the victims and survivors of the terrorist attacks,
atrocities and cowardly attacks perpetrated throughout
the world, including this year’s events resulting in 51
deaths in New Zealand and nearly 300 in Sri Lanka.
It is in the memory of the victims and the resilience
of the survivors of terrorism that we embrace our
humanity and find the strength to fight together with
determination and resolve an evil that affects us all.
We remain faithful to our principles and aware and
respectful of fundamental rights, including those of
19-26347

27/08/2019

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

women, children and family members as the victims of
foreign terrorist fighters.
In the light of the most recent reports indicating
the territorial defeat of the Islamic State in Iraq and
the Sham and the terrorist group’s aspiration to achieve
global relevance through its regional affiliates by
inspiring attacks and transforming itself into a covert
global network, we echo the urgent need to step up our
resolve and resources to address the challenges posed
by the prosecution and repatriation of detainees and
internally displaced persons.
Reports on the spike in the number of refugees
in camps alerts us to the scale of the problem faced at
the humanitarian, human rights, security, logistical,
legal, jurisdictional and other levels, as exemplified
by the case of Al-Hol camp, which only this year has
seen its population increase sevenfold to more than
70,000 people.
We echo the concern about and threat posed to adult
detainees and, to a greater degree, minors and young
people, who are often traumatized by, and exposed
to, radicalization in prison while affected by poverty,
marginalization and stigmatization, which makes the
process of social reintegration more difficult and the
risk of future violence and their recruitment into one of
those terrorist groups more likely.
In that regard, we commend the work of the United
Nations system for having developed the key principles for
the protection, repatriation, prosecution, rehabilitation
and reintegration of women and children with links to
United Nations- listed terrorist groups — a useful tool
that can facilitate the development and implementation
of policies and actions in line with international law.
We are also aware of the noxious relationship
between terrorism and transnational criminal
organizations involved in the trafficking of drugs,
people and natural resources, which only further puts
our ability to combat them to the test and requires
strengthening and increasing existing international
cooperation among the relevant authorities. We are
concerned about the number of foreign terrorist
fighters, estimated by some Member States to number
between 24,000 and 30,000, and the challenge that that
poses to countries in which their presence is felt and
those of transit and origin.
Lastly, we urge Member States, with the support
of the United Nations system, to continue to strengthen

S/PV. 8605

their strategies for the prosecution, rehabilitation and
reintegration of suspected terrorists and returning and
relocating foreign terrorist fighters and their families,
while paying particular attention to approaches sensitive
to gender-related issues and violence against children.
Mrs. Mele Colifa (Equatorial Guinea) (spoke
in Spanish): We appreciate the convening of this
important briefing. Similarly, we appreciate the
briefings delivered by Mr. Voronkov and Ms. Coninsx,
which helped us to contextualize the ninth report of the
Secretary-General on the threat posed by the Islamic
State in Iraq and the Levant (Da’esh) to international
peace and security (S/2019/612).
With the fall of Baghouz in March, the military
defeat of Da’esh in Syria must be registered as an
important milestone of global efforts against terrorism.
As the report indicates, however, full success in that
important undertaking requires the international
community, in support of the affected States and in
respect of their sovereignty, to address the challenges
posed by the subsequent humanitarian situation, the
prosecution of Da’esh affiliates and their families,
especially women and children, and the dispersal of
foreign terrorist fighters to other territories.
In that regard, we remain concerned about the impact
of the growing presence of foreign terrorist fighters in
Africa and their interaction with, and reinforcement of,
Da’esh-affiliated groups, such as the Islamic State in
the Greater Sahara and the designated Da’esh provinces
in West and Central Africa. We are further concerned
over their collaboration with Al-Qaida and its affiliates
in the region and other terrorist groups and their
conflictive relations with groups such as Al-Shabaab
and Boko Haram, especially in West Africa, where
there has been an upsurge in violence and attacks
linked to Da’esh and Al-Qaida.
We therefore commend the strengthened
collaboration among the various United Nations
agencies, including those present here, in support of
States in designing and carrying out their counterterrorism strategies and implementing the relevant
Council resolutions and the 2018 addendum to the
Madrid Guiding Principles on foreign terrorist fighters,
among others.
That is why, as we have been doing, we encourage
those efforts to also focus on so-called geographical
blind spots in the fight against terrorism, in order to

19-2634711/21

S/PV.8605

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

reinforce efforts to prevent and curb the spread of
terrorist groups and their activities.
The African continent is being bled out by
the activities of terrorist groups, such as the Boko
Haram group in north-eastern Nigeria, which also
affects the neighbouring countries of the Niger, Chad
and Cameroon, countries which are neighbours of
Equatorial Guinea. There is the case of Al-Shabaab in
the east of the continent. Countries such as Mali and
Burkina Faso are falling victim to groups supported by
Al-Qaida in the Islamic Maghreb. All those phenomena
cause enormous damage and pose serious challenges to
the lives and economies of the countries most directly
affected and, to a lesser extent, their neighbours and, by
extension, the whole of Africa.
Resolutions 2462 (2019) and 2482 (2019), which
the Council adopted this year, led by France and
Peru, respectively, and which Equatorial Guinea
had the honour of co-sponsoring, help revitalize and
strengthen the fight against Da’esh, Al-Qaida and
other terrorist groups by focusing on preventing and
suppressing the financing of terrorism and the links
between transnational crime and terrorism. Those two
strategic areas are important to preventing the use of
new technologies for the dissemination of terrorist
propaganda and as a tool for the recruitment and
radicalization of juvenile delinquents in prisons; illegal
mineral exploitation; human, arms and drug trafficking
for terrorist purposes; and the potential for the creation
and use of weapons of mass destruction.
Covert Da’esh and Al-Qaida networks, the
existence of lone wolves and new methods of terrorist
attacks executed by women, girls and entire families;
attacks against targets that are considered easy, such
as places of worship, family ceremonies, among others;
and the recent attacks by the extreme right remind
us of the need to galvanize international cooperation
against terrorism and spur investment in sustainable
development to tackle the root causes of terrorism
and conflict. In that regard, we are encouraged by
the holding of regional conferences in Tajikistan and
Kenya, which we hope will translate into concrete
results with a view to containing and eliminating the
terrorist threat.
We just celebrated the International Day of
Remembrance and Tribute to the Victims of Terrorism,
which focused on the resilience of victims of terrorism
and their families. In that regard, we wish to conclude
12/21

27/08/2019

by acknowledging and encouraging the role of the
United Nations in facilitating international judicial
cooperation and gathering digital evidence. Moreover,
processes that promote accountability through
mechanisms such as the United Nations Investigative
Team for Accountability of Da’esh/ISIL, to promote
accountability for crimes committed by Da’esh in
support of victims in Iraq, including and especially
sexual and gender-based violence victims.
The Republic of Equatorial Guinea remains firmly
committed to the implementation of the relevant
Security Council resolutions to ensure the success of
that important work.
Mr. Allen (United Kingdom): May I start by
thanking Mr. Vladimir Voronkov and Ms. Michèle
Coninsx for their briefings today, which I think set out
very clearly, as does the Secretary-General’s report
(S/2019/612), just how much of a challenge remains.
While military successes have removed Da’esh’s
territorial control of the so-called caliphate, Da’esh and
foreign terrorist fighters continue to pose an ongoing
and serious challenge to our individual and collective
security. It is not only Da’esh, as other colleagues have
also talked about other groups, particularly Al-Qaida
and Al-Qaida-affiliated groups. We must be very
concerned by those.
I think that, faced with a problem that affects many
countries in many regions of the world, Member States
naturally look to the United Nations, and in particular
to the Security Council, through its resolutions and
committees, to give guidance and support. I believe
that means that we need not only a timely and effective
set of responses but also even better coordination
and evaluation.
We, as the United Kingdom, therefore welcome the
number of guidance products that are being developed
to assist States in navigating some of those complex new
challenges. But I would like to stress — I am sure that I
am preaching to the converted to my left — the need to
ensure that those are complementary and reflective of a
whole-of-United Nations approach.
To that end, we would particularly like to encourage
the Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive Directorate
(CTED) to continue to conduct its assessment visits and
strengthen its own dialogue with Member States, and
for Member States to engage CTED in requesting those.
I can say that the United Kingdom is looking forward to
its own CTED assessment in October.
19-26347

27/08/2019

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

I would also like to stress the need for proactive
follow-up by CTED and its partners, and that is where
the Office of Counter-Terrorism particularly comes
in with its capacity-building capabilities. It is so
important that, where CTED carries out an assessment,
in partnership with a Member State, that capacitybuilding and support be in place for those Member
States to really be able to make a difference. I think
that I would start there, if I might, in responding to the
briefings that I heard. The Secretary-General’s report
sets out a number of challenges. Let me just focus on
a few.
First, I share the concerns raised by a number of
colleagues and our briefers about the conditions in
the camps in north-east Syria, particularly for family
members and children. That should be of great concern
for us all. We welcome the United Nations increased
attention on the challenge of addressing those
conditions, while also integrating efforts to prevent
violent extremism and incitement to terrorism among
camp populations. That is clearly a task beyond the
United Nations; it is for all Member States to think
about how we can support such work.
An important element of that is accountability for
the crimes committed by Da’esh. I was very pleased
to hear the remarks by our colleague from Equatorial
Guinea on the subject. We, like them, fully support
the work of the United Nations Investigative Team
to Promote Accountability for Crimes Committed by
Da’esh/Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (UNITAD),
in particular when it comes to sexual and gender-based
violence. We have increased our funding for UNITAD,
and I hope that we all support their efforts to collect,
preserve and, of course, use that crucial evidence.

S/PV. 8605

of risk. But, at the same time, they can be an important
place for disengagement and rehabilitation efforts. We
would encourage the United Nations and its partners
to support Member States in developing measures in
that area. I would note that the Council has placed
great emphasis on prosecution, rehabilitation and
reintegration. That is something that we have taken to
heart in the United Kingdom. I would like to say just a
couple of words about our experience in that area.
In the United Kingdom, rehabilitation work is
focused on a broad range of individuals, not just those
serving a prison sentence for a terrorism-related offense
and not just those in prison. We also work with those on
probation in the community and those subject to court
orders of other kinds, such as returnees from Syria.
Let me finish by expressing our concerns about the
increase in the number of terrorist attacks motivated by
extreme right-wing ideologies. We know that terrorist
narratives, incitement and resources are moving across
borders — both real and virtual. We fully support the
Christchurch Call to Action and efforts to remove
terrorist content online, while protecting human rights
and freedom of expression. We look forward to working
with our partners in Member States, the United Nations
and the technological industry to strengthen those
efforts and combat incitement.

It is also alarming that Da’esh still reportedly has
$300 million in reserves. We know that terrorist attacks
are increasingly low-cost and low-tech. In recent cases,
we have seen that transfers of small amounts of money
using new technologies, inspired by narratives both
online and offline, can terrorize our citizens. That
amount of money could cause huge damage. We again
collectively need to tackle the financing of terrorism
and ensure we are doing so in a way that keeps pace
with modern money flows. That is a job for us all.

Across all forms of terrorism and extremism, let
me say that we strongly support the United Nations
initiatives to prevent violent extremism, which place
civil society at their centre. The cornerstone of the United
Kingdom’s own prevention model is our local work
with communities and civil society organizations. We
support civil society organizations across the country
to build their awareness of the risks of radicalization
and their resilience to terrorism and violent extremist
narratives and propaganda. As I have said before in the
Chamber, that is not something that can be done from
outside of a community or from outside of a country.
It can be done only at the local level by communities
themselves being empowered to tackle extremism and
terrorism before they start. That is one of the places in
which the United Nations could be so very helpful in
sharing best practices. I encourage members to step up
their efforts even further in that area.

I would like to say how much we agree with the
analysis of the Secretary-General’s report (S/2019/612)
with regard to the risk of radicalization and mobilization
taking place in prisons. Prisons, of course, are a place

Mr. Van Shalkwyk (South Africa): Like others,
we would like to thank Mr. Vladimir Voronkov, UnderSecretary-General of the United Nations Office of
Counter-Terrorism, and Ms Michèle Coninsx, Executive

19-2634713/21

S/PV.8605

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

Director of the Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive
Directorate, for their briefings on the SecretaryGeneral’s strategic-level report on the threat posed by
the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL/Da’esh)
(S/2019/612).
The comprehensive report on the threat posed
by ISIL/Da’esh provided in the Secretary-General’s
ninth strategic-level report emphasizes that, while the
group has suffered significant setbacks, it nevertheless
remains a serious threat to international peace and
security as a result, inter alia, of its highly-adaptive
nature and continued access to significant funds
and recruits. As the report indicates, ISIL/Da’esh is
attempting to regroup and re-establish itself in a covert
capacity and further expand its international presence
by means of affiliates. The present lull in attacks by the
group might, regrettably, be only temporary.
South Africa notes with particular concern the
findings in the Secretary-General’s report concerning
the African continent, where ISIL/Da’esh has sought to
exploit peace and security challenges, via affiliates, to
further the group’s abhorrent agenda. Areas of particular
concern highlighted in the report include parts of
North Africa, where the crisis in Libya in particular
has provided fertile ground for ISIL/Da’esh affiliates in
fragile countries and the surrounding region.
Also of concern is the observation in the Secretary
General’s report that West Africa has seen a striking
increase in ISIL and Al-Qaida-linked recruitment
and violence and that the Islamic State West Africa
Province, believed to comprise 4,000 fighters, now
ranks alongside the Islamic State of Iraq and the LevantKhorasan as the strongest ISIL regional affiliate.

27/08/2019

counter-terrorism bodies of the United Nations in
assisting Member States in fighting the scourge and
encourage greater cooperation among them and regional
bodies, including the African Union. In that regard,
we commend the Secretary-General’s international
regional conferences, including the African Regional
High-level Conference on Counter-Terrorism and
the Prevention of Violent Extremism Conducive to
Terrorism, inaugurated by the Secretary-General and
His Excellency President Kenyatta of Kenya in Nairobi
in July.
In the fight against ISIL/Da’esh, South Africa also
views as important the work of the United Nations
Investigative Team to Promote Accountability for
Crimes Committed by Da’esh/Islamic State in Iraq
and the Levant (UNITAD), which undertakes the
task of investigating the crimes committed by ISIL/
Da’esh and works to ensure that those responsible face
accountability for their crimes.
South Africa remains committed to addressing
terrorism holistically as a security threat, and equally
to addressing the conditions and factors that give rise to
terrorism and fuel it. Its causes and manifestations are
varied and should be taken into account in elaborating
counter-measures, in full compliance with international
law, including human rights law and humanitarian law.
It is also critically important that countries refrain
from the use of unilateral coercive measures in their
counter-terrorism efforts. Such measures often result in
unintended casualties and serve to fuel a vicious cycle
of resentment and hatred that ultimately perpetuates
further violent extremism and terrorism.

We are of course also particularly concerned about
reports suggesting that ISIL/Da’esh is attempting
to establish itself in Central Africa, and even in the
Southern African region. South Africa will continue
to stand steadfast with our fellow African brothers and
sisters in the fight against terrorism on the continent
so that that terrible scourge is not allowed to erode the
hard-won progress we have collectively made in Africa.

Mr. Djani (Indonesia): First of all, like others, I
would like to thank Under-Secretary-General Voronkov
and Assistant Secretary-General Coninsx for their
briefings, which provided insight. We also express
our gratitude to the Analytical Support and Sanctions
Monitoring Team, the Counter-Terrorism Committee
Executive Directorate, the United Nations Office of
Counter-Terrorism and related entities for the report
(S/2019/612) we have before us.

South Africa remains committed to international
cooperation in fighting terrorism. No country can
shoulder the burden alone. The centrality of the United
Nations in coordinating and facilitating international
efforts to fight terrorism and providing support to
those Member States requiring it is crucial if we are
to succeed. In that regard, we value the work of the

I have read some of the report. Like others, we take
note of many of the various salient points, including
that, despite its territorial defeat, the Islamic State
in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL) continues to aspire to
global relevance, in particular through its affiliates and
inspired-attacks. We also note the ongoing humanitarian
and security challenges posed by foreign terrorist

14/21

19-26347

27/08/2019

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

fighters (FTFs) and their family members. With that in
mind, my statement will focus on three issues.
First, with regard to the threat posed by ISIL,
the heinous ISIL-linked or ISIL-inspired attacks that
have recently been witnessed in Sri Lanka, Syria,
Iraq, several places in West Africa and other parts of
the world, even during a wedding ceremony recently
in Afghanistan, again demonstrate that ISIL remains
a serious threat. That is also the case in our region,
where Indonesian authorities successfully foiled a plot
by an ISIL-linked terror group in May. The fall of the
last ISIL-held territory in Syria and a decrease in its
resources were significant, but evidently this does not
mean the end of ISIL. Therefore, we feel it is only wise
not to go overboard and declare victory over terrorism
just yet.
The evolution of ISIL from a territorial entity to a
covert network, the activities of its regional affiliates,
the threat posed by foreign terrorist fighters and the
logistical, jurisdictional and human rights complexities
of addressing ISIL-related detainees in Syria and
Iraq remain huge challenges. We shall continue to be
vigilant in that regard.
That leads to my second point, relating to the
importance of international and regional cooperation,
which we have referred to here several times. All
recent challenges reflect the need for the effective
implementation of relevant international instruments,
United Nations resolutions and, more important,
cooperation at all levels among States and non-State
entities. The response of the United Nations, Member
States and other stakeholders to the evolving threats
in the areas of preventing and countering terrorist
financing, securing international judicial cooperation,
prosecution, rehabilitation and reintegration and
community engagement are becoming increasingly
important. I think we have achieved a lot, but the
problem is that there is still much to be done.
My third and final point concerns the way forward.
For sustainable, long-term success in the fight against
terrorism, it is crucial to adopt a holistic approach.
While continuing with hard measures, we should also
invest in soft measures to counter terrorist narratives
and steer people away from extremism. We need to
promote dialogue and tolerance and give voice to
moderation as the best approach to confront hatred
and prevent incitement. We also need to eliminate
conditions conducive to the spread of terrorism. We

S/PV. 8605

must be mindful of the importance of prisons and
detention facilities, while implementing policies to
prevent recidivism.
Although ISIL has dwindled, it remains a scourge of
humankind. We need to have a clear strategy to address
the root causes of the emergence of ISIL to ensure that
this tragic cycle of violence will not repeat itself. No
justification is good enough and, once again, Indonesia
condemns terrorism in all its forms and manifestations,
no matter its origins or motivations. After hearing
everything that has been said in this Chamber, I believe
this is a particular issue on which the Council is united.
We stand together in our condemnation of terrorism. As
we also heard, we recently commemorated the second
annual International Day of Remembrance and Tribute
to the Victims of Terrorism. It is incumbent upon all of
us to do more to fight terrorism; we owe it to its victims.
Mr. Ugarelli (Peru) (spoke in Spanish): We also
wish to express our appreciation for the convening
of this meeting and the valuable briefings given by
Under-Secretary-General Voronkov and Executive
Director Coninsx.
Despite the military defeat of Islamic State in
Iraq and the Levant (ISIL/Da’esh) and the loss of its
territorial control, we know that it continues to pose
a serious threat to international peace and security as
it seeks to maintain its global influence through its
network of affiliated organizations, as well as inspiring
attacks through its hate narrative. In that regard, the
fight against Da’esh remains a huge challenge for all
States, including the issue of the return of foreign
terrorist fighters and their families, attacks on critical
infrastructure and vulnerable targets, the use of the
Internet and social networks and the use of sexual
violence as a strategic and ideological goal.
It is also essential to coordinate the international
community’s efforts in support of regional and
international organizations, especially the United
Nations. In that regard, we highlight the efforts of the
United Nations Office of Counter-Terrorism (UNOCT)
and the Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive
Directorate (CTED), as well as the role of the Global
Counter-Terrorism Coordination Compact. Preventing
and combating terrorism require a holistic approach in
line with the United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism
Strategy and the concept of sustainable peace, while
recognizing that peace and security, development
and humans rights are mutually reinforcing. The

19-2634715/21

S/PV.8605

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

transformation of Da’esh into an underground
organization seems to have fostered action by regional
terrorist groups, through which Da’esh has become
a kind of franchise. Without necessarily needing
to develop operational or logistical links, Da’esh is
now able to claim responsibility for attacks by such
local groups.
We believe that it is essential, in accordance with
international law, to combat the abuse of information and
communication technologies, as well as the non-profit
organizations used by Da’esh to raise funds, recruit
followers, justify its actions and continue promoting its
terrorist narrative. In that connection, we agree that the
fight against its financial and logistical capacity must
be a priority. Da’esh retains considerable wealth. Its
financial flows must be limited as we tackle the issue
of money laundering. We highlight the importance
of resolution 2462 (2019) to prevent and combat the
financing of terrorism.
We join other countries in highlighting the
adoption of resolution 2482 (2019), on the links between
terrorism and organized crime. Criminal activities
such as drug trafficking and trafficking in persons
or cultural property not only represent a source of
financing but also a mechanism for logistical support.
In that regard, we welcome the work of the United
Nations Office on Drugs and Crime and the importance
of close cooperation with UNOCT and CTED, as well
as the efforts of the international community, including
the Global Counter-Terrorism Forum, with a view
to improving our understanding and response to this
global phenomenon.
The challenge posed by the return of foreign terrorist
fighters merits particular attention, especially when
they are incorporated into national criminal justice
systems. It is necessary to develop appropriate policies
for prosecution, rehabilitation and reintegration while
fully respecting human rights and due process. Such
strategies should also adopt a gender perspective and
safeguard the rights of children. The addendum to the
Madrid Guiding Principles and the key principles for
the protection, repatriation, prosecution, rehabilitation
and reintegration of women and children linked to
United Nations-listed terrorist groups are excellent
tools for this purpose.
While the crimes committed, including those
related to sexual violence, must not go unpunished,
accountability should contribute to strengthening
16/21

27/08/2019

justice, reconciliation and non-recurrence. We must
prevent prisons from becoming environments that
foster radicalization and recruitment and ensure that
freed combatants can properly reintegrate into society.
Bearing this in mind, we must also recognize the courage
and role of the victims of terrorism in our efforts to
prevent and combat this scourge. We would therefore
like to highlight the initiative of the Secretary-General
to organize the first International Congress for Victims
of Terrorism as part of the seventy-fifth anniversary of
the United Nations.
To conclude, I wish to reiterate Peru’s wholehearted
commitment to preventing and combating terrorism in
all its forms and manifestations, particularly through
actions that the Council is in a position to take thanks
to our shared consensus.
Mr. Alotaibi (Kuwait) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, we thank Mr. Vladimir Voronkov and Ms. Michèle
Coninsx for their valuable and comprehensive briefings
on the threat posed by Islamic State in Iraq and the
Levant (ISIL) (Da’esh) to international peace and
security. I will focus on three key issues.
First, with regard to the continuing threat posed
by Da’esh, despite the victory of the international
community against terrorist organizations, especially
the so-called Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant
(Da’esh) and its military defeat in Syria with the fall
of the city of Al-Baghuz in the Deir ez-Zor region
in March, Da’esh has not been fully eradicated. It
continues to operate and develop covertly in Iraq,
Syria and other regions across the world by evolving
its tactics — either for terrorist operations or financing
such operations, as well as recruiting individuals based
on available resources.
The Secretary-General’s report (S/2019/612) notes
that Da’esh continues to be able to send money to carry
out subversive acts in ways that are difficult to detect by
authorities. It still has a wealth of nearly $300 million.
The war against Da’esh in Iraq and Syria has
resulted in many humanitarian and security threats and
challenges that include, for example, the phenomenon
of foreign terrorist fighters, returnees and people
wishing to relocate with their families. Addressing
their large number requires building the capacities of
law enforcement agencies to try them and rehabilitate
the victims.
19-26347

27/08/2019

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

Prisons are also incubators that fuel and spread
extremist ideologies among poor, marginalized or
discriminated against prisoners. That calls for greater
cooperation and communication among Member States,
with the support of relevant United Nations agencies, in
order to bolster efforts related to the rehabilitation of
prisoners and their reintegration into society, including
prisoners convicted of terrorist crimes.
The State of Kuwait has established Al-Salam
Rehabilitation Centre, which provides guidance to those
who were affected by aberrant ideologies. The centre’s
programme leads to the rehabilitation of participants
with extremist ideologies. That reflects our endeavours
to cope with global events and counter the phenomenon
of religious bigotry and extremist thought.
Secondly, combating and preventing terrorist
financing is one of the main challenges that countries
face in their counter-terrorism efforts. Terrorist
groups finance their activities through various means,
including transnational organized crime, ransom, arms
trafficking, drug trafficking and extortion. The Security
Council has adopted many resolutions to consolidate the
capacity of Member States to prevent and combat the
financing of terrorism, notably, resolution 1373 (2001),
which introduced legally binding rules. Recently, the
Council also adopted resolution 2462 (2019) under
Chapter VII of the Charter of the United Nations. That
resolution is dedicated exclusively to the prevention
and suppression of terrorism financing and refocuses
attention on evaluating and understanding the threat
posed by terrorist financing and the strategic role of
financial intelligence in efforts to combat terrorism.
It also focuses on the importance of public-private
partnerships, as well as effective activities related to
cooperation, coordination and exchange of information.
Thirdly, on the importance of international
cooperation, one of the key tools to combat the threat
of Da’esh to international peace and security is
international, regional and subregional cooperation in
the following areas — sharing information, improving
prevention, addressing circumstances conducive to
terrorism, preventing incitement to perpetrate terrorist
acts, combating financial support to terrorist groups,
training members of law enforcement agencies,
addressing the nexus between crime and terrorism and
focusing on youth and engaging them in national plans
related to combating terrorism. We must also conclude
bilateral and multilateral counter-terrorism agreements.

S/PV. 8605

We commend the ongoing cooperation between
United Nations bodies and agencies with regional
organizations and Member States in the areas of
capacity-building and the exchange of expertise. We
look forward to further cooperation in that regard.
In conclusion, we continue to condemn terrorism
in all of its forms and manifestations, regardless of its
motives. It is a criminal act that cannot be justified and
should not be associated with any religion, nationality,
civilization or ethnicity. Combating terrorism requires
the mobilization of all international efforts to tackle this
criminal scourge through measures to ensure respect
for human rights, the rule of law and good governance.
Mrs. Boniface (France) (spoke in French): Allow
me also to thank Vladimir Voronkov and Michèle
Coninsx for their briefings.
As the report indicates (S/2019/612), despite the
loss of its territory, Da’esh continues to pose a serious
threat to international peace and security, particularly
through its regional subsidiaries and the attacks it
continues to inspire. In that context, the efforts of both
the military and civilian components of the international
coalition against Da’esh must continue in order to
support pluralistic and inclusive political solutions in
Syria and Iraq. That is the only lasting response for
preventing the re-emergence of Da’esh in a different
form. The fight against impunity for crimes committed
by Da’esh is also an essential element for peace and
reconciliation. Those messages were reaffirmed at the
coalition’s meeting in Paris on 25 June and enshrined
in the Paris road map, which is intended to guide the
coalition’s action in the coming months. In addition,
France believes that our efforts must continue to focus
on three priority action areas for action, which are
included in the report.
First, we must focus on combating terrorist
financing. As the financial resources of Da’esh
are still estimated at nearly $300 million, we must
intensify our efforts to isolate terrorists by drying
up their sources of funding. France encourages all
States to fully implement resolution 2462 (2019)
and cooperate closely with the United Nations in the
implementation of their obligations. We must build the
broadest possible partnership, involving all the actors
concerned — States, the private sector, multilateral
institutions and civil society.
France commends the outstanding work of the
Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive Directorate

19-2634717/21

S/PV.8605

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

and the Office of Counter-Terrorism in assessing
needs and providing technical assistance. The second
iteration of the “No money for terror” conference, to be
held in Australia in November, will be an opportunity
to take stock of the implementation of the commitments
made in Paris in April 2018 and the obligations set out
in resolution 2462 (2019).
The second priority concerns the treatment of
foreign terrorist fighters and persons associated with
them through the full implementation of resolution
2396 (2017). We must continue to strengthen measures
to detect, assist and monitor people at risk, through
constant information sharing. At the international
level, close coordination among civilian, military
and financial intelligence services, as well as among
judicial authorities, is essential to responding to the
threat and delivering justice. France has a consistent
position in that regard — foreign terrorist fighters are
expected to be tried as close as possible to the location
where they committed their crimes. It is a matter of both
justice and security. France recalls that it is opposed,
in all places and under all circumstances, to the
death penalty. In addition, France attaches particular
importance to providing assistance to children,
especially psychosocial and educational, to promote
their reintegration.
Finally, the third priority is preventing the use of the
Internet for terrorist purposes. Progress has been made,
with Internet companies mobilizing their resources. But
as the Christchurch attack demonstrated, much remains
to be done to more effectively prevent the spread of
terrorist propaganda and support the development of
positive counterarguments. That is why France and
New Zealand have mobilized alongside several partners
and Internet companies to launch the Christchurch Call,
which includes collective and voluntary commitments
by Governments and online service providers to address
the problem of terrorist content online and prevent the
misuse of the Internet, while respecting human rights
and fundamental freedoms and the principles of a free,
open and secure Internet. That complements important
measures already taken in other frameworks, such as
the European Union, the Group of 20, the Group of
Seven, the Global Internet Forum to Counter Terrorism,
the Tech Against Terrorism initiative and the Aqaba
Process. We will remain fully mobilized to ensure the
follow-up of these commitments.
Allow me, in conclusion, to stress the central and
unifying role that the United Nations must continue
18/21

27/08/2019

to play in the fight against terrorism. France will
continue to support United Nations entities in their
efforts to identify needs and responses and to promote
coordination among all relevant actors.
Mr. Pecsteen de Buytswerve (Belgium) (spoke in
French): At the outset, I would like to thank Ms. Coninsx
and Mr. Voronkov for their interesting briefings.
We take note of the fact that, even after its military
defeat and the territorial end of its self-proclaimed State,
Da’esh continues to seek a global role, in particular
through its affiliates and isolated attacks by individuals
who subscribe to its hateful ideology. In addition, the
situation in the detention camps and facilities in Syria
and Iraq remains a great concern, especially with
regard to radicalized women and to children. That is the
reason behind the policy of Belgium to repatriate those
people. Belgium believes that the threat is far from over,
including in Europe. There is a particular risk stemming
from individuals who were prevented by the authorities
from joining Da’esh and still wish to contribute to the
terrorist movement through an individual act. In the face
of such threats, a comprehensive approach, including
the prevention of violent extremism, is indispensable.
Belgium concurs with the Secretary-General’s
analysis that there is still a risk in prisons, which
remain an environment conducive to alienation and,
potentially, radicalization. Part of the problem lies
is the lack of awareness of this constantly evolving
phenomenon and of appropriate training. Monitoring of
prisoners is also crucial.
In reconsidering its prison system, Belgium
has opted for a tailor-made approach based on an
individual risk assessment and management. At the end
of detention, monitoring continues at the local level,
through police services, psychosocial services and
local administrations, which continue to exchange the
necessary information.
Following the Secretary-General’s previous report
(S/2019/103), several resolutions were adopted to help
the international community tackle the terrorist threat,
such as resolution 2462 (2019), on the financing of
terrorism, initiated by France; resolution 2467 (2019),
on the use of sexual violence as a tactic of terrorism,
initiated by Germany; and resolution 2482 (2019),
on the link between organized crime and terrorism,
initiated by Peru. Belgium very much welcomes the
attention devoted in these resolutions to the importance
of human rights, international humanitarian law and
19-26347

27/08/2019

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

international refugee law in our efforts and policies
to combat terrorism. In particular, it is necessary to
guarantee the necessary space for the daily actions
of humanitarian workers in a situation affected by
terrorism. Belgium will co-organize a side-event on
this subject with the European Union during the highlevel week of the General Assembly in September.
Finally, Belgium is of the view that it is important
to closely monitor the polarization created within our
societies by the attacks perpetrated by or in the name
of Da’esh and the resulting responses. Indeed, recent
attacks inspired by extremist and violent ideologies in
some Member States should give rise to vigilance and
prevention. Belgium will continue to engage resolutely
in multilateral efforts to combat this global threat.
Mr. Bieke (Côte d’Ivoire) (spoke in French): My
delegation welcomes this briefing to consider the
report of the Secretary-General on the threat posed
by ISIL (Da’esh) to international peace and security
and the range of United Nations efforts in support of
Member States in countering the threat (S/2019/612). It
congratulates Mr. Voronkov, Under-Secretary-General
and Head of the Office of Counter-Terrorism (UNOCT),
and Ms. Coninsx, Executive Director of the CounterTerrorism Committee Executive Directorate (CTED),
on their enlightening briefings.
Da’esh represents one of today’s greatest security
challenges for the international community and, above
all, for the Security Council. Despite its militarily
defeat in Syria and Iraq, Da’esh still retains its ability to
cause harm. Worse still, its ideology, rhetoric and scope
of action continue to extend beyond the borders of the
two countries, thereby posing an ongoing threat to the
security and stability of our States. Indeed, this terrorist
organization remains very active throughout the world,
demonstrating its resilience thanks to new technologies
and various devices that allow it to bypass international
technical and financial control mechanisms.
The relevant reports of the Secretary-General, the ninth
of which is before the Council for consideration, draw
our attention to the extent of the threat and the urgency
of coordinating our actions to curb or even eradicate
this phenomenon.
In the face of the global threat posed by Da’esh,
counter-terrorism strategies must, in order to be
effective, be part of a multilateral approach based on
enhanced cooperation among all actors in the fight
against terrorism. In that regard, it is the responsibility

S/PV. 8605

of the United Nations, and more specifically the
Security Council, to be at the forefront of our
common action to halt the spread of this scourge.
My country therefore welcomes the adoption in
2019 of two key texts in the fight against terrorism,
namely, resolution 2462 (2019), which recommends
in particular the adoption of national and regional
legislation to remove sources of terrorist financing;
and resolution 2482 (2019) which, inter alia, establishes
a direct link between terrorists and organized crime.
Côte d’Ivoire also welcomes the launch of the Global
Counter-Terrorism Coordination Compact, as well
as the approval of the revitalized structure of the
related working groups and the 2019-2020 workplans.
In addition, my delegation appreciates the support
of UNOCT and CTED in strengthening the legal
and institutional capacities of States and regional
organizations. Côte d’Ivoire therefore encourages them
to promote meetings designed to promote exchanges of
experience and good practices in counter-terrorism.
For the fight against Da’esh to be comprehensive
and effective we will have to take into account a
range of issues, including accountability for crimes
committed, the phenomenon of radicalization and the
repatriation of children of foreign fighters, of whom,
according to UNICEF, there are about 29,000 in Syria,
including 20,000 who are believed to be from Iraq.
Côte d’Ivoire is of the view that the crimes committed
by Da’esh in Iraq and Syria must not go unpunished and
therefore reiterates its support for the United Nations
Investigative Team to Promote Accountability for
Crimes Committed by Da’esh/Islamic State in Iraq and
the Levant, whose work should safeguard the right of
victims to justice as part of a fair trial.
The fight against terrorism and violent
extremism can only produce the desired results if
it is supported by national and regional strategies
to eradicate youth poverty and unemployment,
as
well
as
transnational
organized
crime.
To that end, it is essential to develop urgent responses
to the social demands of the population and to provide
better job opportunities to young people. Such a
strategy is particularly valid for West Africa and the
Sahel, geographical areas that have seen a worrying
increase in activities of the Islamic State and its
complex network of affiliates, which take advantage
of the porous borders, States’ weak capacities and
community rivalries.

19-2634719/21

S/PV.8605

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

The strengthening of international cooperation
and the pooling of resources must remain the guiding
principles underpinning our action against terrorism in
all its forms. Aware of that imperative, the members of
the Economic Community of West African States have
decided to hold an extraordinary summit on the threats
posed by terrorism to regional peace and security on
14 September.
Côte d’Ivoire remains convinced that eradicating
terrorism demands holistic solutions within the
framework of a multilateral approach. It therefore
welcomed the Franco-German position articulated on
the side lines of the Group of Seven summit to promote
broader support for the Group of Five for the Sahel
within a security and stability partnership in the Sahel
aimed at expanding the scope of its work.
In conclusion, my country hopes that our
shared commitment to combating terrorism will be
commensurate with the magnitude of the challenges
posed by the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant. It
must be an ongoing and coordinated effort that takes
into account the structural causes and phenomena that
fuel terrorism and violent extremism.
The President: I shall now make a statement in my
capacity as the representative of Poland.
First of all, let me join other colleagues in thanking
Ms. Coninsx and Mr. Voronkov for their, as always,
very comprehensive and informative briefings.
Poland fully shares the assessment made by the
Secretary-General in his report (S/2019/612) and
reflected in the interventions by Ms. Coninsx and
Mr. Voronkov. Despite the progress made in fighting
the Islamic State in Iraq and the Sham (ISIS), Member
States and the Security Council must remain vigilant so
as not to allow ISIS to revive its operational capacities.
Allow me also to echo my colleagues calls for stepping
up international cooperation in combating terrorism,
as terrorism today is of a transboundary nature. Such
cooperation is instrumental in effectively addressing
this challenge, and it also requires the cooperation
with and the engagement of the private sector and
civil society.
Poland is deeply concerned about the threat posed
by foreign terrorist fighters (FTFs), returnees and those
who have relocated. Women and children associated
with FTFs returning and relocating from conflict zones
20/21

27/08/2019

may require a special focus and assistance, as they may
have served in many different roles.
We also wish to echo the remarks made by
Ms. Coninsx with regard to the potentially disastrous
situation of overcrowded camps for internally displaced
persons, in which there are stranded families with links
to United-Nations-listed terrorist groups, if that is not
addressed. With limited access to food, water, medical
care and other basic services, people may be easily
recruited by terrorists offering better living conditions.
I also wish to touch upon the challenges that
Member States are facing in the justice and corrections
systems, which was raised by some representatives. In
Europe, radicalization in prisons remains an important
issue, with the estimated number of FTFs who
have returned from conflict zones reaching several
thousands. Without additional resources allocated by
Member States, prisons will become places in which
radical ideologies can thrive. The sharing of extremist
views among inmates coming from backgrounds
marked by poverty and violence pose the potential risk
of further violence.
Lastly, I would like to draw the Council’s attention
to the proper investigation by Member States of
ISIS operatives for their crimes, including crimes of
sexual violence. Resolution 2467 (2019), spearheaded
by Germany, recognizes victims of sexual violence,
perpetrated by terrorists, as victims of terrorism. We
would like to recall that that resolution encourages the
Secretary-General to ensure that monitoring teams for
sanctions committees include members with specific
sexual violence and gender expertise and, in that spirit,
we encourage Member States to allow expert bodies to
carry out work in the field.
I also wish to echo what the representative of
Equatorial Guinea said about the importance of
ensuring accountability and affirm Poland’s full support
for the United Nations Investigative Team to Promote
Accountability for Crimes Committed by Da’esh/
Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant and all United
Nations-established investigative mechanisms aimed at
fighting impunity and ensuring accountability, as we
believe that both are key counter-terrorism instruments.
We also echo the Secretary-General’s appeal
to comprehensively address the needs of survivors
of conflict-related sexual violence, while bearing
in mind that investigations should lead to fair trials
and be conducted in accordance with international
19-26347

27/08/2019

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

law, including international humanitarian law and
international human rights law.
I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.

S/PV. 8605

There are no more names inscribed on the list
of speakers.
The meeting rose at 4.55 p.m.

19-2634721/21
