172

General Assembly-Forty-first Session

society in all its interrelated aspects -as mothers, as participants in the economic development process andas participants in public life;

41/111.

2. Reaffirms that the implementation of the Nairobi
Forward-looking Strategies for the Advancement of
Women should contribute to the elimination of all forms
of inequality between women and men and to the integration ofwomen in the development process, and should ensure the broad participation of women in efforts to
strengthen international peace, security and co-operation;

The General Assembly,
Recalling ali its relevant resolutions, in particular resolution 40/108 of 13 December 1985, in which, inter alia, it
endorsed the Nairobi Forward-looking Strategies for the
Advancement of Women 59 for the period up to the year
2000 and set out measures for their immediate implementation and for the overall achievement of the goals and objectives ofthe United Nations Decade for Women: Equality, Development and Peace,
Taking into consideration Economic and Social Council
resolutions 1986/30 of 23 May 1986 and 1986/65 and
1986/71 of 23 July 1986,
Conscious of the considerable and constructive contribution to the advancement of the status of women made by
the Commission on the Status of Women, the specialized
agencies, the regional commissions and other organizations ofthe United Nations system, Member States and intergovernmental and non-governmental organizations,
Emphasizing the need for the immediate and foil implementation of the Forward-looking Strategies and for
their evaluation and follow-up,
1. Takes note of the reports of the Secretary-General
concerning the implementation of the Nairobi Forwardlooking Strategies for the Advancement of Women; 62
2. Reaffirms the need for the Forward-looking Strategies to be translated immediately into concrete action by
Governments, as determined by overall national priorities,
as well as by the organizations of the United Nations system, the specialized agencies and intergovernmental and
non-governmental organizations;
3. Reaffirms a/so the central role of the Commission
on the Status of Women in matters related to the advancement of women and calls upon the Commission to promote the implementation of the Forward-looking Strategies to the year 2000 based on the goals of the United
Nations Decade for Women: Equality, Development and
Peace and the subtheme "Employment, Health and Education", and urges ali organizations ofthe United Nations
system to co-operate with the Commission in this task;
4. Reaffirmsfurther, in the implementation ofthe Forward-looking Strategies, the role of the Centre for Social
Development and Humanitarian Affairs of the Department of International Economic and Social Affairs of the
Secretariat, in particular the Branch for the Advancement
of Women, as the substantive secretariat of the Commission on the Status of Women andas a focal point for matters on women, the catalysing role of the United Nations
Development Fund for Women and the role of the International Research and Training Institute for the Advancement of Women in the advancement of women in the context of the participation of women in development;
5. Endorses Economic and Social Council resolution
1986/30, in particular the decision by the Council to convene in January 1987 a session of the Commission on the
Status ofWomen for five working days prior to the organizational session of the Council and its decision that the
session be held in New York asan exception to the general
principie, reaffirmed by the General Assembly in its resolution 40/243 of 18 December 1985, that United Nations
bodies shall plan to meet at their respective established
headquarters;

3. Calls upon Member States to adopt the necessary effective measures with a view to the implementation of the
Forward-looking Strategies as a matter ofpriority, including the establishment or strengthening of appropriate
mechanisms for the advancement of women and for the
implementation of the Strategies, in order to ensure the
full integration of women in the political, economic, social
and cultural life of their countries;
4. Invites Member States to encourage such social and
economic development as will ensure the equal participation ofwomen in all spheres ofwork activity, equal pay for
work of equal value, and equal opportunities for education
and vocational training;
5. Appeals to Member States to promote conditions
that will enable women to participate as equal partners
with men in public and political life, in the decisionmaking process at all levels and in the management of different spheres of life in society;
6. Urges Governments to recognize the special status
and social importance of childbearing and child rearing
and to take ali necessary measures to encourage the support of parenthood, including paid maternity, parental
and child-care leave, and to provide women with security
for their jobs as long as necessary with a view to allowing
them to fulfil their role as mothers without prejudice to
their professional and public activities;
7. Appeals to Governments to promote the establishment of appropriate facilities for the care and education of
children as a means of combining parenthood with economic, political, social, cultural and other activities, and
thus to assist women towards foil integration in their societies;
8. Requests the Secretary-General, when preparing future reports on the world social situation, to pay due attention to the question of the status of women, their role in society and the progress achieved in the implementation of
the Forward-looking Strategies;
9. Requests the Secretary-General, when preparing
surveys on the role of women in development, to pay due
attention to ali the interrelated aspects of the role of
women in society;
10. Invites the Commission on the Status of Women to
consider the inclusion, in an appropriate form, of the question of the role of women in society in its agenda and programme of work for the implementation of the Nairobi
Forward-looking Strategies for the Advancement of
Women.
97th plenary meeting
4 December 1986

Implementation of the Nairobi Forwardlooking Strategies for the Advancement of
Women

6 2 A/41/ó23 and A/41/672.

VI.

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

6. Emphasizes, in the framework of the Forwardlooking Strategies, the importance of the total integration
of women in the development process, having in mind the
specific and urgent needs of the developing countries;
7. Calls upon ali Member States to establish specific
targets at each leve! in order to increase the percentage of
women in professional and decision-making positions in
their countries;
8. Cal/s upon the Secretary-General and the heads of
the specialized agencies and other United Nations bodies
to establish new five-year targets at each level for the percentage of women in Professional and decision-making
positions, in accordance with the criteria established by
the General Assembly, in particular that of equitable geographical distribution, in order that a definite upward
trend in the implementation of Assembly resolution
33/143 of 20 December 1978 be registered in the number
of Professional and decision-making positions held by
women by 1990, and to set additional targets every five
years;
9. Requests the Secretary-General to invite Governments, organizations of the United Nations system, including the regional commissions and the specialized
agencies, and intergovernmental and non-governmental
organizations to report periodically, through the Commission on the Status ofWomen, to the Economic and Social
Council on activities undertaken at ali levels to implement
the Forward-looking Strategies;
10. Also requests the Secretary-General to report to the
General Assembly at its forty-second session on measures
taken to implement the present resolution;
11. Decides to consider these questions further at its
forty-second session under the item entitled "Forwardlooking strategies for the advancement of women to the
year 2000".
97th plenary meeting
4 December 1986

41/112.

Elimination of all forms of religious intolerance

The General Assembly,
Reaffirming its resolution 36/55 of 25 November 1981,
in which it proclaimed the Declaration on the Elimination
of Ali Forms of Intolerance and of Discrimination Based
on Religion or Belief,
Recalling its resolution 37/187 of 18 December 1982
and subsequent resolutions, in which it made and reiterated requests to the Commission on Human Rights to
consider what measures might be necessary to implement
the Declaration,
Encouraged by the efforts being made by the Commission on Human Rights and by the Sub-Commission on
Prevention ofDiscrimination and Protection ofMinorities
and their respective Special Rapporteurs to study relevant
developments affecting the implementation of the Declaration,
Emphasizing that non-governmental organizations and
religious bodies and groups at every level have an important role to play in the promotion of tolerance and the protection of freedom of religion or belief and inviting them to
consider, in particular, what further role they could envisage playing regarding the dissemination of the text of the
Declaration in national and local languages,
A ware that intolerance and discrimination on the
grounds of religion or belief continue to exist in many
parts of the world,

173

Believing that further efforts are therefore required to
promote and protect the right to freedom ofthought, conscience, religion and belief,
l. Reaffirms that freedom ofthought, conscience, religion and belief is a right guaranteed to ali without discrimination;
2. Urges States, therefore, in accordance with their respective constitutional systems and with such internationally accepted instruments as the {!niversal Declaratio~ ~f
Human Rights2 and the Intemat1onal Covenant on C1v1l
and Political Rights, 22 to provide, where they have not already done so, adequate constitutional and legal guarantees offreedom ofthought, conscience, religion and belief;
3. Notes with appreciation that work has airead y begun
in the Commission on Human Rights on the preparation
of a compendium of the national legislation and regulations of States on the question of freedom of religion or belief;
4. Pledges its determination to encourage understanding, tolerance and respect in matters relating to freedom of
religion or belief and recalls that a Seminar on this theme
was held at Geneva from 3 to 14 December 198463 within
the framework of the programme of advisory services in
the field of human rights;
5. Requests the Commission on Human Rights to urge
the Sub-Commission on Prevention of Discrimination and
Protection of Minorities to accord high priority at its
thirty-ninth session to consideration ofthe study prepared
by its Special Rapporteur, in accordance with the terms of
Sub-Commission resolution 1983/31 of 6 September
1983, 64 on the current dimensions of the problems of intolerance and of discrimination on the grounds of religion or
belief, and to report on this matter to the Commission al
its forty-fourth session;
6. Takes note of Commission on Human Rights resolution 1986/20 of l O March 19863 1 and Economic and Social Council decision 1986/134 of 23 May 1986, pursuant
to which a Special Rapporteur has been appointed for one
year to examine incidents and governmental actions in ali
parts of the world that are inconsistent with the provisions
of the Declaration on the Elimination of Ali Forms of Intolerance and of Discrimination Based on Religion or Belief and to recommend remedia! measures, as appropriate;
1. Urges ali States to take ali appropriate measures to
combat intolerance and to encourage understanding, tolerance and respect in matters relating to freedom of religion or belief and, in this context, to examine where necessary the supervision and training of their civil servants,
educators and other public officials to ensure that, in the
course of their official duties, they respect different religions and beliefs and do not discriminate against persons
professing other religions or beliefs;
8. Invites the United Nations University and other
academic and research institutions to undertake programmes and studies on the encouragement of understanding, tolerance and respect in matters relating to freedom of religion or belief;
9. Invites the Secretary-General to continue to give
high priority to the dissemination of the text of the Declaration on the Elimination of Ali Forms of lntolerance and
of Discrimination Based on Religion or Belief, in ali the
official languages ofthe United Nations, and to take ali appropriate measures to make the text available for use by

6 3 Sec ST/HR/SER.A/lb.
64 See E/CN.4/1984/3-E/CN.4/Sub.2/1983/43 and

chap. , :XI. se,·t. -\

Corr.1 and 2.
