II.

Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

B
The General Assembly,
Gravely alarmed by Israel's decision of 14 December

1981 to apply Israeli law to the occupied Syrian Arab Golan
Heights,
Reaffirming that acquisition of territory by force is in­
admissible under the Charter of the United Nations, the
principles of international law and relevant United Nations
resolutions,
Reaffirming once more the applicability of the Geneva
Convention relative to the Protection of Civilian Persons in
Time of War, of 12 August 1949, 107 to the occupied Syrian
territory,
Recalling its resolutions 35/ 122 A to F of 11 December
1980,
1. Declares that Israel's decision to apply Israeli law
to the occupied Syrian Arab Golan Heights is null and void
and has no legal validity whatsoever;
2. Determines that the provisions of the Geneva Con­
vention relative to the Protection of Civilian Persons in Time
of War, of 12 August 1949, continue to apply to the Syrian
territory occupied by Israel since 1967;
3. Strongly deplores the persistence of the Israeli policy
of annexation, which escalates tension in the region;
4. Demands that Israel, the occupying Power, rescind
forthwith its decision and all administrative and other meas­
ures relating to it, which constitute a flagrant violation of
all relevant principles of international law;
5. Calls upon all States, specialized agencies and "ther
international institutions not to recognize that decision;
6. Requests the Security Council, in the event of Israel's
failure to implement the present resolution, to invoke Chap­
ter VII of the Charter of the United Nations;
7. Requests the Secretary-General to report to the Gen­
eral Assembly and the Security Council on the implemen­
tation of the present resolution not later than 21 December
1981.

103rd plenary meeting
17 December 1981

Enlargement of the Executive Board of the
United Nations Children's Fund 108
The General Assembly,
Convinced that a strengthened and expanded United Na­

36/244.

49

pation of Member States in the work of the Executive Board
of the Fund,
Recalling its resolution 417 (V) of I December 1950,
which established the importance of constituting the Ex­
ecutive Board with due regard to geographical distribution
and to the representation of the major contributing and re­
cipient countries,
Noting that the composition of the Executive Board was
last considered by the General Assembly at its eleventh
session, when the Assembly adopted resolution 1038 (XI)
of 7 December 1956, replacing paragraph 6 (a) of resolution
417 (V),
I . Decides, without prejudice to arrangements which
may be made in other bodies, to enlarge the membership
of the Executive Board of the United Nations Children's
Fund to forty-one members, to be elected from States Mem­
bers of the United Nations or members of specialized agen­
cies or of the International Atomic Energy Agency, subject
to the following conditions:
Nine seats for African States;
(a)
(b) Nine seats for Asian States;
(c) Four seats for Eastern European States;
(d) Six seats for Latin American States;
(e) Twelve seats for Western European and other
States;
(j) One seat to be rotated among the five regional
groups, in the following order:
(i) African States;
(ii) Latin American States;
(iii) Asian States;
(iv) Western European and other States;
(v) Eastern European States;
(g) Without prejudice to the terms of the States al­
ready elected, elections to these forty-one seats shall be for
a term of three years and retiring members shall be eligible
for re-election;
2. Requests the Economic and Social Council to elect,
at its first regular session of 1982, the additional eleven
members of the Executive Board. 109

I 10th plenary meeting
28 April 1982

tions Children's Fund necessitates the increased partici10•

See also sect. V, resolution 36/ I 97.

""' See Economic and Social Council decision 1982/126 of 6 May 1982.
