S/PV.7082

United Nations

asdf

Security Council

Provisional

Sixty-eighth year

7082nd meeting

Thursday, 12 December 2013, 3 p.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Araud . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

(France)

Members:

Argentina . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Australia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Azerbaijan. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Guatemala. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Luxembourg . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Morocco . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Pakistan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Republic of Korea . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Rwanda . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Togo. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Oyarzábal
Mr. Quinlan
Mr. Mehdiyev
Mr. Liu Jieyi
Ms. Bolaños Pérez
Mr. Maes
Mr. Laassel
Mr. Masood Khan
Mr. Sul Kyung-hoon
Mr. Churkin
Mr. Nduhungirehe
Mr. M’Beou
Sir Mark Lyall Grant
Mrs. DiCarlo

Agenda
Non-proliferation
Briefing by the Chair of the Security Council Committee established pursuant
to resolution 1737 (2006)

13-61581 (E)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-506.

*1361581*

S/PV.7082

Non-proliferation

The meeting was called to order at 3.05 p.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Non-proliferation
Briefing by the Chairman of the
Security Council Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1737 (2006)
The President (spoke in French): The Security
Council will now begin its consideration of the item on
its agenda.
At this meeting, the Security Council will hear a
briefing by Ambassador Gary Quinlan, Permanent
Representative of Australia, in his capacity as Chair of
the Security Council Committee established pursuant
to resolution 1737 (2006).
I now give the floor to Ambassador Quinlan.
Mr. Quinlan (Australia): I have the honour to
present the report of the Committee established pursuant
to resolution 1737 (2006), in accordance with paragraph
18 (h) of the same resolution. The present report covers
the period from 6 September to 12 December, during
which time the Committee held two informal meetings
and conducted additional work using the no-objection
procedure envisioned in paragraph 15 of the guidelines
for the conduct of its work.
Before presenting the Committee’s activity, I
would like to welcome the interim agreement reached
between the P5+1 and Iran in Geneva on 24 November.
The potential of this important agreement as a way
forward towards a comprehensive settlement of the
Iranian nuclear issue is obvious. The Security Council
measures imposed by resolutions 1737 (2006), 1747
(2007), 1803 (2008) and 1929 (2010), however, remain
in effect. States have an obligation to implement them
duly. It is only by a Security Council decision that
those measures can be modified or terminated. Until
then, Member States are obligated to enforce them
and the Committee, with the assistance of its Panel of
Experts, must carry out its mandate to monitor their
implementation.
It is, however, my hope that the agreement reached in
Geneva will encourage Iran to engage with the Council
and the Committee. You will recall, Mr President, that
the Committee has twice reached out to Iran this year

2/14

12/12/2013

in relation to incidents investigated by the Panel of
Experts. We wrote on 12 April in relation to the Panel’s
unanimous conclusion that Iran’s launches of the
Shahab-1 and -3 missiles during the Great Prophet VII
exercises contravened paragraph 9 of resolution 1929
(2010). On 21 May we wrote, in relation to the Panel’s
conclusion, that an intercepted arms shipment was at
the very least a probable violation by Iran of paragraph
5 of resolution 1747 (2007). Iran has not so far replied
and the Committee again calls on Iran to do so.
I would like to turn now to the Committee’s activity
during the reporting period.
The Committee met on 23 October to discuss the
Panel’s report on a seizure of a consignment of carbon
fibre destined for Iran. The seizure was reported to the
Committee on 6 June. The Panel of Experts investigated
this case. It concluded that Iran’s attempted procurement
of this carbon fibre was a violation of its obligations
under resolution 1929 (2010) and previous resolutions.
Similarly, on 5 November a Member State reported
its seizure of goods that it suspected were sanctioned
goods, but wanted the assistance of the Panel of Experts
before making its final determination as to whether the
goods were sanctioned or not. The Panel is now working
with that Member State.
The ban on supplying nuclear-related items to Iran
is subject to some conditional exceptions, notably in
relation to items for light-water reactors, which the
Council considers to be less proliferation-sensitive than
heavy-water reactors. The Committee must be notified
of supplies to Iran of items falling under this exception.
During the reporting period, the Committee received
two such notifications by a Member State concerning
the delivery of items for reactor unit 1 of the Bushehr
nuclear power plant.
Member States remain under an obligation to freeze
assets on their territory that are owned or controlled by a
person or entity listed by the Council or the Committee,
and to prevent any assets from being made available
to such persons or entities. Like the goods ban, these
targeted financial sanctions are subject to a range of
conditional exceptions so to ensure that their effect is
limited to the object and purpose of the sanctions.
The Committee received three notifications from
a Member State pursuant to paragraph 15 of resolution
1737 (2006) and paragraph 4 of resolution 1747 (2007),
which allows for payments owed by a listed person or
entity under a contract entered into prior to the listing

13-61581

12/12/2013

Non-proliferation

to be made from that person or entity’s frozen funds,
subject to notification to the Committee.
Listed persons and entities have the right to
petition the Committee to be delisted — that is, to
have the sanctions removed — through the Focal Point
established by resolution 1730 (2006). As mentioned in
my previous briefings to the Council, the Committee
has been considering such a petition from the First
East Export Bank (FEEB), an entity that is currently
on the Committee’s consolidated list. On 25 November,
the Committee rejected the delisting request and
communicated to the Focal Point the reasons for the
rejection, which the Focal Point transmitted to FEEB.
The Committee also assisted States exercising
vigilance, in accordance with the resolutions, over
financial transactions with persons or entities in
Iran. One Member State consulted the Committee on
7 November on the modalities of making a payment,
to which the Committee had already advised it had
no objection in December 2012, from an entity on its
territory to the Ministry of Defence of Iran. Also on
7 November, a State informed the Committee that its
authorities were carrying out an investigation regarding
an alleged connection between an Iranian national and
a company registered in the reporting State, and sought
the Committee’s assistance in obtaining additional
information about the named individual and entity.
As part of the Committee’s efforts to assist Member
States in implementing the Security Council measures,
on 18 November I joined the Chairs of the Committees
established pursuant to resolutions 1373 (2001), 1540
(2004), 1718 (2006) and 1988 (2001) and of the Al-Qaida
Committees, as well as by the President of the Financial
Action Task Force (FATF) in an open briefing for
States on the respective roles of the Security Council
and FATF in combating the financing of terrorism and
proliferation. The high turnout and lively question-andanswer session that followed indicate the strong
interest of Member States on this issue. I believe that
the briefing was effective in raising awareness among
States of the measures imposed by the Council and
the related recommendations and guidance developed
by FATF, as well as the assistance that the Security
Council Committees and FATF can provide. We look
forward to organizing similar joint briefings for the
benefit of Member States.
The Committee continues to assist States and
international organizations in implementing the relevant

S/PV.7082

Security Council measures. On 27 September, the
United Nations Industrial Development Organization
asked the Committee to confirm that its proposal
for technical assistance to Iran did not contravene
the applicable sanctions measures. In a letter dated
11 October, the Committee confirmed that the relevant
resolutions did not prohibit the described project.
The Panel of Experts submitted its midterm report
to the Security Council on 4 December. As mandated
by resolution 2105 (2013), in advance of the submission
to the Council the Committee considered the Panel’s
report during an informal meeting held on 21 November.
Committee members welcomed the report and took
note of the Panel’s key activities since the renewal of its
mandate in June.
Finally, I am happy to report that the Panel is again
at full capacity, with Mr. Kazuto Suzuki joining the
Panel at the beginning of December. Furthermore, over
the past three months the Panel participated in a number
of events that are listed in the annex to the report. I
should note that a slightly more detailed version of the
report that I have just read out, including the annexes,
will be available online.
The President (spoke in French):
Ambassador Quinlan for his statement.

I

thank

I now give the floor to the members of the Security
Council.
Mr. Churkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We thank Ambassador Gary Quinlan for
his briefing on the work of the Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1737 (2006). We are grateful
to him and the Australian delegation for their skilful
leadership of that subsidiary body of the Security
Council.
Russia’s diplomacy over the years has been to
work unstintingly to achieve the agreements that were
concluded between the six international mediators and
Iran on 24 November. The Geneva agreements are based
on a concept elaborated by Russian President Vladimir
Putin. Its thrust is to unconditionally recognize Iran’s
right to develop a peaceful civilian nuclear programme,
including the right to enrich uranium, on the
understanding that all outstanding issues regarding the
Iranian nuclear programme will be resolved and that
the programme will be placed under the strict control of
the International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA).

13-615813/14

S/PV.7082

Non-proliferation

The agreement is based on the principles of the
phased mutual response that is known in the global
diplomatic world as the Lavrov plan. The principles
enjoy consensus support. It is important that the
agreement incorporates provisions for the mitigation
of the anti-Iranian sanctions regime, above all the
unilateral sanctions, the legitimacy of which have never
been recognized and which have long had a negative
impact on the social and economic situation of the
Iranian people.
Today, in his message to the Federal Assembly, the
President of Russia stated:
“With respect to the Iranian nuclear programme,
a breakthrough has been achieved this year. It is,
however, only a first step. We must further pursue
our painstaking work to find a broader solution that
would guarantee Iran’s inalienable right to develop
its peaceful civilian nuclear energy programme
and, I stress, the security of all countries of the
region, including Israel.”
I invite all colleagues to familiarize themselves
with that message, especially the section devoted to
fundamental issues of Russian foreign policy and
current international relations.
The Geneva document must be implemented in
good faith by all parties. Furthermore, the six mediators
and Iran need to work on the next stage of the settlement
process — the elaboration of a final package that will
allow us to fully close this problem in the near future.
The progress in cooperation between Iran and the
IAEA is promising. That cooperation has reached a
new stage and provides for Iran’s implementation of
good-faith transparency measures that go beyond its
commitments in the framework of the IAEA guarantees.
We hope that the IAEA will close the Iranian dossier
in the near future and handle it in the normal way.
We anticipate the entire international community’s
understanding and support for these efforts. It would
be wrong to set up artificial obstacles in that process.
We are convinced that the decision concerning the
Iranian nuclear programme will have a positive impact
on the situation in the Middle East and enable us to
overcome the dangerous trends of recent years, whereby
attempts have been made to resolve a number of crises
and conflict situations in the Middle East by means
of force. As a result, the security of the region will be
enhanced and the foundations will be strengthened for

4/14

12/12/2013

a fair and balanced system of international relations
that have no place for force and coercion.
In the current, critical stage, it is particularly
important for the 1737 Committee and its Panel of
Experts to continue to act in an unbiased, balanced and
objective manner in the interest of promoting a political
and diplomatic settlement of the situation concerning
the Iranian nuclear programme. Russia will spare no
effort to achieve a final, comprehensive solution that
will allow all sanctions imposed on Iran, including
those imposed by the Security Council, to be lifted.
Mr. Liu Jieyi (China) (spoke in Chinese): I thank
Ambassador Quinlan for briefing and his efforts
to advance the work of the Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1737 (2006).
Thanks to the efforts of all parties, the six
mediators recently reached an agreement with Iran.
China welcomes the agreement, which marks a
significant first step in the diplomatic settlement of
the Iranian nuclear issues and proves yet again that
dialogue and negotiation are the only viable approach
to the settlement of the Iran nuclear issue, which is in
the common interests of all sides.
China hopes that all parties will duly implement
the agreement so as to maintain the momentum of
dialogue and negotiation and make progress towards a
comprehensive, long-term and thorough settlement of
the Iranian nuclear issue. China supports the IAEA’s
efforts to continue to play a constructive role in the
settlement of the Iranian nuclear issue. We also support
the IAEA’s efforts to reach an agreement with Iran on
a joint statement on the framework for cooperation
between the IAEA and Iran. We hope that both sides
will strengthen their cooperation and gradually settle
the pending issues between them.
China has always been of the view that all parties
have the obligation to implement the relevant sanctions of
our resolutions in an honest, accurate manner. Sanctions
are only a means, however; they are not the purpose of
the resolution, nor are they a benchmark to measure the
progress achieved by the 1737 (2006) Committee. At
this time, the Committee should focus its attention on
the overall situation and the long-term goal. It should
support and collaborate with the diplomatic process. As
far as specific actions are concerned, the Committee
should help Member States to implement the resolution
in a comprehensive, balanced and manner. In line with
the principles of objectivity, impartiality and pragmatic

13-61581

12/12/2013

Non-proliferation

action, it should settle sensitive cases involving alleged
violations of the resolution in an appropriate manner
and strengthen its guidance to subsidiary bodies.
China will continue to work with the Committee
so as to play a positive and constructive role in taking
forward the work of the Committee. As a permanent
member of the Security Council and a member of the
dialogue mechanism on the Iranian nuclear issue, China
has always maintained an objective, impartial and
responsible position and has actively promoted peace
talks. It has also played a significant role in taking
forward the dialogue process. China will continue to
take into account the general direction of a political
settlement and will continue to work with all sides to
make unremitting efforts to reach a final settlement of
the Iranian nuclear issue.
Mrs. DiCarlo (United States of America): I would
like to thank Ambassador Quinlan for his briefing
and for his leadership of the important Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1737 (2006) on Iran.
For the past decade, the international community
has had grave concerns about the nature of Iran’s
nuclear programme. Since 2006, the Council has
committed to resolve those concerns through a mix
of principled diplomacy and steadily increasing
pressure. The Council’s four major resolutions on the
issue — resolutions 1696 (2006), 1737 (2006), 1747
(2007) and 1803 (2008) — and the tough sanctions that
they imposed embody that approach.
In recent weeks, the P5+1 have taken important
steps on the Iran issue. The joint plan of action adopted
in Geneva last month is a milestone. For the first time
in nearly a decade, key parts of the Iranian nuclear
programme will be halted or rolled back. The joint plan
of action begins to address the issues of the greatest
concern, such as the enrichment of uranium up to
20 per cent, the development of advanced centrifuges
and the work at the Arak reactor. The arrangement also
provides for a six-month window for us to test whether
a long-term comprehensive solution can be reached.
In exchange, the United Nations would provide
limited sanctions relief that is temporary, targeted
and reversible. In the coming weeks and months, our
diplomats and experts expect to meet with Iran to see
if a comprehensive deal is possible. Any such deal
must address squarely the Security Council’s multiple
resolutions on the matter, a principle that the joint plan
of action specifically states.

S/PV.7082

In the meantime, however, the relevant Security
Council resolutions remain in force, and all United
Nations sanctions remain in force. For now, as in the past,
all States must carry out their obligations to implement
those sanctions fully and effectively. In a similar vein,
the Council’s Iran Sanctions Committee and its Panel
of Experts must continue their vital work. In the weeks
and months ahead, we look to the Committee to step up
efforts to help States understand and implement those
sanctions. For example, we call on the Committee to
issue more implementation assistance notes and provide
other useful guidance. We note that the Committee has
not implemented all of the recommendations from the
Panel of Experts’ report. We hope that that work can be
finished soon.
Sanctions violations remain a matter of serious
concern. We therefore call on the Committee to improve
its ability to investigate and respond to such incidents.
Over the past year we have been disappointed that the
Committee has not taken decisive action on reported
violations. In particular, the Committee should be
doing more to tackle Iran’s illicit arms shipments to
Syria, Yemen, Lebanon, Gaza and elsewhere. Iran’s
gun-running threatens to destabilize already fragile
regions and fuel long-smouldering conflicts.
The Panel of Experts also has a key role to play in
supporting States’ efforts to implement sanctions. Over
the past year, the Panel has sustained an impressive
level of activity. That should continue. We particularly
welcome the Panel’s work in investigating Iran’s
attempts to circumvent sanctions. The Committee
should do more to share that information publicly,
including best practices for detecting and stopping
violations in progress.
The United States looks forward to a day when Iran
establishes full confidence in the peaceful nature of its
nuclear programme. But that day is not today. As our
negotiators seek a comprehensive deal, we wish them
the best. Yet, until there is a deal, the Council must
maintain pressure on Iran.
Sir Mark Lyall Grant (United Kingdom): I thank
the Committee established pursuant to resolution
1737 (2006), under the chairmanship of Ambassador
Quinlan, as well as the Panel of Experts, for their
continued work in supporting the implementation of the
Security Council’s resolutions on Iran.
On 24 November, the United Kingdom, France and
Germany and Iran reached a first-stage agreement on the

13-615815/14

S/PV.7082

Non-proliferation

nuclear issue. That was an important and encouraging
milestone. For the first time, we reached a detailed
agreement that goes a long way towards addressing
the most worrisome aspects of the Iranian nuclear
programme. The unity of all five permanent members
of the United Nations Security Council behind the
agreement in itself sends a powerful signal. The United
Kingdom commits to fulfil our part of the agreement in
good faith, and we look to Iran to do the same. The deal
provides for more time to negotiate a comprehensive
solution by halting further advances in Iran’s nuclear
programme. Meanwhile, and most importantly, the
majority of the sanctions remain in place, including, as
the Committee’s 90-day report makes clear, all United
Nations sanctions. We must continue to enforce those
sanctions robustly, as a powerful incentive for Iran to
reach a comprehensive solution that would ensure an
exclusively peaceful nuclear programme.
Reaching an interim agreement has been a difficult
and painstaking process. We are right to test to the full
Iran’s readiness to act in good faith, to work with the
rest of the international community and to enter into
international agreements. If Iran does not abide by its
commitments, it will bear a heavy responsibility. Early
signs indicate that Iran is cooperating. For example,
we welcome the recent signature of a joint statement
for a cooperation framework between Iran and the
International Atomic Energy Agency. We are pleased
to see that Iran has finally decided to cooperate with
the Agency so as to resolve all present and past issues.
That is a step in the right direction. However, Iran has
yet to address the substance of the Agency’s concerns
over the possible military dimensions to Iran’s nuclear
programme.
Turning to the work of the Committee, we remain
concerned by breaches and possible breaches by Iran
of its international obligations. The Committee has
reported the recent discovery of a consignment of
high-grade carbon fibre destined for Iran. The Panel
of Experts investigated the circumstances of that case
and concluded that Iran’s attempted procurement was
indeed a violation of its obligations under resolution
1929 (2010). That is deeply regrettable. The United
Kingdom welcomes the Panel’s work and calls on it
to continue to investigate those reports and to bring
relevant information to the Committee’s attention. The
Committee must take appropriate action in response,
including considering an implementation assistance
notice to assist Member States.

6/14

12/12/2013

In January, the Panel of Experts reached a clear and
unanimous conclusion in its report that Iran’s launch
of a ballistic missile last year constituted a violation of
resolution 1929 (2010). Efforts by the Chair to engage
with Iran on that issue have unfortunately been spurned.
Iran has still not responded to the Committee’s letter
of 12 April requesting further information, despite
multiple requests to do so. The evidence of that breach
is compelling. The Committee should now take further
action in response.
The Panel’s reports on Gaza and the illicit arms
interdiction reported by the Government of Yemen
provide credible information that Iran continues to
illicitly transfer arms within the region, in contravention
on the United Nations embargo on the export of weapons
by Iran. Such actions are unacceptable and serve only
to undermine regional security. We encourage the Panel
to continue to monitor that issue, identify individuals
and entities responsible and make recommendations to
the Committee, as appropriate.
The United Kingdom is committed to finding a
peaceful, negotiated solution on the nuclear issue. The
first-step agreement is in the interests of the whole
world. We will apply the same rigour and determination
we have shown in the negotiation when it comes to
implementation of the agreement and to the search for a
comprehensive settlement.
Mr. Mehdiyev (Azerbaijan): I would like to thank
Ambassador Gary Quinlan for his work as Chair of
the Committee established pursuant to resolution 1737
(2006) and for presenting the 90-day report of the
Committee. We also take note of the midterm report of
the Panel of Experts established pursuant to resolution
1929 (2010) and its activities during the reporting
period.
Azerbaijan attaches great importance to the
work of the Committee and to the implementation of
Security Council measures, the objective of which
we have seen as contributing to a political solution to
the problem based on international law. The Treaty
on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons (NPT),
relevant Security Council resolutions, the Statute of
the International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) and
the NPT safeguards agreements provide a solid basis
to that end.
We are encouraged by the intensification of talks
between the Islamic Republic of Iran and the P5+1
during the reporting period, which resulted in reaching

13-61581

12/12/2013

Non-proliferation

an interim agreement between the parties in Geneva on
24 November. Furthermore, Iran and the IAEA signed
a joint statement on a framework for cooperation,
confirming that they had agreed to strengthen their
cooperation and dialogue aimed at ensuring the
exclusively peaceful nature of Iran’s nuclear programme
through the resolution of all outstanding issues. As the
report of the IAEA Director General of 14 November
(see S/2013/668, annex) pointed out, that agreement
marked an important step forward.
During the reporting period, the Committee
continued to receive information from Member States
related to actions taken to implement the sanctions
regime. It is essential that Member States cooperate
with the Committee and the Panel of Experts by
providing information on the implementation measures.
The Committee also continued to assist States and
international organizations to implement the relevant
Security Council resolutions. As part of its efforts in
that regard, we take positive note of the open briefing
for States on 18 November, jointly convened by the
chairs of six subsidiary bodies and the President of the
Financial Action Task Force (FATF), on the respective
roles of the Security Council and FATF in combating
the financing of terrorism and proliferation. We share
the view that the briefing was effective in raising
awareness among States of the measures imposed
by the Council and the related recommendations and
guidance developed by FATF.
We also note the Panel’s visits to several Member
States and the participation of its members in a number
of international meetings during the reporting period.
It is essential that the Panel continue its outreach
activities, which play an important role in increasing
the number of national implementation reports from
Member States. We hope that diplomatic efforts and
the recent important progress in the negotiations will
help move the resolution of the problem forward. A
diplomatic solution based on strict compliance with
international law and the relevant Security Council
resolutions is the only way to preserve peace and
stability in the region.
Ms. Bolaños Pérez (Guatemala) (spoke in Spanish):
My delegation thanks Ambassador Gary Quinlan for
his informative report and the work he and his team of
collaborators carried out in the Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1737 (2006). Since this is our
final statement on the issue in this forum, allow me to
thank him also for all of the support to my delegation

S/PV.7082

throughout the year and to wish him the best in the
coming year.
I reiterate my Government’s satisfaction with the
interim agreement reached in Geneva on 24 November
among the Islamic Republic of Iran, the European Union
and the E3+3 countries on Iran’s nuclear programme.
We congratulate the negotiators for having succeeded in
renewing the optimism of the international community
over a process that has at times appeared hopelessly
stalled.
With respect to the report before us today, I wish to
underscore the following.
First, my country commends the work of the
Committee, which has continued to consider requests
for information and for reports by Member States of
alleged violations. Once the Panel of Experts concludes
its investigation, it is important that the Committee
respond and act in a timely and effective manner through
new designations and/or information notes, if necessary.
In cases of requests for information on the sanctions
regime from States or international organizations, it is
important that the Committee respond clearly, directly
and, above all, expeditiously, pursuant to its mandate.
We note the midterm report of the Panel of Experts
and consider it appropriate. We commend its speedy
transmission to the Council after being considered by
the Committee. As for the Panel’s final report, which
was delivered to the Committee almost six months ago
(see S/2013/331, annex), we again call on all members
to redouble their efforts to reach a consensus on the
recommendations contained therein, and on possible
implementation measures.
Another issue that my delegation considers
highly important is transparency. We emphasize
the importance of holding briefing meetings that are
open to all Member States and of varying the subjects
addressed in them. The latest meeting of that kind
was the briefing on the financing of terrorism and
proliferation financing, held on 18 November. As my
delegation has stated previously, we are convinced that
greater transparency would ensure greater effectiveness
in the sanctions regimes and improved implementation
of the Council’s resolutions.
Nevertheless, such an exercise is insufficient to
resolve the lack of transparency within the Security
Council. That is clearly evident in a few of the Council’s
subsidiary organs, such as the sanctions committees on

13-615817/14

S/PV.7082

Non-proliferation

Iran and the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea.
That relative opacity leads to a lack of information not
only among States non-members of the Council, but
also among permanent and non-permanent Council
members.
We know that the issues dealt with are highly
sensitive political matters. However, that does not
justify the fact that a majority of the Member States
are excluded from negotiations on resolutions and
mandate renewals for groups of experts, or the lack
of comprehensive consultations in the selection of
candidates to fill vacancies in those groups. In passing,
we should say that some countries and regions are
overrepresented in those groups, which, we believe,
has a negative impact on the effectiveness of their work
and, consequently, on the efficient implementation of
resolutions and the provisions imposed by them.
It is a fact that broad geographical representation
will enhance the Council’s effectiveness. It facilitates
the implementation of resolutions and ensures greater
acceptance and integration of the Committee’s
decisions by all Member States. That is why over the
two years a priority of my delegation has been to work
on improving the situation by providing information
to non-member States, especially within our region,
but also within the Council machinery, in order to
achieve some improvements, such as the introduction
of language on selection criteria for candidates for
positions in subsidiary bodies, which must include,
inter alia, broad geographic representation.
In the case of the 1737 Committee, as in the case
of others, it is important that the Panel of Experts not
be perceived as representing an agenda or a specific
regional group. The Committee’s task concerns every
State, and that is a vital message for ensuring its
success, legitimacy and credibility.
Finally, I would like to reiterate my Government’s
support for the agreement between Iran and the E3+3,
and our hope that it will be implemented and that the
dialogue between the parties will continue. We urge the
international community to redouble efforts to make
the most of that first important step towards stability
in the region.
Mr. Oyarzábal (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish): At
the outset, I would like to thank Ambassador Quinlan
for his presentation of the quarterly report on the work
of the Security Council Committee established pursuant

8/14

12/12/2013

to resolution 1737 (2006), and for his leadership of the
Committee.
I would first like to welcome the provisional
agreement reached in Geneva in November between
Iran and the group of the five permanent members of the
Security Council and Germany. It creates the possibility
of resolving pending issues, and we believe that it
demonstrates the value of diplomatic measures that
enable us to reach solutions through negotiation. At the
same time, we know that the international community
must continue to support the relevance of the nuclear
non-proliferation regime and its cornerstone, the Treaty
on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons. We have
received the most recent report, dated 15 November, of
the Director General of the International Atomic Energy
Agency (IAEA), which outlines the agreement on a
framework for cooperation between the Agency and
Iran, which is aimed at resolving current and previous
issues. We realize that the agreement is an important
step forward in re-establishing the confidence of the
international community in the exclusively peaceful
nature of the Iranian nuclear programme. In that regard,
we believe that it is essential that Iran cooperate with
the IAEA and take the measures necessary to enable
it to fully comply with its obligations, including the
relevant resolutions of the Security Council.
Concerning the work of the 1737 Committee, I
would like to thank the Panel of Experts for its midterm
report. I would also to highlight the importance of
the open informational meeting held on 18 November
on the role of the Security Council and the Financial
Action Task Force in combating terrorism financing
and proliferation. Generally speaking, we believe that
the periodic holding of open informational meetings is
a good practice that improves ties between the Council
and all Member States, and we therefore encourage the
Committee to continue those efforts.
In conclusion, I would like to emphasize once
again my country’s historic commitment to the
non-proliferation of weapons of mass destruction. At
the same time, I should reaffirm the inalienable right of
all States party to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation
of Nuclear Weapons to develop their research on
and production and utilization of nuclear energy for
peaceful purposes without discrimination of any kind.
Mr. Sul Kyung-hoon (Republic of Korea): I would
like to thank Ambassador Quinlan for his briefing
today on the work of the Security Council Committee

13-61581

12/12/2013

Non-proliferation

established pursuant to resolution 1737 (2006), and
for his leadership of that important Committee. The
briefing was highly informative and helps to clarify
the obligations of Member States under the relevant
Security Council resolutions.
At the outset, we welcome the Geneva agreement
between the group of the five permanent members of
the Security Council and Germany (P5+1) and Iran to
work towards resolution of the Iranian nuclear issue.
While we commend the efforts of all of the relevant
parties, what is now critical is faithful implementation
of the measures under the agreement. In that regard,
we welcome the joint statement on a framework for
cooperation between the International Atomic Energy
Agency (IAEA) and Iran with respect to verification
activities. We recognize the importance of the IAEA’s
role in resolving all present and past issues relating to
the Iranian nuclear programme, and in that regard, we
expect Iran to fully cooperate with the Agency. Noting
the efforts of the Iranian Government in contributing
to that recent progress, we hope that Iran will further
utilize that momentum and restore the confidence of
the international community by fulfilling in their
entirety the measures stipulated in the joint plan of
action reached with the P5+1.
Similarly, it is important that Iran complies with
its international obligations under the relevant Security
Council and IAEA resolutions. As was made clear in
today’s briefing, the Security Council measures remain
in full effect. Until the Council decides otherwise, the
Committee must continue to carry out its mandate.
It must, therefore, continue its consideration of the
recommendations of the Panel of Experts and should
also respond to alleged violations appropriately and
swiftly.
It is regrettable that the Committee has not received
any response from Iran to the letters it sent in April
and May concerning Iran’s missile launches and its
intercepted arms shipment in Yemen. Given the current
constructive spirit, we look forward to Iran’s prompt
and sincere response to those letters.
I would also like to take this opportunity to express
our appreciation for the joint open briefing convened by
the Chairs of the relevant Sanctions Committees with
the Financial Action Task Force. It was very helpful
in raising awareness, and we look forward to similar
briefings in the future.

S/PV.7082

In conclusion, we sincerely hope that the
implementation of the agreement and the trust-building
between the P5+1 and Iran will lead to final resolution
of the Iranian nuclear issue. It is our hope that such
a process will also have a positive influence on other
outstanding non-proliferation issues.
Mr. Maes (Luxembourg) (spoke in French): I
would first like to thank the Permanent Representative
of Australia, Ambassador Gary Quinlan, for his
presentation of the quarterly report of the Security
Council Committee established pursuant to resolution
1737 (2006), and to congratulate him on the way he has
run that important Committee with the support of his
team.
The interim agreement on the Iranian nuclear
programme concluded in Geneva on 24 November
sets a new course. We welcome that development,
which seemed unthinkable less than a year ago. We
also commend the energy and efforts of the High
Representative of the European Union, Ms. Catherine
Ashton, who has played a central role in the conduct of
negotiations between Iran and the E3+3. The interim
agreement has two encouraging lessons for us. The first
is that every party involved has had to show courage.
The agreement is good and balanced, and in order to
reach it, concessions had to be made on both sides of the
negotiating table. That ability to compromise should be
welcomed. It bodes well.
The second lesson is that the dual approach has
borne fruit. That approach, one that Luxembourg and
its European partners have always advocated, favours
the path of diplomacy while taking a firm stand against
any refusal to hold a dialogue. The change we are
witnessing should encourage us to continue with the
dual approach in the various non-proliferation issues
before us.
Although it opens up considerable possibilities, the
Geneva interim agreement is only a first step. We have
seen enough false starts in the past to know that we
must remain vigilant. All the parties concerned must
now speedily implement the commitments made in
Geneva. The work of verifying the implementation of
the agreement, which will be done in close coordination
with the International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA),
will be critical to proving Iran’s good faith and its desire
to reach a definitive and comprehensive agreement.
With respect to the role of the IAEA, we welcome
the joint statement signed with Iran on 11 November,

13-615819/14

S/PV.7082

Non-proliferation

prior to the Geneva interim agreement. The statement
creates a framework for cooperation for verification
activities to determine the exact nature of the Iranian
nuclear programme. That is an important development,
for although the right of Iran to the peaceful use of
nuclear energy is not in question, it must reassure the
international community by taking the necessary steps
to prove that its nuclear programme is strictly peaceful
in nature. In that context, we welcome the fact that, on
8 December, for the first time in more than two years
ago, IAEA inspectors had access to the Arak heavy
water production site.
Re-establishing the confidence of the international
community should also require Iran to meet its
international obligations under the terms of the
resolutions adopted since 2006 by the Board of
Governors of the IAEA and by the Security Council.
The action of the 1737 Committee and the proper
implementation of its mandate are crucial in that regard.
The interception of the carbon fibre cargo shipment
destined for the Iranian port of Bandar Abbas, which
the Panel of Experts recently found to be a violation
of the sanctions regime, must also have an appropriate
follow-up.
Ambassador Quinlan and other speakers also
recalled that, in recent months, the 1737 Committee
addressed two letters to the Iranian authorities, neither
of which has yet been answered. The first is about the
launches of Shahab-1 and -3 missiles in July 2012 during
the Great Prophet VII exercises; the other concerns the
interception of an arms cargo shipment off the coast
of Yemen in January 2013. We call on the Iranian
authorities to answer those letters. It would be a simple
gesture that would lay the foundation for collaboration
with the Committee that has been unfortunately lacking
until now.
Finally, we welcome the success of the open
information session held on 18 November that brought
together the President of the Financial Action Task
Force (FATF), Mr. Vladimir Nechaev, and the heads of
the Security Council Committees on Counter-Terrorism
and Non-Proliferation. The FATF is an important
partner that is providing useful assistance to Member
States so that they can apply the financial provisions of
Security Council resolutions more efficiently. We thank
Ambassador Quinlan for having taken the initiative to
convene that meeting.

10/14

12/12/2013

Mr. Masood Khan (Pakistan): I thank Ambassador
Gary Quinlan for presenting the 90-day report. We
have taken note of the recent report of the International
Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) on the implementation
in Iran of the safeguards agreement under the Treaty on
the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons (NPT).
Pakistan welcomes the interim agreement between
Iran and the P5+1 with respect to the Iranian nuclear
issue. Pakistan had always maintained that Iran, as
a party to the NPT and a member of the IAEA, was
entitled to certain rights that should be recognized, in
line with the provisions of those instruments. At the
same time, Iran should fulfil its legal obligations under
those instruments. We are glad that the joint action plan
strikes the balance between those rights and obligations.
It represents a practical manifestation of the strategic
use of political will and flexibility in the cause of peace
and security. The plan contains the necessary menu of
reciprocal confidence-building measures and marks
the beginning of a diplomatic engagement. Pakistan
hopes that both sides will implement their respective
commitments in good faith.
As an immediate neighbour of Iran, Pakistan
has always underscored the importance of finding a
peaceful solution to the Iranian nuclear issue. We look
forward to a long-term comprehensive solution, which
should augur well for peace and security in the region
and the world at large. The overall positive tone of
the last IAEA report is indicative of the progress on
technical issues between Iran and the Agency. We urge
Iran to stay engaged with the IAEA and extend full
cooperation to it with a view to addressing remaining
issues, including those in line with the joint action plan.
The timing and the context of today’s meeting are
very significant. The interim agreement concluded
last month carries important implications for the work
of the Council, the Committee established pursuant
to resolution 1737 (2006) and the Panel of Experts.
The Council has an important responsibility — to
make its contribution to the resolution of the Iranian
nuclear issue. The Council and the 1737 Committee
may re-evaluate at an appropriate time — and we hope
that it will be soon — the objectives and strategy as set
out in the relevant resolutions of the Security Council
vis-à-vis the Iranian nuclear issue. Such an effort
will help clarify the extent and scope of obligations
for Member States with regard to the implementation
of sanctions. In the meantime, the Committee and its
Panel must adhere to high standards of neutrality and

13-61581

12/12/2013

Non-proliferation

professionalism and align their work with the direction
that may be set by the Council with regard to resolution
of the Iranian nuclear issue.
Mr. Laassel (Morocco) (spoke in French): I would
like to start by conveying my gratitude to Ambassador
Gary Francis Quinlan for his exhaustive periodic report
on the work of the Committee established pursuant to
resolution 1737 (2006). Today’s briefing is the last we
will attend as a member of the Council. I would therefore
like to take this opportunity to welcome the efforts of
Ambassador Quinlan at the head of the Committee and
wish him every possible success in his upcoming work.
I would also like to thank the Panel of Experts
established pursuant to paragraph 29 of resolution 1929
(2010) and to welcome the new members of the Panel.
We cherish the hope that the Committee will continue
to enjoy the impartiality and professional work of the
Panel of Experts. The cooperation of all Member States,
including requests for information, is crucial to enable
the Committee to fulfil the mandate with which it was
entrusted by the Council.
The report that was submitted for our consideration
today clearly demonstrates that the Committee continues
to consider all cases referred to it, including the report
of the Panel of Experts and the notifications of facts
that jeopardize the application of provisions adopted by
the Security Council. We pay tribute to the interaction
of the Committee and its Panel of Experts with the
Member States and international organizations. We
urge the Committee to continue to make available to
Member States all information and clarifications aimed
at facilitating the implementation of relevant Council
resolutions.
To that end, we take note with satisfaction of the
participation of the Chairman of the Committee in
the open information session held on 18 November
organized with the Financial Action Task Force on
the fight against the financing and proliferation of
terrorism. We note that, according to the last report of
the International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA), the
Agency and Iran signed a joint statement in New York
on 11 November 2013 on a framework for cooperation.
The framework for cooperation constitutes, as noted
in the IAEA report, substantive progress. As the only
institution in the field of safeguards, the IAEA should
enjoy all the necessary cooperation to make substantive
progress on pending issues.

S/PV.7082

One of the main developments that the Committee’s
Chairman referred to was undoubtedly the joint plan of
action signed in Geneva on 24 November between P5+1
and the Islamic Republic of Iran on the Iranian nuclear
programme. Morocco, which attaches great importance
to the commitments and international conventions
relating to non-proliferation of nuclear weapons, has
noted the agreement with great interest and considers
it to be a constructive and encouraging beginning that
could lead to tangible and positive results towards
settling the Iranian nuclear issue and furthermore
towards creating a nuclear-weapon-free zone in the
Middle East as one of the decisive factors for peace and
security and stability in the region as a whole.
Based on our commitment to ongoing dialogue and
the peaceful settlement of disputes regardless of their
nature or their complexity or degree of sensitivity, we
welcome the continuation of negotiations between Iran
and the P5+1. The efforts undertaken by United Nations
entities should back the IAEA’s actions and work to step
up negotiations between Iran and the P5+1 to achieve a
negotiated solution,
It is of the utmost importance that we prevent
any weakening of the non-proliferation regime
and endeavour to ensure that all States fulfil their
conventional obligations with respect to guarantees. The
force and impact of the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation
of Nuclear Weapons and the pursuit of the strategic
objective of nuclear disarmament depends on all States
fulfilling their obligations under that fundamental
instrument.
My country remains devoted to the goal of global
nuclear disarmament, as we recognize the inalienable
right of all States to use nuclear energy for exclusively
peaceful purposes. The non-proliferation regime rests
on a delicate balance between the rights and duties
of States that it is important to protect, preserve and
strengthen through full respect for its provisions.
Mr. M’Beou (Togo) (spoke in French): I thank
Ambassador Gary Quinlan for his briefing and
congratulate him on his exemplary leadership as Chair
of the Committee established pursuant to resolution
1737 (2006).
At our meeting in September (see S/PV.7028), we
noted the creditable efforts of the Islamic Republic
of Iran to communicate and collaborate with the
International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) as a result
of the change at the head of the executive branch, which

13-6158111/14

S/PV.7082

Non-proliferation

augur well for the chances to resolve the nuclear issue.
Beyond simple communication efforts and statements
of intention, those acts are the basis on which the
historic agreement in Geneva, known as the joint action
plan, was signed 24 November between Iran and the
P5+1 — an agreement that we would like to once again
welcome. We are pleased that the agreement not only
relaxes sanctions in exchange for a downward revision
of Iran’s nuclear programme, but also introduces a new
framework for more trusting and collaborative relations
between Iran and the entire international community.
The joint statement on a cooperation framework
signed on 11 November, which includes six first practical
steps by Iran within three months, has allowed the
IAEA to inspect the Arak heavy-water production plant
on 8 December. It was an opportunity for the inspectors
to get details on the design and operation of the site,
which they had not had for over two years. We hope
that inspections of other sites under IAEA guarantees,
including the Gachin mine, will be undertaken on a
continuous basis since, as also noted by the Agency, full
respect by Iran of its obligations is crucial to convincing
the international community of the exclusively peaceful
nature of its nuclear programme.
We hope that Iran will demonstrate full good faith
in responding to requests of the Agency regarding all
nuclear facilities and locations outside facilities, such
as the Natanz enrichment facility, for which descriptive
information is still pending, and the Fordow fuel
facility, about which Iran must also provide additional
information.
There are still many issues on which answers are
expected from Iran. However, my country believes
that recent developments justify hopes for a diplomatic
solution to the Iranian nuclear issue. Moreover, as we
just mentioned, they show the new Iranian authorities’
willingness to cooperate with the P5+1 and the IAEA.
All these concerted efforts of Iran, in addition to the
expected implementation of the Additional Protocol,
should help to bolster the confidence of the international
community, especially since the Iranian people have
suffered too much under the sanctions on the country’s
economy, as indicated by the report of the SecretaryGeneral on the human rights situation in Iran for the
current year. We once again take this opportunity to
request continued serious and impartial investigations
on all pending cases, in particular the case of the ship
seized in Yemen.

12/14

12/12/2013

In conclusion, we reiterate our gratitude to the 1737
Committee, whose work we have come to appreciate
in the two years of our membership of the Council. We
also extend our appreciation to the Panel of Experts
established pursuant to resolution 1929 (2010) for its
constant and valuable support to the Committee in
fulfilling its mission. We particularly appreciate the
fact that it has always taken the opportunities offered
by the workshops and meetings to inform States of the
importance of implementing the measures taken by the
United Nations. We urge it to continue to practice rigor
and impartiality in its investigations.
Mr. Nduhungirehe (Rwanda) (spoke in French):
I would like to thank Ambassador Gary Quinlan of
Australia, Chair of the Committee established pursuant
to resolution 1737 (2006), for his quarterly briefing
and the work carried out by the Committee under his
chairmanship. We also welcome the ongoing support
of the Committee’s Panel of Experts and encourage
it to continue its work in a professional and impartial
manner and to share its conclusions with concerned
States.
Like all my colleagues before me, I welcome the
interim agreement concluded between Iran and the
P5+1 in Geneva on 24 November, which provided,
inter alia, for the immediate suspension of the Iranian
enrichment programme in exchange for an easing of
sanctions accompanied by regular inspections of the
International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA). In that
respect, we note with satisfaction the visit to the Arak
site on 8 December by two IAEA inspectors, which is
a positive sign of Iran’s commitment to implementing
the interim agreement, as necessary. Rwanda will, of
course, continue to follow this issue.
Given the new state of affairs and the climate of
restored trust, we encourage Iran to resume contact
with the 1737 Committee, in particular by responding
to its letter dated 12 April regarding the launch of the
Shahab-1 and -2 missiles, during the Great Prophet VII
exercise, in violation of resolution 1929 (2010), and
to the letter dated 21 May regarding the interception
of a shipment of arms in violation of paragraph 5 of
resolution 1747 (2007).
As the Chair of the Committee reminded us, despite
the interim agreement the sanctions regime established
by the four Security Council resolutions on the issue
remain in force, and States must comply with it. In that
respect, Rwanda notes with satisfaction the activities

13-61581

12/12/2013

Non-proliferation

of the Committee during the reporting period and
welcomes the participation and cooperation of States
and other sanctions committees and United Nations
agencies that deal with the issue. Having said that,
Rwanda would like to see Iran and the P5+1 resolve to
engage in constructive dialogue aimed at the conclusion
of a comprehensive agreement to ensure that Iran fully
complies with its international obligations and that
the sanctions, which weigh so heavily on the Iranian
people, are lifted.
To conclude, Rwanda fully understands the threat
posed by the Iranian nuclear programme to the countries
of the region. Our country therefore calls on all parties
concerned to act with a sense of responsibility so as to
ease tensions and ensure that diplomacy prevails as the
only possible solution to the crisis. We thank Germany,
China, the United States, the Russian Federation, France
and the United Kingdom for their commitment to and
perseverance in searching for a peaceful settlement to
the crisis.
The President (spoke in French): I shall now make
a statement in my national capacity.
I thank the representative of Australia for
presenting the briefing on the activity of the Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1737 (2006).
For over a decade now, the Iranian nuclear
programme has been a source of concern for the
international community, given that country’s inability
to prove its exclusively civilian nature. That situation is
a threat to international peace and security and has led
the Council to put in place a sanctions regime through
the adoption of five resolutions imposing sanctions,
while calling on Iran to negotiate on those issues. From
2005 to 2013, in spite of all of our efforts, Iran refused
to enter into negotiations, despite all the efforts and the
open and firm approach of the E3+3 Government, as
mandated by the Security Council. An apparent change
in attitude since the presidential election in Tehran has
at last made it possible to engage in the first substantial
discussion on the nuclear issue.
The interim agreement reached in that context
between Iran and the E3+3 on 24 November is an
unquestionable step forward for peace and security
in the Middle East and beyond, but we must remain
vigilant. For the first time for almost 10 years, the
E3+3 has obtained from Iran a suspension of the most
sensitive aspects of its nuclear programme. It is a solid
and credible agreement that respects the necessary

S/PV.7082

requirements set by the E3+3 to halt uranium enrichment
to 20 per cent, to neutralize the stock of enriched
uranium at 20 per cent, and to freeze the main activities
linked to the Arak heavy water reactor. By halting the
most sensitive aspects of its nuclear programme for
six months, Iran provides more time for the diplomatic
track, which France has always favoured.
Moreover, the mechanism agreed provides for a
close monitoring of the commitments undertaken. We,
together with our partners, will remain very vigilant
regarding the scrupulous implementation of the
agreement. The agreement, however, is only an interim
agreement and not a lasting settlement of the nuclear
crisis. We, together with our partners of the E3+3,
therefore remain mobilized in order to reach a longterm agreement with Iran.
In parallel, the dialogue between Iran and the
International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) has made
progress. Not all issues have been resolved — far from
it. The adoption of a joint statement on 11 November
providing for the strengthening of cooperation with the
E3+3 was, however, a step in the right direction. The
transparency measures provided for in that statement,
in particular with regard to the Gachin uranium mine,
the heavy-water production facility at Arak and the
heavy-water research reactor projects are positive. It
remains no less crucial to shed full light on the issues
linked to the possible military dimension of the Iranian
nuclear programme, on which the IAEA still awaits
answers from Tehran.
The core of international sanctions, in particular
those of the Security Council, will remain in place
until a comprehensive settlement of the crisis has been
found. We must therefore pursue our efforts to prevent
their possible circumvention. In that context, the report
of the 1737 (2006) Committee that has been transmitted
to us (S/2013/331, annex) reminds us that, during the
reporting period, Iran continued to conduct nuclear and
ballistic activities in violation of the resolutions of the
Council.
We therefore studied with great care and attention
the report of the Panel of Experts regarding the seizure
in December 2012 of a shipment of high-quality carbon
fibre bound for Iran that could be used in the context
of a nuclear programme. In the report, the experts
unaminously and unambiguously conclude that Iran has
repeatedly violated the Security Council’s resolutions,

13-6158113/14

S/PV.7082

Non-proliferation

12/12/2013

thereby affirming concern about a nuclear programme
that has no identifiable civilian justification.

the Panel’s final report seeking to make the sanctions
regime more effective.

In that regard, I wish to pay tribute to the
remarkable work of the Panel of Experts, which has
made an essential contribution to the functioning of the
Committee. I hope that the Committee will be able to
promptly implement the recommendations contained in

I resume my function as President of the Council.

14/14

There are no more names inscribed on the list of
speakers.
The meeting rose at 4.15 p.m.

13-61581
