Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fourth Committee
a formula acceptable to all which will facilitate the
unification of the two Trust Territories.
469th plenary meeting,
8 December 1953.

B
The General Assembly,
Considering that there is an urgent need to develop
fully in the two parts of Togoland a system of universal suffrage and that it is consequently essential to
establish effective facilities for electoral registration,
with a view to the formation of an electoral body truly
representative of the population of each Territory as
a whole,
Noting paragraph (b) of the text of the announcement 15 made by the two Administering Authorities on
12 June 1953 concerning the re-establishment of the
Joint Council for Togoland Affairs,
Noting further the observations made on this matter by the, petitioners heard by the Fourth Committee
of the General Assembly, as well as the statements
made by the represe1.'::'.l.tives of the Administering
Authorities,
l. Urgently invites the Administering Authorities
to revise the system of electoral qualifications in force
in the Territories and to put into effect a method of
electoral registration based on personal identification
which shall permit all adult persons to qualify for the
right to vote and shall ensure that electoral consultations be carried out in accordance with the democratic
principles of universal, direct and secret suffrage so
as to reflect the opinion of the population as a whole;
2. Recommends that the political parties in the two
Territories collaborate closely with the respective Administering Authorities with a view to carrying out the
identification of the adult persons for electoral purposes.
469th plenary meeting,
8 December 1953.
C
The General Assembly,
Noting that Togoland under British administration
is administered a,s an integral part of the Gold Coast,
the Government of which has published a series of proposals 16 for constitutional changes designed to effect a
further transfer of executive and legislative powers
from the Administering Authority to the Gold Coast
Government and to serve as an interim measure leading
towards full self-government for the Gold Coast within
the British Commonwealth of Nations,
Noting that in the course of these proposals the
Government of the Gold Coast expressed confidence
that "the United Nations Organization will not fail
to give satisfaction to the frequently reiterated and
unanimous demand of the people of the Northern Section for their area to become part of the Northern Territories of the Gold Coast" and stated further that
"there is a growing opinion in Southern Togoland in
favour of integration with the Gold Coast",
Noting also that, in anticipation of further constitutional changes in the Gold Coast, the 1952 United
Nations Visiting Mission, in its report 17 on Togoland
under British administration, raised with some urgency
the question of the compatibility of the provisions of
the Trusteeship Agreement with any further appreSee document T/1067 /Rev.I.
See document A/C.4/249.
11 See document T/1040.

15
16

29

ciable transfer of executive and legislative authority
to the Government of the Gold Coast, and expressed
the opinion that the prospect of a further constitutional
advance in the Gold Coast may require the position of
the Trust Territory to be reviewed with particular care
within a relatively short period of time,
Recalling further that the Visiting Missions of 1949
and 1952 and the Trusteeship Council at its eleventh
session have recognized that the question of the future
constitutional association of Togoland with the Gold
Coast depends to a large extent upon the settlement of
the unification problem,
l. Expr~sses the opinion that further chan~es in the
Constitution of the Gold Coast, with which Togoland
under British administration is administered as an
integral part, may, to the extent that they provide for
an increased measure of self-government, necessitate
revision of the existing Trusteeship Agreement in respect of the Trust Territory in so far as concerns the
existing administrative union;
2. Considers that, in view of the manifest aspiration of the majority of the population of both the Trust
Territories of Togoland for the unification of those
Territories, any change in the Trusteeship Agreement
for Togoland under British administration will necessarily affect the interests of the inhabitants "of Togoland
under French administration;
3. Requests the Trusteeship Council, at its thirteenth session, to re-examine in all aspects the problem
of achieving in the two Trust Territories the basic objectives of the International Trusteeship System as set
forth in Article 76 of the Charter and, in particular,
the progressive development of the inhabitants towards
self-government or independence as may be appropriate to the particular circumstances of the Territories
and. their p~oples and their freely expressed wishes,
havmg particular regard to the special circumstances
created by the constitutional and political situation in
the Gold Coast as it affects both Togoland under British administration and Togoland under French administration;
4. Requests the Trusteeship Council to submit to
the General Assembly at its ninth session a special
report on this problem.
469th plenary meeting,
8 December 1953.
751 (VIII), Revision of the Questionnaire
relating to Trust Territories

The General Assembly,
Noting that the Trusteeship Council has adopted
the revised Questionnaire, 18
Considering that, under Article 88 of the Charter.
the Administering Authorities shall make an annual
repor~ to ~he General Assembly, upon the basis of a
quest10nna1_r~ formulate~ by the Trusteeship Council,
on the poht1cal, economic, social and educational advancement of the inhabitants of each Trust Territory,
. Con!idering that, in approving the Provisional Quest10nnaire, the Trusteeship Council emphasized that it
~oul_d be adapted, if necessary, to specific Trust Terntones,
Considering that the revised Questionnaire is not
applicable in its entirety to all Trust Territories,
1

s See document T /1010.

30

General Assembly-Eighth Senion

1. Instructs a Sub-Committee, consisting of representatives of El Salvador, Haiti, India and Syria, to
examine the Questionnaire formulated by the Trusteeship Council, to study such changes as may be necessary to adapt it to the special conditions of each Territory, and to submit its conclusions to the Trusteeship
Council;
2. Invites the Trusteeship Council to undertake, on
the basis of the work of the Sub-Committee established
under the preceding paragraph, the preparation of separate questionnaires adapted to the particular circumstances of each Trust Territory.
471st plenary meeting,
9 December 1953.

752 (VIII). Attainment by the Trust Territories
of the objective of self-government or independence

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 558 (VI) of 18 January
1952 by which it invited the Administering Authority
of each Trust Territory other than Somaliland under
Italian administration to include in each annual report
information concerning measures taken or contemplated
towards self-government or independence and, inter
alia, the estimated period of time required for such
measures and for the attainment of the ultimate objective,
Having received from the Administering Authorities
concerned annual reports covering periods subsequent to
18 January 1952 in respect of all except one of the
Trust Territories, namely, the Territories of Western
Samoa, New,. Guinea, Nauru, Tanganyika, RuandaUrundi, Togoland under British administration, Togoland under French administration and the Cameroons
under French administration,
Noting that the Administering Authorities have not
provided in these annual reports the information requested in resolution 558 (VI),
Noting, however, that the Administering Authority
of Western Samoa has declared its intention 19 to initiate in 1~54 consultations among the representatives of
the inhabitants leading to the establishment of a selfgoverning State,
1. Reaffirms resolution 558 (VI) of 18 January
1952;

2. Commends to the Administering Authorities of
the othe~ !rus~ Territori~s the example provided by
the Adm1mstenng Authority of Western Samoa in inviting the inhabitants themselves in 1954 to formulate
proposals for the establishment of a self-governing
State;
3. Requests the Trusteeship Council to include in
its next and succeeding reports to the General Assembly a seI>_~rate section dealing with the implementation of resolution 558 (VI) and the present resolution, specifying in particular the measures taken in
respect of:
(a) Consultations with the inhabitants of each Trust
Territory in regard to the measures taken or contemplated towards self-government;
(b) The development in each Trust Territory of
representative, executive and legislative organs and
the extension of their powers ;
19
See Official Records of the General Assembly Eighth Session, Supplement No. 4, page 64.
'

( c) The development in each Trust Territory of universal adult suffrage and direct elections;
( d) The training and appointment of indigenous
persons in each Trust Territory for positions of responsibility in the administration ;
( e) The development of adequate public revenue;
and stating in each case its conclusions and recommendations in the light of resolution 558 (VI) and the
present resolution.
471st plenary meeting,
9 December 1953.

753 (VIII). Educational advancement in Trust
Territories: offers by Member States of study
and training facilities

The General Assembly,
Noting from the report 20 of the Trusteeship Council the results to date of the project of fellowships,
scholarships and internships offered by Member States
to students from the Trust Territories pursuant to General Assembly resolution 557 (VI) of 18 January 1952,
Considering that the offers thus far made by Member States relate to study and training of university
standard and that the inability of the Administering
Authorities of the Trust Territories to provide a sufficient number of candidates is due in part to the generally low levels of education prevailing in the Territories and, in particular, to the inadequacy of facilities
for post-primary education,
Considering further that the relatively small number
of students qualified to take up such fellowships and
scholarships requires that the most effective measures
be taken to ensure that all potential candidates be given
the opportunity to apply and that their applications
be duly considered,
1. Endorses the tribute paid by the Trusteeship
Council to the generosity of those Member States which
have offered facilities, and expresses the hope that additional offers will be forthcoming;
2. Expresses regret that, in the absence of a sufficient number or qualified candidates, only a small proportion of the fellowships and scholarships offered have
been utilized ;
3. Invites Member States, in renewing or initiating
offers of facilities, to take into account the special
needs of the Trust Territories arising from their generally low levels of education, and to contemplate the
provision of facilities not only for university study but
also for post-primary and technical education and training of kinds which may most effectively further the
political, economic, social and educational advancement
of the Territories;
4. invites Member States offering facilities, in cases
where the languages of instruction differ from the
languages of the Trust Territories, to consider the possibility of extending the duration of the facilities offered by a preliminary period of language training and
other adjustment to the country of study or training;
5. Recominends that all Administering Authorities
which have not done so give the fullest publicity in the
Trust Territories under their administration to all offers of study and training facilities and take such other
measures as will ensure that the greatest possible advantage is taken of the offers;
20 See Official Records of the General Assembly, Eighth Session, Supplement No. 4.
