II.

23

Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

solve the serious social and economic problems which
affect the African continent,
Taking note with satisfaction of the successful cooperation between the Organization of African Unity
and the United Nations in organizing thc Intcrnational
Conference in Support of the Peoples of Zimbabwe
and Namibia, held at Maputo from 16 to 21 May
1977,37 and thc World Conference for Action against
Apartheid, held at Lagos from 22 to 26 August 1977,38
and of the ensuing positive results,
Aware of the urgent need to give incrcased assistance
and support to the victims of colonialism, racial discrimination and apartheid resulting from the intcnsified
acts of provocation and aggression against neighbouring countries by the apartheid régimc in South Africa
and Namibia and the illegal racist minority régime in
Southern Rhodesia,
Conscious of the need to take cffectivc steps for the
widest possible dissemination of information relating
to the struggle of the African peoples concerned for
their liberation from colonialism, racial discrimination
and apartheid,
Reaffirming the determination of the Organization
of African Unity and the United Nations to work closely
towards the establishment of the new international
economic order,
l. Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General on co-operation between the United Nations and
the Organization of African Unity 3 ri and commends his
efforts in promoting such co-operation;
2. Expresses its deep appreciation of the outstanding contribution made by the Organization of African
Unity in the relevant work of the United Nations bodies
concerned;
3. Invites the Organization of African Unity and
the United Nations to co-operate fully in the speedy
implementation of the Maputo Declaration in Support
of the Peo ples of Zimbabwe and Namibia and the
Programme of Action for the Liberation of Zimbabwe
and Namibia, 40 adopted by the International Conference in Support of the Peoples of Zimbabwe and Namibia, held at Maputo from 16 to 21 May 1977, and
the Lagos Declaration for Action against Apartheid,41
adopted by the World Conference for Action against
Apartheid, held at Lagos from 22 to 26 August 1977;
4. Commends the efforts of the Organization of
African Unity to find solutions to African problems of
vital importance to the international community;
5. Reaffirms the determination of the United Nations, in co-operation with the Organization of African
Unity, to intensify its efforts to put an end to the
remaining vestiges of colonialism and racial discrimination and to apartheid in southern Africa;
6. Recognizes that it is important that the United
Nations and the specialized agencies be closely asso37 For the report of the Conference, see A/32/109/Rev.lS/ 12344/Rev.1 ( Official Records of the Security Council,
Thirty-second Year, Supplement for Ju/y, August and September 1977).
38 For the report of the Conference, see A/CONF.91/9
(United Nations publication, Sales No. E.77.XIV.2 and 3 and
corl"igendurn).
39 A/32/207.
40 A/32/109/Rev.1-S/12344/Rev.l, annex V. For the printed
text, see Official Records of the Security Council, Thirty-second
Year, Supplement for July, August and September 1977.
41 A/CONF.91/9 (United Nations publication, Sales No.
E.77.XIV.2 and corrigendurn), sect. X.

ciatcd, where appropriate, with the efforts of the Organization of African Unity to promote social and
economic co-opcration in Africa;
7. Requests the Secretary-General to continue to
takc thc necessary measures to strengthen co-operation
at thc política!, economic, cultural and administrative
levels between the United Nations and thc Organization of African Unity in accordance with the rclcvant
resolutions of thc General Assembly, particularly with
regard to the provision of assistancc to the victims of
colonialism and apartheid in southern Africa, and, in
this conncxion, draws attention once again to the Assistancc Fund far the Struggle against Colonialism and
Apartheid cstablished by the Organization of African
Unity;
8. Requests once again the United Nations bodies,
in particular thc Security Council, the Economic and
Social Council, the Special Committee on the Situation
with regard to the Implementation of the Declaration
on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries
and Peoples, the Special Committee against Apartheid
and the Unitcd Nations Council for Namibia, to continue to take effective measures to associate closely thc
Organization of African Unity regularly with ali their
work concerning Africa;

?· Invites the specialized agencies and other organizat10ns concerned within the United Nations system to
continue and intensify their co-operation with the Organization of African Unity and, through it, with the
national Iiberation movements of Zimbabwe and Namibia, in particular within the context of General Assembly resolution 31/30 of 29 November 1976;
10. Expresses its appreciation to the SecretaryGeneral for the efforts he is making on behalf of the internati?nal community to provide effective programmes
of ass1stance to various African States experiencing
grave economic difficulties because of special political
and geo-economic circumstances;
11. Requests all Member States, regional and international organizations as well as the organizations of
the United Nations system to give full and generous
support to the programmes of assistance being organized
by the Secretary-General;
12. Requests the Secretary-General to submit to
the Gen~ral Assemb~y at its thirty-third session a report
on the 1mplementat10n of the present resolution and
on the development of co-operation between the Organization of African Unity and the organizations concerned with the United Nations system.

66th plenary meeting
11 November 1977
32/20.

The situation in the Middle East

The General Assembly,
Having discussed the item entitled "The situation
in the Middle East",
Recallíng its previous resolutions on the subject in
particular resolutions 3414 (XXX) of 5 Decerr:ber
1975 and 31/61 of 9 December 1976,
Taking into account the decisions of the Fifth Conference of Heads of State or Government of NonAligned Countries, held at Colombo from 16 to 19 Au-

24

General Assembly-Thirty-second Session

gust 197 6, concerning the situation in the Middle East
and the question of Palcstine, 42
Deeply concerned that the Arab territories occupied
since 1967 have continued, for more than ten years, to
be under illegal Israeli occupation and that the Palestinian people, aftcr three decades, are still dcprived
of the exercise of their inalienable national rights,
Reaffirming that the acquisition of territory by force
is inadmissible and that all territories thus occupied
must be returned,
Reaffirming also the urgent necessity of the establishment of a just and lasting peace in the region, based
on full respect for the purposes and principies of the
Charter of the United Nations as well as for its resolutions concerning the problem of the Middle East including the question of Palestine,
Taking note with satisfaction of the joint statement
on the Middle East issued on 1 October 1977 by the
Minister for Foreign Affairs of the Union of Soviet
Socialist Republics and the Secretary of State of the
United States of America in their capacities as CoChairmen of the Peace Conference on the Middle East,
Reaffirming that peace is indivisible and that a just
and lasting settlement of the Middle East problem must
be based on a comprehensive solution, under the auspices of the United Nations, which takes into account
all aspects of the Arab-Israeli conflict, in particular the
attainment by the Palestinian people of all their inalienable national rights and the Israeli withdrawal
from all the occupied Arab territories,
Convinced that the early convening of the Peace
Conference on the Middle East with the participation of
all parties concerned, including the Palestine Liberation
Organization, in accordance with relevant resolutions
of the General Assembly, is essential for the realization
of a just and lasting settlement in the region,
l. Condemns Israel's continued occupation of Arab
territories, in violation of the Charter of the United
Nations, the principles of international law and repeated
resolutions of the United Nations;
2. Reaffirms that a just and lasting peace in the
Middle East, in which ali countries and peoples in the
region can live in peace and security within recognized
and secure boundaries, cannot be achieved without
Israel's withdrawal from all Arab territories occupied
since 5 June 1967 and the attainment by the Palestinian
pcople of their inalienable national rights;
3. Calls anew for the early convening of the Peace
Conference on the Middle East, undcr the auspices of
the United Nations and the co-chairmanship of the
Union of Soviet Socialist Republics and the United
States of America, with the participation on an equal
footing of all parties concerned, including the Palestine
Liberation Organization;
4. Urges the parties to the conflict and al! other
interested parties to work towards the achievement of
a comprehensive settlement covering all aspects of the
problems and worked out with the participation of
all parties concerned within the framework of thc
United Nations;
5. Requests the Security Council, in the exercise
of its responsibilities under thc Charter, to take all
necessary measures in order to ensure the implementa42 See

A/31/197.

tion of relevant resolutions of the United Nations and
to facilitate the achievement of such a comprehensive
settlement aiming at the establishment of a just and
lasting peace in the region;
6. Requests the Secretary-General to follow up the
implementation of the present resolution and to inform
all concerned, including the Co-Chairmen of the Peace
Conference on the Middle East;
7. A lso requests the Secretary-General to report
to the Sccurity Council periodically on the development
of the situation and to submit to the General Assembly
at its thirty-third session a comprehensive report covering, in all their aspects, the developments in the
Middle East.
82nd plenary meeting
25 November 1977

32/21.

Credentials of representatives to the
thirty-second session of the General
Assembly

A

The General Assembly
Approves the first report of the Credentials Committee.43
83rd plenary meeting
28 November 1977

B
The General Assembly
Approves the second report of the Credentials Committee. 44
104th plenary meeting
16 December 1977

32/ 40.

Question of Palestine

A

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 3236 (XXIX) of 22 November 1974, 3376 (XXX) of 10 November 1975 and
31/20 of 24 November 1976,
Having considered the report of the Committec on
the Exercise of the Inalienable Rights of the Palestinian
Peoplc, 4 "
Having heard thc statement of the Palcstine Libcration Organization, the representative of the Palcstinian
people, 46
Deeply concerned that no just solution to the problem of Palestine has becn achieved and that this problem
therefore continucs to aggravate the Middle East con4 .1 Ofjicial Records of the General Assembly, Thirty-second
Session, Annexes, agenda item 3, document A/32/336.
44 Jbid., document A/32/336/ Add.1.
4 5 Jbid., Thirty-second Session, Supplement No. 35 (Al
32/35).
4 6 Jbid., Thirty-second Session, Plenary Meetings, 84th meeting, paras. 46- 79.
