Reaolutiom adopted on reporla of the Fourth Committee
E.rec11tive: The selection of members of the executive branch
of the government by the competent authority in the territory
receiving consent of the indigenous population, whether that
authority is hereditary or elected, having regard also to the
nature and measure of control, if any, by an outside agency on
that authority, whether directly or indirectly exercised in the
constitution and conduct of the executive branch of the government;
Jwliciary: The establishment of courts of law and the selection of judges.
2. Participation of the population. Effective participation of
the population in the government of the territory: (a) Is there
an adequate and appropriate electoral and representative system? (b) Is this electoral system conducted without direct or
indirect interference from a foreign government? a
3. Economic, social and cultural jurisdiction. Degree of autonomy in respect of economic, social and cultural affairs, as
-illustrated by the degree of freedom from economic pressure
as exercised, for example, by a foreign minority group which,
by virtue of the help of a foreign Power, has acquired a
-privileged economic status prejudicial to the general economic
interest o{ the people of the territory ; and by the degree of
freedom and lack of discrimination against the indigenous population of the territory in ~ocial legislation ancl social developments.
Fartors indicative of the free assoriatiot1 of II territory with
other component parts of the metropolitan or other coNntry
A. General
1. Political odvanctment. Political advancement of the population sufficient to enable them to decide upon the future
destiny of the territory with due knowledge.
2. Opinio11 of the pop11lation. The opinion of the population of the territory, freely expressed by informed and democratic processes, as to the status or change in status which
they desire.
3. Geographical con.rider1Jtions. Extent tG which the relationa of the territory with the capital of the central government
may be affected by circumstances arising out of their respective geographical positions, such as separation by land,
.sea or other natural obstacles.
4. Ethnic and cult11ral considerations. Extent to which the
population are of different race, language or religion or have
a distinct cultural heritage, interests or aspirations, distinguishin1 them from the peoples of the country with which they
freely associate themselves.
S. Constit11tional con.rid,rations. Association (a) by virtue
of the constitution of the metropolitan cou.ntry, or (b) by
virtue of a treaty or bilateral agreement affecting the status

• For example, the followinf questions would be relevant:
(i> Has each adult inhabitant equal power (subject to
special safeguards for minorities) to determine the character
of the government of the territory?
(ii) Is this power exercised freely, i.e., is there an absence
of undue influence over and coercion of the voter and of the
imposition of disabilities on particular political parties? Some
tests which can he used in the application of this factor are
as follows:
(a) The existence of effective measures to ensure the demo•
cratic elg)_reuion of the will of the people ;
(b) The existence of more than one political party in the
territory;
.
(c) The existence of a secret ballot;
(d) The existence of lep) prohibitions on the exercise of
undemocratic practices in the course of elections;
(,) The existence for the individual elector of a choice between candidates of differing political parties;
(f) The absence of "martial law" and similar measures at
election times ;
(iii) Is each individual free to express his political
opinions, to support or oppose any pelitical party or cause,
and to criticize the government of the day?

SS

of the territory, taking into account (i) whether the c:on■ti•
tutional guarantees extend equally to the usociated territory,
(ii) whether there are powers in certain matten cautltutionally reserved to the territory or to the central aatborh:,,
and (iii) whether there is provision for the putic:lpatloa of
the territory on a basis of equality in any ~hanges in the constitutional system of the State.
B. Status
1. Legislative representation. Representation without di•·
crimination in the central legislative orpns on the same basis
as other inhabitants and re,lona.
2. Citirenship. Citizenship without discrimination on the
same hasis as other inhabitants.
3. Govnwmfflt officials. Eligibility of officials from the
territory to all public offices of the central authority, by
appointment or election, on the same basis as those from other
parts of the country,
C. lnt,rnal constil11tional condmons
1. S11lf ra111. Universal and equal suffra,e. and free periodic
elections, characterized by an absence of IDldue irdhaence over
and coercion of the voter or of the imposition of disabilities
on particular political parties.b
2. Local rights and .rtattu. In a unitary ■)'Item equal risbts
and status for the inhabitants and Jocal bodiea of the territory
as enjoyed by inhabitants and local bodiea of other parts of
the country ; in a federal system an identical decree of self•
government for the inhabitants and local bodies of all parts
of the federation.
3.. Local official.r. Appointment or election of .offlclala in
the territory on the same basis as tho1e in other parts of the
couqtry.
4. lnt,""°' l1gi.,lotion. Local self-,overnment of the ■ame
scope and under the same conditions u enjOJC(l by other
parts of the country.

649 (VD). Admlnletntlve lllllom affeedq
Tl'IUt Terrltorlea
The Ge,.eral Assembly,
Recalliflg that the Trusteeship Agreements for the
Trust Territories concerned authorize the Adminiering Authorities to establish customs, fiscal or administrative unions or federations,
Recalling its resolution 224 (III) of 18 November
1948, recommending that the Truateeship Council
should investigate the question of ac:bninistrative unions
in all its aspects, and resolution 326 (IV) of 15 November 1949, recommendinJ that the Trusteeship
Council should complete the investigation,
Recalli,.g, further, that in resolution 326 (IV) it
noted that the Trusteeship Agreements do not authorize
~ For example, the followi• tests would be relevant:

(a) The existence of effective measures to ensure the
democratic expression of the will of the people;
( b) The existence of more than one political party in the

territory;

( c) The existence of a aec:ret ballot :
(d) The existence of )epl prohibitions on the exercise of
undemocratic practices in the course of electiona;
(,) The existence for the individual elector of a choice
between candidates of differins politlcal parties ;
(/) ~• absence of "martial law" and similar -■urn at

election times ;

(1) Freedom of each individ-1 to ~ hia polidcaJ
opinions, to support or oppoee any polidcal party or caue.- and
to criticize the ,overnment of the day.

36

General AHembly--Seventh Session

any form of political association which would involve
r.nnexation of the Trust Territories in any sense, or
would have the effect of extinguishing their status as
Trust Territories, and affirmed the view that measures
of customs, fiscal or administrative union must not in
any way hamper the free evolution of each Trust Territory toward self -government or independence,
Recalling its resolution 563 (VI) of 18 January
1952, requesting the Trusteeship Council to submit to
it, at its seventh session, a special report containing a
complete analysis of each of the administrative unions
to which a Trust Territory is a party, and of the status
of the Cameroons and Togoland under French administration arising out of their membership in the French
Union,
Re.calling the studies O on administrative unions undertaken by the Trusteeship Council in 1949 and 1950,
and in particular the important analysis of administrative unions contained in resolution 293 (VII) adopted
by the Council on 17 July 1950,
Recalling the regular annual reports adopted by the
Trusteeship Council in 1951 and 1952 on each of the
Trust Territories participating in an administrative
union,
1. Takes note of the special report ' submitted by
the Trusteeship Council in compliance with General
Assembly resolution 563 (VI), and the observations•
made tlM-reon by the General Assembly Committee on
Administrative Unions;
2. Calls to the attention of the Administering Authorities the observations and conclusions contained
in the special report of the Trusteeship Council and
the observations of the General Assembly Committee
on Administrative Unions;
3. Requests the Administering Authorities to continue to transmit promptly to the Trusteeship Council
information as complete as possible concerning the
operation of the administrative unions affecting Trust
Territories under their administration, indicating the
benefits and advantages derived by the inhabitants of
the Trust Territories from administrative unions;
4. Expresses the hope that the Administering Authorities concerned will take into account the freely
expressed wishes of the inhabitants before establishing
or extending the scope of administrative unions;
5. Expresses the hope that the Administering Authorities concerned wilt consult with the Tn~steeship
Council concerning any change in or extension of existing administrative unions. or concerning any proposal to establish new administrative unions;
6. Requests the Trusteeship Council to continue its
regular examination of each administrative union affecting a Trust Territory; and to study these administrative unions, not only with regard to the four safeguards enumerated in Trusteeship Council resolution
293 (VII), but also with regard to the interests of
the inhabitants of the Territory and ,the terms of the
1 See O.iirial Rtcords of th, Tnut11ship Council, Fifth
Stssion, tfmws, agenda item 10, \>· 255 and Offidal R,cords of
thr Gm,ral Asstmbly, Fifth St1.ntm, SvpJ>ltmmt No. 4, annex.
'See O/Jiciol R,cords of tht Gtntral Assnnbly, St'Vmth
St1sion, S"vpplnn,nt No. 12.
• See document Afl,'Z17.

Charter and the Trusteeship Agreements, as well as
any other matters which the Council may deem appropriate.
409th plenary meeting,
20 December 1952.
650 (VII). Ceseation of the transmission of information under Article 73 e of the Charter
in respect of the Netherlands Antilles and
Surinam

The General Assembly,
Bearing in mind the importance of the question of
cessation of the transmission of information and the
information 9 supplied on that subject by the Netherlands Government, and in view of the short time remaining for the conclusion of the work of the seventh
session,
Decides that the Committee set up 10 to study the
factors which should be taken into account in deciding
whether a Territory is or is not a Territory whose
people have not yet attained a full measure of selfgovernment, should examine carefully the documents
submitted by the Netherlands Government relating to
the Netherlands Antilles and Surinam in tht light of
the resolution on factors adopted by the General
Assembly, and report to the Assembly at its next regular session.
409th plenary meeting,
20 December 1952.

651 (VII). Question of. South West Africa
The General Assembly
Decides to postpone consideration of the question
of South West Africa until the eighth session of the
General Assembly, and requests the Ad H oc Committee on South West Africa, established by General
Assembly resolution 570 A (VI) of 19 January 1952,
to continue on the same basis as stated in that resolution and further requests the Committee to report
to the General• Assembly ·at its eighth session.
409th plenary meeting,
20 December 1952.

652 (VII). The Ewe and Togoland unification
problem
The General Assembly,
Having adopted at the sixth session resolution 555
(VI) on the Ewe and Togoland unification problem,
which recommended, inter alia, that the Trusteeship
Council arrange for the dispatch of either a special
mission or its next periodic visiting mission to the
two Trust Territories concerned to study thoroughly
the Ewe and Togoland unification problem, including
the functioning of the proposed Joint Council for

• See document A/2177.
10 See resolution 648

(Vil).
