asdf

United Nations

S/PV.6848

Security Council

Provisional

Sixty-seventh year

6848th meeting
Tuesday, 16 October 2012, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Rosenthal . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Guatemala)

Members:

Azerbaijan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Colombia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Germany . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
India . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Morocco . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Pakistan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Portugal . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
South Africa . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Togo . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . .
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Mr. Mehdiyev
Mr. Li Baodong
Mr. Alzate
Mr. Araud
Mr. Wittig
Mrs. Kaur
Mr. Loulichki
Mr. Masood Khan
Mr. Cabral
Mr. Churkin
Mr. Mashabane
Mr. Menan
Mr. Parham
Ms. Rice

Agenda
The situation in Somalia
Letter dated 12 October 2012 from the Secretary-General addressed to the
President of the Security Council (S/2012/764)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-506.

12-54954 (E)

*1254954*

S/PV.6848

outset, I would like to congratulate you and your
Government on your assumption of the presidency of
the Security Council for the month of October. Allow
me also to express my profound gratitude to the Council
for its continued support for the peace process in
Somalia which has now entered a post-transition phase
of transformation into peacebuilding.

The meeting was called to order at 10.20 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in Somalia
Letter dated 12 October 2012 from the
Secretary-General addressed to the President
of the Security Council (S/2012/764)
The President (spoke in Spanish): Under rule 37
of the Council’s provisional rules of procedure, I invite
the representatives of Ethiopia, Finland, Italy, Japan,
Somalia, Spain and Turkey to participate in today’s
meeting.
Under rule 39 of the Council’s provisional rules
of procedure, I invite Mr. Augustine Mahiga, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General and Head of
the United Nations Political Office for Somalia, to
participate in today’s meeting. On behalf of the Council,
I welcome Mr. Mahiga, who is joining today’s meeting
via video teleconference from Mogadishu.
Under rule 39 of the Council’s provisional rules of
procedure, I invite His Excellency Mr. Thomas MayrHarting, Head of the Delegation of the European Union
to the United Nations, to participate in today’s meeting.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I wish to draw the attention of Council members
to document S/2012/764, which contains a letter dated
12 October 2012 from the Secretary-General addressed
to the President of the Security Council.
I now give the floor to Mr. Mahiga.
Mr. Mahiga: Before I read out my statement, I
would like to introduce to you, Mr. President, and
the Security Council, Ambassador Basile Gateretse,
Deputy Representative of the African Union in
Mogadishu; Lieutenant General Andrew Gutti, Force
Commander of the African Union Mission in Somalia
(AMISOM), based in Mogadishu; and Colonel Kenneth
Muhairwe, Chief of Operations for AMISOM, also
based in Mogadishu. In addition, with me are staff
members of the United Nations Political Office for
Somalia (UNPOS).
Mr. President, I thank you for giving me this
opportunity to brief the Council on the recent
developments in the Somalia peace process. At the
2

The nine-year-old transition period in Somalia
ended peacefully with the adoption of a new
Constitution, the selection of a new Parliament, and a
newly elected Speaker and President. The change met
the expectations of most Somalis and has raised high
expectations for more change. Somalia is now in the
process of forming its first post-transition Government.
This follows the election on 10 September of Hassan
Sheikh Mohamud as President of the Somali Republic.
It was the most representative election of a President in
Somalia since the country’s 20-year-long crisis began,
and the first to be held inside the country.
The election of the President by Parliament was
preceded by an equally transparent and open process
of selecting 275 members of Somalia’s new Federal
Parliament by traditional elders, who gave legitimacy
to the process. The new Parliament is leaner, with the
highest number of graduates, including women, than
any other previous Parliament in Somalia. Earlier, an
825-member National Constituent Assembly adopted
a new provisional Constitution. I pay tribute to the
outgoing president, Sheikh Sharif Sheikh Ahmed, for
his magnanimity and statemanship in conceding defeat
in the election, as well as his public commitment to
supporting and working closely with his successor. I
also pay tribute to all six of the principal signatories
of the road map, whose sustained political commitment
underpinned the inclusive nature of the process to end
the transition.
I thank the Secretary-General for convening a
mini-summit in New York on 26 September on the
margins of the General Assembly, which was unanimous
in welcoming the political change in Somalia. In a video
teleconference from Mogadishu, President Mohamud
outlined his six-pillar policy priorities for the new
Somalia, which include security stabilization, political
outreach and reconciliation, and the delivery of basic
services to the people. There was an encouraging and
reassuring collective message of goodwill and support
from an impressive cross-section of the international
community at the mini-summit, which included several
members of the Security Council.

12-54954

S/PV.6848

On 6 October, President Mohamud appointed
Mr. Abdi Farah Shirdon as Prime Minister. The process
leading to the appointment was broadly consultative
within the constitutionally stipulated timeline. The
Prime Minister will outline his plan of action before
Parliament this week, to be followed by Parliament’s
endorsement of his appointment. He will then proceed to
appoint a cabinet. Thereafter, the Council of Ministers
will develop a policy framework incorporating the plan
of action to implement the six-pillar policy priorities,
which Parliament will officially approve and adopt.
At the same time, Parliament has already developed
its own four-year plan of action, which captures the
six-pillar principles and defines its obligations as the
representative institution of the people, as well as its
relationship with the executive, including its oversight
responsibilities.
The security situation in Somalia has vastly
improved thanks to the continuing efforts and sacrifices
of the African Union Mission in Somalia, the Ethiopian
forces, and the Somali Government and its local allied
forces. The fall of Kismayo, the last stronghold of the
extremist Al-Shabaab insurgents, in late September
marked a decisive turning point in the conflict. The
challenge now is to align the security and political
strategies in Kismayo with the overall stabilization
strategy in the newly recovered areas.
AMISOM is close to reaching its full authorized
strength. The deployment of the Djiboutian battalion in
sector four is ongoing, starting with contingent-owned
equipment and followed by personnel. Two hundred
thirty-five Djiboutian troops have already been
deployed. The deployment of the contingent from Sierra
Leone is also on call. Contingent-owned equipment has
arrived in Mombasa for onward transportation to sector
two. I am also pleased to report that the AMISOM
force command headquarters in Mogadishu is fully
operational, following the deployment of the entire
senior leadership and almost all of its support staff
officers in Mogadishu.
Although Al-Shabaab is now dispersed into a
ragtag militia, it has nonetheless continued its attacks,
using more asymmetrical terrorist and hit-and-run
tactics, which it carries out occasionally in Mogadishu.
AMISOM and the Somali forces must be equipped
to deal with such tactics as they come to control
more territory and their lines of supply get extended.
Another worrying trend is the ongoing assassination
and targeted killings of civilians. Those trends call for

12-54954

expeditious deployment of AMISOM to its full strength
with the necessary logistical support and the intense
training and strengthening of the Somali security force.
It is also essential that AMISOM be supported so that it
can control more effectively the coastal waters around
Mogadishu, Merca, Baraawe and Kismayo in order
to protect its own forces and supply lines, interrupt
Al-Shabaab’s supply lines and effectively secure the
ports for commercial use, including containing the
trade in charcoal. I therefore encourage the Council to
support the request contained in paragraph 50 of the
fourth report of the Chairperson of the African Union
Commission on the implementation of the AMISOM,
mandate addressed to the Secretary-General in a letter
dated 5 October 2012 (S/2012/764, annex).
The surrender of disengaging Al-Shabaab
combatants to AMISOM and Government forces has
increased considerably, while some of the deserting
former fighters are mingling with the civilian
population. That poses a special challenge for the
protection of civilians. The United Nations Political
Office for Somalia and the International Organization
for Migration have developed a plan for receiving
disengaging Al-Shabaab fighters and for reintegrating
them into their respective communities. That plan has
not yet started for lack of funding.
Civilian casualties resulting from the conflict
continue. The majority of cases derive from insurgent
tactics involving the increased use of activated and
improvised explosive devices in contravention of the
basic rules of humanitarian law. At the same time, all
United Nations-sponsored security forces need to be
strengthened to comply with the humanitarian, human
rights and international humanitarian law in their
operations. The AMISOM force intends to support that
process by implementing the human rights due-diligence
promise with regard to the United Nations support for
non-United Nations security forces.
Violence against women and girls is still
widespread in Somalia despite the improved
constitutional protection for women and vigorous
campaigns by Somali human rights defenders and
other advocacy groups. In Mogadishu, sexual violence
against internally displaced women also continues.
My Office, in coordination with the other groups, will
continue to work towards improving the protection and
promotion of the rights of Somali women, including
their participation in public life and the peace and
reconciliation processes. The target of 30 per cent for

3

S/PV.6848

women representatives in Parliament, posts that have
up to now been held only by men, has been only half
met, but the agenda of women’s representation in public
institutions has gained momentum, and it is now part of
a firm political agenda in Somalia.
The protection of children in armed conflicts
has also received encouraging compliance from the
Government and from AMISOM.
On the humanitarian situation, the great political
security strides that Somalia has made must not distract
us from the persisting dire humanitarian situation. More
than 2 million Somalis remain in urgent need of food
aid and other assistance. Meanwhile, herding pastures
are drying up less than one year after the famine raged,
which has led to the worsened humanitarian indicators
that we see now. Funding for the humanitarian
appeal for 2012 stands at only 52 per cent, making it
increasingly difficult for aid agencies to support and
strengthen the livelihoods and resilience of Somalis to
withstand future shocks. I urge international partners
to sustain and expand their assistance of Somalia to
prevent it from sliding back into famine and misery.
The international humanitarian community now
has a promising partner in the new Somali leadership.
Al-Shabaab’s ban on Islamic Relief, which was one of
the last aid organizations operating in areas under its
control, came at the worst time and is unacceptable.
With the new territory under the control of AMISOM
and Government forces, we hope that the situation will
improve quickly. I urge all armed factions in Somalia to
grant unimpeded humanitarian access.
In conclusion, the new Administration in
Mogadishu must now move with speed to lead in the
stabilization of the newly liberated area. President
Mohamud has already undertaken visits to Belet Huen
and Baidoa in central Somalia in a show of commitment
by reaching out to local authorities and communities.
That is critical in filling the vacuum that could
otherwise emerge from the retreat of the insurgents.
The immediate challenge that the Government faces
is therefore the establishment of local and district
administrations, including justice and the rule of law,
as well as to provide basic services to the population. It
is evident that while taking leadership, the Government
does not have the necessary resources.
UNPOS is now focusing on extending good offices
and assistance to the new Administration in stabilizing
the newly liberated areas. There are several actors that

4

need to be engaged and coordinated in stabilizing the
newly recovered areas where the Government needs to
be assisted so that it can assume political leadership.
Civilian activities have to come in quickly behind
military operations to establish local administrations
and provide humanitarian and development-related
activities. That remains slow in coming. The Office has
furthermore embarked on a consultative process with
other stakeholders as part of the strategic review of
the future presence of the United Nations in Somalia,
which will come soon.
With regard to the strategic review, under the
leadership of the Department of Political Affairs, we
have begun a highly consultative process of analysis
and assessment, also engaging the African Union,
in preparation for consultations with a new Somali
authority. I would emphasize that in developing options
for the future United Nations presence, as the Council
requested, we must be led by the needs and expectations
of the Somalis. That may mean adjusting our deadlines
for reporting back to the Council in order to respect the
Somalis’ need for some time and space to constitute
the Cabinet and begin establishing their programme
of work before engaging with us. In that regard, I am
glad to report that today I presented a letter to President
Mohamud from the Secretary-General expressing our
intention to begin the review in mid-November this
year. The President welcomed the proposal.
I pay tribute to the international and regional
partners for the support that they have extended to me
and to the Somali peacemakers throughout the road
map process. The Somali authorities now urgently need
assistance to meet the new challenges in the various
sectors to help them own and lead the process in the
post-transition period.
The efforts of partners to develop a new aid
framework for Somalia, in partnership with the
Government, are most appropriate and timely.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I thank Special
Representative Mahiga for his briefing.
I shall now give the floor to the members of the
Council.
Mrs. Kaur (India): At the outset, I would like to
thank the Guatemalan delegation for having organized
today’s debate on the situation in Somalia. As the new
authorities start their work in Mogadishu, it is a good
time to deliberate upon the progress achieved so far,
the challenges that lie ahead and how the international
12-54954

S/PV.6848

community can continue its support for the Government
and people of Somalia.
We have carefully noted the views expressed
by Special Representative of the Secretary-General
Augustine Mahiga, and I would thank him for his
valuable statement.
During the course of the past year, there has been
remarkable progress in the process of stabilizing the
political, security and humanitarian situations in
Somalia. That has created a historic opportunity that
must be seized for the full restoration of peace and
stability in Somalia after two decades of conflict.
The adoption of a provisional Constitution, the
formation of the new Parliament, the elections of the
President and the Speaker, and the appointment of the
new Prime Minister clearly reflect the collective resolve
of the Somali people to move from the transitional
institutions to a more representative Government that
can meet the legitimate aspirations of all sections of
Somali society.
Those important milestones would not have
been possible but for the coordinated and concerted
efforts of the international community, including the
African Union and the United Nations. The important
role played by Special Representative Mahiga in the
successful completion of the transition process deserves
our special appreciation.
Our congratulations are also due to the new Somali
leadership, particularly His Excellency Mr. Hassan
Sheikh Mohamud, the new President of Somalia. It is a
matter of immense pride for us that President Mohamud
spent a few years studying in India in the late 1980s.
The gains on the political front have been made
possible by the impressive achievements of the African
Union Mission in Somalia (AMISOM) and the Somali
forces on the security front. Thanks to AMISOM,
Mogadishu is today firmly under the control of the
Somali authorities. Last week, AMISOM and the
Somali forces secured the strategic towns of Kismayo
and Wanla Weyn from Al-Shabaab.
The support of the international community to
AMISOM operations has been instrumental in that
success. We commend all troop-contributing countries,
in particular Uganda, Burundi and Kenya, for their
commitment to the Mission and for the sacrifices their
troops have made.

12-54954

In order to consolidate the gains made, the
new Government in Somalia has to embark upon
building effective State institutions that can pursue
national reconciliation, provide for the rule of law,
revitalize economic activities, and restructure and
strengthen the security forces. It is also necessary to
expeditiously implement the pending tasks of the road
map. In that regard, we welcome the six-point policy
framework set out by President Mohamud, and call
upon the international community to fully support the
implementation of the framework.
AMISOM remains the mainstay of the international
community’s efforts for stabilization of the security
situation in Somalia. AMISOM and the Somali security
forces have continued to expand their control in all four
sectors of operations. Still, Al-Shabaab remains a major
threat to peace and stability in Somalia, and has turned
to asymmetric warfare.
The changing security situation demands further
augmentation of resources for AMISOM, including
enablers and force multipliers. We therefore support
the request made by the African Union for a technical
rollover of four months, continuing the current
support package. We also support the expansion of
the logistics support package to cover the deployment
of additional civilian personnel and to include naval
assets for contingent-owned equipment reimbursement.
The latter is crucial to safeguard the supply routes of
AMISOM and to prevent Al-Shabaab from benefitting
from illegal maritime trade and piracy.
Maritime piracy off the coast of Somalia and
the humanitarian plight of hostages held by pirates
remain a major cause of concern for India. Much
of India’s trade — estimated at over $160 billion
annually — passes through the Gulf of Aden. Indians
constitute 7 per cent of the world’s seafarers, and a
consequence of piracy has been the tremendous human
cost that those seafarers have had to pay. According
to the Secretary-General’s latest report, 259 hostages
from 18 ships are still held by pirates. Of those, 43
are, unfortunately, Indian nationals. We hope that the
international community will provide full assistance
to the new Government in Somalia to implement the
comprehensive set of measures to counter piracy as
identified in the road map.
India and Somalia share two millennia of
civilizational exchanges across the seas. Not many years
ago, India made a major contribution to peacekeeping
in Somalia through its significant involvement in the
5

S/PV.6848

United Nations Operation in Somalia II. Last year,
following our Prime Minister’s announcement at the
second India-Africa Summit, India made a financial
contribution of $2 million to AMISOM. This year, we
are making another contribution of $1 million.
We have also continued to extend help to Somalia
in capacity-building through human resources
development and have recently increased the number of
scholarships available for Somali experts and students
to utilize in Indian academic institutions. We have
also contributed to the development of the information
technology sector in Somalia.
As Somalia moves on to a new phase of pacification
and peacebuilding, the continued support of the
international community will remain critical for its
success. I would like to assure the new Government of
Somalia of India’s continued support for our common
endeavours to put Somalia back on to the path of peace,
stability and prosperity.
Mr. Parham (United Kingdom): We are very
grateful to you, Mr. President, for arranging this
timely debate so soon after the Secretary-General’s
mini-summit on Somalia last month. We welcome
the Indian Minister of State to today’s meeting. We
also thank Ambassador Mahiga for his briefing, and
we look forward to the possibility of a briefing from
Commissioner Lamamra.
Much has been achieved in Somalia in the past
12 months, as we have heard. We congratulate the
people of Somalia on the peaceful end to the transition
and on the election of President Hassan Sheikh
Mohamud. The transition was the most representative
and transparent Somali political process in decades. As
the Secretary-General’s high-level event made clear,
the process must continue to be Somali-owned and
Somali-led, with the international community playing
a supporting and facilitating role. I hope that we will be
able to forge a new partnership between Somalia and
the international community, based on the principles of
mutual accountability, good governance and financial
transparency, working for the benefit of the people of
Somalia.
We continue to think that a joint financial
management board would be a useful tool for the new
Somali Government in pursuing those aims. It would
build confidence among the international community
and provide the Somali people with a tool with which
they can hold their Government to account.

6

The upcoming reviews of the United Nations and
African Union (AU) operations in Somalia provide a
timely opportunity to ensure that the correct mechanisms
are in place so that international assistance to Somalia
is well coordinated and effective. The needs of the
people of Somalia must be at the centre of the reviews,
but the reviews must also be complementary and
coherent, outlining a clear delineation of responsibility
between the United Nations and the AU, and setting out
how the wider international community can contribute
effectively.
The Council and the wider international community
must support the priorities that President Hassan
Sheikh Mohamud has set out, including improving
security, economic recovery, improving basic services,
strengthening governance and combating corruption,
as well as continuing the process of political dialogue,
including between Mogadishu and Hargeisa.
It is in that context that my Foreign Secretary
announced last month a further £10 million to help
Somalia with its immediate needs. That is in addition to
our £38 million three-year aid programme, focused on
supporting core State functions throughout Somalia. As
a further sign of our long-term commitment to Somalia,
we hope to open our new Embassy in Mogadishu in the
spring, should security conditions permit.
Maintaining and increasing security and
establishing clear Government structures will be vital
to creating the stability to allow increased delivery of
basic services and economic activity. I pay tribute to
the continued bravery and commitment of the African
Union Mission in Somalia (AMISOM) and the Somali
National Security Forces, which have made significant
progress, including by liberating Kismayo only two
weeks ago.
I urge Security Council partners to do all they can
to support Somali and international efforts to increase
security, including through AMISOM’s upcoming
mandate renewal, on which we will circulate a draft
resolution to Council colleagues in the next few days.
There is much to be done, expectations are high, and
there are many challenges ahead, but Somalia has my
Government’s unwavering support. I urge Security
Council partners to do all they can to ensure that
Somalia consolidates recent progress and continues on
its national path to peace and prosperity.
Mr. Menan (Togo) (spoke in French): I would like
first of all to thank the Special Representative of the

12-54954

S/PV.6848

Secretary-General for Somalia, Mr. Augustine Mahiga,
for the briefing he has just given on the situation in
Somalia.
Somalia turned a new page in its history with the
end of the transition, marked by the adoption of the
provisional Constitution, the holding of elections and the
establishment of new institutions. Indeed, the adoption
on 1 August of the Somali provisional Constitution by
the National Constituent Assembly moved the country
further towards lasting stability. It served as the basis
for elections of new Members of the Federal Parliament
and its principal organs, as well as the election of the
President of the Republic. The Constitution also calls
for the creation of many other institutions in the posttransition period, and we hope that they will soon be
established.
My country welcomes Somalia’s emergence from
institutional instability and the onset of the process of
creating a viable federal State, with more representative
institutions to guide it towards the change that will lead
to stability.
The encouraging results that Somalia has been
able to achieve in the political, security and other
areas are the fruits of the common efforts of the
Somalis themselves and other political actors, notably
the signatories to the road map of 6 September 2011,
regional and international partners, especially the
African Union Mission in Somalia (AMISOM) and
other United Nations organs active in Somalia.
The London and Istanbul conferences, the meetings
of the International Contact Group on Somalia, visits
by several high-level international delegations to
Mogadishu, and the recent summit on Somalia in the
margins of the General Assembly are all evidence of
the international community’s support for the political
process in Somalia. That international support, together
with the work and sacrifices of AMISOM and the
Somali National Security Forces, led to the liberation
of a number of important areas in southern and central
Somalia. Recently, the recapture of the strategic port of
Kismayo, the principal income source and the centre
of operations for Al-Shabaab, was a death blow to
that insurgency. My country reiterates its gratitude to
AMISOM for its remarkable work and the great sense
of responsibility and selflessness of its personnel.
Still, while Al-Shabaab has been routed from
strategic areas and towns and lost much territory,
and while some of its numbers are signing on with

12-54954

Government forces and AMISOM, it is to be feared that
it will use its remaining destructive abilities to engage
in terrorist acts, as we have seen recently in the murder
of journalists and many human rights violations. My
country believes it urgent to safeguard Somalia’s new
institutions so as to solidify the recent gains, given that
the post-transition period in Somalia remains fragile
and that the new institutions are vulnerable to threats
and face many challenges. They must be staunchly
supported in the push to stabilize the country, including
through dialogue with insurgents, because, as the
Secretary-General has noted, the peace process does
not end with the end of the transition.
Togo also urges the new Government to work
for transparency in the management of public funds
and of the aid it receives for reconstruction and
development. We hope that it will honour the need
for women’s representation; work for inclusiveness,
openness and responsibility; and keep a broad view
of the goals to achieve beyond the establishment of
political institutions, such as social and economic
reconstruction, and the development of the country
after 21 years of civil war.
The political and security progress achieved
must not overshadow the humanitarian situation
in Somalia, which remains critical. Togo urges the
various humanitarian agencies to continue with their
assistance initiatives to help the thousands of displaced
persons, refugees and other people in need, despite
the difficulties of doing so, in order to reduce food
insecurity and serious child malnutrition in particular.
The protection of civilians and the issue of
human rights also remain serious concerns and must
be included as priorities in their reconstruction and
national reconciliation programme.
While it is clear that the number of acts of piracy
along the Somali coast has dropped significantly, the
increased criminal activity on the continent, in particular
the kidnapping of humanitarian workers and civilians
by pirate networks, remains a source of concern. The
problem of piracy has not disappeared with the end
of the transition, and the new Somali authorities must
take a comprehensive national approach to maritime
security in order to achieve the remaining objectives set
out in the road map. The international community must
also continue to support the Government of Somalia in
its fight against maritime piracy.

7

S/PV.6848

To conclude, we commend the invaluable
contribution of the European Union and the United
Nations Political Office for Somalia, which have
consistently supported AMISOM and the Somali
authorities throughout the process. Togo welcomes
the very positive actions undertaken by other partners
that have steadfastly remained at Somalia’s side. My
country also supports the extension of the mandate
of AMISOM beyond 31 October 2012, as set out in
resolution 2036 (2012).
Ms. Rice (United States of America): Somalia has
made significant progress in recent months. Among
Somalis and the international community alike,
pervasive despair has turned to cautious optimism
as Somalia enters a historic new phase of national
development.
First and foremost, I congratulate the Somali
people and applaud their hard work and profound
sacrifice. Still, success has been born of partnership.
The African Union, the United Nations and the
international community have joined with the Somali
people to achieve the significant gains we have seen
of late, and we must renew our shared commitment to
ensure that progress continues.
The end of Somalia’s transitional period marks
a new era in governance. We are encouraged by the
results of the road map process, including a provisional
Constitution, the election of a new President and the
appointment of a Prime Minister-designate. Those
promising developments have come through Somali-led
efforts and are nothing short of remarkable.
Addressing the Secretary-General’s mini-summit
on Somalia last month, President Hassan Sheikh
Mohamud outlined his vision for inclusive, broadbased governing institutions in Somalia. We welcome
that vision and the initial but important steps that
President Hassan Sheikh has taken to bring it about,
including the appointment of Prime Minister-designate
Saaid. We hope that the Prime Minister-designate will
work closely and collaboratively with President Hassan
Sheikh and the Parliament to improve governance and
security in Somalia through inclusive, transparent and
representative processes and institutions. Somalia’s
long-term stability and development demand it.
As the United States and other international
partners help build the capacity of Somali institutions,
the new Somali leadership must take urgent steps to
tackle corruption. The mini-summit laid a foundation

8

for coordinating the efforts of the international
community, and I hope that both here in New York
and in Mogadishu we will be able to continue that
collaboration.
The security situation has improved dramatically in
the last year, but Somalia would not be where it is today
without the contributions of the Somali security forces,
the African Union Mission in Somalia (AMISOM) and
their strategic allies in the region. Their efforts have
made Somalia’s transition possible, and it has not been
without cost. I would like to recognize the sacrifices
made by the Somali National Security Forces and
AMISOM forces, including those killed and wounded
in the line of duty while protecting President Hassan
Sheikh in the first days of his presidency.
The United States has been a leading donor for
efforts to improve security in Somalia. We have
contributed more than $131 million to build the capacity
of the Somali security sector. We have also provided
more than $429 million, in addition to our share of
assessed expenses for the United Nations Support
Office for the African Union Mission in Somalia,
which amount to $225 million to date, towards training,
equipment and logistics support to AMISOM troopcontributing countries. We welcome all new partners
in this endeavour.
Despite the military successes and security
improvements, Al-Shabaab remains a threat to Somali
security, as demonstrated by the terrorist attacks
in Mogadishu on 21 and 22 September. We need to
maintain focus on improving the security situation
in Somalia and continue to reinforce AMISOM and
Somalia’s capacity to root out Al-Shabaab.
We encourage all Member States to contribute
to building the capacity of Somalia to provide for its
own security. We especially urge new donors to assist
the Somali National Security Forces with equipment,
salaries, infrastructure, logistical support and support
for regional training efforts.
The United States also welcomes the United Nations
strategic review of its engagement in Somalia as well
as the African Union strategic review of AMISOM
operations. Now is the right time to take stock and
consider how the United Nations and AMISOM can
adapt to support Somalia in its post-transition phase. It
is more important than ever that the Somalis themselves
participate in this process, so that it supports their
vision for the future Somalia.

12-54954

S/PV.6848

While efforts by Somali forces and AMISOM to
degrade Al-Shabaab remain essential, creating the
conditions for effective and legitimate governance is
the foundation of sustainable security for the Somali
people. National and local Somali leaders must provide
timely and visible benefits to Somalis in recently
liberated areas. Establishing police forces and courts,
increasing access to food and water, health care and
education, and providing economic opportunity are
what will earn the respect of the Somali people for their
leaders and their Government. That is also what will
lead to stability.
We recognize that former combatants defecting
from Al-Shabaab will need to be reintegrated into
local communities. We urge further progress under the
national stabilization plan to cement military gains and
to lay a foundation for long-term reconstruction and
economic development.
Meanwhile, we cannot forget the humanitarian
crisis that continues to afflict Somalia and neighbouring
countries. Inside Somalia, more than 2 million Somalis
are facing an acute food security crisis, and 1.3 million
remain internally displaced. In 2012 alone, there have
been more than 60,000 new refugee arrivals, bringing
the total number of Somali refugees in the Horn of
Africa to more than 1 million.
The United States has contributed more than
$1.2 billion in humanitarian assistance to the region
since 2011. We must sustain our humanitarian response,
and we urge all Member States to strongly support
the $1.16 billion United Nations consolidated appeal
for Somalia and to coordinate closely with the United
Nations to ensure a coherent, effective and efficient
response.
While Somalia’s journey has been difficult, and
there were many disappointments along the way, the
completion of the transition was a real success, inspiring
hope among Somalis for the first time in many years.
We encourage the Somali people and leaders, with the
support of the international community, to build on
this momentum, as there is much more to do. Many
challenges lie on the road ahead.
Let me reiterate our strong support for AMISOM
and the United Nations efforts in Somalia, and express
our continuing commitment to supporting the people
of Somalia, so as to ensure that the next phase of their
national development is indeed a success.

12-54954

Mr. Loulichki (Morocco) (spoke in French): I
would first of all like to congratulate you, Mr. President,
on convening this debate at a time when Somalia is
ushering in a decisive and promising phase on the
path towards stability and national reconciliation. I
would also like to commend the eloquent briefing
of Special Representative Augustine Mahiga on
recent developments and future prospects. Lastly, I
welcome the presence among us and the participation
of Mrs. Preneet Kaur, Minister of State for External
Affairs of India.
Morocco welcomes the fact that, following the
instability in Somalia for more than two decades, the
country now has political institutions established on
the basis of an inclusive and transparent process, with
the participation of all elements of Somali society that
support peace. Those significant gains towards stability
and reconciliation would not have been possible without
the resolve of the Somali people, who undertook to
close the painful chapter of the past and to enter into
a stabilization phase on the basis of the Djibouti and
Kampala agreements and the road map.
The adoption of the Constitution, the establishment
of Parliament and the election of the country’s President
and Prime Minister are already crucial elements in
laying the foundations for stable political governance
in Somalia. The formation of the first post-transition
Government, which we hope to see as soon as possible,
will mark the completion of the key political institutions
of the new Somali State.
The achievements to date should be consolidated
in order to build and strengthen the position of the
institutions and the rule of law in Somalia. We would
also like to commend and fully support the six priorities
set out by the new President of the country, Mr. Hassan
Sheikh Mohamud, on strengthening stability and
peacebuilding, respect for human rights, the rule of law
and good governance, economic recovery, the provision
of basic services to the population and, of course,
preserving the unity and integrity of the country.
Achieving all those goals will require the patience,
perseverance and unwavering political commitment
of the Somali authorities in order to establish peace
and lasting stability. Above all, that requires security,
defeating terrorism and extending the authority of the
Somali State throughout the national territory, not to
mention an appropriate response to the humanitarian
situation, the refugees and the internally displaced
persons, who are only now returning.
9

S/PV.6848

In that context, the liberation of the port of Kismayo,
a stronghold of Al-Shabaab, which is inhibiting that
group’s main source of financing and, at the same
time, giving the Somali State better control over the
country’s commercial activities, is a significant turning
point in the fight against terrorism in Somalia. Those
developments and the improvement in the security
situation are in large part due to the African Union
Mission in Somalia and to the troop-contributing
countries and the important role that they continue to
play in improving the country’s security situation.
It goes without saying that extending the gains
in terms of the country’s security and stability to all
Somalis necessarily means strengthening the Somali
armed forces and police. In that regard, we welcome
the signing in August of the national security and
stabilization plan, which seeks to guide and plan
security sector development in Somalia.
The fight against piracy is also an important aspect
in strengthening the stability gains. Securing the Somali
coast will make it possible to ensure normal economic
and trade flows between Somalia and other countries
and the establishment of economic activity and jobs, in
particular for young people.
Somalia, which has emerged from two decades of
war, is recovering. It requires assistance. It needs aid and
the solidarity of the entire international community and
the United Nations, which represents that community,
in order to overcome the many reconstruction and
development challenges facing its authorities. The
Somali people aspire to calm, harmony and a decent
life, free from insecurity, need and uncertainty. Let
us give them the means to achieve their basic and
legitimate aspirations.
Mr. Mashabane (South Africa): We wish to thank
Mr. Augustine Mahiga, Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, for his briefing to the Council.
Following two decades of prolonged conflict,
Somalia is making remarkable progress in consolidating
peace in the country. South Africa commends the
leadership and the people of Somalia on ending the
transition and on ushering in the post-transition phase.
We are convinced that a peaceful and stable Somalia
will have a positive impact not only on the country, but
on the entire region and continent. The achievements in
Somalia are indicative of the success that can be derived
from strategic collaboration among the United Nations,
the African Union and subregional organizations in

10

addressing the peace and security challenges on the
continent.
In celebrating Somalia’s achievements, we cannot
afford to become complacent. As the Secretary-General
stated in his recent report to the Council (S/2012/764),
the end of the transition does not mean the end of the
peace process. Somalia will continue to rely on the
international community for support in addressing the
many challenges that the new Government of President
Hassan Mohamud continues to face.
One important lesson that we have learned from
countries emerging from conflict is the need for the
early realization of peace dividends in order to sustain
peace and security. South Africa therefore welcomes
the convening of the mini-summit on Somalia and the
pledge of the international community to continue its
sustained and coordinated support in the peacebuilding
and stabilization phase in the country. That support
will be crucial in assisting the new Government as it
seeks to address the myriad challenges, including the
security, development and dire humanitarian challenges
still confronting the country.
As we provide that backing, we wish to underline
that no amount of support can replace the important
role of the Somali leadership and ownership in building
their country. We therefore welcome the foundations
of a new beginning, outlined in the six-pillar policy
of the new Government. In that regard, we would like
to highlight the need to strengthen and to support
Somali institutions and leadership to allow the Somali
Government to enhance its capacity in order for it to
function independently in the future.
It must be acknowledged that progress at the
political and peacebuilding levels would not have been
achieved without the conducive environment provided
by the African Union Mission in Somalia (AMISOM)
and the countries in the region. However, the success
of the Somali National Security Forces, supported by
AMISOM, in liberating areas that were previously
controlled by Al-Shabaab will require the creation
of local Government structures and the provision of
security and social services to those areas.
It is therefore imperative for Somalia to begin
developing adequate governance institutions that are
equipped to focus on the implementation of the new
Government’s immediate and long-term priorities.
In addition, the capability and capacity of the Somali
National Security Forces must be developed to ensure

12-54954

S/PV.6848

that security vacuums do not lead to the creation of
militias. It is equally imperative to encourage the
new Somali Government to prepare a strategy of
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration aimed at
dismantling, where necessary, and integrating militias
into the Somali National Security Forces. Strong and
loyal National Security Forces will ultimately ensure
that stability and security are preserved in the long
term.
As we celebrate the dawn of this new beginning for
Somalia, we are conscious that there are those in Somalia
who remain violently opposed to the new Government.
Recent security incidents in Mogadishu, including the
attempt on the President’s life, demonstrate that the
political and military gains in Somalia must be jealously
guarded in order to avoid a reversal of the situation.
We are therefore encouraged by President
Mohamud’s statement that he will reach out to the
armed groups in the quest for peace and reconciliation.
We should assist that process and consider increasing
efforts to provide incentives to those who remain
outside the political process. If managed properly, this
could facilitate reconciliation and advance the cause of
peace in Somalia. South Africa stands ready to share
its experience and expertise in the area of national
reconciliation with the Government of Somalia. My
delegation is encouraged by the defection of more than
3,000 former Al-Shabaab combatants. Sustaining such
defections will require significant resources and funding
for providing former combatants with alternative
livelihoods and employment opportunities. In that
regard, we encourage the international community to
support the Somali Government as it seeks to implement
its national security and stabilization plan.
We pay tribute to the immense sacrifices that have
been made by AMISOM and the countries of the region,
working with Somalia’s National Security Forces, to
create the security environment necessary for political
and economic development to take place. In order to
sustain those gains, it is vital that the international
community continue its financial and logistical support
to AMISOM. That support must be extended to the
maritime component, for which adequate resources are
particularly crucial in view of the recent gains made
by AMISOM in capturing the strategic port cities
of Kismayo and Merca, and in order to ensure that
Al-Shabaab’s supply line is completely disrupted. In
that regard, my delegation strongly supports the request
of the African Union’s Peace and Security Council that

12-54954

the United Nations support package for AMISOM be
extended to include civilian and maritime components
for the Mission.
South Africa has always viewed the phenomenon of
piracy as a byproduct of instability on land. Increased
stability within Somalia, as well as strengthened Somali
national institutions, will result in greater success for
the international community’s efforts to address this
scourge. In that context, South Africa is committed to
working with the new federal Government in rendering
assistance in capacity-building for Somalis to manage
their piracy situation.
In conclusion, there can be no security without
development and no development without security in
Somalia. In that regard, we welcome the strategic review
of AMISOM, designed to determine how the Mission
can continue to contribute to Somalia’s stabilization and
to implementing the Somali Government’s priorities.
We also look forward to receiving the SecretaryGeneral’s recommendations on an integrated strategic
approach to the United Nations system in Somalia. The
results of those reviews will be crucial for developing
coherent institutional responses in Somalia’s peace
consolidation phase. We would like to thank the
Secretary-General for his personal commitment, and
to express our appreciation for the tireless efforts of
Special Representative Augustine Mahiga in helping
the people of Somalia to close the transition chapter in
their country. Our gratitude and appreciation also go to
the Intergovernmental Authority on Development and
the African Union for their selfless contributions and
solidarity with the people of Somalia.
Mr. Cabral (Portugal): I thank you for organizing
this debate, Mr. President. I would like to join others
in thanking Special Representative Augustine Mahiga
for the update and for his forward-looking observations
today. I would also like to commend him and his team
for their work and efforts, as well as the work of the
African Union, and to acknowledge the role and
contribution of the Intergovernmental Authority on
Development and its leaders to the peace process in
Somalia, particularly that of the late Prime Minister
Meles Zenawi of Ethiopia.
During the past year, Somalia has been a stage
for major political and security developments. On the
political front, August marked the completion of the
transition period, which began eight years ago. After
the adoption of a new Constitution, the Somali political
leadership, traditional elders and other stakeholders
11

S/PV.6848

rose above their differences and acted in the best
interests of the Somali people, in a process that led to the
establishment of a new Parliament, the election of a new
President and, subsequently, the nomination of a new
Prime Minister. On the security front, the African Union
Mission in Somalia (AMISOM), the Somali national
forces and regional partners continued to expand their
areas of control, significantly weakening Al-Shabaab.
Portugal commends the Somali stakeholders and the
Somali people for their achievements and pays tribute
to the sacrifices that have been made by the women and
men serving in AMISOM.
The same degree of commitment, integrity and
endurance we have witnessed during these months is
now needed from the Somali authorities, to enable them
to respond to the demanding challenges that this new
chapter brings: creating a secure and stable country
that will be ready for elections under universal suffrage
in four years’ time. We welcome the resolve and vision
of President Hassan Sheikh Mohamud and the priorities
he has already outlined: national reconciliation, the
delivery of social services, economic development,
improved justice and security. Those should become
part of the finalization of the pending elements of the
provisional Constitution and of stabilization in general,
that is, through reform of the security sector, establishing
inclusive and representative administrations throughout
the country, delivering basic services to the population,
stimulating business and comprehensively addressing
the threat of piracy. Beyond that, they should translate
into improvements in good governance, the rule
of law, transparency and accountability, as well as
respect for fundamental rights and freedoms. At the
same time, more attention should be given to the role,
full participation and representation of women in the
Somali peace process.
Because the tasks ahead are extremely complex
and demanding, this is the moment for the international
community to renew its commitment to the Somali
people and, at the same time, to strengthen coordination
among all actors in Somalia. In that regard, we look
forward both to the results of the thorough joint African
Union-United Nations assessment of AMISOM, which
has thus far been instrumental in creating an environment
capable of advancing the political process and efforts
to achieve the country’s economic revitalization, and
to those of the current United Nations strategic review,
aimed at considering the Organization’s presence in
Somalia for the next four years.

12

However, as the African Union recently pointed
out, while we reflect on the future of AMISOM and
the important contribution it is making towards the
maintenance of peace, security and reconciliation
in Somalia, it is important to take into account the
issue of the Mission’s funding. We therefore take
this opportunity to urge all parties to give due
consideration to the need to improve the predictability
and sustainability of AMISOM’s funding mechanisms.
On our part, Portugal will continue to play an
active role, at different levels and in various forums, in
contributing to improving the Somali people’s daily life,
in particular through the outstanding contribution of the
European Union, which has been evident on multiple
fronts: development assistance, support for AMISOM
and common security and defence policy operations
such as the European Union Training Mission, the
European Union Naval Force Operation Atalanta and
the new maritime capacity-building mission in the
Horn of Africa. In that context, we naturally share the
position of the European Union that will be expressed
later on in this meeting by Ambassador Mayr-Harting.
I conclude by once again acknowledging and
commending the decisive steps Somalis have taken so
far towards achieving a more representative, democratic
and peaceful Somalia and by reiterating our support for
helping to make the long path of reconstruction ahead
a successful one.
Mr. Alzate (Colombia) (spoke in Spanish): I would
like to thank you, Mr. President, for convening this debate
on the situation in Somalia at this crucial moment in the
efforts to make progress towards Somalia’s political,
economic and security normalization. I would also like
to thank and pay tribute to the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General and Head of the United Nations
Political Office in Somalia, Mr. Augustine Mahiga.
Somalia has made significant strides towards
achieving peace and stability. The last phase of the
transition has been proof of the efforts of Somalia’s
stakeholders towards establishing a more legimate
and representative Government, with new leadership
and new institutions, capable of guiding the future of
the Somali people. While we look with optimism on
the significant progress achieved in security matters,
we are aware that that progress must be consolidated
on various fronts. We must contribute to guiding the
country towards sustainable economic and social
development.

12-54954

S/PV.6848

While the new Somali authorities have the primary
responsibility for restoring security, political stability,
the rule of law and economic development, it also is
essential that the international community continue to
provide support, albeit not unlimited, but recognizing
the inherent challenges facing a country in the process
of consolidation. In that context, we must adopt a
comprehensive strategy aimed at strengthening the
institutions and national capacity-building of the new
Somali State in step with the vision of the Somalis
and the priorities established by the Somali authorities
and in a manner that is also consistent with the future
presence of the United Nations in Somalia. We must also
ensure that there is clear consistency and coordination
in the efforts undertaken by the different entities and
agencies of the United Nations and other regional and
international partners.
We must recognize the significant expansion of
territorial control by the Somali National Security
Forces and the African Union Mission in Somalia
(AMISOM). Today that includes important and strategic
cities such as Mogadishu, Afgoye, Baidoa, Marka and
Kismayo. Despite that progress, Al-Shabaab terrorist
attacks continue to represent a serious threat to Somali
institutions and the political process itself. For that
reason, the work and presence of AMISOM continues
to be crucial for Somalia’s stabilization.
We cannot fail to note that the expanded capacity
of AMISOM hinges to a large degree on whether the
Mission has the resources and equipment needed for
meeting its mandate. Similarly, it is essential that the
Mission have force enablers and multipliers in order
to afford greater operational capacity and flexibility
to the Mission. Along those lines, it is crucial that we
renew the entirety of the logistical support measures
granted under resolution 2036 (2012). We must also
give due consideration to the request of the African
Union for the inclusion of a maritime component and
the strengthening of the civilian component within
AMISOM. We must also provide greater technical
and financial resources and resources for training of
the Somali forces so that they can undertake a more
significant role in the ongoing operations. Efforts
to reform and restructure those forces must continue
through a regularization process that allows for a clear
command and control structure.
We must also harmonize and synchronize the
various political and military efforts with an eye
to achieving a true stabilization of the situation in

12-54954

Somalia. For that reason, we believe it is important to
support the efforts of the Somali authorities with regard
to the consolidation of the recently recovered areas and,
in particular, with the implementation and launching of
the national policy for reconciliation and stabilization,
as well as the national security and stabilization plan.
We must also give due consideration to addressing the
immediate needs of a growing number of combatants
who have abandoned the ranks of Al-Shabaab, as a first
step towards a far-reaching process of disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration.
The end of the transition does not mean the end
of the peace process. On the contrary, it is the time
to address the fundamental tasks that have remained
pending in the Somalia end-of-transition road map on
progress towards the training of local administrators
and the development of functioning institutions capable
of supporting the economic and social recovery of the
country. We must also move forward in the creation
of an inclusive Government Cabinet, the submission
of the national Constitution to a referendum and the
organization of local and national elections in order to
definitively advance the peacebuilding process.
Piracy off the Somali coast is a problem that will
not end with the transition. A stable and sustainable
solution must be an integral part of the efforts
undertaken to strengthen the rule of law in the country
and the capacity-building of national institutions, areas
in which factors relating to the economy, security,
the judiciary and the correctional system can be
simultaneously dealt with.
One of the areas in which the international
community and, in particular, the United Nations are
called upon to provide technical assistance to Somalia
is that of the demarcation of its maritime spaces in
accordance with international law. That will allow for
a clear definition of its territorial waters, exclusive
economic zone and maritime borders. That would
enable Somalia to strengthen its ability to maintain
sovereignty over its waters and maritime resources
and further develop activities such as fishing and
port activities as viable economic alternatives for the
population, given the current dependency on activities
linked to crime surrounding the piracy networks.
In conclusion, I would like to recognize again
AMISOM’s meaningful contribution to the search for
peace in Somalia. I call upon the Somali authorities and
other relevant stakeholders to maintain and broaden the
unity of purpose seen throughout the transition and to
13

S/PV.6848

look upon the stabilization and strengthening of the
Somali State as the principal objective in the long term.
Mr. Churkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian):
We are grateful to the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for Somalia, Mr. Augustine Mahiga,
for his briefing on the situation in that country. We
were pleased to see the completion of the transition
period in Somalia and the implementation of a number
of important political tasks, including the designation
of a Prime Minister. All of that lays the foundation for
strengthening stability and gives important impetus to
the political, social and economic development of the
country.
Progress on the implementation of the Somalia
end-of-transition road map affords a certain optimism
with respect to the prospects for further normalizing
the situation in Somalia and reaffirms the aspirations of
its people to put an end to years of internecine warfare
and disintegration. To maintain the momentum of the
peace process, the new authorities need to mobilize
political will and domestic resources. They need to
immediately complete the formation of the executive
branch, determine priorities for the development of
the country in the post-transition period, including the
implementation of the outstanding tasks under the road
map, and begin to implement them without delay. The
close cooperation of the signatories of the road map
and the strengthening of the engagement between the
international community and the Somali authorities are
critical conditions for achieving success.
There continues to be the daunting task of subduing
Al-Shabaab, without which stabilization in Somalia
will not be possible. In that regard, we welcome the
military successes of the African Union Mission in
Somalia (AMISOM) and the National Security Forces,
which could be seen specifically when they pushed the
extremists out of Kismayo. However, opponents of the
stabilization still maintain considerable firepower and,
in seeking to retain their influence on the ground, are
regrouping their forces and shifting to terrorist tactics
and guerilla warfare. Considerable areas still need to
be cleared of extremists, who have dug in, including to
the north of Kismayo and south of Mogadishu. Even in
Kismayo itself, restoring order will require considerable
effort, above all from the Somalis themselves. There
is a similar situation in other liberated areas, and
stabilization in those areas must be one of the priorities
of the country’s leadership.

14

In that connection, it is also important to promptly
disarm and reintegrate the Al-Shabaab members there.
While the security situation continues to be far from
calm in Somalia, the African Union’s Mission in Somalia
continues to be one of the key levers for normalizing
the situation. The process of providing United Nations
support for AMISOM must be sustained and must take
into account the progress in stabilizing the country
and gains in terms of quelling Al-Shabaab. At the
same time, prospects for the peaceful development of
the country also require further strengthening of the
Somali Security Forces, who will ultimately have to
assume full responsibility for internal security once
AMISOM departs.
We are concerned about the persistent flow of
illegal weapons into Somalia and financial support
for Al-Shabaab. It is therefore necessary that Member
States, especially those in the region, strictly comply
with their obligations under the sanctions regime with
respect to Somalia. In that light, it must be borne in mind
that one of the channels of that activity is smuggling
and the far-flung business activities of extremists in
Somalia itself.
For the first time in recent years, there is evidence
of a downturn in piracy activity along the country’s
coast. That is a result of the well-coordinated actions
of the international community to put an end to the
pirate threat. However, the problem remains acute. The
pirates are shifting their focus to areas beyond the safe
corridor and waiting out this period unfavourable to
them.
Taking hostages for ransom has created a new
source of criminal income, including for refinancing
piracy operations. There have been increasing reports
of contacts between the pirates and Al-Shabaab.
Given that, the Somali authorities have increased
responsibility to implement efforts to eradicate piracy
within the framework of their road map obligations.
Specifically, we anticipate immediate steps to adopt a
range of anti-piracy laws and remove other obstacles to
prosecuting pirates.
One of the key components of a comprehensive
anti-piracy strategy remains the fight against impunity.
That problem will only be resolved by establishing at the
regional level an effective mechanism for the criminal
prosecution of pirates, with international participation.
There is serious concern over the humanitarian
situation in Somalia. The problems due to the many

12-54954

S/PV.6848

years of civil war have been compounded by natural
disasters, including recent flooding in the central part
of the country. For our part, we intend to continue
to actively participate in strengthened efforts by the
international community to provide comprehensive
assistance to Somalia, including humanitarian
assistance.
Mr. Masood Khan (Pakistan): Thank you so
much, Sir, for convening today’s meeting. We also
thank Special Representative of the Secretary-General
Augustine Mahiga for his briefing.
Pakistan welcomes Somalia’s progress over the past
few critical months. Given the courage and resilience of
the Somali people, such progress is no surprise to us.
The people of Somalia have braved all difficulties to
draw the transition to a close.
The presidential and parliamentary elections and
the Prime Minister’s nomination herald a new political
dispensation, which reflects the aspirations of the
Somali people. Somalia is on the cusp of a new chapter
in its history. We congratulate President Hassan
Sheikh Mohamud on his election and wish him and his
Government success.
The African Union Mission in Somalia (AMISOM)
has helped create a stable and secure environment for
meaningful political progress. Recent successes by
AMISOM and the Somali Security Forces have enabled
pro-Government forces to gain control over all major
Somali cities. Peace and security in Somali urban
centres will create salutary conditions for economic
and political progress.
The capture of the strategic port of Kismayo last
month is a major step towards eliminating piracy off
the coast of Somalia. Pakistan has been a victim of
piracy. We support adding the maritime component
to AMISOM for preventing piracy. The component
will reinforce the efforts of the international naval
forces in the Gulf of Aden and adjacent waters. We
must not forget the plight of hostages held by pirates.
A comprehensive approach to ending piracy entails
addressing its root causes, particularly illegal fishing
and dumping of toxic waste in Somali waters.
AMISOM still faces asymmetric conflict with
terrorists and extremists. The ongoing assessment of
AMISOM must therefore take into account the different
challenges the Mission faces. Its role will obviously
be determined by the situation on the ground. In the

12-54954

meantime, we urge the international community to
ensure political and financial support for the Mission.
That is necessary to secure the gains made so far and to
prevent a possible relapse of the conflict. We must not
be complacent.
In many ways, AMISOM operations are a good
example of successful cooperation between a regional
organization and the United Nations. Africa’s collective
and consensual response to its security challenges is
very impressive. We commend the AMISOM troopcontributing countries for their resilience and valour,
and the African Union Peace and Security Council for
its sagacity and resolve. We endorse the African Union
request to extend the AMISOM support package.
Special Representative Mahiga and Commissioner
Lamamra have cautioned that daunting challenges
lie ahead in Somalia. A clear demarcation of goals
and objectives is necessary to sustain the current
momentum of progress. Last month, the Security
Council commissioned the Secretary-General to review
the future of the United Nations presence and underlined
the need for an integrated strategic approach.
We believe that three considerations should guide us
on the subject. First, the review must take into account
the need for national ownership and must accommodate
evolving national priorities. The Somali Government
is now in a position to articulate those priorities
and lead the discourse. Secondly, it is important to
develop an interface between the Secretary-General’s
review process and the initiatives of the African
Union. Thirdly, the United Nations presence should
be geared towards safeguarding territorial integrity
and federalism in Somalia. Different interpretations
of border demarcation and revenue-sharing among the
federating units should not alter the shared commitment
for a strong and united Somalia.
Pakistan and Somalia have strong links going back
in history. We have contributed to the peacekeeping
efforts in Somalia. Now is the time for peacebuilding.
We will do whatever we can to help the Somali
Government accomplish that task. Our bonds with
Somalia will grow even stronger in the years to come.
We will continue to support Somalia bilaterally, as well
as in our capacity as a member of the Security Council,
the Organization of Islamic Cooperation contact group
on Somalia and the United Nations Contact Group on
Piracy off the Coast of Somalia. We assure the new
Government of Somalia of our fullest support.

15

S/PV.6848

Mr. Araud (France) (spoke in French): Naturally, I
too thank the Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral, Mr. Augustine Mahiga.
In recent months, Somalia has been able to achieve
historic milestones that would have seemed impossible a
year ago. They have adopted a provisional Constitution,
designated a Parliament and its President, elected a new
President of the Republic, and, lastly, designated a new
Prime Minister. We now look forward to the upcoming
appointment of a Government. In Somalia, therefore,
there is new hope. The international community must
stand with the Somalis and support them as they
build a new State, all the while respecting Somalia’s
sovereignty.
With the completion of the transition, consolidating
gains is now a top priority, so as to ensure that the
progress of recent months will not be undone. To that
end, as the President of Somalia underscored in his
statement at the mini-summit on Somalia held on the
sidelines of the General Assembly, making the country
secure and stabilizing its territory are the immediate
goals.
Making the country secure requires ongoing
military effort. I will return to that later. But it also calls
for a political strategy. Throughout Somalia’s territory,
particularly in the areas liberated from Al-Shabaab,
establishing inclusive federal and civil administrative
institutions is of priority. But after 20 years of the
absence of federal power in a country where clan
allegiances have been key, those institutions will need
to be accepted by the population and thereby gain their
legitimacy. To that end, we encourage Somali authorities
in their desire to open a dialogue with all Somalis by
undertaking a process of national reconciliation. All of
the components of Somalia should be represented in the
institutions that will be put in place at the federal and
local levels.
In that context, a civil political presence in support
of Somali authorities is vital. The United Nations has
the necessary experience and expertise in that regard.
We therefore hope that it will speed up its deployment
in Mogadishu and swiftly plan the modalities for its new
presence in the liberated territories, in concert with the
African Union and Somali authorities. We look forward
to the results of the review in terms of strengthening
the United Nations political presence, but we do not
want to lose precious time.

16

On the security front, the successes of AMISOM
and the Somali security forces in recent months have
made it possible to regain territory throughout the
central and southern parts of Somalia, and thereby
weaken Al-Shabaab. The reconquest of the south
has been stepped up with the taking of the ports of
Marka and Kismayo, which has denied Al-Shabaab
its major strategic bastion and a considerable part of
its resources. Those results need to be commended,
even as the Ugandan, Burundian, Kenyan, Djiboutian
and Ethiopian troops continue to pay a heavy price to
liberate Somalia from Al-Shabaab.
Despite the recent gains, the presence of AMISOM
is still necessary in order to assist the Somali National
Security Forces in ensuring lasting security in the
country.
In that context, France supports the renewal of
AMISOM’s mandate for one year at the current ceiling
on troop strength. A midterm assessment of the nature
of its presence is to undertaken based on the reviews to
be carried out in close cooperation between the United
Nations and the African Union prior to the end of the
year.
We therefore share the analysis of the African
Union, which, in its last progress report (S/2012/764,
annex), underscored the necessity of finding lasting
financing for AMISOM. I would like to recall that,
since 2007, the European Union has provided ongoing
support to the Mission in the amount of €442 million.
We will renew our financing to pay salaries for
AMISOM soldiers in 2013. However, those resources
are limited, given the current AMISOM troop strength
and the needs that have been expressed with respect to
other parts of the African continent. Other donors will
have to complement the contributions of the European
Union so that the soldiers of AMISOM will be fully
underwritten in 2013.
In the medium term, the setting up of a credible
Somali security force should be our priority so that it
can take over from AMISOM at any early date. That is
needed in order to establish the political credibility of
the new Government and is the only way to guarantee
lasting control of the territory of the country. That effort
needs to be the strategic priority for the international
community in Somalia in the medium term.
France and the European Union are fully committed
to the process, together with the European Union
training mission, which is training Somali soldiers,

12-54954

S/PV.6848

strengthening the establishment of a command structure
and consolidating the chain of command. The strategic
review that is beginning in Brussels will decide how
that mission will continue — we hope that it will cover
two years — and will determine how to develop it to
meet the needs of Somalia. The efforts of that mission
to strengthen security on land will be complemented by
another mission to develop the coast guard in Somalia.
Let me conclude by addressing the human rights
situation and the humanitarian situation in the
country. The recruitment of child soldiers, the killing
of reporters and extrajudicial executions continue to
be a source of concern. In addition, 4 million people
still need food assistance. The United Nations, like
the non-governmental humanitarian organizations, is
providing vital support to people affected by famine
in the region. Unimpeded access to humanitarian
assistance must be guaranteed.
Mr. Mehdiyev (Azerbaijan): At the outset. I would
like to thank Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral Augustine Mahiga for his briefing. We are
grateful to the Secretary-General for convening a
successful mini-summit on Somalia in New York on
26 September. Azerbaijan joins the participants of
the summit in congratulating the Government and the
people of Somalia on the peaceful end of the transition.
That significant achievement represents a historic
moment for the country and an important step towards
a peaceful, democratic, stable and prosperous Somalia.
We commend President Hassan Sheikh Mohamud
of Somalia for his intention to ensure the formation of
inclusive, broad-based governing institutions, and we
welcome his early priorities. It is important to ensure
that international support is aligned with those priorities
and that the spirit of unity is preserved as an essential
guiding principle for all Somali and international actors
working towards peace and development in Somalia.
The United Nations plays a critical role, and we
commend the efforts of Special Representative Mahiga.
We are encouraged by the further consolidation of
the partnership between the United Nations and its
partners.
We note the role of regional bodies, in particular
the African Union and the Intergovernmental Authority
on Development, in contributing to peace in Somalia
and to bringing an end to the transition. It is obvious
that progress has become possible mostly because of
significant improvements in the security situation. We

12-54954

pay tribute to the great sacrifices made by the troopcontributing countries of the African Union Mission in
Somalia (AMISOM) and the Somali National Security
Forces.
I would also like to commend the Organization of
Islamic Cooperation, the League of Arab States, the
European Union and individual Member States for
their contributions to achieving peace and national
reconciliation in Somalia and for providing significant
support so that the urgent needs of the peoples affected
by the humanitarian crisis can be addressed.
The international community must remain strongly
committed to the sovereignty, territorial integrity,
political independence and unity of Somalia. It is crucial
that all necessary efforts continue to be undertaken to
effectively address the threats and challenges posed by
terrorists and armed opposition groups in Somalia, in
particular Al-Shabaab, including through supporting
and implementing measures against the internal and
external actors who are attempting to undermine the
peace process in the country.
As the Secretary-General noted in his recent report,
it is important that the people in areas recovered from
Al-Shabaab quickly see the difference between life
under the insurgents and under the new Government.
That can obviously be achieved through committed
efforts on the part of the national authorities in
favour of strengthened security in liberated areas, the
establishment of good governance and the rule of law,
the development of security sector capacities, the rapid
delivery of services and the continued support of the
international community.
Additional efforts are needed aimed at combating
piracy, armed robbery and hostage-taking off the coast
of Somalia. It is important to ensure that national
commitments are matched by strong support and
assistance from the international community. The full
respect of the relevant international law is a necessary
precondition for the effectiveness of the anti-piracy
response and international cooperation.
The humanitarian situation in Somalia requires
constant attention. Safe, full and unhindered
humanitarian access to people in need must be ensured
by the parties involved. We stress the importance of
sustainable assistance to Somalia in that regard, as well
as a need to redouble efforts to find long-term solutions
to challenges still being faced by the country and its
people.

17

S/PV.6848

Mr. Wittig (Germany): Let me start by joining
other speakers in thanking Special Representative
of the Secretary-General Augustine Mahiga for his
briefing. Let me also thank him for his efforts in the
past years in support of Somalia. We commend him and
his team for the part they have played in moving the
political process in the country forward and helping it
to cross the critical threshold that paved the way for a
brighter future for Somalia.

should be in a position to provide peace and security in
their country on their own.

I would like to focus briefly on three points
today — the political situation in Somalia, the African
Union Mission in Somalia (AMISOM) and the
upcoming strategic review.

In that context, let me reiterate that the European
Union (EU) supports the Somali security sector
through the European Union training mission Somalia.
Since the beginning of 2009, my country has actively
participated in that mission. Several thousand Somali
soldiers trained by the EU’s mission continue to
play a crucial role in improving security jointly with
AMISOM. Security remains key for any progress, and
all efforts by partners in the security sector should be
coordinated and should take into account the lessons
learned.

Germany strongly welcomes the completion of
the transition. We congratulate the authorities and
the people of Somalia on the peaceful conduct of the
process, and I pay tribute to all the signatories of
the road map for their contribution to the successful
conclusion of the transition.

The achievements of AMISOM and its partners in
the field of security must also translate into political
progress and improvements in the economic and social
situation of the Somali people. That is foremost a
task for the Somalis themselves, but the international
community stands ready to support them.

The creation of a new Parliament, the election of
a new Speaker and the election of a new President are
landmarks in Somali history. Now Somalia must focus
on stabilization, reconciliation and building sustainable
and accountable institutions, based on respect for human
rights. The Somali people need to see a peace dividend
after decades of civil war and massive destruction.

Finally, the ongoing assessment and the strategic
review of the United Nations presence in Somalia are
welcome in order to further stabilize and consolidate
the peace in Somalia. We believe that the challenges
Somalia is facing require a joint approach, a sound and
coherent strategy, and a clear division of labour. Let me
offer assurances that Germany continues to stand by
Somalia and its people.

During the mini-summit on Somalia that took
place on the margins of the General Assembly three
weeks ago, we listened carefully to the priorities of
President Hassan Sheikh Mohamud. We think those
priorities — security and peacebuilding to begin
with — are rightly chosen. President Mohamud can
be sure of the continued support of the international
community. My country will carry on playing its part
in the efforts, particularly within the European Union
and through the United Nations.
The success we are celebrating would not have
been possible without the critical contribution of the
African Union Mission in Somalia, which provided
for the security environment for the political process
to make headway. Let me reiterate our appreciation
for AMISOM and what it has achieved under very
difficult circumstances. It deserves our full political
support. But also, among other things, sustainable
and predictable financing should also be supported
by initiatives with regard to the building the capacity
of the Somali security forces. Eventually, the Somalis

18

Mr. Li Baodong (China) (spoke in Chinese): I
would like to thank the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for Somalia, Mr. Augustine Mahiga,
for his briefing.
The peace process has achieved historic progress
in Somalia. The tasks specified by the road map have
been basically accomplished. A new President has been
elected, a new Prime Minister has been appointed,
and there have been military gains in combating
Al-Shabaab. We welcome and offer congratulations
on the success and thank the Special Representative,
the African Union, the Intergovernmental Authority on
Development (IGAD) and other regional organizations
for their efforts. We highly appreciate the important
contributions by the late Prime Minister of Ethiopia,
Mr. Meles Zenawi.
China has noted that there is still a long way to
go to reach lasting peace, and challenges remain. The
capabilities of the Somali Government still need to be
strengthened. Terrorism and extremist forces still exist.

12-54954

S/PV.6848

The terrorist situation remains precarious. We hope
that Somalia’s different parties will make efforts in the
following four aspects.
First, they should continue to advance the political
process and national reconciliation. We hope the Somali
parties will seize this historic opportunity for the greater
good of national stability and development, strengthen
unity and cooperation, and bridge their differences
through dialogue and consultations. We support the
new Government of Somalia in implementing an
interim Constitution, exercising Government functions
and extending effective authority over all its national
territory. We urge different factions in Somalia to
renounce violence and to join the peace process as soon
as possible.
Secondly, the security situation must be further
consolidated. We support Somalia’s efforts to expedite
the building of the security sector and to assume full
responsibility for protecting sovereignty and national
civility. We appreciate AMISOM’s effective work, and
we support its continuing to play an important role in
stability in Somalia. In the light of the real need, the
international community, especially the United Nations,
should strengthen logistical support for AMISOM and
the Somalia security forces.
Thirdly, they most start economic and social
reconstruction. Poverty and underdevelopment are the
root causes of the 20 years of turbulence in Somalia. We
hope that Somali parties will soon prepare economic and
social reconstruction plans so as to let the Somali people
see the prospect of national peace and development.
We call on the United Nations and the entire donor
community to deliver what has been committed and to
raise more funds, in cash or in kind, to help Somalia
achieve economic and social development.
Fourthly, a new strategy in which the international
community can help Somalia must be prepared. We
support the Secretary-General’s strategic review of the
continued United Nations presence in Somalia beyond
2012 to 2016. We hope the United Nations will play an
active coordinating role and take fully into account the
views of the African Union and IGAD, on the basis of
respecting Somalia’s sovereignty. We hope that it will
prepare a comprehensive and viable strategic plan to
help Somalia achieve stability and development and put
that plan into effect as soon as possible.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I shall now make
a statement in my national capacity.

12-54954

Guatemala would like to thank the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Somalia,
Mr. Augustine Mahiga, for his statement. We regret
that we Mr. Ramtane Lamamra, Commissioner for
Peace and Security of the African Union, was not able
to participate to present his report.
Like the rest of the Council members who have
spoken today, Guatemala celebrates the recent
achievements in Somalia, which draw the country
ever closer to the longed-for for peace and stability.
I am pleased to say that in both the political process
and in the security strategy, Somalia has surpassed all
expectations.
With regard to the political process, Guatemala
welcomes the new President of Somalia, His Excellency
Mr. Hassan Sheikh Mohamud. We recognize the timely
nomination of Mr. Abdi Farah Shirdon as Prime
Minister. Both individuals represent the new era in
Somalia. We expect the new authorities to establish
as soon as possible a Government that is inclusive,
transparent and responsible in financial management.
We also expect the timely composition of the Cabinet,
with equitable gender representation in its core. In turn,
the Security Council and the international community
should maintain their strong support for Somalia, and
we reiterate that the end of the transition is not the end
of the peace process. Likewise, we recognize that the
Government of Somalia needs to take ownership of
the national agenda, and that we need to listen to and
assimilate its new priorities.
We look forward to receiving shortly the strategic
review of United Nations efforts in Somalia, which
we trust will take into account the new circumstances
emerging in Somalia and present options for enhancing
United Nations system coordination on the ground. It
is essential that the United Nations work in a spirit of
cooperation and synergy.
Regarding the security strategy, the African Union
Mission in Somalia (AMISOM) has implemented its
mandate in an exemplary manner. Together with the
Somali National Security Forces, it has achieved what
few predicted possible in the short-term — the recovery
of the port of Kismayo. We recognize the extraordinary
efforts of AMISOM, and we pay tribute to the troops
that have made the ultimate sacrifice for peace in
Somalia.
We appreciate the information contained in the
fourth progress report of the Chairman of the African

19

S/PV.6848

Union Commission (S/2012/764, enclosure), which,
among other things, requests the technical renewal
of AMISOM’s mandate, with a few adjustments for
its effective implementation, until 22 February 2013.
We believe that these additional components will
strengthen the logistical package approved in resolution
2036 (2012). Our delegation supports the renewal of
the mandate and will participate constructively in the
negotiations of a draft resolution in the coming days.
We also look forward to the strategic review
of AMISOM in January 2013. In our judgment, the
assessment must take into account the recent movement
of Al-Shabaab to the north of the country. It needs to
ensure security in the areas liberated from Al-Shabaab
and should be accompanied by the strengthening of the
Somali National Security Forces.
Like the African Union in its report, we are
concerned over the financial situation of AMISOM,
in particular for the second half of 2013. It is essential
that the Mission have the resources necessary to carry
out its mandate. We call on all countries in a position
to do so to contribute generously to this objective and
to improve the predictability and sustainability of
AMISOM funding.
We recognize the adoption of the national security
and stabilization plan. We believe it of great importance
that the people of Somalia, in particular outside of
Mogadishu, feel the change in their daily lives and that
local administrations be established and successfully
deliver basic services.
The restructuring and reform of the Somali
National Security Forces is of the utmost importance.
Likewise, the increased number of defections of
combatants affiliated with Al-Shabaab represents a
positive step and a glimmer of hope for the youth of
Somalia. Moreover, the protection of civilians and the
unhindered delivery of humanitarian assistance must
continue to be top priorities.
The reconstruction of Somalia, in terms of both
its infrastructure and its social fabric, as well as the
protection of its natural resources, represent critical
challenges. The fight against piracy and armed robbery
off the coast of Somalia continue to pose a threat. In
the past year, we have seen the transformation of that
country, and Guatemala will continue to support all its
efforts.
I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.
20

I give the floor to the representative of Somalia.
Mr. Duale (Somalia): I am honoured to be in the
Council Chamber and to see such enthusiasm — much
more today than in the past. As mentioned by all
speakers and duly noted, we are moving away from a
bleak forecast and starting to see the light at the end of
the tunnel.
I thank you, Sir, for giving me the opportunity to
participate in this debate on Somalia and to address the
members of the Council. First and foremost, allow me to
congratulate you on your assumption of the presidency
of the Security Council for the month of October, and
also to congratulate your predecessor.
My job has been made much easier today by the
briefing given by Mr. Augustine Mahgia, the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Somalia.
We thank him very much for his untiring support to
successive Somali transitional Governments, and we
hope that he will also continue to support the new
Federal Government.
I regret that we could not hear a briefing from
Mr. Ramtane Lamamra. I nonetheless thank him, the
African Union and the Intergovernmental Authority on
Development for their continued support.
As the Council has heard, the road map has been
completed. A new Parliament has been elected, as have
a new Speaker and Deputy Speakers. On 10 September,
Mr. Hassan Sheikh Mohamud won the presidential
election, and he was inaugurated on 16 September. On
6 October, Mr. Abdi Farah Shirdon was appointed Prime
Minister, and he is now in the process of forming a new
Cabinet, which he said will be small but competent,
and will not tolerate corruption or mismanagement.
Furthermore, he stated that, as far as possible, he and
his Cabinet will follow the President’s six-pillar policy,
which is the foundation of a new beginning.
The six-pillar policy has already been referred to, but
I wish to give a little summary. Pillar 1 is full stability,
the supremacy of the law and good governance and the
rule of law, covering security, the judiciary and good
governance. Pillar 2 is economic recovery, focusing
on livelihoods and economic infrastructure. Pillar 3 is
peacebuilding, stressing social reconciliation through
building bridges of trust. Pillar 4 is service delivery
in the areas of health, education and the environment.
Pillar 5 is international relations, emphasizing building
collaborative relations and polishing the national image.
Pillar 6 is about the unity and integrity of the country,
12-54954

S/PV.6848

and collective striving for a better future. That is a very
brief summary. I also took the liberty to attach more on
the six pillars to the documents I have distributed.
I am also pleased to state that significant progress
has been made in the security sector. The National
Security Forces, valiantly supported by the African
Union Mission in Somalia (AMISOM) and the Ethiopian
National Defence Forces, have succeeded in liberating
significant territory from Al-Shabaab in all four sectors.
While Al-Shabaab has been significantly weakened, it
still retains the ability to strike. Therefore, it is now
all the more necessary to pursue and completely flush
them out from all sectors and all corners of Somalia.
It is now very clear that the new Federal
Government urgently needs tangible, concerted ande
well-coordinated support from the Security Council,
all United Nations bodies and the international
community, to enable and empower the new
Government in implementing and achieving the end
goals of the six-pillar policy. Furthermore, AMISOM
also urgently requires the additional support they have
been requesting for a long time now, as mentioned in the
fourth progress report of the Chairman of the African
Union Commission (S/2012/764, enclosure). We concur
with and endorse that report.
We also wish — as has been mentioned by nearly
all members of the Council — that the Somali Security
Forces should be reinforced, trained and well equipped
as a matter of urgent priority. I also wish, on behalf of
the Government and people of Somalia, to express our
sincere appreciation for the continued and unwavering
support of AMISOM, the troop-contributing countries,
including police components, and the Ethiopian forces.
We are also grateful for all the support given by the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General for
Somalia, Mr. Mahiga, and the United Nations country
team. We are very thankful for the support given by
the international community and we trust that, with the
assistance of all of our partners, Somalia will entirely
overcome the predicament it has been in for the past 21
years.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I give the floor
to the representative of Japan.
Mr. Nishida (Japan): At the outset, Mr. President,
I would like to express appreciation to you for your
leadership in convening this debate on Somalia and
for giving me the opportunity to address the Security
Council. I also would like to express appreciation to

12-54954

Mr. Elmi Ahmed Duale, Permanent Representative
of Somalia, for his statement and to Ambassador
Augustine Mahiga, Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for Somalia, for his briefing.
After more than 20 years of devastation and 8 years
of a transitional period, the concerted efforts of the
Somali Transitional Federal Government, the African
Union (AU), the United Nations, the Security Council
and other partners have contributed to the advancement
of peace and stability in Somalia. Those efforts include
the Djibouti Agreement and the Kampala Accord,
as well as the road map, which together have set
up a timeline for the political process leading to the
end of the transitional period. Japan strived to play a
substantial role in those efforts.
The political tasks have been achieved, despite
some delays. Japan commends the ownership
demonstrated by the Somali people in a democratic
and transparent manner, with the adoption of the new
provisional Federal Constitution of Somalia and the
election of President Hassan Sheikh Mohamud. The
progress that has finally put an end to the transitional
period has been remarkable. We cannot forget to
applaud the dedication of Special Representative
Mahiga to that process. Sincere tribute should also be
paid to the Somali Transitional Federal Government
and the African Union Mission in Somalia (AMISOM),
whose sacrifices made possible the liberation of a large
majority of the territory of Somalia. Japan extends its
appreciation to AMISOM troop-contributing countries
and Ethiopian troops in that regard.
The Somali people have overcome major challenges.
Now is the time for the people of Somalia to enter the
next phase of new political dispensation, stabilization
and peacebuilding. Japan welcomes the six-pillar policy
introduced by President Mohamud at his inaugural
speech, and his appointment of Mr. Abdi Farah Shirdon
as his Prime Minister. Japan is ready to support the new
Somali Government in its new endeavour towards the
reconstruction and development of the country.
While acknowledging the progress made so far,
we need to consolidate that progress. In this regard,
security still remains key, and it is indispensable to
reinforce the Somali National Security Forces. Japan
has been one of the leading actors in security sector
development in Somalia, and remains committed to
working with the United Nations and other donor
countries towards peace and security in Somalia.

21

S/PV.6848

Piracy also remains an important item on the
agenda in terms of stability in Somalia. The number
of attacks by pirates is decreasing, thanks to the joint
efforts of Somalia and the international community.
Japan is proud to have taken part in those efforts, and
continues to ensure maritime security of the region by
various measures, including the deployment of two
destroyers and two patrol aircraft in the Gulf of Aden,
working in close cooperation with other partners.
Last but not least, as Somalia enters a new phase
of peacebuilding, it is necessary for the Somali
people — who have suffered and therefore deserve
to receive the dividends of peace — to become the
front-runners in the development of the country. For
that purpose, a new road map should be made for the
reconstruction and peacebuiding of the country. Japan
appreciates the initiative of the Secretary-General
to hold a mini-summit on Somalia last month, where
participants discussed the future dispensation of
Somalia, as well as the modalities of peacebuilding
in the country. We also appreciate the United Nations
ongoing efforts to conduct a strategic review on the
future presence of the United Nations in Somalia.
Those peace, security and development initiatives
in Africa will be the top priority on our agenda under
our initiative, the Tokyo International Conference on
African Development (TICAD). The TICAD process is
the platform whereby Japan has explored and promoted
the development of the African continent, together with
its African countries and friends, since 1993. Next
June, Japan, the United Nations, the United Nations
Development Programme, and, for the first time, the
AU will co-organize the fifth TICAD meeting, and
discuss current and future challenges that Africa is now
facing, including peacebuilding in Somalia.
Japan would like to invite a high level of
participation by African countries and partners.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give
the floor to Mr. Thomas Mayr-Harting, Head of the
Delegation of the European Union to the United Nations.
Mr. Mayr-Harting: I have the honour to speak on
behalf of the European Union. The acceding country
Croatia, the candidate countries the former Yugoslav
Republic of Macedonia, Montenegro, Iceland and
Serbia, the countries of the Stabilization and Association
Process and potential candidates Albania and Bosnia
and Herzegovina, as well as the Republic of Moldova
and Georgia, align themselves with this statement.

22

I would like to begin by thanking Special
Representative Mahiga for his briefing and the
Permanent Representative of Somalia for his statement.
I would also like to thank and congratulate the
Secretary-General and his staff for having organized
the timely and successful Somalia mini-summit in
the margins of the General Assembly. It provided an
excellent opportunity for participants, including the
European Union, to hear from Somalia’s newly elected
President, Hassan Sheikh Mohamud, with which
priorities his Government aims to set the foundations
for a new beginning.
Like others, we welcome the prospects that the end
of the transition has brought to Somalia for lasting peace,
prosperity and stability. It is clear, however, that much
work remains to be done. The new federal institutions
should embark on stabilization and reconciliation
efforts throughout the country, including in those areas
recovered from Al-Shabaab, where they will need to
establish inclusive, representative administrations. Both
are crucial for the future of a viable federal Somalia.
The people of Somalia should also be assured of good
governance, transparency and accountability, justice,
respect for their rights and fundamental freedoms, and
economic development. The new federal institutions
should reach out to Somalis of all walks of life and act
in their interests, and they should finalize key pending
elements of the provisional Constitution.
The humanitarian situation remains dire. All
parties to the conflict have an obligation to comply with
international humanitarian law and to protect civilians.
Safe and unhindered humanitarian access to people in
need must be ensured by all parties involved.
Against the background of those significant
challenges, the international community should remain
strongly committed to the provision of support to the
Somali people. But in doing so we must respect Somali
ownership, carefully structuring and aligning our
collective actions into a truly comprehensive approach,
in partnership with Somalia. That requires increased
coordination, both among donor countries and among
other international actors. We must avoid duplication
and fragmentation of our support. We are ready to play an
active role and look forward to the results of the United
Nations strategic review of its presence in Somalia. We
believe that such a review must also include a renewed
commitment to help the Somali Government improve
the human rights situation and strengthen monitoring
mechanisms to that end. The European Union supports

12-54954

S/PV.6848

the Office of the High Commissioner for Human Rights
in the implementation, with the Somali authorities, of
the human rights road map.
Such a comprehensive approach would have to
deliver support at the right place and at the right time. In
line with the President of Somalia’s initial vision, that
means in practice focusing on, first, an accelerated and
intensified approach to security-sector reform; secondly,
a comprehensive approach to the elimination of piracy;
thirdly, immediate support to build the capacities of
the institutions and improve their transparency and
accountability through appropriate mechanisms; and,
fourthly, the rapid delivery of services to regions no
longer under Al-Shabaab control.
The new Somali Parliament was able to vote for
a change because of the new sense of security made
possible by the African Union Mission in Somalia
(AMISOM). I therefore want to use this opportunity to
once again acknowledge the great sacrifices made by
AMISOM troops for the benefit of the Somali people
and the role that the mission played in finalizing the
transition.
Since the deployment of AMISOM, the European
Union has been one of the main funders of the operation.
The total support to AMISOM provided by the European
Union since 2007 amounts to €412 million. We join
the African Union in its call for more predictable and
sustainable AMISOM funding, as repeated in its latest
report on the mission, and we call on others to contribute
to the AMISOM Trust Fund, in line with the demands
contained in successive Security Council resolutions.
The planned assessment of the African Union and the
United Nations on the future of international support to
Somalia should take this issue into account.
I can assure the Council that, in addition to
its support for AMISOM, the European Union
will continue to contribute to Somalia’s efforts in
addressing the remaining challenges, including
through its large amount of development assistance and
its Common Security and Defence Policy operations.
Those operations include the European Union Training
Mission, the Atalanta Naval Force and the new regional
maritime capacity-building mission for the Horn of
Africa.
In conclusion, the transition may be over, but it is
clear that the work of transformation is just beginning.
In four years’ time, Somali institutions need to
create the conditions for holding a referendum on the

12-54954

provisional Constitution and elections under universal
suffrage. The United Nations and its Members will
have to stay committed in their support and, in close
cooperation with our Somali counterparts, achieve a
united, efficient and transparent organization of our
international assistance. The Somali people deserve no
less.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Turkey.
Mr. Apakan (Turkey): I would like to thank you,
Mr. President, for having organized this debate on
Somalia, which comes at the very start of the new era in
Somalia. I would also like to extend our gratitude and
appreciation to His Excellency the Secretary-General
for having convened a mini-summit on 26 September.
That timely summit once again demonstrated the
unified support and commitment of the international
community to assisting Somalia in its peacebuilding
efforts.
On this occasion, let me congratulate His
Excellency Hassan Sheikh Mohamud on his election to
the presidency and His Excellency Abdi Farah Shirdon
for his designation as Prime Minister. I also would like
to thank the former President, Sheikh Sharif Ahmed;
Speaker Sharif Hassan; and Prime Minister Mohamed
Ali for the strong statesmanship that they displayed
throughout the most difficult times in Somalia.
Somalia has entered a completely new
era — an era of peacebuilding, institution-building,
national reconciliation and economic recovery. This era
is going to be an era of normalization.
The new, more legitimate and representative
Somali Government now has many tasks that need to
be completed in order to ensure that the normalization
process progresses successfully. We believe that all
of those tasks should be well systematized in a new
programme. Such a new programme and the new era
must be Somali-led and must also address the unfinished
tasks of the former road map. In that sense, the sixpillar plan outlined by President Mohamud is a positive
first step and sound evidence of Somali leadership.
We commend the efforts of the African Union
through the African Union Mission in Somalia
(AMISOM) and acknowledge the remarkable sacrifices
made by the troop-contributing countries. Without
AMISOM’s efforts and sacrifice, we would not have
been as optimistic about the future of Somalia.

23

S/PV.6848

The international community has developed
a common understanding on the need to support
professional and capable Somali National Security
Forces. They will eventually replace AMISOM and
assume full responsibility for securing and stabilizing
the whole country. The rebuilding and restructuring
of the Somali security sector is an indispensable
precondition for State-building. An efficient and
robust Somali security sector that represents Somalia’s
diversity is also essential to realizing the goal of a
united, secure and prosperous Somalia. There will be
no sustainable peace and prosperity without security.
At this point, I would like to draw attention to the
fact that Turkey’s efforts to establish a fund for the
restructuring and rebuilding of the Somali National
Security Forces is well under way. The political support
of the Somali authorities, neighbouring countries and
some international partners has been obtained. We
will soon start restructuring and training the Somali
National Security Forces. I would like to underscore
that all our efforts in that area will be coordinated with
the international community.
Turkey believes that at this critical period in
Somalia, the United Nations is the most important actor
in coordinating all international assistance, promoting
the political reconciliation process and providing
the necessary support in rebuilding State structures
in Somalia. We welcome the Secretary-General’s
ongoing strategic review process to determine how
the United Nations can be most helpful to Somalia in
this new era. We strongly believe that a comprehensive
United Nations presence that integrates all elements
of State — and peacebuilding support should be the
new United Nations structure in that country. Turkey
stands ready to cooperate with the United Nations in
that process.
In the efforts of the Somali people to rebuild
their country, we, as the international community, are
responsible more than ever for supporting them. While
providing our political, technical, humanitarian and
financial support, we must be aware that the Somalis
want to see our physical presence on the ground as a sign
of solidarity. We believe that opening new embassies in
Mogadishu at this historic moment in Somalia will give
the Somalis a proper signal that we, the international
community, will stand by them in their struggle for
their future.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Italy.
24

Mr. Ragaglini (Italy): I wish first of all to thank
you, Mr. President, for convening this timely debate on
the situation in Somalia.
Italy fully aligns itself with the statement to be
delivered by the observer of the European Union. I
would like to add a few remarks in my national capacity.
After two decades of instability, Somalia seems
to be finally showing signs of real promise. The
election of a new President and a new Speaker and
the appointment of a new Prime Minister, who still
requires a vote of confidence from the new Parliament,
represent a turning point in the history of Somalia.
Such developments have instilled new legitimacy in the
political process that began in 2004 with the start of the
Somali transition.
As Prime Minister Monti stated at the mini-summit
on Somalia in New York on 26 September, those are
Somali achievements, while the consolidation of peace
and stability will be primarily a Somali challenge. That
is an honour and a burden, a merit and a responsibility.
Somalis are certainly aware that reconstruction will
require a far-sighted vision and the commitment to
work for the benefit of their people, with full respect
for the principles of transparency and accountability.
The adoption of the provisional Constitution
lays the foundations for a federal democratic State.
The new Parliament must be the embodiment of the
responsibility to honour democracy and human rights.
The new President is a symbol of national unity and the
guardian and promoter of the founding principles of the
Constitution. The new Government, which we hope to
see performing its duties as soon as possible, will have
the task of implementing and administering the policies
for which the Somali people have been waiting for two
decades.
We welcome the six-pillar policy launched by
President Hassan Sheikh Mohamud. The priorities
set out in the document are at the core of the bold and
comprehensive strategy that the new Somali authorities
should carry out decisively in the years ahead. From
now on, reconstruction and stabilization must be the
guideposts for action. We expect due attention to be
paid to developing the institutional and legal framework
of democracy, the judiciary, the rule of law, human
rights and fundamental freedoms. Only when the new
Constitution is fully implemented will civil coexistence
once again be possible in Somalia. Italy is ready to do

12-54954

S/PV.6848

its part in concretely supporting the work in progress
in that field.

to play an effective role in State-building and the
consolidation of peace.

The needs of the people must be at the top of the
agenda. A civic strategy focused on health care, social
services and the creation of job opportunities is the
precondition for a full recovery.

The President: I give the floor to the representative
of Finland.

Security must also be a priority. The African Union
Mission in Somalia (AMISOM) is doing a remarkable
job, but threats still exist. Italy calls on all Somalia’s
partners to provide adequate resources to finance the
Somali National Security Forces and AMISOM, whose
presence is still needed to consolidate the security
framework. Italy is working in close cooperation with
the African Union to provide assistance to the Somali
army and training to the Somali police. We hope that
other partners will soon join us.
The past two decades of Somalia’s history have
taught us that a strategy implemented by military
means alone is not enough. We should therefore ensure
that a civilian strategy is implemented and that local
administrations, representative of all clans, are set up
to revive the reconciliation process. To that end, we
encourage the new Government to spare no effort in
building an effective federal State. At the same time,
we urge all Somalia’s partners willing to support
that federalist agenda not to encourage a process of
fragmentation. The preservation of the unity of a
Somali federal State is essential if we truly want to turn
the page and put Somalia’s past instability behind us.
Ending a transition is always difficult, but the
positive achievements of recent months are a ray of light
after two decades of darkness. If the summer of 2012 is to
be remembered as the Somali Spring, we need a renewed
and broad commitment to make such accomplishments
durable and sustainable. The international community
must continue to stand alongside the Somalis, building
on the important lessons learned, first and foremost,
solidarity and determination.
The United Nations has played a positive guiding
role and must continue to do so. The review of the
United Nations role in Somalia must take into account
the emergence of today’s new and more legitimate
authorities. The new United Nations role should
therefore be shaped through an in-depth dialogue
with the new Somali authorities to guarantee Somali
ownership of the process, to prevent duplication and to
ensure that our efforts will enable the United Nations

12-54954

Mr. Viinanen (Finland): Finland congratulates
the people of Somalia on the historical steps taken in
recent months. We give our support to the new federal
institutions and political actors in Somalia. The goal of
the political process is clear: to pave the way for general
elections and a functioning multiparty system.
Finland has constantly underlined the importance
of Somali ownership of the political process. Decisions
on Somalia’s future rest with the Somalis. The Somali
political leadership must be accountable to the Somali
people.
The United Nations Political Office for Somalia and
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General
for Somalia, Mr. Augustine Mahiga, have played a
key role in the transition process, and we thank them
for their tireless work. The reconstruction work calls
for a strategic and comprehensive approach. We look
forward to the results of the strategic review of the
United Nations presence in Somalia.
The transition period has come to a successful
conclusion, but the peace and reconciliation work
continues. An inclusive peace process leads to
sustainable peace. The full and effective participation
of women is one of the key issues for the new political
era in Somalia. The agreement on a 30 per cent quota for
women representatives in the new Parliament is a major
achievement. The role of Somali elders and traditional
leaders as constructive contributors to furthering peace
has also been vital, and will remain so. Finland has
supported the inclusion of Somali elders and religious
leaders in the peace dialogue and we will continue
to emphasize their central role in the post-transition
period as well.
Like other speakers, we would like to acknowledge
the efforts, achievements and sacrifices made by the
African Union Mission in Somalia (AMISOM), the
Somali security forces and other stakeholders. Despite
their achievements, the security situation in Somalia
is fragile. Al-Shabaab has become weaker, but it has
not vanished. International partners should continue
to capitalize on this opportunity to consolidate the
security situation in Somalia.

25

S/PV.6848

We all agree that improved security is a prerequisite
for normalizing living conditions and promoting
development in Somalia, and that includes dealing
with piracy off the coast of Somalia. Finland has
supported the work of combating piracy, among other
things by participating in the European Union Naval
Force Operation Atalanta and by supporting the United
Nations Office on Drugs and Crime’s programme for
combating maritime piracy in the Horn of Africa.

areas. In the political area, since the road map was
launched on the basis of the Djibouti Agreement and
the Kampala Accord, Spain has supported every effort
undertaken by Somalia’s Government and transitional
institutions. We have participated actively in the
meetings of the International Contact Group, one of
which was held in Madrid in September 2010, as well as
at the London and Istanbul conferences and the Group’s
meeting held in July in Rome.

We should not forget the role of the Somali diaspora.
The political developments in Somalia have shown us
how an active diaspora and able individuals can make
a difference. In Finland, we emphasize the role of the
Somali diaspora and its participation in coordinating
development. Finland is currently assessing ways of
further supporting Somalia in its development needs.

In the security area, aware that security plays a
key role in Somalia’s economic, developmental and
institutional development, Spain has contributed
actively to helping the African Union to train troops
for the African Union Mission in Somalia (AMISOM),
and until July 2011 led the European Union training
mission for security forces in Somalia. In recognition
of AMISOM’s central role in stabilizing Somalia, Spain
will continue its commitment with a contribution of
$1 million in 2012.

Now that the transition period has ended, we are
embarking upon a new era. Finland has stood side by
side with Somalia in the past, and it can count on our
support now and in the future.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Spain.
Mr. González de Linares (Spain) (spoke in Spanish):
I would like to thank you, Mr. President, for organizing
this debate on the situation in Somalia at a crucial
time when the support of the Security Council and the
international community for the new Somali authorities
is especially important.
Spain fully supports the statement made by the
Observer of the European Union. We would like to
make some brief remarks in our national capacity in
order to emphasize our commitment to Somalia.
We are very pleased with the progress made in recent
months in implementing the road map. With Somalia
having successfully reached the end of its transition
period, we are facing a new era in the country’s history.
We are confident that the new Government will make
the right decisions in dealing with the challenges ahead.
In that regard, it is essential to expand State authority
and the provision of services to the people who have
been liberated from Al-Shabaab’s control, as well as to
encourage development so that the Somali people can
begin to enjoy the rewards of peace after so many years
of destruction and suffering.
For its part, Spain firmly intends to support Somalia
in this new phase, as it has been doing since the beginning
of the process in the political, security and development

26

Spain has also played an important part in the
fight against piracy off the coast of Somalia. We are
one of the main contributors to Operation European
Union Naval Force Operation Atalanta, led by Spain
between December 2011 and April 2012. My country
also supports NATO’s Operation Ocean Shield. Under
Spain’s chairmanship, the updating in July of the
working methods of the Contact Group on piracy off
the coast of Somalia is another example of my country’s
active commitment to improving the effectiveness of
the Group’s work.
Regarding the development of Somalia, Spain
has contributed €3 million in financial assistance to
projects and initiatives in this area. I would also like
to highlight our humanitarian assistance, which has
amounted to €8.7 million euros since 2011.
In sum, in view of all the elements highlighted
in my statement, I would like to reiterate Spain’s
firm commitment to continuing to play an active role
in providing Somalia with all the support it needs to
tackle the significant challenges ahead in this new era.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Ethiopia.
Mr. Alemu (Ethiopia): I wish to thank you,
Mr. President, for taking the initiative to organize
this debate at a very important juncture in the history
of Somalia. I would also like to thank Ambassador
Mahiga for the excellent work he has been doing, and

12-54954

S/PV.6848

the Secretary-General for the serious attention he has
always given to Somalia. We regret that Ambassador
Lamamra was unable to participate in his briefing.
Recent developments in the political and security
fronts in Somalia have created an unprecedented
window of opportunity for stabilizing the country and
ensuring sustainable peace and national reconciliation
there. Indeed, this is proof of how serious national efforts
and focused and coordinated subregional, continental
and global endeavours can bring the desired results. It
is evident that the multi-pronged military operations by
the African Union Mission in Somalia (AMISOM) and
Transitional Federal Government forces, with tangible
support from the defence forces of some of Somalia’s
neighbours, have decisively weakened Al-Shabaab.
The progress made on the ground in consolidating the
security gains has continued, with the latest inroads
making it possible to foresee increasingly safe and
secure communication between Mogadishu and Baidoa.
These impressive developments, coupled with the
growing consensus within the international community
on Somalia, have converged to help the people of Somalia
seize the unique opportunity that has been created. The
Security Council should be commended for adopting
resolution 2036 (2012), significantly expanding the
number of AMISOM uniformed personnel and allowing
for the reimbursement of contingent-owned equipment.
That resolution has undoubtedly enabled peacekeeping
forces to be deployed in the liberated areas in order to
facilitate the establishment of administrative systems
by the Somali Government as well as the provision of
humanitarian assistance and repatriation for refugees,
internally displaced persons and returnees.
Whatever we in the region or the international
community might do, at the end of the day it is the
people and the leaders of Somalia who matter the most
in achieving lasting peace and reconciliation in their
country. We have no doubt that the new leadership will
continue to deepen national reconciliation and focus on
building and strengthening the necessary governance
institutions to ensure the provision of basic services
and promote economic recovery. There is no better way
for a Government to enhance legitimacy and strengthen
credibility than by making a difference in service
delivery and in attending to the basic needs of people.
We are of the view that there is real momentum
for durable peace in Somalia. The chances for making
the process irreversible have never been as excellent as

12-54954

they currently are. What remains is for there to be wise
and prudent use of those opportunities on the part of
all, including the new Government. But Somalia needs
help — genuine solidarity — that does not infringe upon
Somalis ownership of the process. The international
community has little option than to do the maximum
possible for peace in Somalia and for the economic
recovery of the country. The peace and stability of
Somalia is closely linked to regional and global peace
and stability. Accordingly, assistance rendered to
Somalia has broader significance, impinging upon the
interest of all those who value peace and stability. The
general situation in regions close to Somalia and further
afield makes it all the more critical that we appreciate
what has been gained in Somalia and that we do the best
we can to ensure that the process is irreversible.
We in the Intergovernmental Authority on
Development (IGAD) will continue, along with the
African Union (AU), as well as the United Nations
and its partners, to assist our brothers in Somalia in
proceeding with success along this promising trajectory.
In fact, a delegation led by the Executive Secretary of
IGAD is currently in Mogadishu to hold consultations
with the new Somali leadership.
We are convinced that a coordinated effort is what
continues to be needed to maintain the momentum
achieved so far and build on the gains that have
already been made. IGAD fully supports the request
by the AU Peace and Security Council for a fourmonth technical rollover of the United Nations support
package to AMISOM, as provided for in resolution
2036 (2012), adopted on 22 February, with the inclusion
of additional civilian and maritime support components
of the Mission, to address the urgent needs arising from
the realities on the ground. We also wish to reiterate
our support for the AU’s call for the Peacebuilding
Commission to take steps to contribute actively to
post-conflict reconstruction and development efforts in
Somalia.
In the same vein, we welcome the decision of the
Secretary-General to undertake an assessment that will
form the basis for coordinated and coherent United
Nations engagement in post-transition Somalia. We
believe that the review should take into account the
initiative by the African Union Commission to undertake
a strategic review of AMISOM and the implementation
of its mandate, with a view to determining how best
the Mission can further contribute to the stabilization
of Somalia and the successful implementation of the

27

S/PV.6848

priorities set by the Somali Government, in close
coordination with an empowered and restructured
national defence and security sector. Once again, we
wish to stress our readiness to cooperate with the
United Nations assessment team in its effort to develop
a comprehensive United Nations engagement strategy
for Somalia.

I now give the floor to Mr. Mahiga for any additional
comments he may wish to make.

We condemn in no uncertain terms the recent
terrorist attacks in Mogadishu. No doubt, Al-Shabaab
is retreating and is unlikely to regain strength if the
regional and the international effort to marginalize the
hardcore elements of the terrorist group is pursued in
a principled manner and in line with what is called for
by international law and the relevant Security Council
resolutions.

Mr. Mahiga: I would like to express my
appreciation to the members of the Council and to the
speakers from other Member States who were invited
for their kind words to me, the United Nations Political
Office for Somalia and my colleagues in the United
Nations. I also want to thank the members of the
Council for their support and promises of continuing
support to the African Union Mission in Somalia and
the new Government of Somalia. We are encouraged by
those sentiments and, in the coming strategic review,
we hope we will be faithfully able to present options
to the Council that will define the next mandate of our
respective institutions.

Finally, I wish to pay particular tribute to the
extraordinary sacrifices made by the Somali Security
Forces, AMISOM and the allied forces.

The President (spoke in Spanish): The Security
Council has thus concluded the present stage of its
consideration of the item on its agenda.

The President (spoke in Spanish): There are no
further speakers inscribed on my list.

28

The meeting rose at 1.05 p.m.

12-54954
