United Nations

S/PV.6688

Security Council

Provisional

Sixty-sixth year

6688th meeting
Thursday, 15 December 2011, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Churkin . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Russian Federation)

Members:

Bosnia and Herzegovina . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Brazil . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Colombia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Gabon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Germany . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
India . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Lebanon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Nigeria . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Portugal . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
South Africa . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . .
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Mr. Vukašinović
Mrs. Viotti
Mr. Wang Min
Mr. Osorio
Mr. Araud
Mr. Moungara Moussotsi
Mr. Wittig
Mr. Hardeep Singh Puri
Mr. Salam
Mr. Amieyeofori
Mr. Cabral
Mr. Nel
Sir Mark Lyall Grant
Mr. DeLaurentis

Agenda
Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-506.

11-63973 (E)

*1163973*

S/PV.6688

by State security committees, which reported to
Mr. Harun, acting at the Darfur security desk.

The meeting was called to order at 10.05 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan
The President (spoke in Russian): Under rule 37
of the Council’s provisional rules of procedure, I invite
the representative of the Sudan to participate in this
meeting.
Under rule 39 of the Council’s provisional rules
of procedure, I invite Mr. Luis Moreno-Ocampo,
Prosecutor of the International Criminal Court, to
participate in this meeting.
On behalf of the Council, I welcome the presence
at this meeting of His Excellency Mr. Andries C. Nel,
Deputy Minister of Justice and Constitutional
Development of South Africa.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I now give the floor to Mr. Moreno-Ocampo.
Mr. Moreno-Ocampo: I am honoured to brief the
Security Council on the activities of the International
Criminal Court following the adoption of resolution
1593 (2005).
As the Council will recall, in our first case, we
investigated attacks by the forces of the Government of
the Sudan against the civilian population during the
period from 2003 to 2005. The evidence showed that
the Sudanese Armed Forces would bomb villages in
Darfur and surround them, and then ground troops
would move in to kill, rape and pillage civilians in
their homes. Those attacks forced the displacement of
4 million civilians to a hostile environment. The
evidence showed the role of the then Minister of State
for the Interior, Ahmad Harun, as the coordinator of the
Government of the Sudan forces and of
militia/Janjaweed leader Ali Kushayb as the ground
commander of some of the attacks.
On 27 April 2007, Pre-Trial Chamber I issued
arrest warrants against both individuals for war crimes
and crimes against humanity. The Chamber found that
the crimes were the consequence of a coordinated
effort supervised by a clear chain of command. The
Pre-Trial Chamber ruled that local security committees
had coordinated those attacks. They were supervised

2

A few days ago, the Office requested an
additional warrant of arrest for then Minister of the
Interior Abdelrahim Mohamed Hussein, who is
currently Minister of Defence. We are charging him
with the same crimes charged in the case Prosecutor
vs. Harun and Kushayb, thus expanding the number of
suspects in the first case.
The evidence shows that Mr. Hussein was also
involved in the crimes committed by his subordinate
Harun. Between 2003 and 2005, Mr. Hussein was the
Minister of the Interior and Special Representative of
the President in Darfur, with all of the powers and
responsibilities of the President. Mr. Hussein delegated
some of his responsibilities to his deputy, Mr. Harun,
but the evidence shows that, directly and through
Mr. Harun, Mr. Hussein played a central role in
coordinating the crimes, including in recruiting,
mobilizing, funding, arming, training and deploying
the militia/Janjaweed as part of the Government of the
Sudan forces, with the knowledge that these forces
would commit crimes.
In the second case, the Office identified the
responsibility of the President of the Sudan,
Mr. Al-Bashir. He launched attacks against villages and
publicly instructed his forces to take no prisoners or
wounded, but to leave behind only scorched Earth.
President Al-Bashir’s genocidal intentions were clear
when he denied any assistance to entire groups forced
out of their homes to inhospitable areas. They were
condemned to die in the desert.
The United Nations and other humanitarian
agencies saved lives by setting up the largest
humanitarian operation in the world. President
Al-Bashir confirmed his genocidal intentions by
ordering a different type of attack against those in the
camps through rape and hunger. President Al-Bashir
appointed Ahmed Harun Minister of State for
Humanitarian Affairs to be in charge of the victims he
had displaced. As of September 2005, Harun obstructed
humanitarian efforts each step of the way. The crimes
of extermination and genocide under article 6(c) do not
require killing by bullets. They consist of intentionally
inflicting conditions of life — such as the deprivation
of access to food and medicine — calculated to bring
about the destruction of part of a population or a group.

11-63973

S/PV.6688

That was the conclusion reached by the Pre-Trial
Chamber on 4 March 2009, when it issued an arrest
warrant against President Al-Bashir for war crimes and
crimes against humanity, including the crimes of
extermination and rape. More than one year later, on
12 July 2010, Pre-Trial Chamber I issued a second
arrest warrant for President Al-Bashir for three counts
of genocide, including rape as a form of genocide and
genocide by deliberately inflicting conditions of life
calculated to bring about physical destruction.
In our third case, we are prosecuting two
commanders of the rebel groups that attacked African
Union peacekeepers in their base at Haskanita in
September 2007. They killed 12 African Union
peacekeepers, looted the entire base, and left thousands
of people displaced in the area without protection. The
two commanders charged, Abdallah Banda Abakaer
Nourain and Saleh Mohammed Jerbo Jamus, are
members of the Zaghawa, one of the ethnic groups
targeted by President Al-Bashir. On 17 June 2010, they
appeared voluntarily before the Court and both have
committed to surrender to the Court for trial. The trial
should start in 2012.
Interestingly, the rebel commanders accepted
their actual participation in the attack and are
contesting only three specific issues at trial: whether
the attack was unlawful; whether they knew it to be so;
and, most importantly, whether the African Union
Mission in the Sudan was a peacekeeping mission in
accordance with the Charter of the United Nations. If
such issues are settled in favour of the Prosecution, the
accused persons will plead guilty to the charges against
them.
These are the cases. We are still evaluating the
responsibility of Mr. Abu Garda, the leader of the rebel
attack, against whom charges were not confirmed.
These are the persons identified as most responsible for
the most serious crimes committed in Darfur over the
past six years. In order to facilitate any decision of the
Council, I want to state that there is no sealed arrest
warrant requested or pending. There is no other case at
this stage.
My duty as Prosecutor is to galvanize efforts to
implement the arrest warrants issued by the Court. In
accordance with resolution 1593 (2005), the
Government of the Sudan has the legal obligation to
cooperate with the International Criminal Court.
However, in 2007, after the issuance of the arrest

11-63973

warrant against Harun and Kushayb, President
Al-Bashir publicly refused to implement them,
challenged the Security Council’s authority and stated
that Harun had done what he had been ordered to do.
In 2009, after the Court issued an arrest warrant
against him, President Al-Bashir expelled humanitarian
organizations that provided more than half of the total
amount of aid delivered. He confirmed his criminal
plans to exterminate those ethnic groups displaced. In
addition, President Al-Bashir blackmailed the
international community by threatening to commit the
same crimes in the south of the country, threatening the
North-South peace process. President Al-Bashir was
trying to avoid isolation and campaigned at the African
Union and elsewhere for political support.
Muammar Al-Qadhafi supported this campaign
and, as the Chairman of the African Union, at the last
minute of the African Union Summit in Sirte, on 3 July
2009, he promoted the adoption of the following
clause:
“In view of the fact that the request by the
African Union for an article 16 deferral had never
been acted upon, the African Union Member
States shall not cooperate pursuant to the
provisions of article 98 of the Rome Statute of the
International Criminal Court relating to
immunities, for the arrest and surrender of
President Omar Al-Bashir of the Sudan”.
On 26 May 2010, Pre-Trial Chamber I decided that the
Government of the Sudan was not cooperating with the
Court, in violation of resolution 1593 (2005) and
communicated this decision to the Security Council.
Cooperation is being extended by other countries.
On 28 November, the High Court of Kenya
implemented an arrest warrant against President
Al-Bashir following the decision of the International
Criminal Court. President Al-Bashir retaliated
diplomatically against the Kenyan decision and
threatened economic and trade sanctions.
Most importantly, Malawi — pursuant to the
argument laid out in the African Union resolution that I
cited earlier — recently refused to arrest President
Al-Bashir. However, on 12 December, Pre-Trial
Chamber I issued a decision pursuant to article 87(7) of
the Rome Statute on the failure by the Republic of
Malawi to comply with the cooperation requests issued
by the court with respect to the arrest and surrender of

3

S/PV.6688

Omar Hassan Ahmad Al-Bashir. The Chamber found
that

implement resolution 1593 (2005) and presidential
statement S/PRST/2008/21.

“customary international law creates an exception
to Head of State immunity when international
courts seek a Head of State’s arrest for the
commission of international crimes. There is no
conflict between Malawi’s obligations towards
the Court and its obligations under customary
international law”.

My next report, in June 2012, could offer an
opportunity to establish consensus on the way forward.
The African Union and the League of Arab States
should play a central role to achieve a solution that
respects the Security Council’s authority and the
Judges’ decisions. The Government of the Sudan has to
review its policy and receive a clear message and
adjust to the world. People in Darfur need the Security
Council’s leadership.

Therefore, the Chamber concluded, article 98(1) of the
Statute does not apply.
Furthermore, the Chamber decided that Malawi
had failed to comply with its obligations to consult
with the Chamber and failed to cooperate with the
Court by failing to arrest and surrender President
Al-Bashir. A similar decision was taken a day later by
Pre-Trial Chamber I in relation to Chad. The Security
Council and the Assembly of States parties were
informed of both decisions.
In conclusion, the arrest warrants issued by the
International Criminal Court shall be implemented. The
Security Council resolutions shall be respected.
Millions of civilians in Darfur shall be protected. The
individuals sought by the Court are still allegedly
committing genocide and crimes against humanity in
Darfur.
It is the case that the world knows where the
fugitives from the Court are, for they are in official
positions, controlling the Government of the Sudan and
commanding military operations in different parts of
the Sudan. Harun is the Governor of Southern
Kordofan state, presenting himself as the man to solve
problems. The attempts to appease them and reward
them with money and recognition are not working.
Civilians in Darfur continue to be subject to
indiscriminate aerial bombardment, despite numerous
injunctions by the Council that such bombardments
cease. Likewise, the numerous injunctions by the
Council that the militia/Janjaweed be disarmed have
not resulted in their disarmament. It is very easy to
produce a long list of false promises and refusals to
abide by previous commitments.
The execution of the arrest warrants will end the
crimes in Darfur. In the coming months, the Court will
decide on the arrest warrant requested against Minister
of Defence Hussein. Such a decision will provide a
new opportunity to the Council to develop a strategy to

4

The President (spoke in Russian): I thank
Mr. Moreno-Ocampo for his briefing.
I now give the floor to the representative of the
Sudan.
Mr. Osman (Sudan) (spoke in Arabic): I would
first like to say that the records of this meeting should
reflect an important truth, namely, that our
participation in this meeting should in no way be
interpreted as Sudan dealing with the International
Criminal Court (ICC). As the Council is aware, the
Sudan is not a party to the Rome Statute and we are in
no way affected by the Court’s proceedings. Our
participation in this meeting is based on the need to
shed light on the truth of what is taking place in
Darfur. The baseless accusations in the report given to
the Council today stand in complete contradiction to
the situation in Darfur. Moreover, they contradict the
report (S/2011/643) of the Secretary-General on Darfur
and the various statements made by senior officials of
the Department of Peacekeeping Operations.
Paragraph 20 of the Secretary-General’s latest
report on the situation in Darfur, which Mr. Hervé
Ladsous, Under-Secretary-General of the Department
of Peacekeeping Operations, presented to the Council
on 25 October (see S/PV.6638), refers to the decrease
in violence in Darfur resulting from clashes between
Government and movement forces, including a drop in
the number of deaths from 1,039 in 2010 to 342 thus
far in 2011. Paragraph 38 of the report refers to the
ongoing voluntary return of internally displaced
persons and refugees to their places of origin. With
regard to the protection of civilians, paragraph 49
refers to a decrease in protection incidents this year
over the last one due to the intervention of the African
Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur
(UNAMID).

11-63973

S/PV.6688

Who are we to believe, then, the reports and their
precise statistics or the usual lies and false
accusations? Are we to believe the report of UNAMID,
the mission actually on the ground in Darfur, or the
information provided by the Prosecutor? We do not
know where that information came from. What kind of
justice are we talking about here? Those who act in this
way must answer to their conscience. History will not
forgive them. Such false accusations run counter to
reason and to the basic standards of a professional
attitude. I am quite certain that the Council will
dismiss them.
This time, the Prosecutor focused mainly on the
case of the Prosecutor versus the national Minister for
Defence, after having attempted to alter reality to
justify his allegations by saying that it was the Minister
for Defence who had appointed Mr. Ahmad Harun.
However, he reveals the true motives behind those
proceedings in paragraph 12 of the report before the
Council, in which he notes that Mr. Hussein has been
Minister of Defence since 2005, when the Sudanese
Armed Forces were engaged in armed conflict in
various regions of the country, including Southern
Kordofan and Blue Nile states. Therefore, an important
question arises. If the armed forces of any country
were facing armed rebels who were jeopardizing the
security and stability of that country, would the
Prosecutor issue an arrest warrant against the Minister
of Defence?
Members may have noted that the Prosecutor
deliberately ignored the most important historic event
regarding the situation in Darfur, namely, the signing
of the Doha Document for Peace in Darfur. There can
be no doubt that those who are aware of those events
know why the Prosecutor ignored the Doha Document.
He did so because chapter V of the Document, entitled
“Justice and Reconciliation”, stresses national justice
procedures, which means refusing the prerogatives of
the ICC, which has no competence in the Sudan
because the Sudan is not a party to the Rome Statute
and therefore under no obligation to deal with the
Court. I need not recall that the Vienna Convention on
the Law of Treaties confirms that States not parties to a
convention are not bound to comply with it.
Were we to be asked why we have not acceded to
or ratified the Rome Statute, we would reply that like
many other sovereign States, including members of the
Council, we have various reasons, which we have
shared on other occasions. I shall merely mention one

11-63973

that appears to me to be sufficient to illustrate the
reasons we have not acceded to the Rome Statute. The
Statute places the Prosecutor above accountability, and
there is no guarantee of the Prosecutor’s compliance
with the principles of neutrality and professional
integrity.
Allow me to put forward an argument made by
Ms. Condoleeza Rice, former Secretary of State of the
United States. On page 188 of her book entitled No
Higher Honor: A Memoir of My Years in Washington,
she states:
(spoke in English)
“[We] opposed the ICC on the grounds, among
others, that its prosecutor is not accountable to
any Government. For us this was an issue of
sovereignty and a step that looks a bit too much
like ‘world government’.”
(spoke in Arabic)
There is no doubt that members of the Council
agree with me that the principle of sovereignty is one
and indivisible, whether with regard to a super-Power
or a small State. Therefore, we have freely not ratified
the Statute, like others who did likewise. Consequently,
we are not bound by the Rome Statute. The reservation
that we have mentioned with regard to the lack of
accountability on the part of the Prosecutor, in the
event that he does not abide by the principles of
professional integrity and impartiality, has been
justified. I would like to share with the Council several
examples providing evidence in that regard.
The International Commission of Inquiry on
Darfur, under the chairmanship of the late Judge
Antonio Cassese, submitted its report to the SecretaryGeneral of the United Nations (S/2005/60, annex),
pursuant to Security Council resolution 1564 (2004).
On page 4 of its report, the Commission concluded that
the Government of the Sudan had not pursued a policy
of genocide.
In addition, the report has proven the absence of
the main element of the charge of genocide, namely,
the intention to commit acts of genocide. The
Commission, which was chaired by Mr. Cassese, an
outstanding international jurist, also stated that the
crucial element, namely, genocidal intent, appeared to
be missing, at least as far as the central Government
authorities were concerned.

5

S/PV.6688

Another source, an official of an internationally
credible organization, Dr. Mercedes Taty, a former
Deputy Emergency Director for Médecins sans
frontières, stated in an MSNBC interview on 16 April
2004 that she did not think that the word ‘genocide’
should be used to describe the conflict in Darfur.
Another example, taken from outside the Sudan,
which refutes the allegations of the Prosecutor, who
has considerably compromised his professional
integrity and impartiality, was given by Dr. Jean-Hervé
Bradol, past President of Médecins sans frontières in
France, who said:
(spoke in English)
“Our teams have not seen evidence of the deliberate
intention to kill people of a specific group” and that the
use of the term “genocide” was inappropriate.
(spoke in Arabic)
Dr. Bradol worked in Darfur and was a member of a
credible volunteer organization in a country that
respects the values of justice.
(spoke in English)
Dr. Bradol subsequently described the claims of
genocide propagated by a certain circle as “obvious
political opportunism”. I refer here to an article that
appeared in The Financial Times on 6 July 2004, and a
news article by Agence France Presse. I would also
mention another article by Dr. Bradol, entitled “From
one genocide to another”, dated 28 September 2004.
I can provide more details for all the sources that
I have cited, just to show that our sources are credible,
while the other party simply propagates unfounded
allegations without referring to even a single credible
source, let alone factual information.
(spoke in Arabic)
Another source is the European Union (EU) factfinding mission that was dispatched to Darfur in 2004,
at the zenith of the conflict. The official spokesperson
of that mission stated:
(spoke in English)
“We are not in the situation of genocide there”. He
added that the EU saw abuses, but not genocide, in
Darfur. I refer here to a Reuters news article of
9 August 2004.

6

(spoke in Arabic)
Speaking to Al-Jazeera on 10 August 2004, the
spokesperson of the EU fact-finding mission stated that
(spoke in English)
“the EU mission finds no evidence of genocide in
Darfur”. I would note that he actually travelled to
Darfur and did not simply carry out his assignment
from some unknown remote location.
(spoke in Arabic)
Another source is Mr. John Danforth, who at the
time was serving as the Special Envoy for Peace in the
Sudan of former President Bush. On 3 July 2005, in a
BBC Panorama interview, he stated that
(spoke in English)
the use of the genocide label “was something that was
said for internal consumption within the United
States”. He is a credible source who is from the United
States itself.
(spoke in Arabic)
Another source is former Nigerian President
Olusegun Obasanjo, the then President of the African
Union and host of the Inter-Sudanese Peace Talks on
the Conflict in Darfur held in Abuja. He stated,
(spoke in English)
“What we know is that there was armed rebellion,
and the government repelled them. That does not
amount to genocide from our own reckoning.”
Another example is Mr. Jan Egeland, former
Under-Secretary-General for Political Affairs, saying
ethnic cleansing did not “fit [the legal definition of]
events in Darfur”.
The last example is Mrs. Asma Jahangir, the
United Nations Special Rapporteur on extrajudiciary,
summary and arbitrary executions, at the height of the
conflict in Darfur told the BBC on 8 June 2004: “I
would not categorize it as ethnic cleansing at the
moment because that is not the impression that I am
getting.”
(spoke in English)
The reference is BBC News, 8 June 2004. Here again, I
ask the person who spoke before me just to provide a
single source for his allegations.

11-63973

S/PV.6688

(spoke in Arabic)
I have cited examples that refute the allegations
of the Prosecutor and show the lack of authenticity in
the most serious accusation, that of ethnic cleansing,
with which he charged President Ahmad Al-Bashir. If
that is his approach, which I have just disproved before
the Council — not on the basis of Sudanese arguments
and contentions, but by examples from a range of
credible heads of international and voluntary
organizations, senior United Nations officials and
senior politicians, such as Mr. Danforth, President
Bush’s special envoy to the Sudan — then what are we
to make of all those false allegations and charges that
he has made against a number of Sudanese officials?
The most recent was the current Minister of Defence,
Mr. Abdelrahim Mohamed Hussein, who had
previously fulfilled his national duties as Minister of
Interior when he contained the armed rebellion. His
current actions as Minister of Defence, protecting the
country against armed rebel movements that threaten
the peace, stability and security of the country, and the
considerable efforts he has made have led to the
establishment of peace, security and stability in the
Sudan from Darfur to the Nuba Mountains and as far as
Blue Nile state.
We challenge anyone to say that there is now one
single outbreak of violence or battle happening
anywhere in the Sudan. Life has returned to normal. It
is a source of pride for those who have been falsely
accused by the Prosecutor that they were a central part
of the Government of the Sudan that negotiated and
implemented the Comprehensive Peace Agreement,
which ended the longest war in Africa and led to the
peaceful establishment of the South Sudan. How can
those who have tried to make peace for more than
60 years be falsely accused by those who do not
respect the principle of impartiality and have no
professional integrity, as defined in the provisions of
the United Nations Charter?
With regard to the responsibility of the military
State to ensure peace and security throughout the

11-63973

country, the Government of the Sudan opens the doors
wide to the rebels in the various regions of the country
and calls on them to have the sense to come and
negotiate with a view to reaching peaceful solutions.
The Doha Document for Peace in Darfur is the most
credible example of our Government’s eagerness to
achieve peace. All leaders of the 11 rebel factions who
came from outside the country were originally from
Darfur. Having signed the Doha Document, they
returned to the Sudan and engaged with the
Government and our people in Darfur to implement the
Agreement in order to achieve development, peace and
justice.
The situation in Darfur has improved
considerably. Only a blind person cannot see that. The
contents of the most recent report of the SecretaryGeneral (S/2011/643) are clear proof of it. I therefore
appeal to the Council, which is entrusted with the
maintenance of peace and security, to assist the
Government of the Sudan in our efforts to complete the
drive for peace and, through its commendable efforts,
to encourage and urge the remaining rebel movements
in Darfur, the Blue Nile and Southern Kordofan to
come and negotiate with us so that we can all live in a
homeland for us all. I am confident that the Council
will not heed those who propagate the culture of war.
In conclusion, it is clear that the Prosecutor
intentionally ignored the most important historic event
in Darfur, namely, the Doha Document for Peace. That
was acknowledged in a previous resolution (2003
(2011). I am confident that the Council will continue to
support that considerable effort, which is about to
conclude and of which we are in the final phase.
The President (spoke in Russian): In accordance
with the understanding reached in the course of the
Council’s prior consultations, I now invite Council
members to informal consultations to continue our
discussion of the subject in a closed meeting.
The meeting rose at 11 a.m.

7
