VI.

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

Jegally binding international treaties in the field of
human rights,
Recalling its resolution 31/86 of 13 December 1976
and in particular the importance of the entry in_to force
of the International Covenants on Human R1ghts as
a major step in the international efforts to promote and
encourage rcspect for human rights and fundamental
freedoms for ali, thereby contributing greatly to the
co-operation of States in the attainment. of the ~urposes
and principies of the Charter of the Umted Nat10ns,
Recalling in this respect its resolutions 2200 A (XXI)
of 16 December 1966 and 3270 (XXIX) of 10 December 1974,
Noting with appreciation that following its appeal
severa! Member States have acceded to the International Covenants on Human Rights,
Having noted the report of the Secretary-General on
the status of the International Covenant on Economic,
Social and Cultural Rights, the International Covenant
on Civil and Political Rights and the Optional Protocol
to the International Covenant on Civil and Political
Rights, 33
Bearing in mind the important responsibilities of the
Economic and Social Council in relation to the international Covenants on Human Rights.
Recognizing the important role of the Human Rights
Committee in the implementation of the International
Covenant on Civil and Political Rights and thc Optional
Protocol thereto,
1. Recognizes the importance of the International
Covenants on Human Rights as a major step in the
international efforts to promote universal respect for and
observance of human rights and fundamental freedoms;
2. Notes with appreciation the report of the Human
Rights Committee on its first and second sessions34
and expresses satisfaction at the serious manner in
which the Committee is undertaking its functions;
3. Expresses its appreciation to States parties to
the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights
which have extended their co-operation to the Human
Rights Committee;
4. Invites again all States which have not yet done
so to become parties to the International Covenant on
Economic, Social and Cultural Rights and the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights as well
as to consider the possibilities of acceding to the Optional Protocol thereto;
5. Appreciates that the Human Rights Committee
strives for uniform standards in the implementation of
the provisions of the International Covenant on Civil
and Political Rights and of the Optional Protocol
thereto;
6. Requests the Secretary-General to keep the
Human Rights Committee informed of the activities of
the Commission on Human Rights, the Sub-Commission
on Prevention of Discrimination and Protection of
Minorities and the Committee on the Elimination of
Racial Discrimination;
7. Requests the Secretary-General to submit to the
General Assembly at its thirty-third session a report
33 A/32/ 188.

34 Official Records of the General Assembly, Thirty-second
Session, Supplement No. 44 (A/32144 and Corr.1).

139

on the status of the International Covcnant on Economic Social and Cultural Rights, thc International
Coven°ant on Civil and Political Rights and the Optional
Protocol to thc International Covenant on Civil and
Política! Rights;
8. Recalls that the lnternational Covenant on Civil
and Political Riohts envisagcs that the Secretary-General
shall provide the necessary staff and facilities for the
effective performance of the Human Rights Committee.
98th plenary meeting
8 December 1977
32/67.

Report of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees

The General Assembly,
Having considered the report of the United Nations
High Commissioner for Refugces on the activities of
his Office 3 " and having heard bis statement, 3 u
Recalling its resolution 31 /35 of 30 November 1976
and taking into account the additional responsibilities
assumcd by the High Commissioner in different parts
of the world for the benefit of an increasing number of
refugees and displaced persons.
Recognizing the eminently humanitarian character
of the various activities of the High Commissioner and
the importance of permanent solutions being promoted
by bis Officc, including voluntary repatriation, local
integration or resettlement in othcr countries,
Concerned by infringements of the basic human
rights of refugees and the urgent need on the part of
Governments to ensurc their effective and continued
protection,
Recognizing the need for further accessions to and
effective implementation by Governments of the relevant
international instruments, including in particular the
1951 Convention relating to thc Status of Refugeesª 7
and the 1967 Protocol relating to the Status of Refugces, ª8
Commending the increasing number of Governments
contributing to the High Commissioner's programmes
and emphasizing the need for a wider sharing of the
financia! burden to provide the vital humanitarian assistance required by rcfugees and displaced persons,
1. t;xpresses its deep satisf action at the effi.cient
manner in which the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees and his staff continue to accomplish
their humanitarian tasks;
2. Requests the High Commissioner to continue to
provide humanitarian assistance to refugees and displaced persons of eoncern to his Office, including those
in urgent need of help in Africa. Asia and Latin
America;
3. Further requests Unitcd Nations agencies and
programmes to render the fullest possible support to the
High Commissioner's humanitarian tasks;
4. Urges Governments to extend the necessary cooperation to thc High Commissioner in promoting permanent and speedy solutions to the problems facing
35 /bid., Supplement No. 12 (A/32/12 and Corr.1) and
Supplement No. 12A (A/32/12/Add.l).
36 /bid., Thirty-second Session, Third Committa, 45th meeting, paras. 1-9; and ibid., Tlzird Committee, Sessional Fascicle,
corrigendum.
:n United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 189, No. 2545, p. 150.
:18 /bid., vol. 606, No. 8791, p. 267.

General Assembly-Thirty-sccond Scssion
_ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ __

140

his Office through voluntary repatriation and assistance
in rehabilitation of returnecs, integration in countries of
asylum or resettlement in other countries as needed;
5. Further urges Governments to facilitate the efforts of the High Commissioner in the field of international protection, ínter ali a:
(a) By considering accession to the relevant international and regional instruments established for the
benefit of refugees;
( b) By elaborating appropriatc procedures at the
national level for the effcctivc implementation of the
provisions of these instruments;
(e) By following humanitarian principies with
respect to the granting of asylum and ensuring that
these are scrupulously observed, including the principie of non-refoulement of refugees;

6. Calls upon Governments to contribute generously
towards the financing of the High Commissioner's humanitarian activities in view of the universal character
of the problems facing bis Office and the need for a
wider financia! support of the programmes being undertaken by him.
98th plenary meeting
8 December 1977

32/69.

Expression of appreciation to the United
Nations High Commissioner for Refugees

The General Assembly,
Notíng with deep regret that the United Nations
High Commissioner for Refugees will shortly be relinquishing his duties,
Recognizing the progress achieved under his guidance
in promoting humanitarian solutions to the problems
of refugees and displaced persons in various parts of
the world,
Considering his unrelenting efforts to alleviate human suffering through the special humanitarian tasks
entrusted to him in addition to the original functions
of his Office,
l. Expresses its sincere appreciation and thanks to
Prince Sadruddin Aga Khan for the effective and dedicated manner in which he has performed his functions
as United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees;
2. Extends its good wishes to him for success in his
future undertakings.
98th plenary meeting
8 December 1977

32/70.

Assistance to refugees in southern Africa

Recognizing the need for concerted international action on behalf of the increasing numbers of refugees
and displaced persons of concern to the High Commissioner,

The General Assembly,
Noting the information provided by the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees on the assistance
activities of his Office on behalf of refugees in southern
Africa, 39
Noting with deep concern the increasing number of
refugees from Namibia, South Africa and Zimbabwe
and recognizing the burden thus imposed upon the
receiving countries,
Noting the continuing efforts of the High Commissioner to extend adequate assistance to these refugees,
particularly in neighbouring African States,
Recognizing the clase co-operation existing between
th~ 9rganization of African Unity and the High Comm1ss10ner,

Considering the outstanding work which has been
performed by the Office of the High Commissioner in
providing international protcction and material assistance to refugees and displaced persons as well as in
promoting permanent solutions to their problems,

_l. _Commends the program~es of assistance already
b~m~ 1mplemented by the Umted Nations High Comm1ss10ner for Refugees and requests him further to
strengthen measures for the benefit of refugees in southern Africa;

Noting with deep appreciation the effective manner
in which the Office of the High Commissioner has been
dealing with various essential humanitarian tasks entrusted to it,

2. Urges Governments to contribute generously towards the programmes of the High Commissioner and
to provide him with the necessary facilities required to
a~s~st the refuge~~ in southern Africa, ínter alía by prov1dmg opportumt1es for local settlement, education and
vocational training;

32/68.

Continuation of the Office of the United
Nations High Commissioner for Refugees

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 2957 (XXVII) of 12 December 1972, in which it decided to review, not later
than at its thirty-second session, the arrangements for
the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner
for Refugees with a view to determining whether the
Office should be continued beyond 31 December 1978,

1. Decides to continue the Office of the United
Nations High Commissioner for Refugees for a further
period of five ycars from 1 January 1979;

2. Decides to rcview, not later than at its thirtyseventh session, the arrangements for thc Office of thc
High Commissioner with a view to detcrmining whether
thc Office should be continued beyond 31 December 1983.

98th plenary meeting
8 December 1977

3. Requests United Nations agencies and programmes, non-governmental organizations and voluntary agencies to extend maximum support to the High
Cornmissioner in his efforts;
4. Requests the High Commissioner to continue
his co-operation with the Organization of African Unity
39 See Ofjicial Records of the General Assembly
Thirtysecond Scssion, Supplement No. 12 (A/32/12 and 'Corr.l),
chap. III.
