S/2021/415

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
30 April 2021
Original: English

Letter dated 29 April 2021 from the President of the
Security Council addressed to the Secretary-General and the
Permanent Representatives of the members of the Security Council
I have the honour to enclose herewith a copy of the briefings provided by
Mr. Mark Lowcock, Under-Secretary-General for Humanitarian Affairs and
Emergency Relief Coordinator; Mr. Peter Maurer, President of the International
Committee of the Red Cross; and Mr. Kevin Rudd, Chair of the Board of Directors
of International Peace Institute, as well as the statements delivered by Their
Excellencies Mr. Bui Thanh Son, Minister for Foreign Affairs of Viet Nam; Ms.
Eva-Maria Lijmets, Minister for Foreign Affairs of Estonia; Mr. Simon Coveney,
Minister for Foreign Affairs and Defence of Ireland; Ms. Linda Thomas-Greenfield,
Permanent Representative of the United States and Member of President Biden’s
Cabinet; Mr. Jens Frølich Holte, Deputy Minister for Foreign Affairs of Norway; Mr.
Sergey Vershinin, Deputy Minister for Foreign Affairs of the Russian Federation;
Ms. Keisal Peters, Minister of State in the Ministry of Foreign Affairs and Trade
of Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, as well as by the representatives of China,
France, India, Kenya, Mexico, the Niger, Tunisia and the United Kingdom of Great
Britain and Northern Ireland, in connection with the video-teleconference on the
“Protection of civilians in armed conflict: indispensable civilian objects” convened
on Tuesday, 27 April 2021.
In accordance with the understanding reached among Council members
for this video-teleconference, the following delegations and entities submitted
written statements, copies of which are also enclosed: Afghanistan, Armenia,
Austria, Azerbaijan, Bahrain, Belgium, Brazil, Costa Rica, Cuba, Ecuador, Egypt,
El Salvador, Ethiopia, the European Union, Guatemala, the Islamic Republic of
Iran, Italy, Japan, Liechtenstein, Malta, Myanmar, Pakistan, Poland, Portugal, the
Republic of Korea, South Africa, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, Turkey, Ukraine and
the United Arab Emirates.
In accordance with the procedure set out in the letter dated 7 May 2020 from
the President of the Security Council addressed to the Permanent Representatives
of the members of the Security Council (S/2020/372), which was agreed in the light
of the extraordinary circumstances caused by the coronavirus disease pandemic,
these briefings and statements will be issued as an official document of the
Security Council.
(Signed) Dang Dinh Quy
President of the Security Council

21-05813 (E) 040521 010621

*2105813*

S/2021/415

Annex 1
Briefing by the Under-Secretary-General for Humanitarian Affairs
and Emergency Relief Coordinator, Mark Lowcock
The whole world is grappling with the biggest crisis of our lifetime. Our only
battle today should be with the coronavirus disease (COVID-19). Now is the moment
to end all other conflicts. But wherever violent conflict persists, we must strengthen
the protection of civilians.
Over the past 30 years, there has been some progress made to comply with
international humanitarian law to protect civilians and the objects they rely on to
survive, such as food, medicines, hospitals and water installations. But it has not
been enough.
In the past two decades we have seen the emergence of transnational terrorist
groups that totally reject the laws of war — groups that use their nihilistic ideologies
to justify unspeakable violence against civilians. They do not even pretend to
subscribe to the basic humanitarian norms. They regard civilians, including aid
workers, as legitimate targets.
At the same time, big military Powers are reorienting their military planning,
training and spending to deter and defeat enemy States. And when States and armed
groups disrespect or undermine international humanitarian law, other States and
non-State actors regard it as an invitation to do the same.
I am deeply concerned about what this means for our ability to protect decades
of hard-won progress. I will set out the impact of conflict on four critical areas.
First, let me talk about food. In April, Mr. David Beasley, Mr. Qu Dongyu
and I briefed the Security Council (see S/2020/340) on the destructive link between
conflict and food security. The impact of armed conflict on food security can be
direct, such as the destruction of food stocks and agricultural assets. Attacks on food
drive people to move and they disrupt food systems and markets, leaving few able to
afford food or access water and fuel to prepare food.
Last year, in Nigeria, an attack on a rice farm in the outskirts of Maiduguri
killed more than 110 farmers. The pillaging of food and livestock was widely
reported in South Sudan between 2013 and 2020. In Yemen, air strikes and shelling
have hit farms, markets, food storage sites and fishing boats. Even now, we hear
reports of agricultural inputs and infrastructure in Ethiopia’s Tigray region being
systematically destroyed in that conflict.
Any attack on food supplies and food infrastructure is unacceptable. I have
been reporting to the Security Council on the risk of conflict-induced famine since
2018. And we across the United Nations, together with our non-governmental
organization partners, recently warned of the risk of famine looming in Yemen,
South Sudan, north-east Nigeria and elsewhere if urgent action is not taken.
Secondly, let me talk about water. In January 2016, the Islamic State in Iraq
and the Levant cut off the water supply to Aleppo governorate in Syria, affecting
some 2 million people. Boko Haram is known to have poisoned water sources such
as wells and streams, making water use dangerous for both humans and livestock.
Cutting off a safe water supply during conflict causes sanitation and health
crises. Even one incident that disrupts the water supply can have enormous health
consequences. Evidence shows that even a single brief disruption to a drinking
water supply — for just one day — can heighten the risk of contracting water-borne
diseases such as cholera. This particularly affects very young children, for whom
infection presents the greatest risk of death.
2/102

21-05813

S/2021/415

Water and sanitation services are often hit in armed conflicts. In Ukraine
and in Libya, fighting has damaged water infrastructure and hindered maintenance,
leading to cuts and shortages. Deliberately interrupting or shutting down a water
supply is also used as a tactic of war. In South Sudan, Sudan People’s Liberation
Army soldiers stole pumps that were used by locals in Mboro to pump water
from boreholes, thereby depriving them of access to water for both consumption
and sanitation.
Thirdly, let me talk about medical care. Violence, attacks and threats against
medical care significantly weaken the ability of health systems to function. What
I have found particularly hard to stomach are the systematic attacks on medical
facilities in Syria. The World Health Organization counted 250 such attacks between
2018 and 2020 alone. These attacks have killed about 1,000 health-care workers over
the past decade.
Besides being acts of pure cruelty, these attacks have devastated the Syrian
health system. My predecessors and I have appeared regularly before the Security
Council to call out these violations and plead on behalf of people trapped in the
fighting. In Burkina Faso, ambulances have been burned and health facilities looted.
In Mali, equipment and medicine were destroyed or looted and vehicles hijacked.
Attacks have also affected the COVID-19 response. In Libya last year, air
strikes and shelling damaged hospitals treating COVID-19 patients. In Yemen,
quarantine centres were damaged in hostilities. As a result of these frequent attacks,
medical professionals flee and facilities are often forced to close, leaving millions
without access to health care. Facilities that do remain open face acute shortages of
staff, medicines and supplies. At the end of June last year, only half of 113 Syrian
hospitals checked were fully functioning. In March last year, up to 70 per cent of the
health workforce had left the country.
Fourthly, we see horrific instances of the use of rape and other sexual violence
in the pursuit of political and military goals, and the intentional destruction of the
infrastructure that supports survivors. That is what we saw as part of a deliberate
effort to force hundreds of thousands of Rohingya out of Myanmar in 2017. I will
never forget some of the stories — women I met in Cox’s Bazar told me of their
experience — of systematically organized rape by men in uniform in front of families
and children. It is also what we have seen in the last six months in northern Ethiopia;
the rapes there have not stopped. They are deliberately and systematically organized,
targeted, ethnically based and intended to terrorize, humiliate and brutalize.
I could give plenty of other examples from what I have seen and heard over
the past four years. Sometimes a conflict can produce horrific results due not only to
who or what is targeted but where and how it is done. The use of explosive weapons
in populated areas exposes large numbers of civilians to the risk of death or injury.
When these were used in populated areas last year, 88 per cent of those killed or
injured were civilians, as compared to 16 per cent in other areas.
The use of explosive weapons in urban areas also has a devastating toll on
essential infrastructure and services. A 2020 study in Yemen showed how the use of
heavy explosive weapons in populated areas has disrupted every resource and system
in the country, including water and power supplies, hospitals and sanitation systems.
Fewer people want to return if their supply of vital services has been destroyed.
Fewer people can.
In an increasingly digitized world, cyberattacks also pose a threat to essential
infrastructure. As the Secretary-General has noted, cyberattacks — with their
associated impact on health care, electrical and water infrastructure — could become
increasingly widespread. Disruption to electricity grids can deprive huge numbers
21-058133/102

S/2021/415

of people of electrical power. Cyberattacks have jeopardized health-care services
in places such as the United Kingdom, the Czech Republic, France, Spain and the
United States — sometimes forcing operations to be delayed, compromising patient
data and disrupting services, including the processing of COVID-19 tests.
Imagine a similar scenario playing out in a country already affected by armed
conflict. It would not only have a devastating effect on people in the immediate- and
longer-term but would also hamper the humanitarian response.
There are three ways to strengthen the protection of civilians and of objects
indispensable to their survival.
The first is to enhance compliance with international humanitarian law. That
can be done by better identifying these indispensable objects and regularly updating
no-strike lists that include them. We also need to respond to, and learn from, harm
to such objects. At the same time, we need to continue to leverage political dialogue,
sanctions and arms-transfer decisions in order to ensure respect for the law and the
protection of civilians and the objects they depend on to survive.
The second way is to prevent the use of explosive weapons with wide-area
effects in populated areas, as the Secretary-General has repeatedly called for. Good
practices exist — for example, in Afghanistan and Somalia, where multinational
forces’ use of certain air-delivered weapons has been restricted or their use of
artillery and other indirect-fire munitions has been limited. In 2017, the Office for
the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs published a compilation of military policy
and practice to reduce the humanitarian impact of the use of explosive weapons in
populated areas.
Thirdly, unless there is accountability, miscreants will draw the lesson
that serious crime pays. Essentially, what is not punished is incentivized. If war
crimes go unpunished, things will get worse. Ensuring accountability for serious
violations of international humanitarian law is one of the greatest challenges
we face in strengthening the protection of civilians. It is especially important to
ensure accountability for serious violations when they are themselves a tactic and a
deliberate choice made by perpetrators. As the Secretary-General has said,
“our power in the United Nations is a power of persuasion, is a power of
speaking up, denouncing what needs to be denounced. But we cannot order
countries to do what they must do.”
We have a robust legal framework governing parties’ behaviour in war, and
we have a growing body of good practice to put it into motion. All we need now is
the political will of Member States and all parties to armed conflict to respect the
rules and do the right thing.

4/102

21-05813

S/2021/415

Annex 2
Briefing by the President of the International Committee of the
Red Cross
Today the International Committee of the Red Cross (ICRC) brings a warning
to the Security Council: without urgent action to protect essential services in conflict
zones, we face a humanitarian disaster on a vast scale. I commend the Council,
under the leadership of Viet Nam, for promoting this debate and the accompanying
resolution 2573 (2021) in order to bring political attention to this critical
operational concern.
Through our work in Aden, Aleppo, Benghazi, Gaza, Homs, Mosul and beyond,
the ICRC has become all too familiar with the severe and cumulative impacts on
populations when essential services, including electricity, health, education, water
and sanitation, are damaged in conflict. The humanitarian consequences are grim,
ranging from health crises to displacement to environmental degradation. There is
often no safe water to drink, no electricity to power homes and no health services to
treat the wounded and sick.
It is those who already face barriers and disadvantages that are the most
affected — notably women and children, older people and persons with disabilities.
In protracted conflicts, children under 5 are 20 times more likely to die from diseases
linked to unsafe water and sanitation than from violence.
The ICRC works in the midst of this suffering. We are present during the
long years of war when political solutions are absent, because allowing critical
infrastructure to fail is simply not an option. Substituting local authorities for
decades with water trucking or providing medical equipment to clinics in remote
basements is not an option.
The ICRC is therefore working to prevent the collapse of critical infrastructure
that is too big to fail, which would plunge millions into crisis. That means the repair
and rehabilitation of infrastructure and the provision of parts, as well as training
and capacity-building, to local service providers. In doing so, we seek to mitigate
humanitarian consequences, strengthen the resilience of essential services and curb
the reversal of the Sustainable Development Goals.
Preventing that damage in the first place, however, is paramount. International
humanitarian law provides crucial safeguards aimed at ensuring that essential
services continue during armed conflict. Given the enormous suffering of civilians,
serious questions are raised as to how parties to conflict are interpreting and
concretely applying such obligations, particularly in urban settings.
Those rules include the obligation to refrain from attacking, destroying,
removing or otherwise rendering useless objects indispensable to the survival of
the civilian population and, more generally, the requirement to take constant care
to spare the civilian population, civilians and civilian objects from harm in the
conduct of military operations and to respect the basic principles of distinction,
proportionality and precaution. They also include the prohibition of indiscriminate
and disproportionate attacks, the requirement to take all feasible precautions in
attacks and managing the effects of attacks in order to protect civilians and civilian
objects and following the rules that seek to protect the natural environment and limit
the damage caused to it. Today I call on the Council to do five things.
First, the Council must ensure that all parties to armed conflict and those who
support them make efforts to better respect international humanitarian law. That
includes rules on the conduct of hostilities that protect civilians and civilian objects,
as well as critical infrastructure that enables the delivery of essential services in order
to protect civilian personnel who operate, maintain and repair that infrastructure.
21-058135/102

S/2021/415

Secondly, the ICRC continues to call for the adoption of an “avoidance policy”
regarding the use of heavy explosive weapons in populated areas. Such weapons
should not be used against targets in populated areas unless sufficient mitigation
measures are taken to reduce the risks to civilians, including measures to limit
their wide-area effects. Military manuals, strategies and ground rules need to be
adapted to the new realities of urban warfare and an interpretation of the rules of
international humanitarian law that does justice not only to military necessity but
also the principle of humanity.
Thirdly, we call on all States to ensure that sanctions regimes and counterterrorism measures comply with international humanitarian law, particularly the
rules governing humanitarian activities. Effective mitigating measures, especially
lasting and well-framed humanitarian exemptions, must be put in place to enable
impartial humanitarian organizations to ensure continuity in the delivery of
essential services.
Fourthly, we urge the adoption of measures so that health care and
interconnected services such as water, sanitation and electricity are protected to
safeguard against public health risks. Frequently, we see infectious diseases,
such as cholera epidemics, rip through communities where water and sanitation
infrastructure have been destroyed during fighting. Preventable diseases are costing
too many lives as epidemics spread beyond the borders of war zones.
Fifthly, we call on States to adopt measures to increase their understanding
of the effects of conflict on the natural environment and minimize the impact of
military operations on the environment and dependent civilians. Some elements of
the natural environment are indispensable for the survival of the civilian population.
Damage to critical infrastructure poses a wide range of threats to the environment,
which in turn can have devastating environmental health impacts. Climate risks now
magnify that harm for dependent communities.
We welcome further discussions with States on all of these recommendations.
The ICRC has developed a body of practice-based knowledge to support our
expertise in the law. As a humanitarian organization we have been confronted with
the limits of the collective humanitarian response in the face of extensive damage
and destruction to critical infrastructure, as well as its misuse by parties to conflict.
While humanitarian organizations are adept at directing assistance towards
the most vulnerable, the risk posed to populations if an essential service system fails
is alarming. When systems fail, the scale of the consequences far exceed what can
be addressed by humanitarian action alone.
Recognizing the need to respond at scale has led us to forge new relationships,
including with development actors. Together with the World Bank and UNICEF, we
have developed a series of joint recommendations for systemic change in a recently
released report on water and sanitation, entitled Joining Forces to Combat Protracted
Crises. Evidently, that does not replace the need for belligerents to prevent the
damage, destruction and misuse of critical infrastructure in the first place.
In the face of this pressing situation, my call is for us to work together, and
I urge the Council to show leadership so that the suffering of the men, women and
children who have lived through the horrors of wars is not compounded.

6/102

21-05813

S/2021/415

Annex 3
Briefing by the Chair of the International Peace Institute Board of
Directors, Kevin Rudd
I thank you for inviting the International Peace Institute to brief the Security
Council on this crucial issue. The International Peace Institute was founded more
than 50 years ago in partnership with Secretary-General U Thant and has contributed
closely to this matter — both here in New York but also in the field. I also want to
acknowledge the leadership of Viet Nam in convening this debate today.
Let me be clear — targeting objects indispensable to the survival of the
civilian population is prohibited by international law. It is an offence to humanity
and an insult to the aspirations of the United Nations and the commitment of its
members to peace, development and human rights.
The Council has recalled on several occasions the obligation to protect essential
civilian infrastructure, including most recently with the adoption of resolution 2565
(2021), on access to the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) vaccines. Nonetheless,
both deliberate and inadvertent attacks against vital human infrastructure and the
natural environment remain a daily reality. That is a shocking indictment of us all,
and it is important that the Security Council — as the leading organ for international
peace and security — remains seized of it.
Examples of this include the repeated attacks on medical facilities and water
infrastructure in Yemen and the central Sahel, the theft of cattle and destruction of
sanitation projects in South Sudan, the cutting off of water supplies in Somalia, the
detonation of electricity pylons in Afghanistan, the scorching of farmers’ fields in
Iraq and Mozambique, attacks against humanitarian actors in northern Nigeria and
the Niger and cyberattacks against hospitals.
Attacks on essential civilian infrastructure are not confined, however, to a
single context or perpetrator. They occur in international and national conflicts, in
urban and rural settings, and both intentionally and unintentionally. This a problem
that concerns all parties to armed conflict, and we all have a responsibility to protect
objects indispensable to the survival of the civilian population.
The targeting of vital infrastructure and natural resources impacts us all —
men, women, boys and girls. Most immediately and directly, it disrupts access to
essential goods and services. Since the beginning of the year, the World Health
Organization has recorded more than 160 attacks against health care — more than
one attack per day. In Yemen, more than 40 attacks between 2018 and 2020 damaged
water infrastructure, including some managed by humanitarian organizations,
thereby restricting water supplies for up to 185,000 households. Such destruction
causes food and water shortages, increases prices and exposes the population,
especially children, to preventable disease and the risk of malnutrition. It also forces
children out of school and generates massive displacement.
That impact is still being felt in many places as natural resources and the
means of subsistence are depleted and public services suffer. Those effects are
compounded by climate change and environmental degradation, as well as by public
health emergencies, including the ongoing COVID-19 pandemic.
Humanitarian crises turn into development crises, with an urgent need for the
reconstruction and rehabilitation of infrastructure. But in places like Afghanistan
and Syria, protracted armed violence constrains the scope for rebuilding. In the
long term, attacks on vital infrastructure render the Sustainable Development Goals
unattainable for millions.
The resulting destruction and prolonged deprivation also raise the prospects
for renewed cycles of violence, thereby generating grievances among affected
21-058137/102

S/2021/415

populations and accentuating feelings of exclusion. Membership in armed groups
sometimes provide the best opportunities for securing a livelihood. This situation
creates optimal conditions for recruitment into armed groups and the perpetuation
of armed violence.
Ultimately, attacks against vital infrastructure and natural resources trigger
a vicious cycle as they undermine the fulfilment of basic human rights, sustainable
development and peace.
The United Nations system, in particular the Secretariat, has an important
role to play in promoting the protection of vital infrastructure and ensuring a crosspillar approach between humanitarian, development and peace actors. There are four
areas in particular where the United Nations can take action.
The first is prevention. The Secretary-General should use his good offices
to engage with all parties to armed conflict, including non-State armed groups, to
call for restraint and promote compliance with the laws of war, reminding them that
the rule of precaution in attacks requires fighters to spare civilian infrastructure
and the natural environment. United Nations peace operations and country teams
could support the adoption of national strategies for the protection of civilians,
which ought to include the protection of vital civilian objects and the facilitation of
humanitarian activities. When possible, prevention should include efforts to foster
cooperation around natural resources, especially water diplomacy, in order to turn
those natural resources from sources of tension into instruments for peace. The
Secretary-General’s call for a global ceasefire was an important step in that regard.
Secondly, the United Nations itself should ensure that it protects civilian
infrastructure, starting by proactively complying with the human rights due diligence
policy and ensuring that United Nations peace operations demonstrate human-rights
readiness.
Thirdly, the Secretariat — at the request of the Security Council —
could consider systematically monitoring attacks against all types of essential
infrastructure. To that end, it could consider fostering synergies and expanding
the scope of existing mechanisms, including those for monitoring attacks on
medical facilities, humanitarian workers and schools. Having a repository of data
on attacks against all essential infrastructure would enable the States Members of
the United Nations to learn from failures in military operations and to document
atrocities. Those are all necessary steps for enhancing prevention and protection
in the long run and, eventually, holding perpetrators accountable. Indeed, States
must investigate attacks against civilian objects, medical and humanitarian actors
and, when necessary, prosecute and secure compensation for affected populations.
Unfortunately, too often, parties to conflict fail to open any investigations. We
cannot continue to turn a blind eye.
Finally, the United Nations should continue working with international,
regional and national partners to coordinate a holistic approach to rehabilitation
and reconstruction. United Nations agencies, funds and programmes can help
build a comprehensive picture of the direct and indirect of disruptions to essential
human infrastructure and natural resources, including their gender dimensions and
environmental impacts. This can provide the blueprint for recovery and reconstruction.
This reconstruction will require coordination between the humanitarian and
development sectors, including through the Joint Steering Committee to Advance
Humanitarian and Development Collaboration. A cross-pillar approach is necessary
to strengthen resilience.
The United Nations, however, cannot successfully promote the protection
of objects indispensable to the survival of the civilian population or support
8/102

21-05813

S/2021/415

reconstruction without the political will and efforts of its Member States. I know all
too well that as Ministers this task is particularly incumbent on all of you.
The Security Council and its members must take the lead in respecting and
ensuring respect for international humanitarian law, including by upholding their
obligation to protect objects indispensable to the survival of the civilian population.
That is the bare minimum, but it would yield maximum results for the protection of
essential infrastructure and for mitigating humanitarian and development impacts
in the long run.
Should the Council decide to adopt an overarching decision addressing the
holistic protection of such objects, it should ensure that this decision remains consistent
with international law. Further, it should safeguard a space for humanitarian actors
to operate without constraints in all its future decisions, including as they relate to
counter-terrorism and sanctions.
The Council should also recall that natural resources are shared and can
be powerful instruments for cooperation. The protection of objects indispensable
to the survival of the civilian population is at the centre of the role of the United
Nations system and its members in promoting respect for human rights, sustainable
development and peace.

21-058139/102

S/2021/415

Annex 4
Statement by the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Viet Nam,
Bui Thanh Son
I wish to thank Mr. Lowcock, Mr. Rudd and Mr. Maurer for their insightful
and very practical briefings.
We often measure the consequences of conflicts in numbers of direct victims
of violence, but the indirect and longer-term impacts of widespread damage to basic
infrastructure are equally destructive. For instance, in protracted conflicts, children
are much more likely to die from diseases linked to unsafe water and sanitation than
from conflict-related violence.
Viet Nam knows this first-hand. Decades of wars left us with little intact.
Schools, hospitals, roads, power grids, water and sanitation systems were destroyed,
and farmlands and the environment were contaminated.
Unfortunately, history keeps repeating itself. Crises have been unfolding
across regions, from the Central African Republic, South Sudan and Libya, to
Afghanistan, Yemen and Syria. Left without basic infrastructure and essential
services, millions of people, particularly women and children, are displaced and
subject to hunger, disease and a grim prospect of return, resettlement and recovery.
The impact of the destruction of basic infrastructure persists far beyond the end of
conflicts, thus hampering the sustainable development of communities and nations.
The protection of civilians has been at the forefront of the work of the Security
Council. But more often than not, the Council’s discussions have focused on protecting
the people, with little attention paid to securing the means for their survival.
The open debate today is therefore a good opportunity for the Council to
deliberate this issue at a thematic level, and I hope this is only the beginning. It is
critical that the Council develop a strategy to effectively protect infrastructure and
objects critical for the survival of civilians in armed conflict. Such a strategy must
be comprehensive and holistic and must be based on compliance and partnerships.
Let me elaborate.
First, the Council must put an emphasis on compliance. All parties to conflicts,
especially Member States, must adhere to the fundamental principles of the Charter
of the United Nations and international law. They must comply with international
humanitarian law, particularly the principles of distinction, proportionality and
precaution, as well as the prohibition of attacking or destroying objects indispensable
to the survival of the civilian population. Parties must fully take into account the
ensuing longer-term impacts of damaged infrastructure on the survival of civilians
and the environment.
Secondly, basic infrastructure is, by nature, interlinked. The destruction of
power generation and grids, for instance, can render useless water and sanitation
facilities, which then affects the operation of hospitals and food facilities.
It is therefore vital that the Council consider the interconnected nature of
objects and ensure that measures be put in place to protect entire systems, not only
individual objects. It is equally important to protect the personnel essential for the
operation of those systems and to ensure that the materials and equipment needed for
their maintenance and repair can reach their destinations.
Thirdly, cooperation and partnership remain key in supporting recovery and
building resilience for civilians in armed conflicts. The Council should encourage and
facilitate closer coordination between Member States, international organizations
and humanitarian and development partners in post-conflict peacebuilding,
10/102

21-05813

S/2021/415

especially in efforts to rebuild basic infrastructure and restore essential services to
civilians. That could play a crucial role in saving the lives of civilians and providing
them long-term support.
Finally, the best way to protect civilians is to prevent conflicts. The root
causes of conflicts, including poverty, injustice, power politics and disregard
for international law, must be addressed. The implementation of the Sustainable
Development Goals should continue to guide national and international efforts to
leave no one behind.
Resolution 2573 (2021), submitted by Viet Nam and to be adopted at the end
of today’s meeting, provides the core of such a strategy. It is my expectation that it
will carry the protection-of-civilians agenda forward in a more sustainable way in
order to cope with an increasingly turbulent world. We thank the States Members of
the United Nations for their tremendous support during the negotiation of the text.
Peace may mean many different things, but for civilians, peace takes shape in
the most fundamental items: food, water, sanitation, health care and education. Our
discussion today has addressed the very core of peace in the eyes of civilians.
It is time that the global community, beginning with the Security Council,
brings our efforts closer to the needs of those stranded in the devastation of wars. It
is time we put in place an approach that is holistic and resilient in order to create a
foundation for sustainable peace and development.

21-0581311/102

S/2021/415

Annex 5
Statement by the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Estonia,
Eva-Maria Liimets
I extend warm greetings to you, Mr. President, and to the people of Viet Nam.
I also welcome the participation of Mr. Lowcock, Mr. Maurer and Mr. Rudd in this
meeting and thank them for their insightful briefings.
We welcome today’s topic of discussion. Estonia has placed the rules-based
international order and compliance with international law, including international
humanitarian law and international human rights law, at the centre of its work here
in the Security Council.
At the outset, it is important to note that it is the primary responsibility of
States to ensure the protection of their population. That includes the protection
afforded under international humanitarian law to objects essential to the survival of
the civilian population, such as food, water and medical supplies.
Unfortunately, in the course of the work of the Security Council, as we
continue to learn about cases of non-compliance, we are reminded time and time
again that the normative framework for the protection of civilians is too often not
upheld in real life.
The pandemic also adds a new layer of risks. I reiterate Estonia’s support for
the Secretary-General’s call for a global ceasefire during the coronavirus disease
(COVID-19) pandemic, and for resolution 2565 (2021), which we unanimously
adopted in February.
Civilians, including the most vulnerable — women, children and adolescents,
continue to be disproportionately affected by conflict.
I recall the situation in Ukraine, with 1.5 million internally displaced persons
(IDPs) forced to leave their homes, and note too the 2 million IDPs in the Sudan and
the 6.2 million IDPs in Syria. The return and resettlement of displaced communities
is often hindered by the destruction of essential objects and the disruption of
essential services.
Although the Security Council has condemned the use of starvation of
civilians as a method of warfare, more needs to be done to help people on the ground.
The conflict in the Tigray region in Ethiopia has forced 1.7 million people to
leave their homes in search of protection and food. Considering the ongoing fighting
it will be impossible to plant seeds for the next season. That will food security even
more challenging in the long-term.
In Afghanistan, due to poverty, the COVID-19 pandemic and the ongoing
conflict, almost half of the children under 5 suffer from acute malnutrition. In
March, 17 million people were at the highest levels of food insecurity — the secondworst situation of this kind in the world.
We are not doing enough. On an international level, due attention also needs
to be paid to new elements — the increasing urbanization of armed conflicts, climate
change and the environmental consequences of armed conflict. New technologies
can help to find ways to improve humanitarian assistance.
At the same time, we keep seeing malicious cyberactivities targeting critical
civilian infrastructure, including electricity, water, sanitation and health care. As we
have said in the Council, international law also applies in cyberspace. Obligations
deriving from international humanitarian law govern States’ activities in conflict
in order to protect civilians and civilian infrastructure. Law acts to constrain, not
facilitate conflict.
12/102

21-05813

S/2021/415

In building back better after the pandemic, it will be crucial to strengthen the
resilience of both indispensable objects and essential services, including through
cyber-related capacity-building. I am confident that cybersecurity needs to be part
of both conflict prevention and conflict resolution.
The urgent action we must take is twofold.
First, States must strengthen their capacity to more effectively protect civilians
in times of war. National and United Nations staff need to be trained in international
humanitarian law, which has been shown to yield positive results.
Secondly, we have to make sure that no one is above the law. No perpetrator
should escape justice. It is the responsibility of States to exercise criminal
jurisdiction over those responsible for international crimes, and to have relevant
national legislation in place.
When States fail to meet that responsibility, the international community and
the Security Council must step in. The Council needs to fulfil its mandate to stop
atrocities and restore justice. The Council’s inaction in situations where atrocities
are committed speaks volumes. I urge the Security Council to make use of its ability
to refer cases to the International Criminal Court, when necessary.
Finally, let me assure you that Estonia remains committed to the protection
of civilians through its actions at the national, regional and international levels,
including here in the Council. I wish you every success in raising awareness through
this debate on the crucial need for the protection of civilians and essential objects
during conflict.

21-0581313/102

S/2021/415

Annex 6
Statement by the Minister for Foreign Affairs and Defence of
Ireland, Simon Coveney
I thank Viet Nam for organizing today’s debate on this important topic. I also
want to thank Mark Lowcock, Peter Maurer and Kevin Rudd for sharing their expert
testimony with us.
It has been 22 years since the Security Council adopted the protectionof-civilians agenda through resolution 1265 (1999). Since then, the Council has
developed a culture of protection that recognizes the interconnected nature of the
risks to civilians in armed conflict.
I welcome the adoption of resolution 2573 (2021) on this critical issue, which,
tragically, we are now addressing with increasing regularity.
The destruction of, or damage to, indispensable civilian objects, including
food, water, sanitation, health care and education systems — and the critical
information infrastructure that underpins them — has devastating effects. More
civilians die from such indirect causes of conflict than from the violence itself. We
know, too, that the impacts can last for generations, making paths to peace and the
rebuilding of societies even more challenging.
It should not be this way. International law has long prohibited attacks against
objects indispensable to the survival of civilian populations, so it is a damning
indictment of our world that the Council has to remind parties to conflicts of that
prohibition and plead with them not to deprive civilian populations of food, water
and the basic infrastructure they need for daily existence. We must therefore ask
ourselves what we can do to better protect civilians and the essential services they
need in situations of armed conflict.
I would like to focus today on three specific points in that regard.
First, we need to support food systems and provide food security. Resolution
2417 (2018), unanimously adopted by the Council, is clear on the linkages between
conflict, the destruction of civilian objects and food insecurity. During conflict, the
destruction of the assets on which agricultural production and livelihoods are built
not only produces hunger but can also be a driver of long-term displacement and
other destabilizing consequences.
When mills, farms, homesteads and granaries are demolished; when crops,
pastures, and livestock are seized and burned; when water sources are destroyed or
defiled, we are on a path to starvation, famine and forced migration.
Starvation of civilians is a method of combat and it needs to be prohibited.
We have a clear responsibility, therefore, to protect civilian objects that act as a
bulwark against famine. An added dimension, as the International Committee of the
Red Cross (ICRC) points out, is that the climate crisis now defines how conflictaffected communities experience their natural environment. This convergence of
climate crisis, environmental degradation and armed conflict is likely to have deep
and long-term humanitarian consequences.
Secondly, the detrimental health effects of conflict are exacerbated by the
obscene practice of attacking medical facilities and personnel. The indispensable
nature of medical facilities, medical assets and health-care workers in times of conflict
cannot be overstated. Their protected status in armed conflict is unequivocally
enshrined in international humanitarian law.
Yet, we have witnessed the grotesque scenario of doctors in Aleppo forced
to work in underground tunnels. Médecins Sans Frontières and the ICRC report
14/102

21-05813

S/2021/415

frequent attacks on medical facilities and medical workers, including recently in
Afghanistan, the Democratic Republic of the Congo, Ethiopia and the Sudan.
Attacks on medical facilities have become too common and the previous
Secretary-General rightly said that “when so-called surgical strikes end up hitting
surgical wards, something is deeply wrong” (S/PV.7685, p. 3).
Attacks on medical infrastructure deprive the sick, the wounded, persons
with disabilities, pregnant women, the old and the young of their most fundamental
dignity and of vital care and assistance when they perhaps need it the most.
We are also increasingly concerned that cyberoperations are becoming a
part of conflict that can disrupt the operation of critical infrastructure and vital
services to civilians, including in health and medical facilities that are vulnerable to
cyberattacks.
The destruction and occupation of schools by armed forces represents an
attack on children and our collective future. That is especially true in protracted
conflicts such as those in Syria and Yemen, where a generation of children is being
deprived of an education. These children are growing up denied the skills they need to
contribute to their countries and economies, thereby exacerbating already desperate
situations. We must redouble our efforts to prevent the destruction of schools and
hospitals in conflicts.
Thirdly, with regard to the use of explosive weapons in populated areas,
Ireland remains gravely concerned about their impact and the civilian harm caused
during active hostilities in populated areas.
Year after year, the Secretary-General reports that over 90 per cent of those
killed and injured by the use of explosive weapons in populated areas are civilians. It
is well documented that the manner in which explosive weapons are used in populated
areas has devastating short and long-term effects. The widespread loss of life and the
physical and psychological injuries inflicted on civilians are simply unacceptable.
Of particular relevance to today’s discussion is the effect of explosive weapons
in populated areas on critical infrastructure, such as roads, hospitals and sanitation
facilities. That infrastructure is vital for meeting immediate humanitarian needs and
for post-conflict development.
It is for those reasons that Ireland is leading negotiations in Geneva on a
political declaration to address the humanitarian consequences arising from the use
of explosive weapons in populated areas. Good progress has been made and we are
determined to finalize a declaration that will result in positive change. I hope I can
count on colleagues to support us in doing that.
Finally, I would like to make brief reference to the need to protect cultural
property in armed conflict. The legal basis for protection is strong, but the need for
protection is unquestionable. War is the enemy of art, culture, monuments and our
cultural heritage. Cultural property reflects the identity of a people, its culture and
its heritage, and preserving it — by rebuilding destroyed communities — can be an
important element of the pathway to peace.
The terrible suffering inflicted on civilians would be significantly reduced if
parties to conflict complied with their obligations under international law. A pressing
challenge remains ensuring accountability for serious violations of international law,
including international humanitarian and human rights law. The Security Council
has a role in calling out those States and actors that are failing to live up to their
obligations and legal responsibilities, as well as moral responsibilities. When the
Council does not do so, we must be ready to accept that their failure is also partly
our responsibility.
21-0581315/102

S/2021/415

Annex 7
Statement by the Permanent Representative of the United States
of America and Member of President Biden’s Cabinet, Linda
Thomas-Greenfield
I thank the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Viet Nam for bringing this
important aspect of the protection of civilians agenda to the centre of the Security
Council’s attention. We welcome Viet Nam’s efforts on resolution 2573 (2021), which
accompanies this open debate, and we were proud to support it. I would also like to
thank our briefers for their comprehensive and honest accounting of the challenge of
protecting civilian infrastructure in conflict situations.
Our charge — to advance peace and security — has to put people first.
Their lives, their dignity, their well-being — that is what we are here to protect.
And although we have not spoken at such length about the specific issue of civilian
infrastructure before, I am glad we are doing so now because it is not hyperbole to say
that every person in the world relies on their civilian infrastructure system. But far
too often, armed actors target these basic services. We must make a point of holding
them accountable, especially when they violate international humanitarian law.
Imagine if your farm was intentionally destroyed, your water pipes intentionally
contaminated or damaged, your community health facility targeted for bombing.
Imagine if civilians were then forced to leave their homes and communities to find
electricity, running water or adequate food supplies in an often arduous and too
often deadly search.
This is not hypothetical; it is happening right now in the Tigray region of
Ethiopia. There, fighting has resulted in decimated civilian communications systems,
failed electrical grids and looted and destroyed protected hospitals. To meet their
basic needs, the people of Tigray have been forced to flee and travel long distances,
often facing threats of violence, particularly sexual and gender-based violence. This
is simply intolerable. There must be an immediate cessation of hostilities in Tigray.
During conflicts, schools and other public buildings are essential as places for
children to stay safe. Those buildings can serve as shelters, spaces for communities
to reconnect or as sites for distributing aid and services. So, when these essential,
protected buildings are deliberately targeted, it has a unique and devastating impact
on women, caregivers and families. When armed actors occupy a health centre,
women and girls who need maternal care often die as a result.
Again, this is not hypothetical, it is happening right now in Syria, where
the Al-Assad regime — with documented help from Russia — has devastated the
country’s civilian infrastructure and displaced over half the population through
its campaign of atrocities. They have attacked and destroyed protected schools,
hospitals, markets, residential communities and places of worship. We saw this
regime’s depravity as recently as 21 March, when the Al-Atarib Surgical Hospital
in Aleppo was destroyed. Sixteen people, mostly medical staff, were injured. Six
patients, including a child, were killed.
When civilian infrastructure is intentionally targeted, humanitarian actors
also often bear the brunt. When roads and bridges are destroyed, when health
facilities are targeted for bombings, the capacity to deliver much-needed relief and
supplies to those in dire circumstances is diminished or denied.
And sadly, that is exactly what is happening right now in Yemen, where
violence inflicted by all parties to the conflict has destroyed schools, hospitals and
markets. The World Health Organization recorded 142 attacks on health facilities
alone from March 2015 to March 2020. Yemen is the world’s worst humanitarian
16/102

21-05813

S/2021/415

crisis. But the humanitarians who are trying to help — the do-gooders risking life
and limb to save others — are being blocked by attacks on basic infrastructure. This
is horrific, and it is wrong. And we must protect civilians by demonstrating that we
will hold bad actors to account when they violate international humanitarian law.
So today let us recall our duty. The Charter of the United Nations demands
that we maintain international peace and security. That means protecting civilians
and the systems and infrastructure that serve as their lifelines.

21-0581317/102

S/2021/415

Annex 8
Statement by the Deputy Minister of Foreign Affairs of Norway,
Jens Frølich Holte
We would like to thank Viet Nam for hosting this debate and the briefers
for setting the stage. The destruction of civilian infrastructure has devastating
consequences for the civilian population, and we welcome resolution 2573 (2021),
adopted today.
The protracted nature of today’s conflicts, the impact of the use of explosive
weapons in populated areas and the malicious use of new technologies exacerbate
this problem. We have seen all too clearly that the failure to protect civilians and
critical civilian infrastructure has immediate humanitarian ramifications for, as well
as long-term impacts on, individuals and communities.
Protecting schools and universities is essential. The right to education must
be upheld in peacetime and armed conflict alike. Education protects children and
young people from a wide range of violations and threats to their health and lives,
including sexual and gender-based violence and recruitment and use by armed forces
and groups. Increasingly, educational facilities are being attacked or used for military
purposes. This is an unacceptable and dangerous trend, which hinders safe access
to and the enjoyment of the right to education. We must all take steps to strengthen
the protection of education amid conflict. We therefore encourage all States to join
the 107 that have endorsed the Safe Schools Declaration and are working together
to implement it.
Attacks on health-care facilities, personnel and their means of transport are
unacceptable. Facilities are being destroyed, and patients and staff killed, maimed
or displaced. The destruction of water and electricity systems affects the health of
the population and the quality of health services. Essential services crumble and
disappear. As the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic has demonstrated,
this has an immediate effect on individuals and their communities, and a global
impact on health. Now more than ever, we must ensure the protection of health
infrastructure, including to be able to respond to the COVID-19 pandemic and
similar outbreaks in the future. We call for the full implementation of resolutions
2286 (2016) and 2565 (2021).
We must strengthen the protection of civilians from humanitarian harm caused
by the use of explosive weapons in populated areas. We support Ireland’s leadership
in negotiating what we hope will be a strong political declaration — a declaration
that will encourage parties to conflict to minimize the use of such weapons and
develop policies and practices that will strengthen implementation of international
humanitarian law and increase the protection of civilians in armed conflict.
The destruction of infrastructure leads to environmental degradation. Syria,
with damage to oil refineries and the destruction of water and waste-management
systems; Yemen, with the destruction of water and sanitation facilities; and Tigray,
where farmland is scorched to cinders, are all examples of destruction that causes
long-term damage to the environment.
In many conf lict-affected areas, environmental degradation, coupled with
the impacts of climate change, has a devastating effect on food security, health
and livelihoods. In this context, the International Committee of the Red Cross
Guidelines on the Protection of the Natural Environment in Armed Conf lict are a
useful tool, which identifies a range of concrete measures. Recognizing the scale
and consequence of this issue, we welcome the opportunity to discuss it in the
Security Council.
18/102

21-05813

S/2021/415

We recall resolution 2417 (2018), which links armed conflict, conflict-induced
food insecurity and the threat of famine and call on all parties to spare infrastructure
needed for food production and distribution. The intentional use of the starvation of
civilians as a method of warfare is a war crime. We urge States parties to the Rome
Statute to ratify the recent amendment concerning the war crime of starvation in
non-international armed conflict.
Hostile cyberoperations conducted in armed conf lict pose a serious threat
to objects indispensable to the survival of, and delivery of essential services to,
the civilian population. We reaffirm that international humanitarian law applies in
this regard.
Fundamentally, in order to truly protect civilian populations, all parties to
armed conflicts must fully respect and implement their obligations under international
humanitarian law. Impunity for any violations must end. All States must investigate,
within their jurisdiction, attacks against civilians and civilian objects, including
objects indispensable to the survival of the civilian population. Those responsible
must be held to account.
We hope to come away from this discussion with joint recognition of the
need to support humanitarian rehabilitation of infrastructure. Humanitarian action
to maintain and repair indispensable civilian objects and infrastructure is crucial
to the survival of the civilian population. Strengthening the protection of civilians
and civilian infrastructure is also an important part of achieving the Sustainable
Development Goals, including those on health, education, food security, peace
and justice.
The protection during a conflict of civilians and civilian infrastructure that
delivers essential services can determine the prospects for achieving sustainable
peace and reconciliation. It will affect the ability to ensure the voluntary and
dignified return and reintegration of displaced persons, and to prevent conflict from
recurring. We recall the words of Secretary-General Guterres in the 2018 debate on
protection of civilians: “[P]rotecting civilians in conflict is ... the only way to lay
the foundation for sustained peace” (S/PV.8264, p.3). To sum it up, only if protection
succeeds, can peace succeed.

21-0581319/102

S/2021/415

Annex 9
Statement by Deputy Minister for Foreign Affairs of the Russian
Federation, Sergey Vershinin
[Original: Russian]
At the outset, let me express appreciation to the Minister for Foreign Affairs of
the Socialist Republic of Viet Nam, Mr. Bui Thanh Son, for convening this Security
Council debate on a truly pressing topic: “Protection of civilians in armed conflict:
indispensable civilian objects”.
We are also thankful to the Vietnamese Mission for drafting a balanced
thematic text in resolution 2573 (2021). The document generally reflects the endorsed
approaches of the international community to the issue under discussion today.
The protection of civilian infrastructure in armed conflict is an inalienable
component of international humanitarian law. In particular, the provisions of the
1949 Geneva Conventions and their 1977 Protocols Additional address this issue.
A number of previously adopted Security Council resolutions also touch upon this
question, including resolution 2417 (2018), on the protection of civilians.
We proceed from the understanding that any deliberate attacks on civilian
populations or indispensable civilian facilities are unacceptable. Such facilities
include food stocks, crops, livestock, drinking water and irrigation facilities, as well
as other elements of critical infrastructure. Let me stress that, under international
humanitarian law, all sides to armed conflicts must differentiate between civilian
population and combatants, as well as between civil and military facilities. The
international community needs to cooperate in order to restore damaged infrastructure
and provide timely assistance to conflict-affected countries. We believe the United
Nations, alongside other international and regional organizations, plays an important
role in this regard. However, such assistance should only be rendered at the request
of the State affected.
In this context, we would like specifically to highlight the state of affairs in
Syria, which was already mentioned during this debate. The current situation in that
country clearly illustrates that Syrians need urgent help in restoring critical civil
infrastructure, and comprehensive assistance, free of politicization or preconditions.
Despite some relevant stability on the ground, the humanitarian situation in
Syria has dangerously deteriorated against the backdrop of a prolonged conflict,
economic crisis, the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic and the unilateral
sanctions imposed against Syrians by the United States of America and the European
Union. As per data provided by humanitarian agencies operating on the ground in
Syria, the production of energy has dropped by 70 per cent and that of drinking
water by 30-40 per cent, while the number of irrigation facilities has decreased
by half as compared to the year 2011. Apparently, the outage of critical water and
energy infrastructure will have devastating effects on millions of Syrians — from
risks of epidemics and environmental disasters to another mass migration. This
is to say nothing of constructing residential buildings and renovating schools and
hospitals — activities critical in terms of creating appropriate conditions for the
return of refugees and internally displaced persons.
The devastating effect of unilateral sanctions is worth making a separate point.
Not only are they inflicting a humanitarian disaster on ordinary Syrians, but they
deliberately provoke negative consequences for specialized agencies, obstructing
financial transactions and the import of medicines and spare parts to Syria. Here is
one outcome — whereas before the war Syria used to manufacture most medicines
20/102

21-05813

S/2021/415

at home and export them to 23 countries, it is now almost completely dependent on
external medical aid deliveries.
Anti-Syrian sanctions are getting worse even though the Secretary-General
called for restrictions to be waived amid the COVID-19 pandemic. According to
United Nations data, 90 per cent of the Syrian population lives below the poverty
line, and 70 per cent have no access to food. At the same time, the restrictions do not
prevent the Americans who occupy oilfields and farmland in the north-east of Syria
from stepping up smuggling and illegal trade in oil and grains.
Another noteworthy fact is that Western sanctions cover not only the transEuphrates region, but also Idlib, which is known to be under the control of Hayat
Tahrir al-Sham, which the Security Council has listed as a terrorist group. Western
States call for enhanced humanitarian deliveries to these areas, over which Damascus
has no control — and, what is more, to do so via the cross-border mechanism rather
than through the Syrian Government, even though that mechanism undermines the
sovereignty and territorial integrity of Syria, as well as the guiding principles of
humanitarian assistance stipulated in General Assembly resolution 46/182.
We call on the responsible members of the international community to
join Russia’s broad humanitarian efforts in mine action, restoring educational and
medical facilities and residential buildings, reconstructing roads and electric lines,
and providing food and medical assistance.
We express our deep appreciation to the International Red Cross Committee
and the International Federation of Red Cross and Red Crescent Societies, as well as
relevant national societies. Impartial humanitarian assistance deserves the highest
praise. Russia continues its cooperation with such bodies, in particular by sponsoring
programmes in Syria, Nagorno-Karabakh and Ukraine.

21-0581321/102

S/2021/415

Annex 10
Statement by the Minister of State with the Responsibility for
Foreign Affairs and Foreign Trade of Saint Vincent and the
Grenadines, Keisal M. Peters
Saint Vincent and the Grenadines thanks Viet Nam for convening this timely
open debate, and, furthermore, we extend our gratitude to the briefers for their
insightful remarks.
The prohibition against the attack, destruction, removal or rendering useless
objects indispensable to the survival of the civilian population remains a core tenet
of international humanitarian law, as enshrined in the Geneva Conventions. Military
objectives should never take precedence over the protection of civilians and civilian
infrastructure. Far too often, State and non-State actors alike have violated well
established principles of the law of armed conflict, particularly those of distinction,
proportionality and precaution.
Sanctions and ill-designed counter-terrorism measures continue to stymie both
development and humanitarian access in many locales, bringing untold suffering
upon the local population in an attempt to achieve narrow political objectives. To
be sure, counter-terrorism operations are sometimes necessary to protect people
and preserve a country’s sovereignty, unity and territorial integrity. However,
both sanctions and counter-terrorism measures must comply with all principles of
international humanitarian law and international human-rights law.
The socioeconomic impact of armed conflict often gives rise to perilous
humanitarian crises. When coupled with climate change, severe weather events and
environmental degradation, these conflicts have a dramatic impact on civilians,
particularly women and children, and extend further, impeding the overall recovery
of the countries affected.
We have seen the reality of these effects across protracted conflicts on the
Security Council agenda. In Yemen, the health system is crippled, leaving half of the
facilities operational, rendering the country ill-equipped to combat the coronavirus
disease pandemic. A similarly grave situation exists in Syria, where 10 years of war
have left over 13 million Syrians in need of multidimensional forms of humanitarian
assistance, including shelter, following mass displacements, and basic health care.
In conflict-affected areas of Somalia, water and sanitation infrastructure have been
destroyed, reducing access to clean water and increasing the risk of preventable
diseases, such as cholera. The destruction that occurs as a result of deliberate and
indiscriminate attacks hinders efforts to achieve the Sustainable Development Goals.
The destruction of resources needed for civilian life, living and production
is causing unbearable suffering for too many people around the world. It is only
through staunch compliance with the principles of international law that civilians
and civilian infrastructure will be afforded the protection they rightly deserve.
We call on all parties to conflict to safeguard water stations, health-care facilities
and other essential infrastructure necessary to reduce vulnerabilities and promote
development. The rehabilitation of infrastructure already devastated must also be
prioritized to alleviate dire humanitarian situations. In this regard, we continue to
encourage the international community to contribute to the restoration of critical
infrastructure in countries affected by armed conflict, without which millions will
be forced to remain dependent on humanitarian assistance for basic necessities.
Reconstruction is also a necessary element, which facilitates the safe, voluntary
and dignified return of refugees and internally displaced persons to their places
of origin.
22/102

21-05813

S/2021/415

Acts committed in violation of international law must not be tolerated under
any circumstances and must be met with condemnation from the international
community. The link between justice and peace has long been recognized. As
such, we reiterate our call for the perpetrators of these abhorrent acts to be
held accountable.
Civilians across the globe have suffered as a result of geopolitical dynamics
over which they have neither influence nor control. We therefore call on parties
to conflicts to demonstrate the political will required to achieve lasting peace and
stability. The Council has a responsibility to advocate for the victims of armed
conflict. We must continue to raise our voices to ensure their protection and to make
certain that the international community honours its legal and moral responsibilities
to safeguard the survival of people impacted by conflicts around the world.

21-0581323/102

S/2021/415

Annex 11
Statement by the Permanent Representative of China to the
United Nations, Zhang Jun
[Original: Chinese and English]
China welcomes Your Excellency as President of the Security Council
meeting again and appreciates Viet Nam’s initiative in convening this open debate
and its careful preparations. We hope that the Council will adopt draft resolution
S/2021/402 on this issue. I also would like to thank Under-Secretary-General Mark
Lowcock, President Peter Maurer and Chairman Kevin Rudd for their briefings.
Their views and recommendations will help the Council better discuss and address
this important issue.
Civilians bear the brunt of armed conflict. Infrastructure for agriculture
production, food security, water, power supplies and health care, among other
installations, are essential for ensuring the subsistence of civilians and improving the
humanitarian situation. The protection of these facilities is an explicit requirement of
international humanitarian law. In the context of the current global pandemic, it is all
the more important and a shared priority for the international community to ensure
accessibility and the safety of medical facilities for conflict-affected civilians.
China supports the draft resolution prepared by Viet Nam and actively
participated in the discussions and consultations with other members. The draft
resolution calls for addressing the root causes of conflict, ensuring the functionality
of infrastructure in conflict-affected countries, enhancing efforts to promote postpandemic recovery and facilitating sustained peace, and welcomes international and
regional cooperation in this regard. These are constructive and practical elements. The
international community should adhere to the people-centred approach, addressing
both symptoms and root causes, and take effective and concrete actions to push for
a peace process, and create conditions for the protection of objects indispensable to
the survival of the civilian population.
First of all, we must stick to the concept of systemic governance and address
the root causes of conflict through relentless efforts. Armed conflicts bring systemic
risks to civilians. No egg remains unbroken in an overturned nest. In the event of
a conflict or war, it is difficult to ensure absolute security for civilians and civilian
objects. To solve this problem, we must look at the big picture and address its root
causes. The vast majority of armed conflicts result from extreme poverty and the
scarcity of resources. The promotion of development for peace is the fundamental
way out of this conundrum. The international community should coordinate the
implementation of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development to help conflictaffected countries and regions meet the challenges in poverty reduction and pandemic
control, thereby gradually eliminating the root causes of conflict.
Secondly, we must adhere to peaceful solutions to conflicts through dialogue,
good offices and negotiations. At present, multiple hot-spot issues on the Security
Council’s agenda are at a critical stage. The international community should seize
the opportunity to support dialogue and consultation, strengthen mediation and
good offices, intensify diplomatic efforts and prevent the escalation of tensions, so
as to free civilians from the ordeal of war at an early date. The Security Council and
other United Nations bodies should play a coordinating role and support regional
organizations that have the advantage of finding regional solutions to regional
disputes, so as to forge a synergy for promoting talks for peace. All parties to conflict
should respond positively to the Secretary-General’s appeal for a global ceasefire
and take forward the political process through inclusive dialogue.
24/102

21-05813

S/2021/415

Thirdly, we must help host countries strengthen capacity-building on the basis
of clearly defined responsibilities. The Governments of conflict-affected countries
should assume the primary responsibility for the protection of objects indispensable
to the survival of the civilian population. All parties to conflict must fulfil their
obligations under international law to protect civilians and civilian objects,
correctly distinguish between military and civilian objects, ensure the functioning
of infrastructure and prioritize the needs of vulnerable groups, such as women
and children. The international community should respect the sovereignty of host
countries, focus on their needs, hear their views and help them build their capacity to
operate and protect infrastructure on their own. We must be alert to terrorist forces
that try to control or destroy infrastructure or even launch cyberattacks on critical
infrastructure by using digital technology.
The international community should work together to protect civilians
and civilian objects and ensure civilians’ sustainable access to essential services.
The General Assembly, the Security Council, the Economic and Social Council,
the Peacebuilding Commission and the United Nations resident offices should, in
accordance with their respective mandates, bring into play their own advantages and
strengthen coordination with regional organizations and international bodies, such
as the International Committee of the Red Cross, to shift the focus of humanitarian
relief and development assistance towards civilians and civilian objects, and play a
bigger role in post-conflict reconstruction. Member States can also make their own
contributions. In this regard, China is ready to share its experience.
Over the years, by aligning the Belt and Road Initiative with the 2030 Agenda,
China has deepened cooperation with relevant national, regional and international
organizations to help developing countries build up their infrastructure, boost
employment and improve people’s livelihoods. China has helped build 24 agricultural
technology demonstration centres in Africa, benefiting more than 500,000 local
people. The development sub-fund under the United Nations peace and development
trust fund has implemented 34 projects, involving multiple United Nations agencies,
benefiting dozens of countries. Since the outbreak of the coronavirus disease, China
has provided emergency medical assistance to several conflict-affected countries and
dispatched medical teams to help them fight the pandemic. Looking forward, China
will continue to work with the international community to help conflict-affected
countries build their capacity for independent development and for the protection
of civilians.

21-0581325/102

S/2021/415

Annex 12
Statement by the Permanent Representative of France to the
United Nations, Nicolas de Rivière
[Original: French]
I thank Mr. Lowcock, Mr. Maurer and Mr. Rudd for their briefings. I would
like to focus on three points.
As you have all pointed out, armed conflict has a devastating impact on the
civilian infrastructure that is essential to the survival of populations. I am thinking
in particular of hospitals and medical facilities, facilities providing access to water
and electricity, as well as crops and agricultural infrastructure. Civilian populations,
particularly in Syria, Yemen, the Sahel and the Lake Chad basin, are paying the price
every day: increased humanitarian needs and food insecurity, displacement and the
spread of epidemics.
Some parties to conflict even go so far as to knowingly incorporate violations
of international humanitarian law into their military strategy in order to deprive the
population of all relief and to ensure their surrender. That is unacceptable, and it is
up to the Security Council to clearly and regularly reaffirm that.
Even war has rules. Respect for international humanitarian law is not an
option; it is an obligation imposed on everyone. Our collective responsibility is to
find the operational means to ensure that law is respected.
That is the meaning of the Call for Humanitarian Action, launched by France
and Germany in 2019 and now endorsed by 47 Member States and the European
Union. That call identifies concrete actions that States can take to strengthen
respect for international humanitarian law, and we call on all our partners to support
that call.
We also call on countries that have not yet done so to ratify the Protocols
Additional to the Geneva Conventions of 1949.
Every State has a responsibility to guarantee respect for international
humanitarian law: I am thinking in particular of training. Last year, France finalized
its national training plan on international humanitarian law, which targets all
French actors: the military, diplomats and senior officials. This plan also provides
for training activities for our foreign partners. We are doing this in particular in
the Sahel.
Thirdly, we must strengthen the fight against impunity. The perpetrators of
violations of international humanitarian law must be brought to justice. I recall that
the use of starvation against civilians as a method of warfare and attacks on hospitals
and medical facilities constitute war crimes.
France will continue to fully support mechanisms to fight impunity. We must
strengthen national capacities to conduct impartial and independent investigations
and, where national mechanisms are insufficient or inadequate, support the use of
international mechanisms. France reiterates its call for the universalization of the
Rome Statute of the International Criminal Court. We must also more systematically
sanction the perpetrators of serious violations of international humanitarian law
within the framework of the United Nations and European sanctions regimes.
Lastly, I would like to commend the Vietnamese initiative for a Security
Council resolution on the protection of objects indispensable to the survival of the
civilian population. Respect for international law is a key priority for our diplomacy,
and we will remain particularly vigilant on those issues, which are, in the true
sense, vital.
26/102

21-05813

S/2021/415

Annex 13
Statement by the Permanent Representative of India to the
United Nations, T.S. Tirumurti
At the outset, let me begin by thanking the His Excellency Foreign Minister
of Viet Nam and the Vietnamese delegation for organizing this open debate on
this important issue. I also thank Under-Secretary-General for Humanitarian
Affairs Mark Lowcock, International Committee of the Red Cross President Peter
Maurer and the Honourable Kevin Rudd, Chair of the Board of Directors of the
International Peace Institute, for their briefings. These briefings have been useful in
understanding the impact of the destruction of objects indispensable to the survival
of civilian population in situations of armed conflict. India also thanks Viet Nam for
successfully steering draft resolution S/2021/402 on this subject.
The primary responsibility of meeting the protection needs of populations,
including the maintenance of essential services, rests with national Governments.
However, over decades of practice and shaped by the searing experience of
destructive wars, we now have a set of international principles and jurisprudence
that places equal responsibility on the aggressor to ensure that civilians and civilian
infrastructure not be targeted in armed conflicts.
History has shown us that the killing of civilians and the devastation of
civilian infrastructure have been used as legitimate weapons of war, especially
during the two World Wars. Apart from the death and destruction caused, we recall
the Marshall Plan, which supported Europe’s reconstruction efforts to bring about
a semblance of normalcy in people’s lives. Out of all this sprung not just the United
Nations itself, but a vast array of international jurisprudence on the responsibility
of those launching wars and military attacks to fully insulate and protect innocent
civilian populations and infrastructure indispensable to survival from their attacks.
However, it is a matter of concern that armed conflicts until this day seem to
consider civilian populations and civilian infrastructure almost legitimate targets,
resulting in the maiming and killing of thousands and rendering millions homeless.
The situation has only become worse with the civilian population and indispensable
civilian infrastructure becoming easy targets of terrorist groups and non-State
actors, especially those sponsored by State actors. Countries with a rich history and
cultural heritage, such as Syria and Afghanistan, are facing serious threats of armed
conflict today, which have devastated not just the population, especially women and
children, but also indispensable civilian infrastructure and historical sites. There
are other countries still reeling from past military actions carried out without due
consideration for protecting civilian populations and infrastructure. Therefore, the
issue of the protection of civilians and civilian objects in armed conflicts should be
sought within the framework of applicable international law and in strict adherence
to the principle of respect for the sovereignty of States.
India strongly condemns the use of oppressive violence against innocent
civilians and the targeting of civilian objects in armed conflicts, regardless of who
commits them.
In recent years, civilians and critical civilian infrastructure in urban areas
have become easy targets in armed conflict situations. Access to humanitarian
assistance can be easily compromised, with the destruction of hospitals, attacks on
medical transport and essential services in countries experiencing armed conflict.
The cyberattacks targeting civilian infrastructure, including health care, have
become common, which have continued even during the pandemic.
It is a matter of serious concern that, in situations of armed conflict, wellestablished norms — such as respecting applicable international humanitarian law
21-0581327/102

S/2021/415

and relevant human rights law — the protection of civilian objects and ensuring
safe and unhindered access for medical and humanitarian agencies are not being
adhered to by the parties. This is more evident in armed conflicts where parties are
being backed by Member States as proxies. This is a dangerous trend that must be
addressed. We need to reflect on such situations if we are to lend a sense of realism
to the debate on the protection of civilian objects.
In armed conflict situations, United Nations peacekeepers are coming
under increasing pressure to protect civilian objects. United Nations missions and
peacekeepers are not a panacea for all problems in conflict situations. The tendency
of burdening peacekeepers with responsibilities that ought to primarily lie with the
State should stop. This disincentivizes the international community from paying
greater attention to strengthening national security forces so that they can take
over this responsibility from the peacekeepers. It is therefore important to provide
carefully though-out mandates to peacekeepers in close consultations with troopcontributing countries, as the protection of peacekeepers is as important as the
protection of civilians. Without proper equipment, training and resources to meet
the mandate’s objectives and clear accountability at all levels, the expectation from
peacekeeping operations to protect civilian objects is unrealistic.
The rehabilitation and reconstruction of civilian infrastructure and the
restoration of essential services should be given high priority in the post-conflict
context, as it will facilitate socioeconomic recovery and peacebuilding. Owing to
the significant costs associated with it, donor countries and United Nations agencies
should provide financial and technical assistance for capacity-building.
For our part, after the end of the armed conflict in 2009 in Sri Lanka, India
assisted the Government of Sri Lanka in immediately restoring some of the most
basic and essential civilian infrastructure. India deployed seven demining teams on
an emergency basis, which enabled internally displaced persons to return to their
homes and livelihoods. India contributed extensively to rebuilding basic essential
infrastructure in northern Sri Lanka, including 46,000 houses for internally displaced
persons. India’s development portfolio of more than $3 billion in Afghanistan is
aimed at rebuilding capacities and capabilities of Afghan nationals and institutions.
In addition to several infrastructure and community-development projects, India
constructed the Afghan-India Friendship Dam and is now taking up construction of
the Shahtoot Dam to provide safe drinking water for the 2 million residents of the
city of Kabul.
In conclusion, India stands ready, as part of a broader endeavour, to support
efforts aimed at strengthening the normative architecture for the protection of objects
indispensable to civilians and the provision of humanitarian assistance in armed
conflict. Such a normative architecture should respect the principles of sovereignty,
political independence, territorial integrity and unity of countries affected by
armed conflicts.

28/102

21-05813

S/2021/415

Annex 14
Statement by the Deputy Permanent Representative of Kenya to the
United Nations, Michael Kiboino
Kenya’s delegation thanks His Excellency Mr. Bui Thanh Son for hosting
today’s open debate. We also thank all the distinguished briefers for their briefings.
Kenya condemns the deliberate targeting of objects indispensable to the
survival of civilian populations as a method of warfare. Beyond the immediate
suffering it causes, it leads to long-lasting devastation of economies, livelihoods,
education and social systems. These impacts persist long after the immediate conflict
is over, including when ceasefires and peace agreements have been reached. It is for
these reasons that we welcome today’s debate.
Indeed, this debate represents an opportunity to underline the importance
for all parties to conflict to protect objects indispensable to the survival of civilian
populations, including the infrastructure for food, agriculture, water and sanitation,
medical services and energy. While this principle is well established in international
humanitarian law, we believe it needs to be constantly emphasized so that it better
informs the conduct of war and the responses of the international community.
The concerns of the Security Council on this matter are clear. But even as it is
right to express them, we must not lose sight of dangerous actors that are entrenching
themselves in multiple countries and regions. We refer to the increasing exploitation
of the humanitarian space and its associated civilian objects by such terrorist groups
as Al-Qaida and the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant. These groups understand
the humanitarian concerns directed at civilians who are victims of conflict and
therefore utilize the population to generate finances, disguise their operations and
recruit from traumatized, uprooted refugees. They also exploit civilian objects
as cover to launch attacks, hoping to attract retaliation and subsequent collateral
damage for propaganda purposes.
Unfortunately, not enough is being done to deny them the space to engage in
such manipulative and atrocious actions. If anything, terrorist groups increasingly
feel that the humanitarian space is a strategic asset. This is prolonging conflicts and
weakening the ability of peacekeeping missions and national security agencies to
truly protect the peace and civilians. We look forward to more action to address this
growing problem.
Allow me to underscore some practical measures that, if implemented, would
lead to more effective protection of objects indispensable to the survival of the
civilian population in conflict situations.
First, the Security Council should insist that parties to armed conflict adhere
to international humanitarian law and protect civilian infrastructure that supports
essential services as well as the workers who operate and maintain it.
Secondly, the Council should embed the protection of objects indispensable
to the survival of civilian population in its decision-making, including, but not
limited to, applying impactful sanctions against individuals and groups that exploit
the humanitarian space as a key part of their strategy and operations to further
their terrorist agenda; ensuring that peacekeeping mandates are fit for purpose so
as to deter and combat such exploitation; and making sure that missions have robust
public messaging and counter-narrative capabilities.
It is also time to start emphasizing resilience-based humanitarian support,
which comprises rehabilitation and reconstruction of civilian infrastructure,
restoration of essential services, and provision of modern equipment and technology.
21-0581329/102

S/2021/415

This will facilitate socioeconomic development, enhanced adaptive capacity of local
populations and reduced dependency on humanitarian aid.
The international financial institutions can also do more to de-risk investments
in fragile post-conflict environments, which often struggle to attract traditional
investment. In addition, the Security Council should more robustly use the advisory
role of the Peacebuilding Commission in post-conflict situations.
In conclusion, I would reaffirm Kenya’s support for the measures that the
Security Council will institute, including adopting the draft resolution contained in
document S/2021/402 to deter the destruction of objects indispensable to the survival
of civilian populations.

30/102

21-05813

S/2021/415

Annex 15
Statement by the Permanent Representative of Mexico to the
United Nations, Juan Ramón de la Fuente Ramírez
[Original: Spanish]
Mexico thanks Mr. Lowcock, Mr. Maurer and Mr. Rudd for their
informative briefings.
In the light of the current challenges posed by the increasing urbanization of
conflicts and the use of new technologies, we also thank Viet Nam for convening
today’s debate. We agree in particular on the need for unrestricted respect for
international humanitarian law and the importance of protecting objects that are
indispensable for the survival of civilian populations, in particular drinking-water
installations and supplies, power plants, medical facilities and schools, to mention a
few that seem essential to us.
It is a source of alarm for Mexico that attacks on these indispensable spaces
persist despite the fact that they are prohibited by the protocols additional to the
Geneva Conventions. We express our strong condemnation of this type of attack
and the lack of compliance with the norms of international humanitarian law. There
is no room for exceptions: deliberate attacks on critical infrastructure can never be
condoned. The starting point is to prevent the suffering of civilians in any conflict
at all costs.
I will focus my specific comments on two points in particular.
First, with regard to strengthening the protection of civilians through respect
for international humanitarian law, it is true that since the adoption of the protectionof-civilians agenda in 1999, the Security Council has promoted resolutions related
to food, education and the protection of medical personnel. However, it will always
be necessary to continue to expand the spectrum of protection. That is why we have
enthusiastically joined in co-sponsoring the draft resolution proposed by Viet Nam
(S/2021/402), which strengthens international humanitarian law and international
human rights law in the area of the protection of essential objects.
The specific mention of civilians operating, repairing, and maintaining
these objects represents in itself a significant contribution to the strengthening of
international humanitarian law. Moreover, the inclusion of a sub-item dedicated to
the protection of vital objects in the reports of the Secretary-General on the protection
of civilians will contribute to raising the visibility of this issue and, in particular, to
strengthening the accountability system.
Secondly, with regard to the consequences for civilian populations of attacks on
indispensable objects, beyond the attacks on drinking water facilities or power plants
that disrupt the provision of basic services, the coronavirus disease pandemic has
made the link between access to water and health even more obvious. Without water,
it is impossible to comply with hygiene and disease-prevention measures. Damage to
crops and livestock affects the availability of food, which creates conditions of food
insecurity and can even lead to the use of hunger as an instrument of war. Mexico
therefore considers that, in addition to respecting international humanitarian law,
investing in the maintenance and resilience of infrastructure is imperative, so that
services continue to function in situations of conflict and to mitigate the consequences
of conflict, which can generate truly precarious humanitarian conditions.
My delegation is also concerned that women and girls are disproportionately
affected by the lack of basic services, as are indigenous peoples. For example, the
closure of schools owing to attacks or lack of water or electricity has long-term
21-0581331/102

S/2021/415

repercussions on the education and development of the child population and the
development of the community. Schools are also places where children receive
food and psychosocial support. Such facilities must be respected without exception.
In this regard, I am pleased to announce that Mexico has joined the Safe Schools
Initiative. We will continue to support efforts aimed at protecting schools and all
educational facilities.
In sum, we have an obligation to prevent further damage and consequences
for civilian populations in situations of armed conflict. We must ensure unrestricted
compliance with international humanitarian law in any pronouncement or action of
the Security Council, strengthen awareness of these rules at the national level and
ensure that those responsible for acts contrary to international humanitarian law do
not enjoy impunity.

32/102

21-05813

S/2021/415

Annex 16
Statement by the Permanent Representative of the Niger to the
United Nations, Abdou Abarry
[Original: French]
The topic under review is relevant insofar as efforts to curb the spread of the
coronavirus disease have increased the vulnerabilities of civilians living in conflict
zones and posed new challenges for State and humanitarian actors in protecting
these populations and the infrastructure necessary for their survival.
In several theatres of conflict, be it in Syria, Yemen, Afghanistan or the
Sahel, there has been an upsurge in cowardly and wanton attacks by armed groups
on civilian targets in violation of the principles of distinction, prohibition of
indiscriminate attacks, proportionality and the taking of precautionary measures
in the conduct of hostilities, as advocated by the Geneva Conventions of 1949 and
their protocols additional. The time has come for the Security Council to strengthen
its commitment in this area, sending a clear message of support for respect for
international humanitarian law and accountability for violators.
At this point, I would like to thank Viet Nam for making this important issue
one of the priorities of its presidency of the Security Council this month and of its
mandate as a non-permanent member. We would also like to thank Mr. Lowcock, Mr.
Maurer and the representative of the International Peace Institute for their briefings
and for their engagement on this important issue.
One thing is clear — the humanitarian consequences of attacks on such
civilian infrastructure and objects as energy, health, education and water facilities,
together with the destruction of crops and food stocks in times of conflict, are felt
not only in the short, but also in the long term.
In the short term, these acts contribute to the complexity of the humanitarian
situation of populations trapped between belligerents. For example, attacking
a power plant, is an assault on the water-distribution system, the functioning of
hospitals and the wastewater-treatment system in a community. This will lead to
water-borne diseases and other disruptions in the provision of basic services and to
the displacement of vulnerable populations.
In the long term, the road to rebuilding a country whose civilian infrastructure
has been destroyed by conflict is long and requires enormous resources. The damage
caused by war leads to a delay in economic and social development and puts the postconflict country at risk of enormous debts.
In the light of the foregoing, the protection of civilians and the objects essential
to their survival therefore requires a holistic approach from us. To this end, I would
like to make a few recommendations to make the protection of critical infrastructure
a central issue in the protection of civilians in times of conflict.
First of all, we should endorse the Secretary-General’s recommendations on
adopting national and comprehensive policy frameworks on the protection of civilians
that focus on preventing, mitigating and responding to damage to the infrastructure
on which civilians depend. In this regard, I would like to highlight and commend the
efforts of the States members of the Group of Five for the Sahel — namely, Chad,
Mauritania, Burkina Faso, Mali and my country, the Niger — for having developed
and implemented national policies and other frameworks on the protection of
civilians and infrastructure and for the delivery of essential services, based on a
proactive approach to reduce the impact of conflict on civilian populations.
It is also important to ensure equitable and inclusive access for civil society
actors in the process of setting up programmes to strengthen the resilience of civil
21-0581333/102

S/2021/415

infrastructure and essential services and, in developing these measures, to take into
account the youth, peace and security agenda, and the women and peace and security
agenda, as well as the recommendations set forth in resolution 1325 (2000).
Furthermore, given that 6 of the 10 largest peacekeeping operations have been
deployed in the countries most exposed to climate change, measures to improve our
understanding of the correlation between conflict and climate-change impacts are
essential. The Niger, together with Ireland and the Group of Friends on Climate and
Security, continues to work towards the inclusion of climate change in any effort to
address conflict situations.
Finally, any real hope of putting an end to these violations in conflict zones
will also necessarily involve concrete action to silence the weapons and put an end
to their proliferation. We would therefore like to remind States of their obligation to
respect the Arms Trade Treaty and invite the Security Council to examine the role
played by certain actors in the circulation of these weapons, particularly in the Sahel.
In conclusion, and as today’s debate is the last high-level event on the agenda
of the Vietnamese presidency, let me extend my sincere congratulations to the
President of the Security Council and his Government for a successful presidency,
as evidenced by the adoption of important work product by the Security Council
this month.

34/102

21-05813

S/2021/415

Annex 17
Statement by the Permanent Representative of Tunisia to the
United Nations, Tarek Ladeb
[Original: Arabic]
At the outset, I should like to thank Viet Nam for convening a meeting on
this important issue. I also thank Mark Lowcock, Under-Secretary-General for
Humanitarian Affairs and Emergency Relief Coordinator; Peter Maurer, President
of the International Committee of the Red Cross; and Kevin Rudd, Chair of the
International Peace Institute.
The reality of the humanitarian crises raging in many regions worldwide,
particularly in the Arab world and Africa, has revealed that the disruption or
interruption of essential services necessary for survival, for years or even decades,
as a result of prolonged armed conflict and occupation is a salient feature of such
crises. These situations have become complex, their toll on civilians and civilian
facilities growing ever greater as economic crises, climate phenomena and natural
disasters have worsened.
The deterioration of such essential services as water, energy, sanitation and
health care has undoubtedly exacerbated weaknesses and vulnerabilities and had a
major impact on civilian infrastructure in conflict zones, threatening food security,
livelihoods and health. By spurring and prolonging the waves of forced displacement,
it has also undermined security and stability and prevented the peoples affected
from achieving the Sustainable Development Goals.
The effectiveness of the system of essential services and of the broader
humanitarian response in situations of armed conflict is at stake now more than ever,
given the challenge posed by the outbreak of the coronavirus disease (COVID-19)
pandemic. The international community and the Security Council in particular must
therefore work towards a more coherent, inclusive and sustainable approach that is
mindful of the close interdependence of peace, security and sustainable development.
In that connection, I would also like to note the following:
First, it will be necessary to go beyond the traditional focus on short-term
humanitarian solutions to problems caused by the disruption of essential services in
order to address the root causes of crises and find proactive and lasting solutions.
In that regard, ending conflicts must become the top priority, through an
effective Security Council effort bolstered by consensus among Council members.
We emphasize the urgent need to strengthen the foundations of peace by reaching
political settlements and actively pursuing peaceful means of preventing armed
conflict from occurring and recurring , thereby establishing and building peace.
Secondly, it is necessary to establish a firm foundation for minimizing the
disruption of essential services in conflict situations by enshrining the concepts of
protection and the best interests of vulnerable groups, and by ensuring that an effective
response is firmly rooted in international humanitarian law and international human
rights law.
Addressing the challenges associated with a decline in the provision of
essential services will require parties to armed conflict, first and foremost, to
commit to respecting the rules of international human rights law and international
humanitarian law, especially the rules of prudence and proportionality. Belligerents
must refrain from attacking civilians, infrastructure and persons involved in the
provision of basic services while facilitating impartial access to those services and
ensuring accountability in order to prevent such violations from recurring.
21-0581335/102

S/2021/415

Rehabilitating basic services is most effective when done at the appropriate
time and place, particularly when a humanitarian truce has been approved and a
ceasefire has been established. We take this opportunity to reiterate that it is
necessary to establish a global ceasefire in response to the Secretary-General’s
appeal and resolution 2532 (2020) in order to end attacks on and maintain essential
facilities. Doing so will contribute to meeting humanitarian and medical needs more
effectively, promote efforts to combat the COVID-19 pandemic and facilitate the
voluntary and dignified return of displaced persons to their homes.
Thirdly, it is vital to adopt an approach that transcends the frameworks for
and shortcomings of the ongoing, conventional, short-term management of problems
related to essential services to include reducing vulnerability, preserving dignity and
changing people’s lives.
Such an approach will require action to contain the deterioration of
infrastructure during conflicts before it becomes irreversible. To that end, more
should be done to interlink the humanitarian and development plans of specialized
United Nations agencies, early recovery efforts should be harmonized, and integrated
projects that encompass humanitarian, development and peacebuilding activities
should be promoted.
In that regard, it would be worthwhile to continue building the capacities
of affected communities and institutions so as to ensure long-term recovery and
resilience in crises, particularly by rehabilitating hospitals, schools, roads, water and
energy supplies and sanitation, while also making decent and sustainable livelihoods
available to affected groups, thereby improving their prospects for a better life.
Lastly, my delegation is pleased to co-sponsor the humanitarian draft
resolution proposed by Viet Nam on the subject of today’s meeting, as contained in
document S/2021/402. The aim of the draft resolution is to prioritize the protection
of civilians and civilian facilities during armed conflict, thus enshrining the rules
of international law, including international humanitarian law, international human
rights law and the relevant Security Council resolutions.

36/102

21-05813

S/2021/415

Annex 18
Statement by the Acting Permanent Representative of the United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, James Roscoe
Our thanks to Mr. Lowcock, Mr. Maurer and Mr. Rudd for their briefings. The
United Kingdom is grateful to Viet Nam for convening this debate and is delighted
to co-sponsor Viet Nam’s resolution on the protection of indispensable objects for
human survival (resolution 2573 (2020)).
It was striking listening to the briefers today. They catalogued examples —
specific examples — of despicable violations of international humanitarian law.
And in the Security Council we often hear of this kind of evidence — evidence of
the devastation that such attacks on indispensable infrastructure have on civilian
populations. We hear those stories in isolation, and the power of hearing them in
aggregate is significant. Each one of them represents a failure of the Council to fulfil
its mandate. They are our failures because we are not taking the action that might
prevent them.
Just as our briefers set out the examples and impacts of violations, they
also set out how they can be prevented: enhanced compliance with international
humanitarian law, proper military practice and, critically, accountability for those
who make a tactic of such attacks. The adoption of this resolution today should
signal the Council’s unity in condemning such attacks. But it will start to address
this issue only if we are serious about taking action together.
Our first step must be to ensure all parties to armed conflicts understand their
legal obligations under international humanitarian law, follow the rules and exercise
restraint. That is why the United Kingdom provides specialist training in this respect
through our partnership programmes with the armed forces of other Member States.
Our training covers international humanitarian law, international agreements and
the military justice system. Our aim is to build knowledge and compliance and
support more accountable defence and security forces.
But when perpetrators attack indispensable objects in full knowledge of their
obligations under international law and choose to ignore them, we — the Council —
should act. Instead, all too often, they are able to do so with impunity. Effective
national and international accountability mechanisms are a crucial element in
providing justice for victims and in preventing such attacks in the future through
deterrence. It is worth underlining that, under the Geneva Conventions and their
Protocols Additional, States have the obligation to respect, and to ensure respect for,
those instruments.
So what should we be doing? There are three immediate actions we can take
to protect indispensable objects and prevent the suffering caused by targeting them
in violation of international humanitarian law, using existing mechanisms.
First, we must improve reporting and evidence. Governments and armed
actors should ensure the timely collection and reporting of information to avoid
harm to civilians and civilian objects, including indispensable objects. We should
also ensure the effective use of existing United Nations reporting mechanisms in the
Security Council and the Secretariat to inform decision-making.
Secondly, the Security Council must act on reporting. Despite the provisions
in resolution 2417 (2018), the Council has failed to encourage any independent State
investigations into the use of starvation of civilians as a method of warfare. We have
the means, but no action has taken place. In our statement to the Council at the 11
March open debate on conflict and food insecurity (see S/2021/250), we highlighted
such concerns in Tigray, north-east Nigeria, Yemen and South Sudan.
21-0581337/102

S/2021/415

Thirdly, we should do more to hold those responsible for the targeting of
indispensable objects in violation of international humanitarian law to account. We
will continue to press for full, prompt and impartial investigations into all incidents
where indispensable objections to the civilian population are attacked and to ensure
that those responsible for serious violations of international humanitarian law are held
to account. The Security Council should also be ready to consider sanctions against
those who attack civilian objects or otherwise violate international humanitarian
law, as it has done previously, including in the context of South Sudan.
I would like to underscore the United Kingdom’s own unwavering
commitment to the proper implementation of, and compliance with, international
humanitarian law. In March 2019, we published our first Voluntary Report on the
Implementation of International Humanitarian Law at Domestic Level. We are now
working with the British Red Cross to support other Member States to produce
their own reports on domestic implementation as a practical measure to encourage
continued improvements in compliance with international humanitarian law. The
Al-Atarib Surgical Hospital in north-western Syria was bombed just over a month
ago — yet another stark reminder of the devastating toll of attacks on indispensable
infrastructure on civilian populations. The attackers struck because they believe
that they act with impunity. No State should tell the Council that it believes in
international humanitarian law or wishes to protect objects indispensable to the
survival of the civilian population unless it is willing to take steps to prevent such
attacks and hold those who commit them to account.

38/102

21-05813

S/2021/415

Annex 19
Statement by the Permanent Representative of Afghanistan to the
United Nations, Adela Raz
I first want to thank His Excellency Mr. Bui Thanh Son, Foreign Minister of
Viet Nam, for presiding over this meeting and, at the same time, his delegation for
organizing this discussion. I also want to thank the Under-Secretary-General for
Humanitarian Affairs and Emergency Relief Coordinator, Mr. Mark Lowcock, the
President of the International Committee of the Red Cross, Mr. Peter Maurer, and the
Chair of the Board of Directors of the International Peace Institute, Mr. Kevin Rudd,
for their insightful briefings.
Discussions on the protection of civilians require a nuanced focus on the
situation of objects indispensable to the survival of civilian populations. Whether it
be energy systems, medical facilities, sources of food and water or waste management
infrastructure, the disruption of such services can exacerbate humanitarian
emergencies and be catastrophic to essential infrastructure, including hospitals.
The pandemic has stressed the importance of ensuring that parties to armed
conflict comply with international humanitarian law and human rights law and
that critical infrastructure, particularly for the delivery of humanitarian and health
services, is protected. The need for a humanitarian pause to address the effects of
the pandemic and ensure an effective roll out of the vaccine is urgent and emphasizes
the importance of today’s meeting. Afghanistan therefore reiterates the SecretaryGeneral’s call for a global humanitarian ceasefire.
As a country in conflict, we understand that failing to protect indispensable
objects can be disastrous. Yet our enemies continue to launch attacks, going as far
as using public infrastructure. They even use their very own Afghan brothers and
sisters as human shields. In response to that heinous strategy, our armed forces
have been closely adhering to our national policy on civilian casualty prevention
and mitigation, which delineates strict rules of engagement focused on protecting
civilians and indispensable objects.
As the pandemic has waged on, we have also seen new strategies of
indiscriminate and targeted attacks on journalists, human rights advocates and
humanitarian workers, as well as the infrastructure on which they depend. We have
seen attacks on cell towers, energy stations, transportation infrastructure and, most
important, our humanitarian infrastructure. It is a cowardly campaign, which has
claimed more than 1,000 casualties since the start of the year — a year that Afghans
began with a hope for peace and a better future.
The deteriorating security situation, the pandemic and climate change have
contributed to a nearly 100 per cent increase in the number of Afghans in need,
reaching 18.4 million people in January. In addition, the number of people suffering
from food insecurity has risen to 14 million, and the number of people fleeing conflict
in 2020 exceeded 80,000. That situation is both dangerous and unsustainable, but it
could be mitigated through enhanced, genuine, firm and committed efforts for peace
by the Taliban.
Since the early days of the pandemic, the Government of Afghanistan has
been firm in its message that a humanitarian ceasefire is needed to ensure the
protection of civilians and indispensable objects. That is a message that was shared
by members of the Security Council on countless occasions and that was amplified
by the Secretary-General’s appeal for a global ceasefire. Nevertheless, those calls
have failed to materialize, leading to another year of pain for the innocent people
of Afghanistan.
21-0581339/102

S/2021/415

The lack of a ceasefire will directly impact our vaccine efforts as coronavirus
disease (COVID-19) vaccines begin to arrive in Afghanistan through the work of
the COVID-19 Vaccine Global Access Facility and generous bilateral donations.
Defeating the pandemic requires a focused approach, which cannot be achieved if
attacks continue to target infrastructure that is key to a successful vaccine roll out.
In that regard, we thank the Security Council for adopting resolution 2565
(2021), on facilitating equitable and affordable access to COVID-19 vaccines in
armed conflict and post-conflict situations and in humanitarian emergencies. We
hope that the Taliban will understand the urgency of the situation, cease hostilities
and targeted attacks on indispensable infrastructure and personnel and truly work in
favour of the safety of our people.
In addition to the calls and resolutions that the Security Council has already
issued, we believe that it also has a vital role to play in helping us to enhance the
protection of civilians and indispensable objects in Afghanistan. The effective
implementation of sanctions remains a tool that can be used to encourage the Taliban
into compliance with international humanitarian law. By not heeding the calls for a
humanitarian ceasefire during a pandemic and intensifying attacks on indispensable
infrastructure and personnel, the Taliban makes us question its genuine commitment
to peace. The Council must not lose sight of that when deciding on future sanctions
listings or delistings. Our efforts must remain steadfast and focused.
Furthermore, with the Turkey conference on the horizon, we believe that
there is a window of hope for achieving peace, which requires a strong role for the
United Nations, supported by regional and international partners, in order to seize
the momentum and consolidate all efforts to end the conflict in Afghanistan. Only a
comprehensive and enduring peace can ensure stability in Afghanistan and, with it,
maximize our efforts to ensure the protection of civilians and indispensable objects.
Finally, let me reiterate our commitment to protecting and safeguarding all
Afghan citizens throughout the ongoing conflict and fight against terrorist and
armed groups, and, in doing so, pay tribute to our essential personnel and armed
forces. Those heroes have continued to work tirelessly during the pandemic, fighting
to protect the lives of their fellow Afghans, even when that means risking their own
lives. We will honour their sacrifice by continuing our firm and tireless efforts for
peace. Peace is the mandate that was given to us by our people. We will continue to
honour it.

40/102

21-05813

S/2021/415

Annex 20
Statement by the Permanent Representative of Armenia to the
United Nations, Mher Margaryan
I would like to thank the presidency of Viet Nam for organizing this open
debate on the topic of “Protection of objects indispensable to the survival of the
civilian population”. I also thank Under-Secretary-General Mark Lowcock, President
of the International Committee of the Red Cross Peter Maurer and Chair of the
International Peace Institute Kevin Rudd for highlighting the challenges with regard
to the protection of critical civilian infrastructure in situations of armed conflicts
and humanitarian emergencies.
Armed conflicts accompanied by the massive use of heavy weaponry and
indiscriminate attacks on residential areas can have a devastating impact on the
civilian infrastructure, critical for the survival of the civilian population. In the time
of the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic, large-scale military hostilities
and the targeting of health-care institutions, electricity networks and water pipelines
undermine the ability of the authorities to respond to the spread of the disease in
conflict-affected areas.
International humanitarian law and international human rights law shape
a crucial framework for the effective protection of the civilian population and
infrastructure. Armenia attaches the utmost importance to full compliance by all
parties to conflicts with their obligations under the Geneva Conventions and their
protocols additional without any political preconditions. Any attempts to politicize
humanitarian assistance to the population in need should be identified and addressed
by the international community.
While in many parts of the world the Secretary-General’s call for a global
ceasefire has been instrumental to reducing tensions, in our region the pre-planned
large-scale war launched by Azerbaijan in September 2020, with the direct support
of Turkey and the involvement of foreign terrorist fighters, has been the biggest
military escalation in the time of the pandemic. From the first day of the hostilities,
the Azerbaijani armed forces launched deliberate and indiscriminate attacks on
civilian objects, residential buildings and infrastructure in 170 communities of
Artsakh, including the capital city, Stepanakert, as well as in Martakert, Shushi,
Martuni and Hadrut, causing injuries, the loss of lives and the displacement of
thousands of people and inflicting a major humanitarian crisis.
Throughout its offensive, Azerbaijan widely used all types of heavy weaponry,
including multiple-launch rocket systems, artillery, missiles, various types of
unmanned aerial vehicles and military aircraft and prohibited weapons, such as
cluster munitions and incendiary weapons, to conduct targeted attacks on the civilian
population and infrastructure in gross violation of international humanitarian law.
Deliberate air bombardments, artillery and missile strikes heavily damaged a
number of medical facilities, including the maternity ward of Stepanakert’s Maternal
and Child Health Centre and the hospital in Martakert. Targeted attacks were also
carried out on educational institutions, which led to the destruction of 18 schools and
6 kindergartens in Artsakh, depriving 28,000 children of their right to education.
The violations of humanitarian law by Azerbaijan have been widely documented
by various international humanitarian and human rights organizations, including
Human Rights Watch.
In blatant disregard of the calls of the international community, including the
co-Chairs of the Minsk Group of the Organization for Security and Cooperation
in Europe and the Secretary-General, to immediately cease hostilities and in
violation of three consecutive agreements on a humanitarian ceasefire, Azerbaijan
21-0581341/102

S/2021/415

continued massive attacks on the civilians and civilian infrastructure of NagornoKarabakh, with the aim of making life in Nagorno-Karabakh impossible, as a clear
demonstration of the genocidal intent of its aggression.
Genocidal intent was also manifested in the deliberate destruction of Armenian
churches, shrines and cultural monuments by the armed forces of Azerbaijan. A
notable example of such a policy is the targeted destruction of Armenian cathedrals,
including the Holy Saviour Ghazanchetsots Cathedral and the Armenian Church of
Saint John the Baptist in Shushi, which continued even after the establishment of
a ceasefire.
The humanitarian crisis caused by the armed aggression of Azerbaijan was
further exacerbated by the spread of COVID-19 in Nagorno-Karabakh. Azerbaijan’s
deliberate and targeted attacks, inflicting heavy damage on health-care institutions
and water and gas pipelines, severely limited the capacities of the authorities of
Artsakh to contain and respond to the pandemic.
In the aftermath of the aggression, the hundreds of cluster bomblets, submunitions and other explosive remnants of war spread across civilian settlements and
agricultural lands continue to cause a serious security risk to the lives of civilians,
with a long-lasting adverse effect on the humanitarian and socioeconomic situation
in Nagorno-Karabakh.
Azerbaijan’s use of incendiary munitions, such as white phosphorus, which
inflicted massive forest fires in Nagorno-Karabakh, causing severe physical and
psychological injuries and major environmental damage, necessitates an appropriate
response to ensure redress and accountability measures.
Armenia appreciates the activities of the International Committee of the
Red Cross and the humanitarian response centre of the peacekeeping forces of the
Russian Federation, which have been critical to addressing the immediate lifesaving needs of the conflict-affected population. It remains a crucial priority to
ensure the adequate rehabilitation of the damaged infrastructure, such as medical
facilities, water systems, power networks and communication lines, and to address
the issue of extensive contamination by explosive remnants of war so as to deliver a
comprehensive and long-term humanitarian response.
Azerbaijan’s attempts to weaponize the issue of safe and unhindered
humanitarian access for United Nations agencies to the Nagorno-Karabakh conflict
zone are not compatible with the fundamental humanitarian principles and are
explicitly aimed at undermining international efforts to conduct a comprehensive
assessment of the humanitarian, protection and early recovery needs and human
rights situation of the affected population.
We reaffirm the imperative of acting in full compliance with the obligations
under international humanitarian law and ensuring safe and unimpeded humanitarian
access for the United Nations to Nagorno-Karabakh, in line with the principles of
humanity, neutrality, impartiality and independence.

42/102

21-05813

S/2021/415

Annex 21
Statement by the
United Nations

Permanent

Mission

of

Austria

to

the

Austria thanks Viet Nam for the timely convening of the open videoteleconference on the protection of objects indispensable to the survival of the
civilian population under the agenda item “Protection of civilians in armed conflict”,
and fully aligns itself with the statements submitted on behalf of the European Union
(annex 32) and the Group of Friends on the Protection of Civilians in Armed Conflict
(annex 47). In addition, we would like to highlight a few of our national priorities.
First, we repeat our call for full compliance with international humanitarian law
providing, inter alia, for the special protection of civilian objects, including objects
indispensable to the survival of the civilian population. The strict and consistent
implementation of the principles of international humanitarian law by all parties
to both international and non-international conflicts is of the utmost importance.
Austria continues to be a strong supporter of intergovernmental discussions,
as well as multilateral efforts, on strengthening compliance with international
humanitarian law.
In that regard, it bears mentioning that any object that does not contribute to
military action is qualified by international humanitarian law to be a civilian object
and granted specific protection accordingly. When in doubt, an object should be
qualified as civilian. That is especially important in populated areas, where civilians
are disproportionately represented and also disproportionately affected by attacks,
which often contravene international humanitarian law. The use of explosive weapons
in such areas poses a particular challenge, with almost 9 in 10 casualties resulting
from the use of explosive weapons in populated areas being civilians. Moreover, in
addition to the immediate effects of explosive weapons on objects indispensable to the
survival of civilians, such as medical facilities, water and sanitation infrastructure
and electricity grids, the damage done is compounded by indirect or reverberating
effects. It is for that reason that we are strongly committed to the early adoption of
a strong political declaration to effectively enhance the protection of civilians in the
context of explosive weapons use in populated areas.
Secondly, the coronavirus disease pandemic has been adding to the already
numerous challenges of civilians in armed conflicts, in particular of women and
children, worsening their livelihood and further increasing the high demand for
humanitarian needs such as food, shelter, access to safe water and sanitation facilities
and medical services. Austria therefore welcomes the Secretary General’s initiative
of a High-Level Task Force on Preventing Famine as an important step forward.
Thirdly, the protection of objects indispensable to the survival of the civilian
population and enabling effective assistance by humanitarian actors are closely
interrelated. It is therefore of paramount importance to guarantee safe, full,
unhindered and sustained humanitarian access as provided for under international
humanitarian law in order to reach all people in need, in particular the most
vulnerable. The international community needs to take a more outspoken stance
in condemning access restrictions and finding political and practical solutions to
remove access constraints. Concerned by the numerous incidences of direct and
indiscriminate attacks on humanitarian and medical personnel, we also need to
further increase our efforts to ensure their safety and security.
Finally, we believe that accountability and the fight against impunity for
violations of international human rights law and international humanitarian law
are essential steps towards reconciliation and sustainable peace. In this regard, we
wish to highlight the unique and invaluable role of the International Criminal Court
21-0581343/102

S/2021/415

(ICC). We would like to express our continued unwavering support for the Court
and strongly encourage all States parties to the Rome Statute to swiftly ratify the
Rome Statute amendment of December 2019, which allows the ICC to investigate
and prosecute the war crime of intentional starvation of civilians, including in noninternational armed conflicts.

44/102

21-05813

S/2021/415

Annex 22
Statement by the Permanent Representative of Azerbaijan to the
United Nations, Yashar Aliyev
At the outset, I would like to thank the delegation of Viet Nam for having
convened this important meeting to highlight experiences, challenges and
recommendations regarding the protection of objects indispensable to the survival
of the civilian population in armed conflict.
The protection of civilians from direct and indiscriminate attacks is one of
the cardinal objectives of the international humanitarian legal regime, and there
are numerous prohibitions on acts that undermine this objective. The principle of
distinction is at the heart of this regime. Civilian objects are subject to many of the
same protections as apply to civilians themselves.
Azerbaijan is among those countries that have seriously suffered from the
devastating effects of conflict. As is known, in early 1990s, Armenia unleashed a
full-scale war against Azerbaijan. As a result, a significant part of the territory of
Azerbaijan was seized and remained under occupation for almost 30 years.
Over the course of the conflict, Armenia has engaged in numerous
violations of the prohibitions on attacks directed at, or causing indiscriminate or
disproportionate harm to, civilians and civilian objects. The war claimed the lives of
tens of thousands of people; all captured areas were ethnically cleansed of more than
700,000 Azerbaijanis; and most of the occupied cities, towns and villages were razed
to the ground. Furthermore, the large-scale destruction of, and irreversible damage
on, the natural environment by Armenia has been characterized by the international
community as a form of environmental aggression.
From 2015, there has been a re-escalation in and around the occupied
territories of Azerbaijan. In April 2016 and July 2020, Armenia provoked largescale hostilities along the front line and the border between Armenia and Azerbaijan.
The Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees reported in May
2016 on the damage caused to civilian property by artillery bombardments and
unexploded ordnance in Azerbaijani villages close to the conflict zone. In July 2020,
cross-border attacks by the armed forces of Armenia posed a threat to the strategic
international oil and gas pipelines and the Baku-Tbilisi-Kars railway on the territory
of Azerbaijan.
Another act of aggression by Armenia at the end of September 2020 and the
subsequent combat actions have caused numerous casualties among Azerbaijani
civilians. Extensive damage was inflicted upon the civilian infrastructure in several
major cities of Azerbaijan outside the conflict zone. The armed forces of Armenia
also targeted the energy infrastructure in Azerbaijan. The ballistic missile fired
on the city of Minghachevir fell in close vicinity to the building of the Azerbaijan
thermal power plant, which is located in the Mingachevir hydropower complex, the
largest water reservoir in the South Caucasus.
As a result of the counteroffensive operation undertaken and successfully
accomplished by the armed forces of Azerbaijan, some 10,000 square kilometres of
the territory of Azerbaijan — with more than 300 cities, towns and village — were
liberated from occupation. The scale of destruction, vandalism, plunder and looting
evidenced in those territories after their liberation is shocking and unprecedented.
Most parts of these areas have literally been turned into a ghost land, as all the civilian
infrastructure was plundered and destroyed. Moreover, the retreating Armenian
forces and Armenian illegal settlers vacating these territories were disassembling
and then burning houses, schools and other civilian infrastructure, severing electric
21-0581345/102

S/2021/415

cables and poles, destroying gas stations, chopping down trees and setting forests on
fire in an attempt to leave nothing behind.
The destruction of civilian infrastructure and the vast minefields in the
liberated areas represent major challenges to the safe return of internally displaced
persons to their homes and properties. The Government of Azerbaijan has prioritized
the rehabilitation and reconstruction of these territories and the restoration of
housing, essential services and transportation and communication facilities there
to ensure speedy socioeconomic recovery and post-conflict peacebuilding. In the
meantime, master plans of all cities are being prepared and a number of projects are
being implemented, with the participation of international partners.
At the same time, accountability for serious violations of international law
must be an inevitable consequence of the offences committed. The fight against
impunity is also an important preventive tool and an essential prerequisite on the
path to lasting peace and genuine reconciliation.

46/102

21-05813

S/2021/415

Annex 23
Statement by the Permanent Representative of Bahrain to the
United Nations, Jamal Alrowaiei
[Original: Arabic]
At the outset, I should like to welcome His Excellency Mr. Bui Thanh Son,
Minister for Foreign Affairs of the Socialist Republic of Viet Nam, who will be
presiding over this meeting. I thank the Permanent Mission of the Socialist Republic
of Viet Nam, President of the Security Council for April, for convening this important
meeting at a time when armed conflicts in urban areas are on the rise, posing a threat
not only to the lives of civilians, but also to civilian facilities providing the essential
services that make decent living conditions possible.
I must thank the briefers, Mark Lowcock, Under-Secretary-General for
Humanitarian Affairs and Emergency Relief Coordinator; Peter Maurer, President of
the International Committee of the Red Cross; and Kevin Rudd, Chair of the Board
of Directors of the International Peace Institute.
Although the Geneva Conventions of 1949 and their Additional Protocols of
1977 provide legal frameworks for the protection of civilians and civilian objects in
armed conflict, civilian objects and civilians remain the primary targets of armed
conflicts, especially as armed conflicts in urban areas become more common,
claiming innocent lives and destroying civilian objects and agricultural land.
According to the report of the Secretary-General to the Security Council on the
protection of civilians in armed conflict (S/2020/366), direct or indiscriminate
attacks by parties to conflict damaged and destroyed homes, schools, hospitals,
markets, places of worship and essential civilian infrastructure. In addition, as
conflicts continue to take their toll on hospitals and essential infrastructure, the
outbreak of the coronavirus disease pandemic is weakening the capacity of conflictaffected countries to provide the health-care services needed to contain the pandemic.
Moreover, insecurity, instability and inadequate protection of humanitarian and
health-care workers disrupt the provision of the humanitarian assistance required to
alleviate civilian suffering. Bearing that in mind, Bahrain endorsed the SecretaryGeneral’s sincere appeal for an immediate global ceasefire.
Houthi militias backed by Iran continue to launch explosive-laden drones
and ballistic missiles towards Saudi Arabia, targeting civilian objects and innocent
civilians, in flagrant violation of international humanitarian law. Bahrain affirms
its solidarity with Saudi Arabia in every action taken by that country to deter the
terrorist militias and preserve its security, stability and territorial integrity. We also
endorse the Saudi Arabian position that the international community must work
together to stop these blatant attacks.
In conclusion, the protection of civilians, particularly vulnerable groups,
and civilian objects, including essential civilian facilities, in armed conflicts must
remain a priority for the international community. We reiterate our support for the
Secretary-General’s appeal for a global ceasefire, which is more urgent than ever.

21-0581347/102

S/2021/415

Annex 24
Statement by the Permanent Mission of Belgium to the
United Nations
[Original: French]
Belgium associates itself with the written statements submitted on behalf of
the European Union and its member States (annex 32) and of the Group of Friends of
the Protection of Civilians (annex 47).
The reports of the Secretary-General on the protection of civilians over recent
years call us to action on the increasing lack of respect for international humanitarian
law, the absence of protection and the tragic consequences of these shortcomings in
the majority of the countries on the agenda of the Security Council. The injured and
the sick, as well as medical personnel, are being deliberately attacked. Impartial
humanitarian actors continue to be harmed and to face persistent widespread access
constraints, and millions of civilians are being forced to leave their homes for a
perilous future where they will face heightened protection and assistance needs.
The reports detail the worrisome trends of indiscriminate attacks against civilians
and civilian objects, including medical facilities and schools, as well as objects and
facilities indispensable to the survival of the population, which seem to be occurring
with appalling frequency.
Against this backdrop, Belgium would like to draw the attention of the Council
to the following points.
First of all, let me address the fate of children. These attacks cause immense
human suffering, with long-term effects often felt for several generations, and thus
jeopardize the prospects for lasting peace. Neglecting generations of children in
situations of armed conflict dooms their societies to failure, even long after the
conflict has ended.
Over the past year, we have seen cyberattacks targeting medical facilities and
organizations and others on the front lines of the response to the coronavirus disease
pandemic. These actions put human lives at risk by impacting or reducing the ability
of critical institutions to function, distribute supplies or provide essential services.
Belgium therefore supports the call by the International Committee of the Red Cross
on Governments to take immediate and decisive steps to end all cyberattacks against
civilian and medical infrastructure and facilities. In this regard, Governments
must work together, including at the United Nations, to reaffirm and recommit
to the international rules prohibiting such actions, in particular international
humanitarian law.
Indeed, international humanitarian law is the most important tool for such
purposes. Respect for international humanitarian law is not a matter of legal
technicality but, above all, a matter of human decency and political will — the political
will to conduct hostilities in a manner that respects international humanitarian law;
to enshrine these rules in training for combat personnel and in military practices;
to put in place appropriate legislative and institutional mechanisms to address
violations of international humanitarian law; and to hold those responsible for war
crimes to account.
How, then, can we strengthen implementation of international humanitarian
law? Belgium would like to share some good practices today.
First, we must promote the implementation and dissemination of international
humanitarian law at the national level. In this regard, national humanitarian
law commissions and Red Cross and Red Crescent Societies play a crucial role.
48/102

21-05813

S/2021/415

Moreover, it is impossible to further disseminate international humanitarian law and
the protection of civilians without engagement with non-State armed groups, since
it is only through dialogue that we can share information, encourage respect for the
rules and negotiate humanitarian access. Care must therefore be taken to ensure
that counter-terrorism measures do not hinder this commitment, and hence pose no
obstacles to humanitarian action based on humanitarian principles.
It is also important to provide adequate relevant training for armed forces. In
Belgium, international humanitarian law is an integral part of the training provided
to military personnel. We are also investing in training on the protection of civilians
for troop-contributing countries, particularly in French.
Secondly, States that support parties to an armed conflict, whether through a
coalition of States or by supporting a non-State armed group, must respect and ensure
respect for international humanitarian law — that is, seek to exert any influence
they may have over the conduct of the parties to ensure they abide by international
humanitarian law.
Thirdly, it is incumbent upon States, pursuant to their obligations under
international humanitarian law, to equip themselves with the means to ensure those
who commit violations are held accountable for their actions, as well as to deter
the commission of further atrocities. Belgium has therefore established universal
jurisdiction, to take effect as soon as conditions allow. We recall, in this regard, the
contribution of the International Criminal Court in the fight against impunity for the
most serious crimes, including war crimes. We also recall that depriving civilians of
objects essential to their survival, including deliberately obstructing the delivery of
aid or services in order to intentionally starve them, is a war crime and may as such
be brought before the International Criminal Court.
In conclusion, the international community must be more consistent in its
condemnation of such flagrant violations of international humanitarian law. The
Security Council undoubtedly has a core role to play in this regard. It could encourage
the provision of international humanitarian law training to peacekeepers; give
appropriate emphasis to international humanitarian law in efforts to rebuild the rule
of law in post-conflict situations; promote accountability and add perpetrators of the
most serious crimes to sanctions lists; or make better use of existing monitoring and
investigation mechanisms.

21-0581349/102

S/2021/415

Annex 25
Statement by the Permanent Mission of Brazil to the United Nations
Brazil congratulates Viet Nam for the initiative of promoting this timely
debate on the protection of objects indispensable to the survival of the civilian
population. This question is at the core of the protection of civilians, who generally
suffer the dire consequences of increasingly long and complex armed conflicts. As
the concept note (S/2021/335, annex) rightly highlights, more civilians are dying
from the indirect effects or armed conflicts than from hostilities and attacks.
International humanitarian law provides a solid framework to protect civilian
objects, also granting special protection to those that are indispensable to the survival
of the population. It goes beyond the principles of distinction, proportionality and
precaution. Protocols Additional I and II to the Geneva Conventions set out a clear
prohibition against deliberately denying the civilian population such objects and
detailed norms in this regard. Modern international humanitarian law therefore
reflects a conscious choice to strengthen protection and limit the means and methods
of warfare so as to minimize human suffering.
Yet, despite the normative developments regulating armed conflict, more
often than not the Security Council receives reports of the destruction of objects
indispensable to the survival of the civilian population. The clear prohibition of
starvation of civilians as a method of warfare has not impeded this appalling practice
in ongoing conflicts. The dire consequences of these violations may be felt for
generations, not only because of high recovery costs but also due to the loss of lives
and livelihoods.
It is clear that the problem is not the absence of norms, but the lack of
implementation and respect for them. Hence the Security Council should call for
respect for, and adherence to, international humanitarian law in a consistent manner. If
there are violations, they must be met by independent and non-selective accountability,
including through relevant international criminal law instruments. Member States, for
their part, need to increase their efforts in disseminating international humanitarian
law norms and principles internally, including in peacetime.
It is also important to address the root causes of armed conflict. After all, the
protection of civilians and the objects indispensable to their survival can best be
achieved if we prevent conflicts from happening in the first place. Placing emphasis
on diplomacy and cooperation reduces the risks of armed conflict and the human
costs associated with it. The international community should demonstrate renewed
commitment to making use of the tools established by the Charter of the United
Nations for the prevention of conflicts and the peaceful settlement of disputes.
Peacekeeping operations may also assist Member States in building the
necessary capacity to perform their primary responsibility to protect their citizens.
Quick-impact projects, for instance, may provide immediate relief to the civilian
population and improve the conditions for more effective implementation of
protection of civilian mandates. A comprehensive approach to the protection of
objects indispensable to the survival of the civilian population also calls for longterm solutions that enhance resilience, reduce dependency on humanitarian aid and
help States move along the path of political reconciliation and development. This
dimension also serves to highlight the importance of mainstreaming peacebuilding
efforts in the United Nations, and the benefits of greater interaction between the
Council and the Peacebuilding Commission.
In conclusion, any armed conflict will inevitably cause destruction, jeopardize
civilian infrastructure and disrupt essential services. While respecting and ensuring
50/102

21-05813

S/2021/415

respect for international humanitarian law is instrumental to minimizing human
suffering, the most effective way to protect civilians is to prevent conflicts and, if
they emerge, to tirelessly promote political solutions for lasting peace.

21-0581351/102

S/2021/415

Annex 26
Statement by the Deputy Permanent Representative of Costa Rica
to the United Nations, Maritza Chan Valverde
At the outset, Costa Rica would like to thank Viet Nam for convening this highlevel open debate on “Critical infrastructure: the protection of objects indispensable
to the survival of the civilian population”. Costa Rica is pleased to see you, Minister
Bui Thanh Sơn, presiding over this important meeting. We greatly appreciate the
briefings provided by Under-Secretary-General for Humanitarian Affairs Mark
Lowcock; International Committee of the Red Cross President Peter Maurer; and
Kevin Rudd, Chair of the International Peace Institute Board of Directors.
Costa Rica deeply regrets that both State and non-State parties to conflict
have failed to distinguish between military objectives and civilians and civilian
objects, or to take every feasible precaution in the conduct of hostilities. Much of
the harm civilians experience in conflict is indiscriminate and permanent, but also
preventable. In this regard, Costa Rica would like to stress two points.
First of all, despite existing international legal protections, civilians and civilian
objects continue to sustain extensive harm — local businesses and marketplaces are
destroyed, schools demolished and public health infrastructure incapacitated. This
impacts sources of income for people and their communities and undermines feelings
of security and dignity. Daily life is upended, and the international community is not
upholding its obligations to protect civilians in conflict if we continue to permit the
destruction of civilian infrastructure and services by ignoring the direct, indirect
and reverberating effects of the use of explosive weapons in populated areas. Costa
Rica therefore calls on Member States to join in support of a strong draft political
declaration on strengthening the protection of civilians from humanitarian harm
arising from the use of explosive weapons in populated areas.
Secondly, conflict-related environmental damage can have devastating impacts
on civilian lives and livelihoods, including detrimental effects on human health and
suffering, as the Secretary-General outlined in his 2019 and 2020 reports on the
protection of civilians in armed conflict (S/2019/373 and S/2020/366). Indispensable
to survival, protecting the environment in armed conflict is protecting civilians.
The destruction of the environment, including through exposure to conflict
pollution or toxic remnants of war, can make life unsustainable for civilians and
impact the delivery of essential services to civilian populations. For example,
conflict-related contamination of water resources and the destruction of water,
sanitation and hygiene infrastructure can eliminate access to drinking water and
waste disposal, of particular concern for halting the spread of communicable
diseases, including cholera and the coronavirus disease. The deliberate shutting
down of water-pumping facilities continues to have devastating effects on the lives of
millions of people in conflict-affected areas in the Middle East and eastern Ukraine,
while also having detrimental consequences on agricultural production. Meanwhile,
damage to water-pumping stations and related energy infrastructure in Ukraine risks
flooding mines that store nuclear and toxic waste, threatening a potential regional
environmental catastrophe.
Civilians living in conflict zones are further exposed to increased vulnerability
to climate risks, as violence breaks down environmental governance and mitigation
infrastructure essential to combating these impacts, as well as the climate crisis and
its effects. Costa Rica calls on the Secretary-General and the Security Council to
take measures to ensure regular monitoring and assessment of these risks in armed
conflicts in order to improve the understanding of the impacts of conflict-related
environmental degradation on indispensable civilian objects and find solutions to
52/102

21-05813

S/2021/415

improve prevention, mitigation and remediation as a means of better protecting
civilians in armed conflict.
Protecting civilians in conflict is an increasingly complex task, and the
question of how to protect is ever-more pertinent. Providing effective protection
starts with understanding what threats to human security exist and how these differ
within a population. However, even with the best of intentions, civilian harm still
occurs and needs to be addressed to maintain credibility. The coronavirus disease
pandemic has further constrained the international community’s ability to maintain
focus on its protection responsibilities in the face of an acute crisis at home. It is clear
that more can and should be done to support civilians and the internally displaced.
Nevertheless, the cross-cutting nature of the protection of civilians also gives the
issue particular importance within the often-siloed landscape of the United Nations
system and its varied stakeholders.

21-0581353/102

S/2021/415

Annex 27
Statement by the Permanent Representative of Cuba to the
United Nations, Pedro Luis Pedroso Cuesta
Humankind is facing a complex scenario and colossal challenges. International
peace and security are threatened by the increase in conflicts and unconventional
warfare, while the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic has triggered a crisis
with manifold and devastating effects that transcend the area of health and affect the
economy, trade and our societies in general.
The root causes of conflict must be eradicated, and a just, democratic and
equitable international order must be established. The substantial resources allocated
to the arms industry should be invested in sustainable development and provide
the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development with the necessary means for its
implementation. The Charter of the United Nations must be strictly complied with,
in particular its purposes and principles of non-interference in the internal affairs of
States and respect for sovereignty and territorial integrity.
We share the concern reflected in the Secretary-General’s latest reports on
the protection of civilians in armed conflict, which note that civilians continue to
make up the vast majority of victims in conflict situations, targets of indiscriminate
attacks and other violations.
The challenges we face in ensuring the protection of civilians, particularly in
conflict situations, are manifold, including arms transfers to unauthorized non-State
actors, an increase in development programmes associated with lethal autonomous
weapons systems, the use of military attack drones, increasing military expenditures
and the malicious use of information and telecommunications technologies. The
resources earmarked for the development of these technologies should contribute to
the economic and social development of peoples.
The Security Council should fulfil its primary mandate of maintaining
international peace and security, promoting respect for international law and the
peaceful settlement of disputes. It should refrain from supporting military adventures
and from resorting to the threat or use of force in the settlement of conflicts.
The responsibility for conflict prevention and the protection of civilians lies
with States. The international community, the United Nations and regional and
subregional bodies can provide constructive assistance, but not replace the role
of the affected State. They should support and complement the efforts of national
Governments, impartially and unconditionally, when requested to do so, in strict
respect for their sovereignty, territorial integrity and political independence.
It is unacceptable that civilian protection efforts are manipulated to advance
the geopolitical interests of certain States and used as an excuse for disregarding and
violating the principles of the Charter of the United Nations and interfering in their
internal affairs.
We strongly condemn the killing of innocent people as well as the indiscriminate
and disproportionate use of force against them. The protection of civilians cannot be
a pretext for legitimizing military interventions aimed at imposing regime change
and overthrowing the political, economic and social order legitimately established
in sovereign States.
We recognize that humanitarian assistance constitutes a fundamental
component of the protection of civilians in armed conflict, and it must be provided
in accordance with the principles of the Charter, international law, international
humanitarian law and General Assembly resolution 46/182. The guiding principles of
54/102

21-05813

S/2021/415

humanitarian assistance must be respected, namely, humanity, neutrality, impartiality
and independence, and provided in accordance with international law and the national
laws of the affected countries and with the consent of the receiving States.
We reject the manipulation of humanitarian assistance for political purposes.
The application and intensification of unilateral coercive measures, in violation of
international law, cause serious deprivation and human harm to the very civilians who
are intended to be protected. These arbitrary and illegal measures generate additional
difficulties in the current context of the fight against the COVID-19 pandemic.
We reiterate the full validity of the Proclamation of Latin America and the
Caribbean as a Zone of Peace, signed by the Heads of State and Government of the
entire region.
All parties involved in hostilities must comply with their obligations under
international humanitarian law, as enshrined in the Geneva Conventions and their
Protocols Additional.
This also applies to United Nations peacekeeping operations, particularly
those with civilian protection mandates and deployed in changing security contexts.
These must have realistic, achievable mandates with specific, clearly defined
objectives and the necessary resources to avoid jeopardizing the safety and security
of peacekeepers.
Protecting civilians, particularly in situations of armed conflict, requires
political will and commitment. We reiterate our support for the Secretary-General’s
urgent call to cease hostilities and put an end to the scourge of war, and instead
to open up opportunities for diplomacy and cooperation, enabling us to confront
together the terrible COVID-19 pandemic.
It is the duty of all States, and in particular of the members of the Security
Council, to uphold multilateralism and the purposes and principles of the Charter
of the United Nations, including respect for the sovereign equality of States
and their political independence, unity and territorial integrity; the peaceful
settlement of disputes; and refraining from the use or threat of use of force in
international relations.

21-0581355/102

S/2021/415

Annex 28
Statement by the Permanent Mission of Ecuador to the
United Nations
[Original: Spanish]
I would like to express my delegation’s appreciation to you, Mr. President,
for convening this meeting on the protection of objects indispensable to the survival
of the civilian population, a key issue in the United Nations efforts to promote and
ensure the life and dignity of populations in conflict zones, as well as full respect for
their rights. Together with peace, that is the central issue that justifies the existence
of the Security Council and the United Nations. Its inclusion in the formal agenda of
the Council, 32 years ago, has made it possible for progress to be made in this area,
although major challenges remain.
In 2019 we celebrated the seventieth anniversary of the Geneva Conventions
of 1949, but despite having a robust normative framework, little has been achieved as
an international community in recent years since that commemoration. In 2021 we
face the particular challenge of recovering ground lost as a result of the coronavirus
disease (COVID-19) pandemic, from which we are gradually emerging but which
dismantled the efforts and projections of the first year of the Decade of Action,
which was 2020, for a world of peace by 2030.
In the current circumstances of the global health crisis, all Members of this
Organization and all its organs, including in particular the Security Council, must
rise to meet that existential challenge. To that end, it is essential to ensure the
implementation of a global ceasefire.
Therefore, the implementation of resolutions 2532 (2021) and 2565 (2021)
is key to facilitating access and corridors for humanitarian aid, as well as all the
resolutions aimed at protecting the population. But it is also essential to expand
the Security Council’s provisions on the protection of essential objects for the
civilian population.
The most recent report of the Secretary-General (S/2020/525) indicates
an absolutely precarious and persistent situation and enormous gaps, which have
expanded with COVID-19. Civilian assets have continued to be destroyed or damaged
over the past three years, and it is time for a strong response from the Security
Council. I note in this regard the briefings this morning by the representative of Viet
Nam and by Mark Lowcock, Under-Secretary-General for Humanitarian Affairs
and Emergency Relief Coordinator and Head of the Office for the Coordination of
Humanitarian Affairs. I would also like to draw attention to the briefing by the
President of the International Committee of the Red Cross, Peter Maurer, and by the
Chair of the Board of Directors of the International Peace Institute, Kevin Rudd.
The destruction of access means additional barriers for people with disabilities.
I therefore underscore resolution 2475 (2019), which recognizes the discriminatory
impact of armed conflict on such persons.
It is also regrettable that women, children, internally displaced persons and
refugees continue to be among those most affected by attacks on vital civilian objects.
It is essential that the Security Council consider the distinct impact that women
suffer as a result of violence and conflict and promote and ensure the participation
of women in conflict prevention and peacebuilding processes, including in efforts
to protect civilians.
Ecuador rejects and condemns the continued attacks on health services,
including the destruction of hospitals, as well as the military use of, or attacks on,
56/102

21-05813

S/2021/415

schools. We also condemn and reject the use of cyberspace to destroy or damage
critical infrastructure, including in the area of health.
Ecuador will continue to promote the Organization’s efforts against the use
of explosives in populated areas. And on this occasion we insist on condemning the
use of those weapons, as well as on our commitment to continuing to support the
efforts of the United Nations, the International Committee of the Red Cross and civil
society in promoting the effective implementation of international humanitarian law
and alleviating the impact and suffering caused by conflicts.
We advocate the peaceful settlement of disputes and reject the use of weapons
with indiscriminate effects, prohibited by international humanitarian law. We
also promote universal disarmament. For that reason, we also reject the use of
autonomous lethal weapons. In addition to lowering the threshold for the emergence
of new conflicts, the autonomy of weapons does not contribute to full compliance
with international humanitarian law, as that requires absolute human control.
Responsibility and accountability are key. That is why, in January 2020,
Ecuador joined the Franco-Mexican initiative promoting the suspension of the use
of the veto in cases of mass atrocities. And, in November 2018, we signed the Code
of Conduct regarding Security Council action against genocide, crimes against
humanity or war crimes of the Accountability, Coherence and Transparency group.
We continue to urge all countries to sign it.
I do not want to neglect to mention the humanitarian consequences of
nuclear weapons. No international framework for the protection of civilians can be
comprehensive and sufficient if it does not include the complete prohibition of nuclear
weapons. The very existence of such weapons defies the existence of humankind.
Not even the most sophisticated mechanism in the most developed country could
contain or mitigate the devastating impact of nuclear weapons on the population, and
so their existence is a disavowal of the protection of civilians.
Finally, I confirm that Ecuador joined in co-sponsoring draft resolution
S/2021/402, which we consider a valuable tool for the Security Council’s efforts in
this area.

21-0581357/102

S/2021/415

Annex 29
Statement by the Permanent Mission of Egypt to the United Nations
We welcome the convening of this important Security Council open debate
and extend our thanks to Viet Nam for this timely initiative.
The world is indeed witnessing unprecedented massive challenges with
regard to protecting civilians in armed conflict. These challenges are represented
in multiple and exacerbating conflicts, accompanied by an escalation of violations
against civilians and waves of displacement and migration that are the largest since
the Second World War. The brunt of these conflicts falls on the shoulders of civilians,
especially the most vulnerable groups — women and children.
The destruction of objects indispensable to the survival of the civilian
population and the disruption of essential services have been identified as a
significant challenge for the safe return and voluntary resettlement of displaced
communities. In a post-conflict context, the rehabilitation and reconstruction of
civilian infrastructure and the restoration of essential services should be prioritized
to facilitate socioeconomic recovery and peacebuilding. Owing to significant costs
associated with infrastructure rehabilitation and reconstruction, assistance by
international partners in capacity-building could play an essential role in supporting
peacebuilding efforts. In this regard, Egypt reaffirms the importance of compliance
with the provisions of international law and international humanitarian law by all
parties involved in armed conflicts.
In 2016, Egypt, and other friendly countries led an initiative in the Security
Council to introduce a draft resolution on medical protection in armed conflict,
which was later adopted by consensus and with broad support from the international
community as resolution 2286 (2016) at the very beginning of Egypt’s presidency of
the Security Council in May 2016. This resolution drew upon all the existing legal
frameworks that bind all parties to conflict with regard to the protection of the sick
and injured, medical workers, hospitals and medical facilities.
In accordance with international law, the primary responsibility for the
protection of civilians rests with States. Due priority should continue to be accorded
to the promotion of knowledge of, respect for, and observance by States of their
obligations assumed under the Charter of the United Nations, international law,
international human rights law and international humanitarian law.
In recent years, we witnessed atrocities committed by non-State actors, which
calls upon the United Nations to take a comprehensive approach to the protection of
civilians, including through its counter-terrorism efforts. In this regard, all parties
to a conflict have an international obligation under the Geneva Conventions of 1949
to protect the human rights and fundamental freedoms of civilians. All parties, in
particular States, must comply with the principles of distinction and proportionality
in armed conflicts. All parties must refrain from targeting medical facilities and
civilian objects and grant access to those providing humanitarian assistance.
Respect for the principles of sovereign equality, political independence and
territorial integrity of all States and of non-intervention must also be upheld. It is
imperative that a country’s consent be obtained before humanitarian assistance can
gain access to its territory, and that consent must always be continuously in place
throughout the action of the assistance operations.
In conclusion, we would like to stress the importance of the contribution that
peacekeeping missions make to the protection of civilians in armed conflict. United
Nations peacekeeping missions constitute one of the most effective means available
to the Organization to protect civilians in situations of armed conflict. We support
58/102

21-05813

S/2021/415

endowing such missions with the mandates and capacities needed to enable them to
become more effective in providing protection. Egypt stresses that it is important for
United Nations peacekeeping missions to uphold the principles of respect for host
countries’ sovereignty and cultural specificities. Relevant peacekeeping missions
with mandates of this type should also fulfil their tasks without prejudice to the
primacy of host Governments’ responsibility to protect civilians.

21-0581359/102

S/2021/415

Annex 30
Statement by the Permanent Mission of El Salvador to the
United Nations
[Original: Spanish]
We thank the Vietnamese presidency of the Security Council for organizing
today’s important open debate on the protection of infrastructure essential to
the survival of civilian populations in conflict zones. El Salvador attaches great
importance to this issue, as it is civilians who continue to represent the vast majority
of victims in conflicts and who suffer the immediate, short- and long-term effects
of conflict.
El Salvador regrets the increase in direct or indiscriminate attacks by parties
to conflict on objects indispensable for civilian survival, including those listed as
objects of protection in the Geneva Conventions, as well as other infrastructure
indispensable for the provision of basic social protection services, such as, inter alia,
education, health, drinking water, food, energy and places of worship, as described
in the Secretary-General’s latest report on the current state of the protection
of civilians in armed conflict (S/2020/366). It is for this reason that El Salvador
strongly condemns the attacks, destruction, removal or rendering useless of objects
indispensable for the survival of the civilian population as being contrary to the 1977
Protocol I Additional to the Geneva Conventions of 1949 relating to the protection of
victims of international armed conflicts, as well as for their serious short- and longterm consequences on global health, human development and peace — and because
these same consequences have the capacity to cause displacement within and outside
the borders of affected countries, put food security at risk and act as a catalyst for
climate change.
El Salvador regrets that, despite the Secretary-General’s call in March 2020
for a global ceasefire to focus attention on the fight against the coronavirus disease
(COVID-19) pandemic, we have seen an increase in attacks on hospitals in different
countries and regions of the world, making it imperative to increase protection not
only of medical facilities, but also, primarily, of humanitarian and health workers.
El Salvador recognizes that new information and telecommunications
technologies represent an important opportunity to promote the economic and social
development of States. However, the malicious use of these technologies extends to
cyberattacks against critical infrastructure, particularly in the health and energy
sectors, which are the most vulnerable to such attacks. We have seen how, during
the COVID-19 pandemic, cyberattacks on national health systems have been on the
rise, putting the lives of thousands of people at risk. We would take this opportunity
to condemn, in particular, the cyberattacks against the World Health Organization
and the phishing attempts that have taken place in recent months. The increase in
interconnectivity means that these attacks could grow in coming years; further work
must therefore be done to impede such attacks. In addition, international law in this
area should be codified to prevent the misuse of new technologies and to recognize
the interrelationship with applicable international humanitarian law, including in the
field of cyberoperations during armed conflicts.
We welcome the Security Council’s efforts to discuss this important threat in
a substantive manner, with a view to providing effective solutions. In this regard,
we welcome the adoption of resolution 2573 (2021), submitted by Viet Nam, on the
protection of critical infrastructure, and urge the Council to continue these important
discussions, leaving aside any political or special interests.
We must continue to work on accountability and close the door on impunity. In
this regard, El Salvador considers that it is essential, in order to prevent the recurrence
60/102

21-05813

S/2021/415

of war crimes, to facilitate access to justice for victims and reparations for victims
and survivors. Prosecutions for war crimes must include investigating and ultimately
convicting those criminally responsible, regardless of who they are and where their
crimes took place, all in accordance with applicable international criminal law. We
call on States to continue to cooperate with international investigative and judicial
mechanisms to reduce scenarios of impunity in this regard.
Finally, El Salvador reiterates the urgent need to continue to work on
strengthening the coordination and cooperation of the United Nations and regional
organizations; training members of armed forces and armed groups in international
humanitarian law and international human rights law; improving capacities to
monitor, investigate, prosecute and convict those guilty of having committed
war crimes, crimes against humanity, acts of genocide and other violations of
international humanitarian law; and providing opportunities for reparations and
social reintegration for victims and survivors of these scourges.

21-0581361/102

S/2021/415

Annex 31
Statement by the Permanent Representative of Ethiopia to the
United Nations, Taye Atskeselassie Amde
I commend the successful presidency of the Security Council of Viet Nam
during this month of April 2021. I also thank the Vietnamese presidency for
convening today’s important debate on the protection of civilians and indispensable
civilian objects.
International humanitarian law encompassed in the Geneva Conventions could
not be clearer with respect to the regime for the protection of civilians and civilian
objects. My country has been a signatory State of the Geneva Conventions since as
far back as 1949 and of the Fourth Geneva Convention Relative to the Protection of
Civilian Persons in Time of War since 1969.
In conventional armed conflicts, which most States have experienced, we
have encountered serious setbacks and gaps in implementation of these norms. Even
so, the right has been distinguished from the wrong, and the international system has
been in a better position to remedy the violations. However, contemporary conflicts
and threats continuously evolve and take on complex dynamics. Accordingly, it is
appropriate now to give proper attention to the conduct of non-State actors that wreak
havoc by targeting civilians and civilian objects with a view to causing outrage
and to undermining national authority. In considering these non-conventional
confrontations, the international system should look beyond the immediate
inclination to take an adversarial stand to the positions of national Governments,
especially those in developing countries, but should find solutions based on the real
geopolitical factors at play.
Not only are attacks against civilians and civilian objects a transgression
against the normative framework, but they are also a crime that jeopardizes
sustainable peace and hard-won development gains. It puts off peacemaking and
reconciliation and risks eroding the cohesive fabric of societies. That is the reason
why irresponsible actors that are fixated on causing absolute annihilation of nations
engage in destruction of civilian sites, including schools, hospitals, energy-generating
plants, markets and other places of exceptional public significance.
Ethiopian troops have made and continue to make enormous sacrifices in
our collective mission to protect civilians in different corners of the world. Our
commitment to the maintenance of international peace and security and the protection
of civilians is historic and enduring.
Let me now turn to a contemporary challenge my country is facing and briefly
highlight violations by non-State actors of the solemn obligation to protect civilians
and civilian objects. Since early November, a treasonous group has committed all
sorts of crimes against the public and attacked the Ethiopian National Defence Forces.
When its futile attempt to secure victory failed, the Tigray People’s Liberation Front
opened an attack against civilians. This criminal group undertook a deliberate effort
to destroy hospitals and health-care facilities, roads, bridges, power-transmission
lines and airports, which the Ethiopian people had toiled to build. The group targeted
and caused considerable destruction to civilian airports in Bahir Dar, Gondar
and Axum.
The law-enforcement operation in Tigray, together with the security challenges
in other parts of Ethiopia, poses a unique challenge whereby the Government is
striving to protect civilians and civilian objects against orchestrated attacks by
frustrated criminal groups. As a State with an independent existence and a long
history of governance, Ethiopia will take the necessary measures to protect its unity
62/102

21-05813

S/2021/415

and territorial integrity. In addition, it will make the utmost efforts to protect its
public from all forms of wrongdoing, including attacks by domestic criminal groups
that intend to destabilize the nation.
We uphold our obligations under national and international law. Further, we
will realize our obligation to bring justice and accountability to perpetrators of
crimes, notwithstanding their status or affiliation. In this regard, we applaud the
humanitarian assistance provided for our citizens to date and encourage friendly
countries to enhance their support.

21-0581363/102

S/2021/415

Annex 32
Statement by the Delegation of the European Union to the United
Nations, in its capacity as observer
I have the honour to speak on behalf of the European Union (EU) and its
member States.
The candidate countries the Republic of North Macedonia and Montenegro,
the country of the Stabilization and Association Process and potential candidate
Bosnia and Herzegovina, as well as the Republic of Moldova, align themselves with
this statement.
I welcome this open debate on the protection of objects indispensable to the
survival of the civilian population, which is of utmost relevance in today’s crises, as
well as the adoption of resolution 2573 (2021).
The EU is deeply concerned at continued gross violations of international
humanitarian law and of humanitarian principles, by the shrinking of the humanitarian
space and by continued attacks on humanitarian and health-care workers. It is also
concerned about the impact of the widespread and deliberate destruction or damage
caused to such civilian objects as schools and hospitals in today’s armed conflicts
via attacks conducted in clear violation of international humanitarian law. The direct
and indirect effects of this reality are one of the most critical challenges for the
protection of civilians and a major driver of long-term social and economic instability
and displacement. Attacks on health infrastructure have a critical impact on the
survival and well-being of civilians and are currently also seriously undermining
efforts to fight the coronavirus disease pandemic.
We are unfortunately witnessing this phenomenon in a number of crises
today. The situation in Yemen is marked by widespread violations of international
humanitarian law by all parties to the conflict, the scale and nature of which is
shocking. Accountability for these violations is vital. Persistently indiscriminate
attacks are killing and wounding civilians and damaging such critical infrastructure
as health facilities, schools, markets and farms. As a result of the conflict, the economy
has collapsed, and the humanitarian situation is alarming: there are over 4 million
internally displaced persons; 80 per cent of the population lives below the poverty
line; fewer than 50 per cent of health clinics are functioning; some 8 million children
are out of school; water and electricity services are erratic and unaffordable for the
large majority of population; and food security systems are under severe strain.
Restrictions imposed by parties to the conflict on humanitarian supplies and
access increase the risk of famine. The current restrictions on airports, seaports and
across the land, together with the continuous fighting, further impede the delivery of
humanitarian aid and affect the ability of Yemeni civilians to gain access to the food,
medicine and fuel essential to the survival of the civilian population. Some 16.2
million Yemenis — over half of the total population — are projected to be highly
food insecure in Yemen by June 2021.
Nigeria is the country with the highest number of attacks against health
facilities in West and Central Africa. It is also where more than 500 incidents
affecting schools and students were recorded between 2015 and 2019. Between
January 2020 and March 2021 alone, 59 episodes of violence or threats against health
services were reported, including the damaging of 11 health-care facilities. Attacks
on aid workers are widespread. Civilians face a high risk of seeing their human rights
violated and of other violations of international humanitarian law. They are also
seeing the deliberate destruction of economic assets that guarantee the population’s
livelihood, namely, crops and cattle, including in north-central Nigeria, in the context
64/102

21-05813

S/2021/415

of the conflict between pastoralists and farmers. In April 2021, during a series of
attacks on the town of Damasak in Borno state, in north-eastern Nigeria, non-State
armed groups looted and burned down private homes, warehouses belonging to
humanitarian agencies, a clinic and a United Nations protection facility.
These acts are accelerating the forced displacements taking place and
aggravate civilian vulnerability in crisis-affected areas. In north-eastern Nigeria,
2.2 million people have been uprooted from their homes, and in the north-west, there
is a growing pattern of attacks on education establishments, including with mass
abductions of pupils. In the north-eastern states of the country, regular attacks on
schools, universities and students are taking place as a result of the ongoing Boko
Haram insurgency.
The crisis in Syria is also a protection crisis. The EU strongly condemns the
deliberate targeting of civilians and civilian infrastructures by the Syrian regime
and its allies, which has been documented by the Syria Board of Inquiry. Full respect
for the rights of all individuals in accordance with international humanitarian law,
human rights and refugee law must be observed, which includes the protection of
civilians, including humanitarian and medical workers, and the protection of such
civilian infrastructure as schools and hospitals. More than 13 million Syrians inside
Syria — half of whom are children — are in need of humanitarian assistance.
While the need for health services remains high, as of 2021, 50 per cent of
Syria’s health facilities are not functioning or are only partially functioning. Further,
it is estimated that 11.5 million people in Syria are being exposed to risks posed by
the widespread presence of mines and explosive remnants of war. In fact, Syria is
facing possibly the highest level of weapon contamination the world has seen since
the Second World War, with swathes of the country turned into minefields. This
means that it will take decades to make the land and cities safe again.
It is important to ensure that life-saving and life-sustaining humanitarian
actions are not disrupted or targeted and that safe, full, unhindered and sustained
access to the most vulnerable people in Syria is guaranteed by all routes available,
including cross-border. The extension of the decision by the Security Council on the
authorization for cross-border assistance in July is vital. Otherwise, humanitarian
assistance to more than 3 million people will be in danger and the response to the
needs of the population could be jeopardized. Faced with that reality, the international
community has both a moral and a legal duty to take action.
First, the EU recalls that all parties to armed conflicts are to respect
international humanitarian law and bear the primary responsibility for ensuring the
protection of civilian populations and objects under their control. In that respect, the
EU will continue to put international humanitarian law at the heart of its external
action. The EU is committed to continuing its efforts to promote international
humanitarian law comprehensively, including through training and exercises, in
particular for military and security forces. The EU also works to fight impunity
and to ensure accountability for violations of international humanitarian law. In that
regard, we highlight the important role of the International Criminal Court (ICC).
We reiterate our call on the Security Council to have the situation in Syria referred
to the ICC.
Secondly, the unlawful use of certain types of weapons in specific situations
may have a disproportionate and devastating effect on the natural environment,
causing the degradation of agricultural land and devastating health impacts. We
recall that all means and methods of warfare are to fully comply with international
law, in particular international humanitarian law and international human rights law,
and that those who employ such weapons are accountable and responsible for their
use. Ensuring compliance with international humanitarian law is crucial, particularly
21-0581365/102

S/2021/415

when armed conflicts are increasingly fought in urban areas, exposing civilians
and civilian infrastructure to substantial risks. In that respect, we recognize the
challenges associated with the use of explosive weapons in densely populated areas
and their impact on civilians, and we call on all parties to armed conﬂict to fully
comply with international humanitarian law.
Thirdly, five years after the adoption of resolution 2286 (2016), drafted and
negotiated by Spain, together with Egypt, Japan, New Zealand and Uruguay, we
need to double our efforts to ensure the implementation of the resolution and that
medical facilities, and more broadly humanitarian and medical workers, are not
subject to attacks in violation of international law. In that respect, I would like to
recall that the EU, together with France, Germany, Mexico, Norway, the Niger and
Switzerland, is organizing a discussion series on the protection of humanitarian
and medical workers in armed conf lict. We also need to continue to uphold the
protection of schools and education infrastructure in situations of conf lict, and we
welcome the efforts of States Members of the United Nations that have endorsed the
Safe Schools Declaration.
Fourthly, the Global Report on Food Crises 2020 shows that conflict was
to blame for 6 out of the 10 worst food crises in the world and for nearly 60 per
cent of humanitarian needs. The destruction of objects indispensable to the survival
of the civilian population, including water resources and infrastructure, may in
many contexts contribute to conflict-related hunger. The EU urges all parties to
armed conflicts, State and non-State alike, to fully respect their obligations under
international humanitarian law, including the prohibition of the use of starvation of
the civilian population as a method of warfare, and to allow and facilitate safe and
unhindered humanitarian access. In that respect, we recall that in 2019, the Assembly
of State Parties to the Rome Statute of the ICC voted unanimously to extend the war
crime of starvation to non-international armed conflict.
Fifthly, strengthening the humanitarian, development and peace nexus with
a needs-based, as well as a human rights-based, approach would enhance a holistic
approach to delivering on the Sustainable Development Goals. There is a need for
donors and civil society to engage more coherently with the United Nations Common
Country Analysis and Cooperation Frameworks in order to design collective outcomes
ensuring that all stakeholders can enhance the delivery of durable solutions, which
would enhance resilience. To respond to challenges and to build back better, we need
a common understanding of the needs in each context based on joint analysis and
joined-up planning and monitoring, including data and evidence-based information.
It is through joint efforts that we can ensure the protection of civilian populations
and the enhanced delivery of adequate gender-sensitive services.
Finally, the international community needs to take a more outspoken stance
in calling on all parties to conflicts to respect international humanitarian law,
condemning violations and finding political and practical solutions to protect objects
that are vital to civilian populations, as well as conducting fact-finding investigations
and ensuring accountability for violations. The Security Council plays a critical
role in steering that forward and ensuring accountability. We count on the Security
Council and the international community to support those efforts.

66/102

21-05813

S/2021/415

Annex 33
Statement by the Permanent Mission of Guatemala to the
United Nations
Guatemala registers its appreciation to the Socialist Republic of Viet Nam, as
President of the Security Council for the month of April, for convening this videoteleconference open debate on the theme “Protection of objects indispensable to the
survival of the civilian population”, as well as to all the briefers for their insightful
presentations.
Over the past two decades, peacekeeping missions have progressively adapted
their protection strategies, embracing a holistic approach that involves coordinated
military, police and civilian interventions, including through the addition of advisers
on human rights, sexual violence in conflict and child protection. Guatemala
encourages troop- and police-contributing countries to take all necessary measures
concerning the protection of civilians, as reflected in the consensus of the Special
Committee on Peacekeeping Operations and the principles of international
humanitarian law. In that regard, Guatemala takes note that this interpretation is not
reflected in the Policy on the Protection of Civilians in United Nations Peacekeeping
(2019) of the Department of Peace Operations.
Guatemala reiterates that the primary responsibility for the protection of
civilians, as well as for the protection and promotion of human rights, rests with the
host State. Within United Nations peacekeeping operations, the protection of civilians
is a whole-of-mission objective that requires a comprehensive and integrated approach
among civilian, police, military and corrections components in coordination with
the national authorities, as well as local communities and the relevant humanitarian
organizations, in order to create a protective environment for civilians.
Furthermore, my delegation reiterates that the effective protection of civilians
requires well-defined, realistic and achievable mandates; political will, leadership,
performance and accountability at all levels; the mobilization of adequate resources
and assets; in addition to well-trained and appropriately equipped military, police
and civilian personnel.
The cornerstone of this discussion is resolution 2417 (2018), which condemns
acts of depriving civilians of objects indispensable to their survival. We reiterate
the call on all parties to armed conflict to comply with their obligations under
international humanitarian law, including the obligation to refrain from attacking,
destroying, removing or rendering useless objects indispensable to the survival
of the civilian population. The more so in the context of the coronavirus disease
(COVID-19), Guatemala recalls that it is crucial to protect civilian infrastructure
critical to the delivery of humanitarian aid and the provision of essential services
concerning vaccinations and related medical care in situations of armed conflicts
and complex humanitarian emergencies.
Protection threats are expanding and aggravating during this pandemic.
United Nations peacekeeping operations, in particular, must quickly adapt and find
creative solutions to fulfil their protective functions in the field. Guatemala strongly
condemns the fact that some armed groups have openly attacked hospitals and
COVID-19 health centres, while others have taken advantage of the pandemic and
the reduced presence of the State and international actors to operate and strengthen
their stronghold.
This is not the first time that peacekeeping operations have been put to the test
in an epidemic. The spread of cholera by United Nations peacekeepers in Haiti and
the challenges of fighting Ebola while protecting civilians in eastern Congo already
21-0581367/102

S/2021/415

offer many lessons. One important lesson is to bolster strategic communication
and carefully work on public messaging to counter hate speech, rumour and
misinformation. Informing the public about COVID-19 and being transparent about
the mission is affected and constrained by the virus is key.
The international community must work collectively with the aim of ensuring
that the protection of civilians is at the core of all activities, including capacitybuilding initiatives and support to national stakeholders. All missions should work
with regional, national and local actors for a cessation of hostilities and violent acts
and to advocate for protection-oriented responses to the pandemic.
Guatemala will continue to provide its special forces with a mandate to protect
civilians with the highest level of effectiveness and efficiency, thus fulfilling our
commitment, without caveats, to contribute to maintaining and sustaining peace.

68/102

21-05813

S/2021/415

Annex 34
Statement by the Permanent Representative of the Islamic Republic
of Iran to the United Nations, Majid Takht Ravanchi
While the prohibition of the use of force, save the two exceptional cases
authorized by the Charter of the United Nations, is a fundamental principle and a
pre-emptory norm of international law, armed conflicts are still a reality of our time.
However, according to international humanitarian law, which governs the
conduct of States in armed conflicts, there are certain rules that must be observed
by parties to conflicts. The most prominent principles upon which international
humanitarian law is founded are the principles of humanity and the dictates of
public conscience. As also authoritatively pronounced by the International Court
of Justice, “the overriding consideration of humanity” is “at the heart of” the
principles and rules of law applicable in armed conflict. According to that principle,
inflicting “unnecessary suffering”, even to “combatants”, is prohibited, let alone
causing any suffering to civilians, the protection of whom is the prime objective
of many international legally binding instruments constituting international
humanitarian law.
Distinction is another principle of international humanitarian law, according
to which the parties to the conflict shall distinguish between the civilian population
and combatants and between civilian objects and military objectives. In addition,
in accordance with article 35, paragraph 1, of the Protocol Additional to the
Geneva Conventions of 12 August 1949, and relating to the Protection of Victims
of International Armed Conflicts (Protocol I), the choices of “methods or means of
warfare is not unlimited”.
Consequently, as also clearly stated by the International Court of Justice,
“States must never make civilians the object of attack” and, as stipulated in article
18 of the Fourth Geneva Convention of 12 August 1949, civilian objects, such as
hospitals, “may in no circumstances be the object of attack, but shall at all times be
respected and protected by the parties to the conflict”.
Likewise, starvation of civilians as a method of warfare or attacking or
rendering useless objects indispensable to the survival of the civilian population
must be avoided.
Those explicit norms indicate that our challenge today is not the lack of
adequate binding rules for the protection of civilians or civilian objects; rather, it
is the lack of compliance with such norms and, more important, the inaction of the
Security Council when they are breached materially and even systematically.
A living example is the decades-long systematic inhumane and unlawful
practices of the Israeli regime in the occupied territories, which cover a range of
brutalities, such as deliberate systematic and massive ethnic cleansing; the demolition
of homes and the confiscation of land and property of the Palestinians; the unlawful
blockade of the Gaza Strip; and the killing of civilians, including women and
innocent children, all of which are clear manifestations of war crimes.
Another example is the brutalities of Saudi Arabia in its six years of aggression
in Yemen, in which thousands of civilians, including women and children, have
been killed; homes, mosques, hospitals, schools, market places, diplomatic missions
and even wedding and funeral ceremonies have been indiscriminately attacked; and
starvation of civilians is used as a method of warfare, causing the world’s worst
contemporary humanitarian crisis.
Moreover, in both cases, objects indispensable to the survival of civilians,
such as foodstuffs, drinking-water installations and hospitals, have been the subject
21-0581369/102

S/2021/415

of systematic armed attacks or deliberate disruption and civilian places, such as
ports and airports, have been the subject of strict unlawful blockades.
Another case is the imposition of inhumane unilateral sanctions against Syria,
which prevents the import of humanitarian goods, including food and medicine,
causing serious harm to the health and lives of people. In practice, their adverse
effects are equivalent to starvation and must therefore stop immediately.
While emerging methods and new means of warfare, developed as a result of
technological advances, may require new rules, the development of which, according
to Article 13 of the Charter, falls within the purview of the General Assembly, the
existing norms on the protection of civilians and civilian objects are quite clear and
sufficient.
Even if there are situations that are not covered by such norms, civilians
remain under the protection and authority of “the principles of international law, as
they result from the usages established between civilized nations, from the laws of
humanity, and the requirements of the public conscience”, as expressly stated in the
Convention with respect to the Laws and Customs of War on Land of 29 July 1899
and its annex: Regulations concerning the Laws and Customs of War on Land.
Indeed, what the Security Council must do is to ensure the protection of
civilians and civilian objects in armed conflicts, compel the perpetrators to bring
such practices to an immediate end and hold them accountable for such crimes.
That is of the utmost importance in the current circumstances, in which the adverse
consequences of the coronavirus disease pandemic are exacerbating the already
serious humanitarian situations in a number of conflict-ridden countries.
In addition, when certain civilian objects, such as drinking-water installations,
are attacked or otherwise rendered useless, unfortunately, the main victims are
children. According to UNICEF, in protracted conflicts:
“Children under 5 are more than 20 times more likely to die from diarrhoeal
disease linked to unsafe water and sanitation than violence in conflict.”
It must also be stressed that, when civilian objects are attacked, destroyed
or rendered useless, it seriously impedes the return and resettlement of displaced
communities, as well as reconstruction efforts in post-conflict situations.
The Islamic Republic of Iran will continue its efforts to further promote
awareness about the norms of international humanitarian law at the national level
and to enhance their full and effective application at the international level.

70/102

21-05813

S/2021/415

Annex 35
Statement by the Permanent Mission of Italy to the United Nations
Italy would like to thank the Vietnamese presidency for organizing this open
debate and aligns itself with the statement of the European Union (annex 32). We
were also pleased to join the statement submitted by Switzerland on behalf of the
Group of Friends on the Protection of Civilians in Armed Conflicts (annex 47). At
the same time, we would like to make some remarks in our national capacity.
The protection of objects indispensable to the survival of the civilian population
was enshrined in the Additional Protocols of 1977 to the Geneva Conventions of
1949, which refer to the prohibition of attacks against objects that include foodstuffs,
agricultural areas for the production of foodstuffs, crops, livestock, drinking-water
installations and supplies and irrigation works. Protecting foodstuffs as well as
infrastructures necessary for food production and supply and water distribution
is indeed crucial for the overall protection of civilians and, therefore, also for
maintaining international peace and security.
Italy is proud to be a party to all of the Geneva Conventions and Protocols on
international humanitarian law and to have been among the co-sponsors of resolution
2417 (2018), which recognizes the link between hunger and conflict and condemns
the use of hunger as a method of warfare.
At the same time, it must be observed that since the adoption of the two
Additional Protocols, more than 40 years ago, international humanitarian law has
evolved significantly. As pointed out in the latest report of the Secretary-General
on the protection of civilians (S/2020/366), the contemporary notion of essential
infrastructure also includes hospitals and schools.
Notwithstanding resolution 2286 (2016), on the protection of medical personnel
and facilities in armed conflict, which Italy co-sponsored, in too many cases we
continue to witness attacks on hospitals and frontline doctors. That is all the more
unacceptable in the current pandemic scenario, where health infrastructures are
not only providers of primary health-care services but also indispensable pillars
of the vaccination campaign and irreplaceable tools to improve the resilience and
preparedness of national health systems. From that perspective, hospitals should be
considered important factors in promoting a better recovery from the pandemic.
As the Additional Protocols provide only a non-exhaustive list, it should
be noted that educational facilities also represent essential infrastructures. In
humanitarian crises, millions of children are deprived of access to schools, which
are too often attacked or used for military purposes. UNICEF estimates that in
emergency settings, education is the first service to be suspended and the last to
be reactivated. Without access to education, children are at greater risk of being
the victims of violence and abuse, including sexual violence, child labour, human
trafficking and harmful practices such as child, early and forced marriage.
Dropping out of school in crisis contexts is, in most cases, a direct consequence
of wartime attacks against school facilities, the military use of school buildings
or the forced recruitment, use or abduction of children, mainly by non-State
armed groups. That situation exposes children to disproportionately greater and
prolonged suffering, which, if not adequately addressed, can undermine the human
development of individuals and, consequently, the social and economic development
of communities themselves. That seems particularly true during this period marked
by the coronavirus disease pandemic, as school closures and limitations in accessing
social and health services expose children to even greater risks of violations
and abuse.
21-0581371/102

S/2021/415

For all the aforementioned reasons, Italy is among the States that have
subscribed to the 2015 Safe Schools Declaration for the protection of education
from attack and is a strong advocate of its implementation. We are also willing
to do our part in helping to build resilient societies, as we are aware of the crucial
role of education in situations of emergency. Several humanitarian aid initiatives
supported by Italian cooperation in crisis areas have consistently been dedicated to
the education sector.
From a humanitarian perspective, the protection of civilians in conflict areas
is also pursued through mine-action activities such as the clearing of territories of
anti-personnel mines and other remnants of war; stockpile destruction; mine-risk
education; medical assistance to survivors; and international advocacy activities.
For that reason, Italy supports humanitarian demining activities in Libya, Iraq,
Afghanistan, the Sudan, Colombia, the Democratic Republic of the Congo and
Somalia. In that same spirit, Italy supports the draft of a political declaration aimed at
protecting the civilian population from explosive weapons in densely populated areas.
The need to protect objects indispensable to the survival of the civilian
population is emblematic of the multifaceted nature of today’s security challenges.
As our societies and economies become increasingly complex and interconnected,
the growing interdependence of food production, water systems, power grids,
hospitals and schools should be recognized and taken into account.
The Security Council should increase its attention to those cross-cutting
issues and support a comprehensive and preventive approach to addressing their
potential impact on global security. For that reason, we welcome the adoption today
of resolution 2572 (2021), which Italy co-sponsored based on its convictions.
We stand ready to support an enhanced role on the part of the United
Nations in identifying best practices to protect those essential infrastructures and
to raise awareness of the importance of the effective application of international
humanitarian law.

72/102

21-05813

S/2021/415

Annex 36
Statement by the Permanent Representative of Japan to the
United Nations, Ishikane Kimihiro
I would like to begin by thanking Viet Nam for having convened this
important meeting. I would also like to thank all the briefers, including the UnderSecretary-General for Humanitarian Affairs and Emergency Relief Coordinator and
the President of the International Committee of the Red Cross, for their briefings.
As a staunch supporter of the concept of human security, Japan attaches great
importance to the theme of today’s debate: the protection of objects indispensable
to the survival of the civilian population. A wide range of objects and services are
indispensable, not limited to those listed in article 54 of Additional Protocol I to
the Geneva Conventions — foodstuffs, agricultural areas for the production of
foodstuffs, crops, livestock, drinking-water installations and supplies and irrigation
works. The civilian population cannot survive without, for example, medical
facilities, wastewater management and sanitary systems, and energy systems.
The coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic is striking hardest the weakest
segments of society, including those people affected by armed conflict, and has
brought to light the importance of maintaining essential medical services for people
fighting the virus in already fragile conflict situations. The relevant medical facilities
and access to medical services must be protected from attacks and destruction.
This year marks the fifth anniversary of resolution 2286 (2016) on health care
in armed conflict, to which Japan contributed as a co-penholder in 2016. Despite
that resolution and the subsequent resolution 2417 (2018), on conflict and hunger,
adopted in 2018, it is regrettable that we continue to witness repeated attacks against
medical and humanitarian personnel and their facilities in conflict zones. Most
recently in February, the Council adopted resolution 2565 (2021) and urged all parties
to protect infrastructure critical to the delivery of humanitarian aid for essential
services concerning vaccinations and related medical care. The Security Council
must use its powers to the fullest extent in order to facilitate the implementation of
those resolutions.
In December 2019, Dr. Nakamura Tetsu, a representative of a Japanese
humanitarian non-governmental organization, was killed in a terrorist attack
along with his Afghan colleagues in the eastern part of Afghanistan, when he was
travelling in a car to monitor his irrigation project. Dr. Nakamura devoted himself
for decades to health-care services and agricultural development for the Afghan
people. He strongly believed that peace and stability in and the reconstruction of
the country cannot be achieved without building a solid basis for the food and water
supply. Japan strongly condemns that heinous attack against that aid worker, whose
sole motive was to assist civilians and their livelihoods.
Japan is committed to actively contributing to the protection of civilians and
objects indispensable to their survival. In March, Japan made a contribution of more
than $30 million to the International Committee of the Red Cross for its emergency
and rehabilitation activities in the framework of the COVID-19 pandemic to provide
water services and improved access to medical care to the victims of armed conflict,
for example, in Syria, Afghanistan, Yemen, South Sudan and Somalia. Also in
March, Japan contributed approximately $4.5 million to UNICEF’s operations in
Syria, including the reconstruction of water and sewerage systems, to improve access
to safe water and sanitation for the population of eastern Ghouta. It also supports
health clinics for women and children by providing medical equipment.
Japan is determined to continue making every effort to ensure the protection
of objects indispensable to the survival of the civilian population in armed conflict.
21-0581373/102

S/2021/415

We will continue to work closely with other Member States, the United Nations
system, international humanitarian organizations and civil-society organizations to
contribute to that endeavour.

74/102

21-05813

S/2021/415

Annex 37
Statement by the Deputy Permanent Representative of Liechtenstein
to the United Nations, Georg Sparber
Liechtenstein is grateful to Viet Nam for having organized this debate and
recognizes the importance of the topic to the Security Council’s work, as well as to
the protection of civilians agenda as a whole.
Notably, the destruction of objects indispensable to the survival of the
civilian population, such as food, crops, livestock and water, is not only an outcome
of conflict but also a root cause, as people are increasingly brought into conflict
with one another over dwindling resources to sustain life. Attacks that result in the
destruction of such objects heighten the insecurity of people, often for a long time, at
times with that specific intention on the part of the perpetrators, in which case they
amount to war crimes.
The Security Council has at its disposal the tools necessary to deter such
actions by ensuring accountability. It must take a long-term and comprehensive
perspective on security, with human security at the centre of its work. It should also
consider further the contribution that the protection of civilians can make to the
prevention of future conflicts and the perpetuation of ongoing ones.
The most effective way to protect civilians is by averting armed conflict in
the first place, and, indeed, the goal of preventing armed conflict was the driving
idea behind the creation of the United Nations. The Charter of the United Nations is
clear that the use of force is in fact illegal except in narrowly defined, exceptional
cases. We view the deterrent effect of the criminalization of illegal war-making as
an essential part of the protection of civilians agenda.
The activation of the jurisdiction of the International Criminal Court (ICC)
over the crime of aggression on 17 July 2018 was therefore an important step forward.
We encourage all States to ratify the Kampala amendments to the Rome Statute on
the crime of aggression. We would also remind Council members that the possibility
of referring aggression situations to the ICC is a powerful new tool that the Council
has at its disposal. In the context of the protection of civilians after an armed conflict
is triggered, the Rome Statute provides that the term
“‘conditions of life’ may include, but is not necessarily restricted to, deliberate
deprivation of resources indispensable for survival, such as food or medical
services, or systematic expulsion from homes”.
We therefore very much welcome the decision taken by the Assembly of
States Parties to the Rome Statute in 2019 to fill a gap in the Statute by adding
the starvation of civilians in non-international armed conflict to article 8 of the
Statute, upon the initiative of Switzerland. Given the rapidly changing nature of
warfare, it is important to also consider the relevance of cyberoperations in that
discussion. To that end, Liechtenstein, together with 10 other States parties to the
ICC, has created a Council of Advisers of eminent experts in international law to
discuss how the Rome Statute, including its elements on the deliberate deprivation
of resources indispensable for survival, applies in the context of cyberoperations.
We are thankful to our partners who have joined that endeavour and look forward
to forthcoming report of the Council of Advisers on the Application of the Rome
Statute to Cyberwarfare.
Let me briefly mention some situations in which that topic is particularly
relevant to the Council’s work and should meet with the corresponding disposition
of the Council to act. In Syria, the Allouk water station — the main water supply for
460,000 people — had its supply cut approximately 20 times in 2020. That led to some
21-0581375/102

S/2021/415

parts of the region going without water for more than a week. Cuts to water supplies,
which are self-evidently indispensable to survival, are extremely concerning, and
Liechtenstein recalls that ultimately it is the Council’s responsibility to ensure that
access is consistently maintained.
Syrian Government forces have destroyed vital humanitarian aid supplies
intended for its own people for many years, including as recently as last month
in an airstrike on a non-governmental-organization-supported warehouse, and
systematically attacked medical facilities more than 400 times since the beginning
of the war. Meanwhile, the ongoing threat by some veto-wielding members of the
Security Council to end the mandate for the final border crossing at Bab Al-Hawa is
a direct threat to the survival of 2.8 million civilians in need in Syria’s north-west.
That is one of many, albeit a particularly blatant, instance of how the constant
threat and use of the veto prevents the Security Council from taking vital action. It
is also a grave violation of the Accountability, Coherence and Transparency group
Code of Conduct enshrining the expectation of 122 States for the Council to do
better in precisely those situations. The situations in Yemen and in the Tigray region
of Ethiopia are also of grave concern.
While Liechtenstein welcomes the agreement between the World Food
Programme and the Government of Ethiopia on humanitarian access, the situation is
clearly nowhere close to ensuring that the people receive the necessary humanitarian
assistance. Liechtenstein welcomes the Council’s recent agreement on a press
statement on the situation in Tigray (SC/14501) — an overdue reaction by the Council
that we hope will soon be followed up. It should be in the primary interest of the
Security Council to prevent a worsening of the humanitarian crisis and the worstcase scenario of a famine in the region.

76/102

21-05813

S/2021/415

Annex 38
Statement by the Permanent Mission of Malta to the United Nations
Malta thanks the presidency of Viet Nam for having organized this ministeriallevel open debate on the protection of objects indispensable to the survival of civilian
populations and for their efforts in negotiating resolution 2572 (2021), adopted today
by the Council, which we are proud to co-sponsor. Malta also thanks today’s briefers
for their insightful presentations as well as for the critical work that the organizations
that they represent carry out in a multitude of difficult scenarios.
Malta fully aligns itself with the statement submitted by the European Union
(annex 32) while also delivering a few additional remarks in our national capacity.
This debate provides a timely, and, regrettably, much-needed, opportunity for
the international community to reiterate the need for all parties involved in conflicts
to respect international humanitarian law and its guiding principles, which include
an obligation to ensure the protection of objects and infrastructure that are critical
to the survival of the civilian population in time of hostilities.
In a variety of conflict scenarios, including Yemen, Syria, Nigeria, Cameroon,
Ukraine, Afghanistan and Myanmar, we continue to witness gross violations of
international humanitarian law. Among those violations we observe the widespread
destruction or damage, both intentional and unintentional, of civilian objects and
structures. That encompasses hospitals and related health facilities; schools and
education-related facilities; civilian infrastructure, including that essential to
the delivery of humanitarian aid; public service infrastructure, including water
and electricity supply mechanisms; and other economic assets crucial to civilian
populations’ well-being, such as livestock and agricultural assets.
Damage to such indispensable objects creates a vicious circle. At the onset,
essential services are disrupted, thus causing devastating harm to the civilian
population. Simultaneously, such situations also plant the seed for further suffering
for civilians, given the linkages between the damage suffered and the likely onset
of conflict-related food and water insecurity; the increased likelihood of forced
displacement; the possibility of environmental consequences due to damage to
critical infrastructure; a compounded spread of infectious diseases, including due to
medicine shortages; and, more broadly, the worsening of the humanitarian situation.
Worryingly, current and future trends pose even greater difficulties when
seeking to safeguard objects indispensable to the survival of the civilian population
from damage. Let me highlight two specific scenarios.
First, urbanization and high population density, particularly in conflict
situations, inevitably results in increased vulnerability for civilians and related
objects, for example through the intermingling of combatants and civilians and
related objects.
Secondly, the malicious use of digital technology poses further risks, as
witnessed through the number of cyberattacks that have been directed at critical
infrastructure, particularly in the fields of health care and energy.
In the light of such circumstances, the international community is legally
compelled to recall and abide by international humanitarian law and its provisions.
Let us commit to safeguarding the protections afforded to objects and infrastructure
that are imperative for a civilian population’s survival and to ensuring that lifesustaining humanitarian assistance continues to be delivered, without the imposition
of unnecessary obstacles.
Additional specific measures that should be encouraged include the following.
21-0581377/102

S/2021/415

In the context of medical facilities, one must recall the unanimous adoption of
resolution 2286 (2016), in 2016, and its persistently relevant provisions that safeguard
medical facilities and seek to ensure that humanitarian and medical workers are not
subject to attack.
The same protections should be extended to educational facilities. In that vein,
Malta proudly refers to its endorsement of the Safe Schools Declaration and calls on
other Member States to join the 107 Members that have taken such a step.
The increasing prevalence of urban warfare necessitates a re-evaluation of
previous military practice in order to ensure effective protection for the civilian
population and related infrastructure. In that vein, the Republic of Malta expresses
its support for the Irish-led initiative to adopt a political declaration and looks
forward to constructively engaging in efforts towards the adoption of a political
declaration that seeks to strengthen the protection of civilians from the impact of
explosive weapons in urban areas.
Allow me to conclude by re-emphasizing Malta’s proactive stance in
advancing the protection of civilians in armed conflict agenda forward within the
United Nations structure. Malta’s co-sponsorship of the Security Council draft
resolution on the protection of objects indispensable to the survival of the civilian
population (S/2021/402), while emphasizing our desire for stronger language in
terms of protecting the environment, is a manifestation of such an approach. Such
an approach will serve as a guiding principle should Malta be entrusted with the
responsibility to serve as a member of the Security Council in 2023-2024.

78/102

21-05813

S/2021/415

Annex 39
Statement by the Permanent Representative of Myanmar to the
United Nations, Kyaw Moe Tun
I wish to congratulate you again, Sir, on your able leadership as the President
of the Council. I would like to thank all briefers for their comprehensive statements.
At the outset, I would like to briefly reiterate the efforts made by Myanmar to
protect civilians in armed conflict, especially children, during the Administration of
the democratically elected civilian Government. In July 2019, Myanmar ratified the
Optional Protocol to the Convention on the Rights of the Child on the involvement
of children in armed conflict following the enactment of a new Child Rights Law,
which prohibits all forms of violence against children. Apart from being a party to
the Convention on the Rights of the Child, Myanmar also signed onto criminalizing
the six grave violations.
Those are the efforts and contributions made by the democratically elected
civilian Government led by President U Win Myint and State Counsellor Daw Aung
San Suu Kyi with respect to the protection of children in armed conflict.
Nevertheless, the situation in Myanmar has led to a radical shift in the efforts
and contributions of the Government for the protection of civilians following the
military coup on 1 February 2021. Instead, the entire people of Myanmar have been
experiencing the inhumane and brutal acts committed by the military and security
forces, and, furthermore, the systematic and targeted attacks of those forces on
the people.
As the world is acutely aware, the military staged that coup and detained the
democratically elected civilian leaders on 1 February for irrational reasons. Following
the coup, the entire population of Myanmar resisted the military in different ways,
including the civil disobedience movement by civil servants, nationwide peaceful
protests and various types of strikes.
In order to break down the protests and suppress those who stand against
the military dictatorship, the military group has been launching indiscriminate
and disproportionate attacks against civilians using tear-gas bombs, rubber bullets,
snipers, live ammunition, rifles, heavy weaponry such as rocket-propelled grenades
and hand grenades. Those have resulted in atrocities, acts of brutality, severe human
rights violations and crimes against humanity. Since the coup, as of 23 April 2021,
the military and security forces had killed more than 730 people, including dozens
of children, and arrested and charged more than 3,300. Furthermore, thousands were
being inhumanely tortured by those forces. The death toll is rising every day.
As covered in the international and local media and social media on a daily
basis, the brutal acts and atrocities being committed by the military are making the
people of Myanmar feel truly helpless. That severe and horrible situation reflects the
fact that the State’s military and security forces have abandoned their constitutional
duty to protect their civilians and, rather, are attacking and murdering their
own people.
Among those murdered by the military have been peaceful protesters, those
living peacefully at their residences, young people with great potential and very
young children, including a 7-year-old child, a 5-year-old child and a 3-year-old
child. As Myanmar is a State party to the Convention on the Rights of the Child
and a country that signed on to criminalizing the six grave violations, such horrible
killings seriously violate the Convention and the agreement.
In addition, I would like to stress the arbitrary detentions, the systematic
murders, the vicious torture during detention and the continued suppression, as well
21-0581379/102

S/2021/415

as the kidnapping of family members as hostages in order to arrest wanted persons.
Those inhumane, systematic and targeted acts by the military and security forces
have clearly violated international human rights law and international humanitarian
law. The military and security forces continue to carry out those inhumane acts in
the rural and urban areas of Myanmar even as I speak.
I wish to take this opportunity to reaffirm that the military and security forces
in Myanmar are seriously unwilling to protect their own civilians and instead are
abandoning the duty of the host State to protect civilians. The worst thing — but
it is the truth — is that Myanmar’s military and security forces are attacking and
murdering the civilians of their own country. That is why it is high time for the
United Nations and the international community to take steps to protect the people
of Myanmar without delay.
At this time, our top priorities are saving the lives of innocent civilians,
protecting the people of Myanmar from the military’s brutal acts and securing
humanitarian assistance for the people in need.
Saving lives and preventing suffering are noble tasks for humankind.
Owing to the current appalling situation in Myanmar, I should like to appeal to the
international community, the United Nations and the Security Council in particular
to use all means necessary to help protect the people of Myanmar from the atrocities
and the brutal and inhumane acts committed by the military through collective,
concrete and unified action taken in a timely and decisive manner.
I wish to express our appreciation to the delegation of Viet Nam for initiating
resolution 2573 (2021), whose adoption Myanmar supported.

80/102

21-05813

S/2021/415

Annex 40
Statement by the Permanent Mission of Pakistan to United Nations
Let me begin by thanking the Permanent Mission of Viet Nam for holding this
very important high-level debate of the Security Council, via video-teleconference,
on the protection of objects indispensable to the survival of the civilian population,
under the agenda item on the protection of civilians in armed conflict.
We also thank the Under-Secretary-General of the Office for the Coordination
of Humanitarian Affairs, the President of the International Committee of Red Cross
and others for their insightful briefings.
Civilians have always been the main victims of war, subjected to mass
extermination, indiscriminate attacks, deportation, hostage-taking, pillage and
internment; all that takes a high toll on them.
The international community has responded to the brutality of war through the
codification of two sets of protection measures through international humanitarian
law: first, the protection of civilians and civilian objects, and, secondly, concerning
other objects specifically protected against attack.
Protecting civilians during armed conflict is therefore a cornerstone of
international humanitarian law.
Article 54 of the Protocol Additional to the Geneva Conventions (1977) —
Protocol I — provides protection for objects indispensable to the survival of the
civilian population, inter alia, food products, agricultural areas for the production of
foodstuffs, crops, livestock, drinking-water installations and supplies, and irrigation
works. International humanitarian law also prohibits starvation as a means of warfare.
Despite that categorical prohibition, it is quite evident that the implementation
of those laws and norms have often been observed in the breach.
The Secretary-General’s 2020 annual report on the protection of civilians
(S/2020/366) highlighted the fact that direct or indiscriminate attacks against homes,
schools, hospitals, markets, places of worship and essential civilian infrastructure
have increased manifold. According to UNICEF, such attacks impede long-term
development and have an impact on an entire generation’s access to education.
Empirical evidence shows that attacks on cultural and religious sites, military
siege and collective punishment have often been used to advance military or political
objectives in situations of foreign occupation and suppression of the right of peoples
to self-determination.
Quite often such occupied territories are subjected to round-the-clock curfews,
communications blackouts, the closure of educational institutions, a bar on religious
and public assembly, the illegal and arbitrary detention of public figures, forced
disappearances and extrajudicial killings of youth, and the shutting down of local
businesses and economic activity — all of which are critical to people’s livelihoods
and survival.
Such tactics, aimed at coercing the civilian population into submission,
undoubtedly constitute violations of resolution 2417 (2018) and international
humanitarian law.
The destruction of objects indispensable to the survival of the civilian
population and the disruption of essential services have also been identified as major
challenges to the safe and voluntary return of refugees.
In a post-conflict context, we must prioritize the rehabilitation and
reconstruction of civilian infrastructure and the restoration of essential services, as
21-0581381/102

S/2021/415

those measures have the potential to facilitate socioeconomic recovery and create an
enabling environment for the voluntary repatriation of refugees.
Owing to the significant costs associated with infrastructure rehabilitation
and reconstruction, the vast United Nations Resident Coordinator system should be
utilized to help countries in post-conflict situations build the capacity needed to
develop and implement good infrastructure projects.
An important issue in today’s debate is how to protect civilian populations and
the objects indispensable for their survival. But how can this be addressed when the
suppression of the civilian population is the very object of the conflict?
The Special Rapporteur of the Commission on Human Rights on the promotion
and protection of human rights while countering terrorism has repeatedly underlined
that the rationale of suppressing terrorism should not provide an escape route for the
suppression of civilians seeking respect for their fundamental rights, including the
right to self-determination.
The challenge of addressing gross violations of international human rights
and humanitarian law are further exacerbated by the inequity in the international
response. In some situations, there is a quick and even robust response. In others, the
perpetrators enjoy virtual impunity to commit crimes.
The Security Council, as the primary organ of the United Nations tasked
with maintaining international peace and security, must not fail to act boldly in all
situations where the survival of millions of civilians caught in the vice of violence
and war is threatened.

82/102

21-05813

S/2021/415

Annex 41
Statement by the Permanent Mission of Poland to the United Nations
First and foremost, I wish to thank the delegation of Viet Nam for having
selected the pertinent issue of the protection of objects indispensable to the survival
of civilian population as the theme for this open debate. Let me also express my
sincere appreciation to you, Mr. President, for your country’s successful presidency
of the Security Council this month and for your quality leadership in the lively
discussions held in this Chamber.
Poland aligns itself with the statements delivered on behalf of the European
Union (annex 32) and by the representative of Switzerland (annex 47) on behalf
of the Group of Friends on the protection of civilians, both of which reiterate the
importance of protecting civilians and essential infrastructure in conflict areas.
Poland is deeply disturbed by the scale of attacks on objects indispensable
to the survival of civilians in conflict areas. Far too often these have been not just
incidents but rather a deliberate tactic of war and terror adopted by combatants. Such
gross violation of international humanitarian law is outrageous and intolerable.
Depriving civilians of infrastructure that is essential to their survival is
particularly perilous in situations of conflict-induced famine and food insecurity.
Two years ago, during Poland’s presidency of the Security Council, resolution 2417
(2018), on conflict-induced food insecurity, was unanimously adopted. Today its
key message of protecting humanitarian supply and access to responses to conflictinduced food insecurity appears more relevant than ever as we struggle with the
widespread pressures imposed by the coronavirus disease.
Educational facilities remain the main sources of inspiration for the younger
generation to realize their full potential. In that context, they constitute an
indispensable condition for the development of societies, economies and humankind
in general. In that light, we are gravely concerned about the increase in violence
against education. We are committed to putting it to an immediate end. Towards this
goal, we welcome and endorse initiatives that aim to reduce the impact of conflict on
education, such as the Safe Schools Declaration.
Immediate, full and uninterrupted humanitarian access in situations of
conf lict is an important prerequisite to effective humanitarian action. Unfortunately,
this is far from being the reality as medical and humanitarian personnel, their
equipment and supplies, as well as entire hospitals and other medical facilities,
continue to be targeted by armed and terrorist groups. We strongly condemn these
attacks and reiterate our commitment to bringing the perpetrators of these heinous
crimes to justice.
Last but not least, we would like to underscore that attacks against critical
infrastructure are disproportionately affecting those most vulnerable to the
detrimental consequences of armed conflicts, including persons with disabilities,
women and children. We must do better to protect these groups so that their
fundamental rights are safeguarded and their basic needs are met.
In conclusion, let me assure you that Poland stands ready to support any
initiative within the United Nations framework to protect civilians by preventing
and addressing violence committed against objects indispensable to their survival.

21-0581383/102

S/2021/415

Annex 42
Statement by the Permanent Representative of Portugal to the
United Nations, Francisco Duarte Lopes
Portugal aligns itself with the statement presented by the European Union
(EU) (annex 32) and, in its national capacity, would like to add the following points.
Portugal thanks Viet Nam, in its capacity as President of the Security Council,
for organizing this open debate and commends it for establishing the protection of
civilians and essential infrastructure in conflict areas as one of the priorities for its
Security Council term.
Deliberate attacks against unprotected civilians constitute war crimes and, in
some cases, crimes against humanity, deserving due accountability. The destruction,
damage or rendering useless of objects indispensable to the survival of the civilian
population has negative impacts on the human rights and well-being of the population
and ultimately on their right to life.
Portugal supports the development of comprehensive strategies for conflict
prevention, namely, the promotion of sustainable development policies, aiming at
consolidating peace and protecting civilians, fully respecting the primacy of political
dialogue and international law.
Only with an integrated approach, based on peace and security, sustainable
development and human rights can we guarantee sustainable peace. As has been
broadly demonstrated since it was first included in peacekeeping mandates 21
years ago, the protection of civilians must be regarded as a cross-cutting priority
throughout the conflict cycle.
One of the fundamental principles of protection of civilians mandates
in peacekeeping is that protecting civilians is the primary responsibility of
Governments. Peacekeepers with a mandate to protect civilians have the authority
and responsibility to provide protection where a Government is unable or unwilling
to protect. Therefore, the protection of civilians is a fundamental pillar of conflict
prevention and peacekeeping and peacebuilding operations.
Objects indispensable to the survival of the civilian population are protected
under article 54 of the Protocol I Additional to the Geneva Conventions of 1949,
which prohibits the attacking, destruction, removal or rendering useless of
such objects.
Discussions on specific sub-themes of protection of civilians are important,
as they allow for a more detailed analysis of areas and issues of concern, resulting in
more targeted strategies. In this specific case, the protection of indispensable objects
has a cross-cutting impact on the overall objective of protecting civilians. Moreover,
it carries positive externalities by allowing us to address other related agendas, such
as the women and peace and security and children and armed conflict.
Attacks on schools have a particularly long-lasting effect, risking the future
of entire generations and disproportionally affecting girls. In this context, the Safe
Schools Declaration is a pivotal document, as is resolution 1998 (2011), urging
parties to refrain from actions that hinder children’s access to education and to health
services. Portugal is proud of the role it played in the resolution’s adoption during its
term as a non-permanent member of the Security Council from 2011 to 2012.
Moreover, addressing specific sub-themes of the protection of civilians is
particularly relevant as new challenges emerge and conflicts become more complex.
Protecting indispensable objects becomes a key task in the context of urban warfare,
climate change and terrorism.
84/102

21-05813

S/2021/415

In regard to material loss, the destruction of health and educational facilities
is perhaps one of the most evident and harmful consequences of conflicts. However,
conflicts can have much broader, complex and pernicious implications in terms
of destruction, damage or the rendering useless of essential objects. For instance,
attacks on foodstuffs, crops, livestock, safe water and sanitation, as well as waste
facilities, energy grids and key mobility infrastructure, such as airports, railways
and main access routes, health and educational facilities, severely compromise
the immediate and long-term well-being of populations. As such, already complex
conflict situations quickly evolve into extremely dire humanitarian crises. This
results in forced displacement, food insecurity and malnutrition, the propagation
of infectious diseases, unmet medical needs and the obstruction of education
opportunities. From this perspective, this is as destructive as direct violence and
attacks on the population.
The destruction, damage or rendering useless of indispensable objects has
other significant implications within protection of civilians mandates by hindering
humanitarian assistance.
In the light of the above, the adoption of resolution 2341 (2017) was key in
establishing the protection of critical infrastructure against terrorist threats and
enhancing international and regional cooperation. Resolution 2417 (2018) drew
attention to the link between armed conflict and conflict‑induced food insecurity;
called on all parties to conflict to comply with their obligations under international
humanitarian law regarding the protection of civilians; and condemned the starvation
of civilians as a method of warfare and the unlawful denial of humanitarian access
to civilian populations.
Despite the Secretary-General’s call for an immediate global ceasefire in
March 2020 to focus on the fight against the coronavirus disease (COVID-19),
ongoing conflicts continue to harm populations worldwide. In this sense, resolution
2565 (2021) was pivotal in calling for strengthened international cooperation to
facilitate equitable and affordable access to COVID-19 vaccines in armed conflict
and post-conflict situations, and during complex humanitarian emergencies.
I would like to share some ideas in view of some of the guiding questions of
this debate.
With a view to supporting the host Government in its primary responsibility
to protect civilians, it is important to engage in dialogue and political advocacy, such
as support for reconciliation, peace agreements or mediation, and capacity-building.
In the light of challenges, such of urbanization, climate change and the
COVID-19 pandemic, it is of the utmost importance that protection of civilians
mandates in peace operations include clear objectives, as well as comprehensive,
integrated and cross-cutting strategies directed to the entire conflict cycle that take
into account the slow pace of rehabilitation and reconstruction processes in the postconflict phase. The protection of indispensable objects should include a preventive,
as well as a reconstruction, dimension. The protection of indispensable objects
must be considered in post-conflict, rehabilitation and reconstruction phases as an
important component in socioeconomic recovery and peacebuilding.
It is essential to guarantee and reinforce training for all members of
peacekeeping operations. This includes training in international humanitarian law
within armed forces, an obligation under customary international humanitarian law,
as well as under the Geneva Conventions and their Protocols Additional. The Security
Council and the General Assembly have repeatedly recalled such obligation.
Establishing dialogue and contacts with local actors facilitates the
implementation of protection of civilians mandates, particularly regarding the
21-0581385/102

S/2021/415

protection of indispensable objects, as these actors have a unique understanding of
the challenges and needs on the ground.
It is also important to strengthen partnerships with international partners for
humanitarian assistance and capacity-building. The International Committee of the
Red Cross, for instance, is a key actor in the humanitarian and international framework.
Monitoring and reporting processes are fundamental for decision-making on
the ground, enabling more targeted strategies.
Finally, promoting accountability and fighting impunity must reflect the
consequences of the destruction, damage or rendering useless of indispensable
objects, and not just the consequences of direct violence.
Portugal remains committed to the defence of international humanitarian
law and humanitarian aid principles and reaffirms the importance of the European
Consensus on Humanitarian Aid, which provides a common vision that guides the
action of the EU in humanitarian aid.
The Portuguese presidency of the EU Council, under its humanitarian
programme, is highlighting the importance of compliance with international
humanitarian law, of respecting and safeguarding humanitarian principles, and of
guaranteeing humanitarian access in conflict situations. This includes ensuring the
protection of civilians in armed conflicts and the protection of objects indispensable
to the survival of the civilian population. Those issues will also remain, I assure you,
relevant priorities for our action in the scope of the United Nations.

86/102

21-05813

S/2021/415

Annex 43
Statement by the Permanent Representative of the Republic of
Korea to the United Nations, Cho Hyun
At the outset, I would like to thank you, Sir, for convening today’s timely
open debate on the protection of objects indispensable to the survival of the
civilian population.
To date, the international community has consistently emphasized the need
to protect objects indispensable to the survival of the civilian population, such as
foodstuffs, crops, drinking water installations, energy systems and medical facilities
during armed conflicts. Unfortunately, however, we are witnessing how even today
armed conflicts and attacks have a direct and indirect effect on such objects, and
their consequences warrant the ongoing attention and collective action of the
international community. The protection of civilian objects is important not only for
fulfilling the humanitarian needs of civilians in armed conflicts, but also for their
post-conflict resilience and peacebuilding.
Furthermore, the ever-changing reality of conflicts caused by the pandemic,
new technology, the urbanization of armed conflict and other new factors further
aggravates the situation in various complex ways. The importance of ensuring the
protection of civilian objects in armed conflicts has been recognized and documented
on many occasions, including in the 2020 report of the Secretary-General on the
protection of civilians in armed conflict (S/2020/366) and in many resolutions,
such as 2175 (2014), 2286 (2016), 2417 (2018) and 2565 (2021). I would also like
to reiterate our support for the Secretary-General’s appeal for a global ceasefire
announced on 23 March 2020 and resolution 2532 (2020), against the coronavirus
disease (COVID-19) crisis.
The international community has strived to establish principles and guidance
for the protection of objects indispensable to the survival of the civilian population.
Attacking, destroying, removing or rendering useless such objects is prohibited
by international humanitarian law, including the 1949 Geneva Conventions and
their Protocols Additional. The Security Council, in its numerous resolutions and
statements, has also stressed the need to respect international law by parties to armed
conflict, including the protection of civilians and civilian objects and safeguarding
humanitarian assistance to those in need. Parties to armed conflicts, including nonState armed groups, should be mindful of these laws and act in accordance with them.
The Republic of Korea reiterates its commitment to continuing to support the
efforts of the international community, including the United Nations, in this area. We
have continued our efforts in this regard, including reflecting the norms concerned
in our national laws, manuals and guides of the relevant agencies and entities.
Moreover, noting the economic and social challenges posed by the COVID-19
pandemic, the Republic of Korea has made significant contributions under the “ODA
Korea: Building TRUST” programme to enhance the comprehensive resilience of
developing countries, supporting their education, business and social safety nets,
and has contributed $5 million to the United Nations COVID-19 Response and
Recovery Fund.
The Republic of Korea will continue to join hands with the United Nations
and the international community in its effort to protect objects indispensable to the
survival of the civilian population.

21-0581387/102

S/2021/415

Annex 44
Statement by the Permanent Representative of South Africa to the
United Nations, Mathu Joyini
I thank the presidency of Viet Nam for convening this ministerial-level
open debate on the theme “Protection of objects indispensable to the survival of
the civilian population”, under the item entitled “Protection of civilians in armed
conflict”. Let me also thank Mr. Mark Lowcock, Mr. Peter Maurer and Mr. Kevin
Rudd for their briefings.
The protection of civilians has been the focus of ongoing discussions and
debates at the United Nations and its subsidiary bodies for decades, yet we continue to
see violations of international humanitarian law and untold suffering. The objectives
of international humanitarian law and those of the Security Council overlap in that
both attempt to bring peace to civilian populations.
Armed conflict continues to have a devastating impact on civilian lives,
especially women, children and youth who are disproportionately affected by armed
conflict. In some cases, these indiscriminate attacks lead to civilians being forced to
flee their homes, leading to high numbers of internationally and internally displaced
persons. This has resulted in these vulnerable populations requiring humanitarian
assistance to survive.
South Africa remains concerned regarding the current global humanitarian
situation, which has deteriorated, primarily owing to armed conflict and other
emerging threats, such as climate-induced conflict. Adding to this, COVID-19 has
further compounded the humanitarian situation in conflict situations.
Protracted armed conflict undermines the efforts of affected States to repair
and maintain essential civilian infrastructure resulting in a lack of provision of
essential services to civilians for longer periods. In this regard, it is important for the
Security Council to work closely with regional and international partners to address
these challenges. In this regard, South Africa emphasizes the importance of quick
impact projects and other peacebuilding activities focused on institution building,
which have proven useful in alleviating the plight of civilians in need.
Today, 27 April, marks 27 years of freedom since South Africa defeated
apartheid. As South Africans celebrate Freedom Day today, we are reminded that
freedom cannot be truly achieved if civilian populations are in danger owing to
attacks on objects indispensable to their survival.
Therefore, South Africa condemns any forms of restrictions on humanitarian
access and the deprivation of civilians of objects indispensable to their survival. We
also condemn the use of hunger and starvation as a tactic of war in armed conflict,
as well as the wilful obstruction of the provision of essential services to populations
in need.
This debate reminds us that the primacy of international humanitarian law is
to protect the civilian population and their property infrastructure in order to avert
humanitarian crises and catastrophes. Parties to conflict have the responsibility to
ensure the protection of essential civilian infrastructure, such as food systems and
markets, health and education facilities, energy systems, transport routes, including
international airports and water and sanitation installations. It is also crucial for host
States to ensure that safe access to essential civil services is uninterrupted.
The Geneva Conventions of 1949 and the Protocols Additional thereto of 1977
form the cornerstone of international humanitarian law. As signatories to the Geneva
Conventions, every State has the obligation to protect civilians, and failure to do so
88/102

21-05813

S/2021/415

results in humanitarian crises, catastrophes and human suffering. Furthermore, such
failure poses a threat to food security and nutrition, especially in conflict situations
where humanitarian corridors are deliberately blocked or destroyed to deny access
to both food aid and humanitarian health personnel to the affected population and
vulnerable groups.
The violation of international humanitarian law and the specific use of
starvation as a method of warfare ultimately endanger civilians and reduce access to
essential services. This automatically deprives civilian populations of their liberty
and their basic fundamental human rights and freedoms. We therefore call on all
parties to armed conflict, including armed opposition groups, to bear responsibility
for ensuring that civilians and objects indispensable to their survival be protected.
Those who do not fulfil their obligations to international humanitarian law must be
held accountable for those violations. Furthermore, we urge affected States to bring
the perpetrators to justice, and for the Security Council to continue designating
perpetrators for targeted sanctions.
All parties to conflict must comply with the provisions of international
humanitarian law, in particular the principle of distinction and proportionality and the
obligation to take all the necessary precautions to avoid harm and danger to civilians
and civilian objects. Alongside this, it is critical that international humanitarian law
be applied consistently and in an impartial manner. No country or party to a conflict
can be above the law.
The Security Council has made progress on the protection of civilians, since
the landmark adoption of resolution 1265 (1999), in terms of translating mandated
peacekeeping missions into effective action on the ground. However, numerous
limitations at the strategic and operational levels remain a challenge. These
challenges negatively impact the capability of peacekeeping missions to fulfil their
protection of civilian priority tasks. In this regard, it is crucial that the Security
Council carefully consider each specific conflict situation and ensure that clearly
defined mandates, adequate resources, capabilities and assets be made available, as
applicable, to enable peacekeeping missions to successfully complete their protection
of civilian mandates.
We hope that the ongoing Action for Peacekeeping plus initiative process will
take into account the need to review some of the challenges besetting United Nations
peacekeeping operations in discharging their protection of civilians mandate,
including protecting objects indispensable to the survival of the civilians.
South Africa recognizes the critical role of early warning and intelligencegathering in the prevention of attacks on critical civilian infrastructure. In this
regard, we emphasize the establishment of such systems in order to allow for early
and quick response to any threats. This will require close coordination between
the security apparatus of the host State and the peacekeeping missions in order to
effectively respond to imminent threats to civilians and essential infrastructure.
South Africa would like to stress the need to ensure the safety and protection of
humanitarian and health workers in order to ensure the continuation of their essential
work, and to further urge parties to conflict to prioritize the safety of such workers.
In this regard, South Africa urges the international community to continue to deepen
its support, in particular funding, for host States’ efforts to provide protection to
civilians in conflict situations.
South Africa would like to express its appreciation to the International
Committee of the Red Cross (ICRC) for its unwavering commitment to preserving
human lives and upholding human dignity. We commend the ICRC’s ongoing work
to reach people who are in urgent need of humanitarian assistance and relief. We
21-0581389/102

S/2021/415

hope that the ICRC will work closely with the African Humanitarian Agency once
it is operational, a practical African Union response to humanitarian challenges on
the continent.
In conclusion, we would like to propose that the Security Council consider
a thematic draft resolution that addresses protecting objects indispensable to the
survival of civilian populations, as currently there are myriad resolutions that
partially address issues under this theme. This will allow the Council to monitor
the implementation of its decisions on the protection of objects indispensable to the
survival of the civilian population.

90/102

21-05813

S/2021/415

Annex 45
Statement by the Permanent Representative of Spain to the
United Nations, Agustín Santos Maraver
[Original: Spanish]
Spain thanks the Vietnamese presidency of the Security Council for holding
this open debate on the protection of objects indispensable to the survival of the
civilian population and aligns itself with the statement submitted on behalf of the
European Union (annex 32).
Upholding international humanitarian law and conducting humanitarian
activities based on the principles of impartiality, independence, neutrality and
humanity are priorities in Spain’s foreign policy. Our collaboration in drafting
resolution 2286 (2016), exactly five years ago, demonstrates Spain’s firm commitment
to protecting the origins of international humanitarian law: the mission of medical
personnel in armed conflict.
At the same time, the various levels of protection that international
humanitarian law grants to civilian facilities justifies my Government’s determined
commitment to protecting education in emergencies and to supporting the Safe
Schools Declaration and the Guidelines for Protecting Schools and Universities
from Military Use during Armed Conflict. Spain organized the third Conference of
Safe Schools, in Palma de Mallorca in 2019, and the first Safe Schools Declaration
implementation seminar, in Madrid just a few weeks ago, with the participation of
officials from 19 States. In that context, the Director of the Spanish Agency for
International Cooperation announced Spain’s commitment to leading the technical
implementation of the Declaration, together with Norway and Argentina.
In addition to hospitals and schools, we must be increasingly attentive to,
and protective of, critical civilian infrastructure indispensable to survival amid
armed conflicts, such as access to water, natural resources, food, crops and powergeneration and -distribution infrastructure.
Protecting the environment is a priority for all countries in the twenty-first
century. Safeguarding the environment will not only help protect civilians during
conflict but facilitate an end to conflict and recovery from it, helping to create more
resilient societies. Spanish humanitarian action is committed to mainstreaming the
environment throughout its interventions and participates in projects committed to
zero waste from medical deployments. Disasters linked to the adverse effects of
climate change are on the rise. They have significant humanitarian consequences,
such as forced displacement and migration, the destruction of livelihoods and
exacerbated needs, and ultimately lead to cycles of violence and conflict.
When it comes to preventing attacks, we must continue promoting tools and
mechanisms that can help prevent civilian casualties, such as the humanitarian
notification mechanism, preventive data collection and investigations and dialogue
on international humanitarian law with non-State actors that makes clear the
responsibility to protect is incumbent upon all parties.
Spain is a staunch defender of the International Fact-Finding Commission,
a standing body under Protocol Additional I, of 1977, to the Geneva Conventions
of 1949, on the protection of victims of international armed conflicts, in carrying
out investigations into acts that constitute a serious violation of international
humanitarian law .
We also support the work of the International Criminal Court and promote
cooperation between the Court and the Security Council. Protecting victims is a
21-0581391/102

S/2021/415

priority for Spain and, in this regard, my Government contributes to the Trust Fund
for Victims of the International Criminal Court.
Finally, I should like to highlight the training and capacity-building that
our armed forces and State security forces and bodies undergo in international
humanitarian law, as well as the various indicators integrated throughout our
current humanitarian strategies, including on protection, to ensure that Spanish
personnel and our local partners are knowledgeable of, and trained in, international
humanitarian law.

92/102

21-05813

S/2021/415

Annex 46
Statement by the
United Nations

Permanent

Mission

of

Sweden

to

the

I have the honour to deliver this statement on behalf of the Nordic countries,
namely, Finland, Denmark, Iceland, Norway and my own country, Sweden.
We would like to thank the Permanent Mission of the Socialist Republic of
Viet Nam for organizing this debate on such a timely issue, as well as the briefers for
their informative remarks.
The devastating impact of armed conflicts on the civilian population is
exacerbated by failures to protect the very objects upon which civilians rely to survive,
that is, food, sanitation, medical care and other essential civilian infrastructure, such
as electrical and water systems. The military use of, and attacks on, educational
facilities is increasingly denying children their right to education and depriving them
of the protective environment schools provide, putting their health and lives at risk.
International humanitarian law provides specific legal protections for
such objects, which are indispensable for the survival of the civilian population.
International humanitarian law prohibits attacking, destroying, removing or
rendering useless objects indispensable to the survival of the population, including
through cyber-means and methods of warfare. These rules must be respected by all
parties and in all circumstances.
The continuing attacks on medical care in armed conflict, despite international
humanitarian law obligations, is concerning, particularly given the unprecedented
challenges and vulnerabilities since the onset of the coronavirus disease pandemic.
The pandemic has demonstrated the need for compliance with these rules, not least
the obligations to protect health-care workers and facilities in armed conflict set
out under the Geneva Conventions of 1949 and the obligations applicable to such
workers and facilities under the Protocols Additional thereto of 1977 and 2005. We
also call for the full implementation of resolution 2286 (2016), on the protection of
health care.
ln this regard, we would like to commend the important efforts made by the
International Committee of the Red Cross (ICRC) to find concrete ways forward to
assist States in improving respect for the obligation to protect health care in armed
conflict through the publication of the factsheet Respecting and Protecting Health
Care in Armed Conflicts and in Situations Not Covered by International Humanitarian
Law, which the Government of Sweden funded. We encourage all States to benefit
from that guidance document.
The landmark resolution 2417 (2018) emphasizes the link between armed
conflict, conflict-induced food insecurity and the threat of famine. It also states that
using the starvation of civilians as a method of warfare may constitute a war crime.
Resolution 2417 (2018) calls on all parties to fully comply with their obligations
under international humanitarian law and to spare farms, markets, mills, storage sites
and other infrastructure needed for food production and distribution. In December
2019, the Rome Statute was amended to include the war crime of using starvation of
civilians as a method of warfare in non-international armed conflicts.
Armed conflicts also pose threats to the environment that can have a
detrimental effect on local populations. The recently updated ICRC Guidelines on the
Protection of the Natural Environment in Armed Conflict provides valuable guidance
on concrete measures that can be adopted to better protect the environment in armed
conflicts. In addition, the ongoing work of the International Law Commission on
the protection of the environment in relation to armed conflicts is compiling and
clarifying the relevant norms of international law.
21-0581393/102

S/2021/415

Both the direct and the indirect impact of armed conflict can have longterm effects on the civilian population and can be devastating. Damage to, or the
destruction of, infrastructure that enables the delivery of essential services can
hinder humanitarian efforts, which in turn can lead to more protracted conflicts.
Mines and other explosive devices that are left behind exacerbate threats to civilians.
They curb the prospects for reconstruction and socioeconomic development by
preventing access to basic services and productive land use and by hindering safe
returns of displaced communities. A more coherent and systematic approach to the
protection of civilians is needed.
The legal protections provided by international humanitarian law, as we all
know, are only as effective as their implementation, enforcement and structures
for accountability. A genuine and concerted effort to comply with international
humanitarian law and international human rights law, including by protecting objects
indispensable to the survival of the civilian population, as well as strengthening
accountability for serious violations of the law, remains imperative to ensure the
protection of civilians.

94/102

21-05813

S/2021/415

Annex 47
Statement by the Permanent Mission of Switzerland to the
United Nations
I am honoured to take the floor on behalf of members of the Group of Friends
of the Protection of Civilians in Armed Conflict: Australia, Austria, Bangladesh,
Belgium, Brazil, Canada, the Dominican Republic, France, Germany, Ireland,
Italy, Ivory Coast, Japan, Kuwait, Liechtenstein, Luxembourg, the Netherlands,
Norway, Poland, Portugal, Spain, Sweden, the United Kingdom, Ukraine, Uruguay
and Switzerland.
We thank the Permanent Mission of the Socialist Republic of Viet Nam
for organizing today’s discussion, and we thank the briefers for their insightful
comments. We appreciate the guiding questions in the concept note (S/2021/335,
annex) and would like to make three points in response.
First, we would like to emphasize that international humanitarian law
obligations in relation to objects indispensable to the survival of the civilian
population are intrinsically linked with the protection of the very same civilian
population using the objects. International humanitarian law, notably its principles
of distinction and proportionality as well as precaution in attack, imposes important
limitations for the conduct of hostilities during armed conflicts and prohibits
attacks on civilian objects and objects indispensable for the survival of the civilian
population. Ensuring respect for these fundamental norms by all parties to armed
conflicts is of paramount importance.
Secondly, in addition to the direct and immediate effects that may result from
the acts of parties to armed conflicts, there may be long-term and indirect effects.
These can result in food insecurity as well as the deterioration of infrastructure and
service systems in protracted conflicts — due to, for example, lack of access and
maintenance. Entire health and educational systems collapse, depriving generations
of children of their futures. This has to be countered by a holistic approach by
Member States, parties to armed conflict, the Security Council and the wider United
Nations system that addresses the root causes of armed conflict, underscores respect
for international humanitarian law, mitigates the consequences of the destruction of
objects indispensable to the survival of civilian population and includes preventive
measures to avoid destruction in the future.
Thirdly, the Group of Friends emphasizes the fundamental importance of
accountability in deterring perpetrators of violations and in securing justice for
victims. In December 2019, the Rome Statute of the International Criminal Court
was amended to include the war crime of intentionally using starvation of civilians
as a method of warfare by depriving them of objects indispensable to their survival,
including wilfully impeding relief supplies in non-international armed conflict. The
Council can now refer to the Court situations of international and non-international
armed conflict where this crime appears to have been committed. The Group of
Friends encourages States parties to the Rome Statute to consider the ratification
of this amendment. It also calls on Member States to address these acts in their
national legislation, as appropriate, and to investigate them, in line with resolution
2417 (2018), on conflict and hunger.

21-0581395/102

S/2021/415

Annex 48
Statement by the Permanent Representative of Turkey to the
United Nations, Feridun H. Sinirlioğlu
I would like to thank you for organizing this meeting and putting emphasis
on the crucial topic of the protection of civilians and civilian objects, at a time when
millions in need are beyond our reach, while critical infrastructure and services are
disrupted on a regular basis.
According to the United Nations, the last four years have seen the highest
recorded increase in humanitarian needs. The combination of conflicts, climate
change and the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic has exacerbated the
already fragile situation in humanitarian settings.
Today, one in 33 people worldwide is in need of humanitarian assistance or
protection. The number of people displaced due to conflict and violence has almost
reached an unprecedented 80 million.
In his latest report on the protection of civilians (S/2020/366), the SecretaryGeneral indicates the importance of protecting health-care workers and essential
infrastructure, as well as facilitating the rapid, unimpeded and safe access of
humanitarian assistance. Strengthening respect for international law and ensuring
accountability for serious violations remain pressing challenges for the protection
of civilians.
While the world is going through a devastating global health crisis,
indiscriminate attacks on civilians and civilian infrastructure, such as hospitals,
schools, marketplaces and electrical and water systems, have further aggravated the
situation of vulnerable people.
The World Health Organization reports over 300 confirmed attacks on healthcare facilities in emergency-affected countries and fragile settings in 2020.
Such an incident occurred only very recently in Syria, where the regime targeted
the United Nations-supported and deconflicted Al-Atarib hospital on 21 March. This
barbaric attack killed and injured innocent civilians. The records show that at least
two aid workers and eight medical personnel are killed every month in Syria.
Respecting international humanitarian law also entails protecting
humanitarian workers and civilian infrastructure. The United Nations deconfliction
mechanism is an indispensable instrument to that end. Turkey will continue to be
fully engaged with the Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs (OCHA)
in the implementation of this mechanism, and we call on all relevant countries to do
the same.
While conflicts have displaced more than 30 million children around the
world, children in Syria remain among the most affected, due to the war that has
been ongoing for more than 10 years. According to UNICEF, one in three schools
in Syria can no longer be used because it has been destroyed or damaged or is being
used for military purposes. Such attacks have an impact on an entire generation’s
access to education.
Terrorist organizations exploit instabilities and attempt to disseminate their
separatist ideology and gain legitimacy. The Secretary-General has revealed on
different occasions the tactics of the terrorist organization Kurdistan Workers’ Party/
People’s Protection Units (PKK/YPG) in Syria, including but not limited to imposing
arbitrary school curricula, arresting teachers and blocking humanitarian aid.
This terrorist organization is also responsible for cutting electricity to the
Allouk water station, in north-eastern Syria, and obstructing its proper functioning.
96/102

21-05813

S/2021/415

At a time when the COVID-19 pandemic has elevated the need for electricity in the
region to a critical level, these repeated power cuts severely affect health services in
the region.
The destruction or damaging of energy systems has long-term effects,
since rebuilding or rehabilitating energy infrastructures requires comprehensive
infrastructure work and substantial resources. Energy systems and infrastructure
must be considered objects indispensable to civilian populations and must benefit
from special protection under international humanitarian law.
The PKK’s evil agenda in Iraq and the consequences of its arbitrary control
over almost 800 villages in the north of the country are also alarming. The local
population has been raising concerns regarding the significant lack of infrastructural
and basic services in these terrorist-controlled areas. The PKK’s policy of forcibly
removing locals from these areas or preventing them from cultivating their lands
needs to be condemned by the international community. The ongoing suffering of
the Yazidi community in camps for internally displaced persons, who are unable to
return to their ancestral homes in the Sinjar region due to the repressive and violent
presence of the PKK and its affiliates, is a case in point.
While conflicts take massive tolls on people’s lives, Turkey, as one of the
leading humanitarian actors, continues to contribute to international humanitarian
assistance efforts across a wide geography.
The medical assistance that we have provided to 157 countries since the start
of the pandemic is in addition to our regular humanitarian aid programming around
the globe. Some 129 of these countries have received donations of medical and other
critical equipment and 50 countries have received cash grants, while 75 have been
issued permits for purchase or export of medical equipment.
We have also supported the health-care infrastructure in a number of countries,
including those that have been affected by armed conflicts, either by building or
renovating hospitals, providing field hospitals or contributing to the capacitybuilding of the local health-care workforce.
In north-western Syria, in accordance with the trilateral agreement on the
fight against COVID-19, the Turkish Red Crescent Society, OCHA and the World
Health Organization continue to deliver health aid and related items, which have
so far amounted to approximately $8.1 million. As part of our efforts to restore life
in northern Syria and recover infrastructure targeted by the Syrian regime and the
terrorist organization PKK/YPG, we continue to repair and construct hospitals and
to establish mobile health-care centres.
While we host 20 per cent of the refugee population worldwide, with about 4
million Syrians who have taken refuge in Turkey, we extend our helping hand also
to millions of vulnerable Syrians across our borders on a daily basis through United
Nations cross-border humanitarian operations.
The continuation of these lifeline services will be a litmus test for the Security
Council in July, when its members will decide on the fate of millions of innocent
civilians. If these operations stop, not only the Syrian people, but the whole region
and beyond will face a humanitarian catastrophe, with grave security and other
repercussions.
We call on the Council to uphold its primary responsibility for maintaining
international peace and security and to renew the mandate of the United Nations
cross-border humanitarian mechanism with additional crossing points without delay.
There can be no excuse for targeting innocent civilians and civilian
infrastructure. We must hold perpetrators accountable and put an end to the
21-0581397/102

S/2021/415

impunity that continues to threaten peace and security at the global level. Genuine
accountability mechanisms play a key role in this regard.
We welcome the work of the International, Impartial and Independent
Mechanism in Syria and the establishment of the Independent Investigative
Mechanism for Myanmar. The recent ruling of the International Criminal Court on
its jurisdiction over the occupied Palestinian territories is an important legal step
to ensure accountability and justice in the face of grave crimes and violations of
international law.
General Assembly resolution ES-10/20, on the protection of the Palestinian
civilian population, adopted during Turkey’s Summit presidency of the Organization
of Islamic Cooperation, is also an important example of the international efforts
to strengthen deterrence against acts of violence and disproportionate use of force
against Palestinian civilians.
International humanitarian law is at the centre of protection. The Geneva
Conventions of 1949 provide a clear framework for ensuring compliance with
international humanitarian law, which includes neutral, impartial and unimpeded
humanitarian action. We should respect and make use of this framework.
On the other hand, it is more urgent than ever that the global ceasefire appeal
of the Secretary-General be implemented so as to help create conditions for the
delivery of humanitarian assistance and for the protection of civilians and civilian
infrastructure in the most pressing settings.

98/102

21-05813

S/2021/415

Annex 49
Statement by the Permanent Representative of Ukraine to the
United Nations, Sergiy Kyslytsya
I would like to express my appreciation to the presidency of Viet Nam for
convening this important debate on the current state of and challenges to the protection
of objects indispensable to the survival of the civilian population in armed conflict,
including the implications of the global coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic. I
am proud to recall that, back in 2017, Ukraine, as an elected member of the Security
Council, initiated the Council’s first-ever resolution on the protection of critical
infrastructure (resolution 2341 (2017)), which is closely linked to today’s discussion.
This debate is a timely one, since armed conflicts continue to pose a wide
range of threats to civilian populations in urban and rural areas. The international
community should ensure the full protection of objects that are vital to the survival
of civilians, including in the context of emerging challenges related to new
technologies and weaponry, climate change and the environmental consequences of
armed conflicts.
Ukraine welcomes the Secretary-General’s report on the protection of civilians
in armed conflict (S/2020/366), as well as his timely initiatives aimed at mitigating
the security consequences of the COVID-19 pandemic. The call for an immediate
global ceasefire — which Ukraine, whose population suffers from ongoing foreign
armed aggression, immediately supported — is directly linked to today’s discussion.
There is still an urgent need to change our approach to the issue of accountability
and to strengthen collective responsibility to prevent, stop and ensure the nonrepetition of attacks against civilians in conflict situations. Unfortunately, this task
remains unimplemented, despite its enduring relevance. Ukraine has become a
prime example of the consequences of violations, by one of the permanent members
of the Security Council, of norms and principles of international law, including
international humanitarian law. As a result, each year since 2014 has recorded
unprecedented numbers of losses among civilians caused by the Russian aggression
against my country. Accountability for each loss of life should be established. This
is one of the main preconditions to achieving a sustainable settlement of the conflict
between Russia and Ukraine.
For more than seven years, the Russian aggression has continued to take
the lives of civilians and to destroy critical infrastructure in my country. This
international armed conflict has turned the subject of the protection of civilians and
objects indispensable to the survival of the civilian population in the temporarily
occupied territories of the Donetsk and Luhansk regions, as well as the Autonomous
Republic of Crimea and the city of Sevastopol, from an academic topic into a very
practical and daily issue for my country.
The armed conflict continues to affect the enjoyment of economic and social
rights by the civilian population, especially by more than 5 million residents of
the conflict-affected areas and internally displaced persons. To date, Ukraine has
experienced the devastating consequences of damage or destruction due to the
shelling of civilian infrastructure by the Russian occupation forces, as well as the
use of civilian facilities for military purposes. The dire humanitarian situation in the
conflict-affected areas of the Donetsk and Luhansk regions continues to deteriorate.
Furthermore, the harassment by the Russian Federation of commercial vessels
passing under the illegally constructed Kerch Strait bridge between Russia and
temporarily occupied Crimea and its restriction of international shipping there, with
the most recent illegal closure of a part of the Black Sea leading to the Strait, have
further aggravated the security, economic and social situations.
21-0581399/102

S/2021/415

More than 80 per cent of the enterprises and critical public infrastructure
damaged in Donbas belong in the “dangerous” or “very dangerous” categories of
environmental risk.
Due to discontinued power supply, destroyed infrastructure, disabled pumping
equipment and other causes, 39 of the region’s mines have been flooded. The
flooding may have resulted in the acidification and mobilization of heavy metals
into the local groundwater and riverine environment, with potentially significant
impacts on human health and wildlife. Some of the flooded mines were earlier used
as waste-storage facilities.
It is a matter of particular concern that there is a danger of flooding at the
site of an underground nuclear test, carried out in 1979 by the Soviet regime in the
Yunkom coal mine near the occupied city of Yenakiyeve. This presents a real risk of
radioactive contamination spreading to groundwater, rivers and, ultimately, to the
Sea of Azov.
In the context of the spread of COVID-19, the state of protection of the life
and health of civilians in the temporarily occupied territories has become ever more
alarming and needs the special attention of the international community.
As a party to the conflict, Russia persists in disregarding its duty, as an
occupying Power under international humanitarian law, to ensure and maintain the
public health of the population and uses the recent aggravation of the humanitarian
situation as a smokescreen for further attacks on the rights and freedoms of the
residents of Crimea.
The spread of the pandemic did not stop the Russian authorities from
announcing another conscription into the occupying army of the Russian Federation,
which constitutes a war crime.
In addition, Russia continues to block the proper and unhindered access
of international monitoring missions, primarily those of the Office of the United
Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights, to the occupied territories.
The dangerous trend of Russia’s abdication of its legal obligations has to be
duly reflected and assessed in the Secretary-General’s next thematic report on the
protection of civilians.
Ukraine pays special attention to issues related to compliance with
international humanitarian law and human rights in armed conflicts, as well as to
those of preventing and responding to forced displacement and of protecting women,
children and all vulnerable persons affected by armed conflict.
As a party to core international instruments related to the protection of
civilians, Ukraine is committed to constantly promoting and supporting all efforts
aimed at strengthening their implementation and advocating respect for human rights
and international humanitarian law at both the bilateral and the multilateral levels.

100/102

21-05813

S/2021/415

Annex 50
Statement by the Permanent Mission of the United Arab Emirates
to the United Nations
The United Arab Emirates would like to thank Viet Nam for organizing this
important and timely open debate and Mark Lowcock, Peter Maurer and Kevin Rudd
for their briefings.
The United Arab Emirates strongly supports an enhanced focus in the Security
Council on preventative and reactive measures to protect infrastructure that enables
civilian to survive conflict and recover from it. It is also important that approaches
to this issue take into consideration the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic
and climate change.
First and foremost, current international humanitarian law provides a
robust framework on this topic; it must be upheld. As this debate underscores, that
recognition must be our collective starting point.
With that in mind, the United Arab Emirates would like to outline five options
that potentially could improve outcomes around protection.
First, the United Arab Emirates views deconfliction mechanisms as the
best practice for identifying and protecting civilian objects. These mechanisms
establish a common understanding of such objects, reflecting the cardinal principle
of distinction, and enable tracking of the status over time. New technology in this
space, especially the utilization of satellite data, could be used to enhance the
accuracy and comprehensiveness of these mechanisms, and thus ultimately protect
greater numbers.
Secondly, the application of gender, age and disability in identifying, protecting
and restoring such objects will result in better outcomes by serving the full needs of
society. This is the basis for sustainable peace and recovery. In the United Nations
system, the United Arab Emirates advocates for the allocation of dedicated budgets
for gender, age and disability advisers across peace and security operations, as well
as mandatory markers, as impactful and lowest-cost interventions.
Thirdly, greater resilience can be achieved through the strengthening
of physical and social infrastructure and services prior to and during conf lict.
Systems lacking resilience experience the greatest disruptions to basic services
and human health. The challenges posed by the pandemic and climate change
underscore this point.
Accordingly, the United Arab Emirates has facilitated the global distribution
of personal protective equipment and COVID-19 vaccine shots through bilateral and
multilateral partnerships, including the United Nations supply hub in Dubai and
United Arab Emirates pro-bono partnerships with the COVID-19 Vaccine Global
Access Facility on logistics. The United Arab Emirates understands the importance
of building resilience by investing in global health systems.
Similarly, it is critical to help communities cope with the effects of climate
change and environmental degradation. The United Arab Emirates advocates for
the United Nations and international financial institutions to prioritize spending in
areas that are both are climate-vulnerable and have had incidents of conflict and
insecurity. For example, supporting farmers in the Sahel at scale on heat-resistant
crops and water management would address both climate adaptation needs and roots
causes of conflict.
In this vein, the United Arab Emirates also supports a sharper focus on
environmental stewardship and positive infrastructure legacy in United Nations
21-05813101/102

S/2021/415

peacekeeping operations as economic engines in host countries. The United Arab
Emirates therefore commends the leadership of the Secretariat in committing to 80
per cent renewable energy usage by 2030, notably through the second phase of the
Department of Operational Support’s environment strategy for field missions.
Moreover, approaches to strengthen civilian objects must prioritize gender,
age and disability. For instance, sexual and reproductive health needs are specific
to women and girls, and so these services must be funded and protected. To this
end, the United Arab Emirates pledged $2 million for the United Nations Population
Fund as part of a $10 million package on a programme on sexual and gender-based
violence in support of Rohingya women refugees’ access to essential health services,
especially for those who are victims of sexual violence.
Fourthly, the United Nations and the Security Council’s approach to conflict
must include planning for reconstruction, in particular the rebuilding of critical
infrastructure to manage the reverberations of armed conflict. The United Arab
Emirates has been proud to support reconstruction in Iraq, notably for Yazidi women,
and has seen at first hand the importance of a continued focus on civilian objects
indispensable despite the cessation of hostilities.
And fifthly, the ultimate goal for protecting civilian objects is the cessation
of hostilities. The United Arab Emirates therefore takes this opportunity to renew
its support to the Secretary-General’s call for a global ceasefire in order to allow
for the delivery of COVID-19 humanitarian assistance, including vaccines, to the
most vulnerable. The United Arab Emirates reiterates its commitment to upholding
international humanitarian law and to constructively addressing threats to objects
indispensable to the survival of civilians.

102/102

21-05813
