87

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fourth Committee

New Zealand, as the administering Power, and to the
Niue Island Legislative Assembly for consideration;
4. Expresses its appreciation of the co-operation
extended to the United Nations by the Government of
New Zealand in connexion with its special study of the
question of Niue and the Tokelau !,lands;
5. Takes note of the decision of the Niue Island
Legislative Assembly concerning the future status of
the Territory;
6. Expresses the hope that the forthcoming constitutional talks between the administering Power and
the representatives of the people of Niue will result in
an early realization of the aspirations of the Niuean
people regarding their future status in accordance with
the relevant provisions of the Charter of the United
Nations and the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples;
7. Requests the administering Power to continue its
assistance to the Territories in order to promote their
economic, social and educational development and, in
that connexion, to avail itself of assistance from the
specialized agencies and other organizations within the
United Nations system, as well as from competent regional and intergovernmental organizations;
8. Requests the administering Power to take the
necessary measures to intensify programmes of political
education as well as to preserve the cultural heritage
of the people of these Territories;
9. Requests the Special Committee to continue to
examine this question and to report thereon to the
General Assembly at its twenty-eighth session.
2110th plenary meeting
14 December 1972

2987 (XXVII). Question of Antigua, Dominica,
Grenada, St. Kitts-Nevis-Anguilla, St. Lucia
and St. Vincent

The General Assembly,
Having considered the question of Antigua,
Dominica, Grenada, St. Kitts-Nevis-Anguilla, St. Lucia
and St. Vincent,
Recalling its resolution 1514 (XV) of 14 December 1960, containing the Declaration on the Granting
of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples,
and its re·solution 2621 (XXV) of 12 October 1970,
containing the programme of action for the full implementation of the Declaration,
Recalling further its previous resolutions relating to
the question, in particular resolutions 2593 (XXIV)
of 16 December 1969 and 2867 (XXVI) of 20 December 1971,
Having examined the relevant chapter of the report
of the Special Committee on the Situation with regard
to the Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples,~7
Reaffirming the inalienable right of the peoples of
Antigua, Dominica, Grenada, St. Kitts-Nevis-Anguilla,
St. Lucia and St. Vincent to achieve independence in
conformity with the provisions of resolution 1514
(XV),
3 7 Ibid.,
Twenty-seventh Session,
(A/8n3/Rev.1), chap. XXIV.

Supplement

No.

23

1. Takes note of the chapter of the report of the
Special Committee on the Situation with regard to the
Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of
Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples relating to Antigua, Dominica, Grenada, St. Kitts-NevisAnguilla, St. Lucia and St. Vincent:
2. Requests the Special Committee to continue to
give consideration to this question in accordance with
the provisions of the relevant resolutions of the General Assembly, and to report thereon to the Assembly
at its twenty-eighth session.
l l I 0th plenary meeting
I 4 Decemher 197:]

3030 (\.XVII). unitPtl Nations Fund for Namibia

T/1e General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 2145 (XXI) of 27 October 1966, by which the United Nations decided to
terminate the Mandate of South Africa over Namibia
and assume direct responsibility for the Territory until
its independence,
_ Reaffirming its resolve to discharge that responsibility
m regard to the Territory,
M~n~ful that, _by assuming direct responsibility for
~am1bia. t~c Umted Nations incurred a solemn obligat10n to assist and prepare the people of the Territory
for self-determination and independence,
Recalling further its resolutions 2679 (XXV) of
9 December 1970 and 2872 (XXVI) of 20 December 1971 concerning the establishment of the United
~ations Fund for Namibia for the purpose of putting
mto eff':'c! a comprehensive programme of assistance
to Namibians, as outlined in the report of the Secret~ry-Gen~ral to the General Assembly at its twentysixth sess10n, 38
Recognizing that South Africa's continued illegal
occupation of Namibia at present prevents the United
N_ati?ns from furnishing needed, large-scale assistance
w1thm the Territory,
Hai·ing examined the report of the Secretary-General
on the operation of the Fund during 1972,39
Bearing in mind that the scope of the programme,
as_ well as i!s financing and administrative machinery,
will be subiect to review by the General Assembly
when South Africa's illegal occupation of Namibia is
terminated,
Noting that the Secretary-General, owing to lack of
funds, has not been able to carry out the programme in
all its parts as envisaged in his report submitted to the
General Assembly at its twenty-sixth session in accordance with its resolution 2679 (XXV),
Noting further that the Secretary-General has, for
the above-mentioned reasons, found it necessary, inter
a/ia, to defer implementation of the preparation and
investigation of the long-term measures described in
paragraph 108 of his report to the General Assembly
at its twenty-sixth session,
Recognizing the importance of undertaking a detailed investigation of the human and natural resources
of Namibia. with a view to preparing proposals for a
co-ordinated plan of international economic and technical a,sistance, including manpower training, to be
::RA 1 8473.
:io A 'X84 I and Corr. I.
