S/2004/573

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
16 July 2004
Original: English

I

Letter dated 16 July 2004 from the Secretary-General addressed to
the President of the Security Council
I have the honour to transmit to you a report from the United Nations
Organization Mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo, regarding the
events which occurred in Ituri, in the north-eastern part of the country, from January
2002 to December 2003.
I would like to take this opportunity to reiterate my grave concern about the
continuing human rights abuses in the Democratic Republic of the Congo, in
particular the impunity with regard to crimes committed against the citizens of that
country. As the Security Council has noted in several of its resolutions and
presidential statements pertaining to the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
impunity must be brought to an end, and perpetrators of crimes such as those
highlighted in the attached report brought to justice.
I should be grateful in you would make this letter and the report available to
the members of the Security Council.
(Signed) Kofi A. Annan

04-43063 (E) 050804

*0443063*

S/2004/573

Special report on the events in Ituri,
January 2002-December 2003
Contents
Paragraphs

Page

Abbreviations. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

3

I.

Summary . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

1–11

4

II.

Introduction: the Ituri district . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

12–16

6

III.

Background to the conflict . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

17–31

8

IV.

Methodology of the investigation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

32–34

14

V.

Most serious human rights abuses committed in Ituri district from January 2002
to 31 December 2003 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

35–158

15

A.

Ethnically targeted attacks . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

41–94

16

B.

Other mass killings . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

95–117

29

C.

Political killings, abduction and forced displacement of suspected opponents

118–137

34

Political killings, enforced disappearances, illegal arrest and forced
displacement of selected persons by UPC . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

119–132

34

Political killings, illegal arrest and forced displacement of selected
persons by FAPC . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

133–137

38

Children associated with armed groups . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

138–158

39

A profile of children associated with armed groups in Ituri: fighting
for survival . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

141–146

40

2.

Training of children . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

147–148

42

3.

Use of children in combat and attacks . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

149–150

42

4.

Presence and use of girls in armed groups . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

151–154

43

5.

Use of children by armed groups in the exploitation of natural
resources: a vicious circle . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

155

44

Prospects for separating children from armed groups . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

156–158

44

Conclusion and recommendations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

159–161

45

1.
2.
D.

1.

6.
VI.
Annexes
I.

Armed and political groups involved in the Ituri conflict

47

II.

Chronology of main political events and incidents of gross violations of human rights
in Ituri, 1998 to 2003 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

51

Ituri district . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

63

Collectivités of Djugu and Irumu territories . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

64

Main military camps where children were trained or present . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

65

Maps

2

S/2004/573

Abbreviations
AFDL

Alliance des forces démocratiques pour la libération du Congo

APC

Armée populaire congolaise

ASADHO

Association africaine de défense des droits de l’homme

FAC

Forces armées congolaises

FAPC

Forces armées du peuple congolais

FIPI

Front pour l’intégration et la paix en Ituri

FLC

Front de libération du Congo

FNI

Front nationaliste intégrationniste

FPDC

Forces populaires pour la démocratie au Congo

FRPI

Front de résistance patriotique de l’Ituri

ICRC

International Committee of the Red Cross

IRIN

Integrated Regional Information Network

MLC

Mouvement de libération du Congo

MONUC

United Nations Organization Mission in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo

MSF

Médecins sans frontières (Doctors without Borders)

PRA

People’s Redemption Army

PUSIC

Parti pour l’unité et la sauvegarde de l’intégrité du Congo

RCD

Rassemblement congolais pour la démocratie

RCD-K/ML

RCD-Kisangani/Mouvement de libération

RCD-N

RCD-National

UPC

Union des patriotes congolais

UPDF

Ugandan People’s Defence Forces

3

S/2004/573

I. Summary
1.
The Ituri district, located in the Orientale Province of the Democratic Republic
of the Congo, currently has one of the world’s worst — and for a long time largely
ignored — human rights records. Based on the investigations carried out by
MONUC and other human rights entities, it is estimated that 8,000 civilians,
probably more, were deliberately killed or were the victims of indiscriminate use of
force from January 2002 to December 2003. The exact number of female victims of
rape or sexual slavery is impossible to estimate at this time. Countless women were
abducted and became “war wives”, while others were raped or sexually abused
before being released. More than 600,000 civilians have been forced to flee their
homes. Thousands of children aged from 7 to 17 were drawn forcibly or voluntarily
into armed groups, placing their very lives at risk and depriving them of a
childhood. In addition, entire villages — belonging to all the different ethnic
groups — were destroyed, including health and education facilities, housing and
other infrastructure.
2.
These abuses have been carried out with total impunity by all Ituri armed
groups and several non-Ituri groups (MLC, RCD, RCD-ML, RCD-N). In addition,
the pre-transition Government in Kinshasa and the Governments of Rwanda and
Uganda all contributed to the massive abuses by arming, training and advising local
armed groups at different times.
3.
The European Union-led Interim Emergency Multinational Force (Operation
Artemis), and then the MONUC Ituri Brigade with a mandate from the Security
Council under Chapter VII of the Charter of the United Nations, have been
instrumental in reducing the intensity of the conflict and the capacity of the local
groups to operate. However, ending the violence and abuses, bridging the gaps
between communities to install and extend a lasting peace, and establishing
structures to strengthen human rights protection and reduce the total impunity
enjoyed by the perpetrators remain major challenges, which the international
community must assist the Government of the Democratic Republic of the Congo to
address. Though there have been timid attempts to restore some kind of State
presence in Ituri through the deployment of a small group of judges and police,
neither currently has the capacity to maintain law and order in the district. It is
therefore of vital importance that MONUC continues to have a Chapter VII mandate
to ensure security.
4.
There have long been tensions and conflict between the Hema and Lendu
communities in the district, fuelled by bad governance. The latest conflict — which
has provoked so many of the abuses — was sparked off by a particular land dispute
in 1998 when some Hema concessionaires1 took advantage of the weakened State
apparatus to illegally enlarge their estates to the detriment of neighbouring mostly
Lendu agriculturalists.2 The agriculturalists revolted when law enforcement agents
came to evict them and in response they tried to destroy the land of the Hema
concessionaires. Initially starting to the north of Bunia, this violence gradually
__________________
1 The concessionaire is the person who rents a concession from the State. The concession is

defined by law as a contract by which the State recognizes the right of an individual or
organization, under conditions defined by law, to use a piece of land or a building belonging to
the State. In the Democratic Republic of the Congo, all land belongs to the State.
2 The first conflict erupted in the collectivité of Walendu Pitsi, located in Djugu territory.

4

S/2004/573

extended to the whole of Ituri district. Moreover, while spreading through the
district, the conflict quickly turned into a confrontation opposing the two
communities, the Hema and the Lendu. This conflict would not have reached such a
level of violence without the involvement of national Congolese players, as well as
of foreign Governments. The Ugandan army, already present in Ituri since late 1998,
fuelled the conflict by initially supporting some Hema notables and allegedly
bombed hundreds of Lendu villages. Some Lendu traditional authorities created selfdefence units. Believing that a Hema conspiracy existed against them, the Lendu
militias began attacking Hema villages solely on account of their ethnicity. They
also benefited from external support to organize themselves, from either the
Congolese (pre-transition Government, rebel movements) or individual Ugandan
officers.
5.
The conflict entered a new phase of violence at the end of 2001 with the
intensification of ethnically targeted attacks on villages, including killings, torture,
rape of civilians, looting of homes, and destruction of social infrastructure. When
the Hema militia UPC took over Bunia, first in August 2002 and again in May 2003,
they adopted an ethnic cleansing policy, to empty the town of its Lendu and Bira
populations, as well as the “non-Iturian” Nande community, which was a
commercial rival to the Hema businessmen. Hundreds of Lendu villages were
completely destroyed during attacks by Ugandan army helicopters together with
Hema militia on the ground.
6.
Different rebel faction leaders struggling for political power in Ituri have
continued to profit from the ethnic resentment originally created by the land dispute.
A series of splits, from 1999 to mid-2003, have in fact resulted in Bunia, the capital
of Ituri, being the stage for repeated power struggles and skirmishes. At each stage
in the fragmentation of the rebel groups, new militias were recruited loyal to one or
another commander or faction leader. Often half of the militias were children. They
were deployed not only to fight each other but also to whip up insecurity in the
countryside and seize strategic localities and commercial opportunities. Ugandan
army commanders already present in Ituri, instead of trying to calm the situation,
preferred to benefit from the situation and support alternately one side or the other3
according to their political and financial interests.
7.
The chiefs of armed groups took over the roles traditionally held by
administrators, businessmen, traditional chiefs and law enforcement officers. They
appointed “public officers”, collected local taxes, sold the natural resources of their
area of control, arrested civilians, judged them and in some cases executed them.
The competition for the control of natural resources by combatant forces,
exacerbated by an almost constant political vacuum in the region, has been a major
factor in prolonging the crisis in Ituri. Those resources have also been of continued
interest to foreign business networks in the region. One source of revenue for rebel
groups has been the sale of concessions to foreign businesses.
8.
By the end of March 2004, at the time of finalization of this report, MONUC
had been able to lessen the inter-ethnic conflict of Ituri, acting to enforce peace and
to restore the rule of law. Since taking over from Operation Artemis on 1 September
2003, the MONUC Ituri Brigade has implemented its Chapter VII mandate by
consolidating its positions in Bunia, carrying out search operations which resulted in
__________________
3 Ugandan authorities alternately supported and provided weapons to RCD-ML, MLC, RCD-N,

UPC, PUSIC, FNI and FAPC.

5

S/2004/573

the declaration of Bunia as a weapon-free zone, and establishing seven outposts,
north, north-east, south and south-east of Bunia (Iga Barrière, Bogoro, Mongbwalu,
Marabo, Tchomia, Mahagi and Kpandroma). MONUC continues to implement
security measures such as patrolling and launching military operations in different
parts of Ituri.
9.
To reinforce the rule of law and ensure public order, MONUC has detained
suspects including the Chief of Staff of FNI, Mathieu Ngudjolo, and several senior
military personnel of UPC, including Aimable Saba Rafiki and Etienne Nembe.
Those actions were taken given the lack of local judicial and security structures,
including a functioning judiciary and prison facility. On 14 January, MONUC
transported to Bunia 12 out of 20 judicial personnel appointed by the Transitional
Government. The judges took their oath of office on 28 January 2004, thereby
allowing them to work legally in Bunia. A minimum judicial capacity has thus been
restored in Bunia.
10. However, since mid-January 2004, FNI and UPC, as well as FAPC, a militia
located along the Ugandan border in Aru, have become increasingly aggressive
towards MONUC and the civilian population. In mid-January 2004, as many as 200
civilians were killed in Gobu, located on the edge of Lake Albert. By the end of
March 2004, MONUC was still investigating the incident with the aim of
ascertaining the identity and affiliation of the perpetrators. This was the most
serious mass killing since the events of Kachele in October 2003. After the incidents
in Gobu, militias conducted several attacks on MONUC aircraft and patrols, the
most serious being the killing on 12 February of a MONUC military observer in an
ambush by unidentified militia elements on a convoy of vehicles returning from a
multidisciplinary investigation 20 km north-east of Bunia.
11. This report has been drafted by the MONUC Human Rights and Child
Protection Sections. It examines more closely the background to the conflict and
gives details of many cases of massacres and other abuses often committed during
attacks on villages. It includes information about political killings, harassment of
political opponents, and the recruitment and use of children in armed groups from
January 2002 to December 2003. The report also highlights the total impunity with
which the armed groups have committed these atrocities. It is not intended as a
political analysis of the situation, and is by no means a complete record of abuses in
the area, given the scale of violations and also the constraints on carrying out such
investigations, including continuing security concerns.

II. Introduction: the Ituri district
12. The region of Ituri is a district of the Orientale Province, bordering Uganda,
with a population of 3.5 million to 5.5 million — no census has been carried out for
years. The population is made up of 18 ethnic groups, including the Lendu and its
southern sub-clan, the Ngiti; the Hema and its northern sub-clan, the Hema/Gegere;
the Bira, the Alur, the Ndo Okebo, the Lugbara, the Mambissa and the Nyali.
Population figures vary greatly, but the Alur consider themselves the largest ethnic
group, which would represent up to 25 per cent of the Ituri population, followed by
the Lendu. No reliable population census by ethnic grouping is available at this

6

S/2004/573

time. The city of Bunia, which had approximately 100,000 inhabitants before the
conflict,4 is said to have doubled, owing to displacement created by the conflict.
13. Ituri district, with its capital at Bunia, is composed of five territories: Aru,
Mahagi, Mambasa, Djugu and Irumu. Each territory is divided into several
collectivités.5 The Hema/Gegere and Lendu groups are concentrated in Djugu
territory, while the Hema and Ngiti groups are found in Irumu territory. The territory
of Djugu, where the conflict erupted, is composed of 10 collectivités6 — three
Lendu, three Hema and four of other ethnic groups — plus the city of Mongbwalu,
which has a special administrative status. Djugu territory is the richest and most
densely populated territory, with around 700,000 persons. The territory of Irumu,
embroiled in the conflict by the end of 2001, is composed of 12 collectivités — one
Ngiti (Walendu Bindi), and four Hema (Bahema Sud, Bahema Boga, Bahema
Mitego and Bahema d’Irumu); the remainder are of other ethnic groups.7 The
Administrator of a territory is appointed by the Government, but works very closely
with the traditional chieftains of each collectivité. The Administrator reports to the
Governor of the province, based in Kisangani, who is the only one with the power to
remove the Chief of the collectivité.
14. The population of Ituri is for the most part agriculturalist, with a significant
minority engaged in livestock raising, fishing and commerce. Generally speaking,
the Hema are perceived to be associated with livestock raising, while the Lendu are
perceived to be associated with agriculture. The Hema population of Bahema Boga,
in Irumu territory, is agriculturalist, however. During the Belgian colonial era, some
Hema were favoured, notably through access to either the religious hierarchy or the
education system, and given much wider access to managerial functions, while the
Lendu were overwhelmingly treated as manual labour. In fact, the colonial
administration accentuated social inequalities between the ethnic groups in the
region through its ethnic “favouritism” in almost all fields, including the
administration and the Catholic clergy. As a result, some Hema remained as the elite
in Ituri upon the collapse of the colonial State.
15. The power struggles and ethnic prejudices became entangled with the land
issue. Most of the land of the Lendu collectivités of Walendu Pitsi and Walendu
Djatsi are divided into concessions belonging to a select few Hema community
members who employed Lendu manual labour. However, in the poorer and rural
areas, both Hema and Lendu communities generally coexisted peacefully, and
intermarriage was common.8 The concessions belonging to the colonialists but
__________________
4 This figure is given by the former Mayor of Bunia town, Gilbert Sugabo Ngulabo, who was in

office until May 2003.
5 The collectivités are administrative sub-districts with a traditional chieftain, who exercises

authority over the population in his area on the basis of tribal/ethnic allegiances. Chieftains are
hereditary among the Hema, Bira and Alur groups but elected among Lendu and Ndo Okebo
groups. The collectivités are divided into groupements, and groupements into localités.
6 Walendu Pitsi, Walendu Djatsi, Walendu Tatsi, Banyari Kilo, Mambisa, Mabendi, Ndo Okebo,
Bahema Banywagi, Bahema Nord and Bahema Badjere.
7 Other collectivités are Andisoma (Bira population), Baboa-Bokoe, Babelebe, Banyari-Tchabi,
Basili, Mobala and Wales Vonkutu.
8 A statement of a Hema woman quoted by IRIN and reported by Jacques Depelchin, a rebel
official involved in reconciliation efforts in 1999, summarizes the situation: “War is not between
Hema and Lendu, but between the rich Hema and the rest of us”.

7

S/2004/573

located in Lendu collectivités, mostly in the territory of Djugu,9 were utilized
according to an agreement between the two parties, where the foreign
concessionaires would have access to the land in return for special fee paid to the
traditional Chief of the collectivité.10 In 1973, when the foreign concessionnaires
were forced to leave, they entrusted their Hema managers with the task of taking
care of their land, hoping to come back once the “Zairianization” was over.11 After a
while, since the foreign concessionnaires were not authorized to come back, the
managers registered the concessions in their own names. This phenomenon was
accelerated after President Mobutu’s appointment as Minister of Agriculture in 1969
of Zbo Kalogi, a Hema, who had considerable influence on the distribution of
Iturian concessions to Hema. This succession of events led to a common Lendu
perception that the Hema population was the rich, educated class that not only had
unjustly accumulated land and control of commerce, but also constituted the
administrative class, with greater access to wealth, education and political power.
16. Ituri’s natural wealth has driven the conflict in the district. Apart from the
region’s farmland and forests, most notably coffee plantations, and valuable crossborder trade, Ituri is the home of the Kilo Moto gold field, one of the world’s
largest. Of added interest are potential large oil reserves in the Lake Albert basin.
The competition for control of resource-rich centres such as Mongbwalu, Gety and
Mabanga (gold fields) and Aru, Mahagi, Tchomia and Kasenyi (wood, fishing,
customs revenues) by the combatant forces and their allies — Uganda, Rwanda and
the Kinshasa authorities — has been a major factor in the prolongation of the crisis
since they provide those who control production and export with very considerable
profits.

III. Background to the conflict
17. During the year 1997, several Hema/Gegere concessionnaires extended the
limits of their territory by bribing the land authorities and getting the registration
certificates without obtaining the attestation de vacance delivered after a vacancy
investigation carried out by the local land authorities as requested by law. This
illegal act was given a legal patina by being secretly lodged with the court. In 1999,
after the two-year statute of limitations on the appeal against the attestation had run
out, the petitioner went to the Tribunal de Grande Instance in Bunia and obtained an
enforcement order to evict the population living on that illegally acquired territory,
if necessary using military force. Had these evictions been executed, they would
have resulted in a total of 200,000 Lendu inhabitants having to leave their land and
homes. Evictions were never fully carried out by law enforcement forces because
the Lendu revolted and destroyed and occupied many estates as a result.
18. These local problems would not have turned into massive slaughter without the
involvement of national and foreign players. In 1998, the Ituri district was taken
over by the RCD rebel movement, supported by the Ugandan and Rwandan armies.
__________________
9 Djugu is by far the richest agricultural area of Ituri.
10 Obligations included the paying of special taxes to the local authorities, paying for local labour

and taking care of social infrastructures.
11 The Zairianization was a policy based on the appropriation of all goods belonging to foreign

nationals and their transfer to Congolese nationals as administrators of the goods in the name of
the State.

8

S/2004/573

When RCD split into RCD-Goma, backed by Rwanda, and RCD-ML, backed by
Uganda, Ituri came under the control of RCD-ML. Since then, Ituri has been at the
crossroads of all the eastern players, both Congolese and foreigners: RCD-ML,
MLC and its proxy RCD-N, as well as the Ugandan army. In 2002, RCD-Goma
made an alliance with UPC, following contacts between this militia and Kigali.
Simultaneously, the pre-transition Government supported some rival militias
through Beni. Moreover, at the end of 2002, MLC and RCD-N coordinated part of
their offensive against RCD-ML with UPC. The lasting involvement of national and
foreign players has enabled the various Ituri militias to obtain supplies and to
increase the number of combatants. This interaction has led to a regularly increasing
level of violence against the civilian populations of Ituri since 1999.
19. In 1999, when the land dispute erupted, Ituri was under the control of the rebel
RCD-ML movement and its ally UPDF. In May 1999 six land disputes emerged, one
after the other, in the collectivité of Walendu Pitsi.12 Witnesses interviewed by
MONUC stated that, under the leadership of the Savo family, the concessionaires
began to organize militias around Fataki. They imposed a fund-raising system on the
Hema/Gegere businessmen. Two prominent Hema/Gegere businessmen who were
opposing the fund-raising were murdered. As the collegial leadership of this militia
was expecting violence, all of the Hema concessionnaires, by the end of May 1999,
contracted squads of UPDF soldiers to protect their land. On 29 May 1999,
important Hema families reportedly paid Captain Kyakabale, the UPDF sector
commander,13 the alleged amount of $12,000 for a punitive action to be undertaken
against the populations occupying their concessions and surrounding areas in the
collectivité Walendu Pitsi, and to arrest the Administrator of Djugu territory,
Christian Dhedonga Nganga-Lolo, because of his refusal to sign the attestation de
vacance a posteriori.14 Christian Dhedonga Nganga-Lolo was arrested by UPDF the
same day together with Longbe Chabi, the traditional Chief of Walendu Pitsi, the
President of the Conseil de collectivité and five other local notables, and they were
kept in a container in Bunia airport. Apart from the Administrator, who was
accompanied by Congolese police, they were all reportedly tortured because of their
refusal to sign the attestation de vacance. They were subsequently released. Later,
the Lendu Chief of the groupement of Pitsi, Chief Djiba, was allegedly executed on
the orders of one of the Hema concessionaires. UPDF carried out its first attacks on
the village of Loda, located between Fataki and Libi, in the night of 29 to 30 May
1999, burning it down and burning alive several elderly persons and women locked
in their houses. Later, the villages of Lubea, Buba, Giba, Linga, Ladejo, Petro and
Arr were reportedly all destroyed by UPDF forces under the command of Captain
Kyakabale, who was reportedly paid by Lobo Tasoro, and several Hema
concessionnaires. UPDF, together with Hema militias, continued their punitive
__________________
12 On 12 April 1999, land dispute between Kadjo Singa and the population of Gonsenge in the

concession of Leyina; on 14 May 1999, land dispute in the Leyina concession, where witnesses
interviewed by MONUC alleged that the Singa family paid UPDF to attack the Lendu on its
land, as a result of which 20 civilians were killed; May 1999, land dispute between the
concessionaire Abisayi (Hema) and the population of the locality of Londju (Lendu); May 1999,
land dispute among the concessionaire Yasona (Hema) and the Lendu population of Laudjo;
1 May 1999, land dispute between the Savo family (Hema) and the Lendu population of
Sanduku in the concession of Bidha; 28 May 1999, land dispute between the concessionaire
Ugaro and the population of Lomba, in the locality of Tsupu Libi, chef lieu of Walendu Pitsi.
13 Captain Kyakabale subsequently left UPDF and took refuge in Rwanda.
14 In spite of the fact that he was a Hema like the estate owners.

9

S/2004/573

actions, burning down villages of first the collectivité of Walendu of Pitsi, then of
Walendu Djatsi, from 1999 to the end of 2001.
20. The new administrative authorities paid little attention to the deteriorating
situation and the Governor of the time, Adele Lotsove, a Hema/Gegere installed by
General Kazini of UPDF in June 1999, took action to put down the Lendu revolt
using UPDF soldiers. Some Lendu tried to request justice by legal means, as the
tribunals in Bunia found in favour of the concessionnaires who had bribed them
generously. Subsequent efforts to contain the increasing inter-community violence
were frustrated by individuals from both communities interested in the continuation
of the conflict. Moreover, several concessionnaires were able to profit from the
conflict to increase their land, since the Lendu living close to their estates were
evicted and their villages destroyed.
21. The collectivité of Walendu Tatsi where the Hema and Lendu communities
were living in peace became involved in the conflict only late in 2001.15 In 2002,
important Hema South families were reportedly involved in financing the
involvement of UPDF in attacking the collectivité of Walendu Bindi, the only Ngibi
collectivité located in Irumu territory. Hundreds of localities were destroyed by
UPDF and the Hema South militias. Meanwhile, the Lendu were organizing
themselves into armed groups to take revenge. The Ugandan military trained
thousands of Hema youth in Ituri and in Uganda. After 2002, others were reportedly
trained in Rwanda. However, the Hema militiamen were not the only ones to carry
weapons; in some Hema localities such as Mandro and Bogoro each family was
reportedly given weapons to defend itself. This was one of the reasons given by
Lendu combatants to justify the massacre of civilians suspected of carrying
weapons.
22. The Institut supérieur pédagogique and the Catholic Church of Bunia had been
the locus of the power struggle between the Hema intellectual elite and other ethnic
groups for some time. For example, while the Institute was under the direction of
Tharcisse Pilo Kamaragi, from 1993 to 1997 until the arrival of AFDL, most of the
non-Iturians, who constituted the majority of the teaching staff, were forced to leave
and all new posts were allocated to Hema/Gegere professors to the detriment of
other groups. According to testimony offered by several intellectuals living in the
Mudzipela area of Bunia, some well known Hema/Gegere professors at the Institute
were reportedly holding regular secret meetings, sometimes together with Hema/
Gegere militia members, in order to decide strategies to create ethnic hatred. The
same sources indicated that the killing of some 200 Lendu inhabitants of Mudzipela
on 19 January 2001 was organized and even directed by the same group with the

__________________
15 According to sources in the administration of Walendu Tatsi, a total of 257 localities were

burned down from 2000 to the end of 2002 alone. It appears that virtually all localities of
Walendu Pitsi were already burned down in 1999.

10

S/2004/573

complicity of UPDF under the command of Edison Muzora.16 The Catholic Church
is often named by the inhabitants of Bunia as “pro-Hema”. This perception dates to
the period of Leonard Dhejju, the Hema Bishop of Bunia,17 who not only favoured
his own ethnic group within the Church but who had also reportedly been in close
contact with Hema militia commanders.18 His activities allegedly included
transferring money collected from members of the Hema community to their own
bank accounts in a private bank in Kigali and negotiating with the Rwandan
authorities to buy weapons and obtain military training for Hema militia members in
Rwanda. Bishop Dhejju was reportedly present at the first meeting between Chief
Kawa and the Rwandan military authorities in June 2002. Bishop Dhejju was asked
to resign by the Vatican in 2002, and he is now living in Kigali. Following the
decision to remove Bishop Dhejju, Monseigneur Mosengwa Basinya arrived in
Bunia on 7 April 2002 with a newly named Apostolic Administrator of Nande
ethnicity, Janvier Kataka. While the Church was preparing to officially announce the
leadership change, the largely Hema audience became aggressive and the
installation of the Apostolic Administrator was forcibly delayed. On 11 April,
Archbishop Mosengwa, together with a group of priests, were taken hostage by a
group of Hema youth including some brought from Katoto village by the
businessman Liripa Savo. The day after, the Archbishop left together with the new
appointee.
23. Having fled to the bush after the destruction of their villages between 1999 and
2001, the Lendu people of Djugu, and later those of Irumu, chose to take justice into
their own hands. Their reprisals resulted in the massacre of thousands of innocent
Hema civilians. They replaced their arrows and machetes from the first period of the
conflict with modern weapons that they were able to buy mostly from Uganda, using
the illegal mining revenues of the Mongbwalu gold field. They also received
weapons from the Kinshasa government via some members of RCD-ML hailing
from Ituri, and some Ugandan authorities. One well known Ugandan supporter and
reputed weapon-provider of Lendu combatants was Colonel Peter Karim, an Alur
official of UPDF. Otherwise, most of the UPDF officers continued to support UPC.
__________________
16 On 19 January 2001, the day after an attack launched by Lendu militia on UPDF forces based in

Bunia airport reportedly to destroy the helicopter bombing their villages, an organized massacre
of Lendu inhabitants was carried out in Mudzipela. Each Lendu family was visited, house by
house, by Hema of Bunia and approximately 250 persons were killed, mostly by sticks with
nails distributed before the attack, and their houses set on fire. Several witnesses from
Mudzipela gave the names of Hema professors of the Institut supérieur pédagogique of Bunia as
the organizers, and the chief of the operations was reportedly also a professor. Among the
victims were also several Lendu professors and students of the Institute. Since this incident, all
Lendu have left Mudzipela: there are neither Lendu students nor teachers at the Institute.
Just before the massacre, Colonel Muzora reportedly said in a public speech: “From now on, we
can start killing Lendu”.
17 Monseigneur Dhejju, a Hema/Gegere, was the Bishop of Bunia from 1976 to 2002. He was
accused of having favoured his own ethnic group, giving the Church land of Mudzipela to
members of the Hema/Gegere tribe from the villages and nominating only Hema or Hema/
Gegere priests. It is as a result of his action that Mudzipela, originally inhabited by Bira, began
to be a Hema neighbourhood. Also, several students of theology who had successfully finished
their studies were never appointed, apparently because they were not Hema. When he was
forced to resign by the Catholic hierarchy, there were only 6 Lendu and 2 Bira priests out of 49
priests appointed by him. Among the priests that he appointed there were also sons of the Hema
militia chiefs.
18 The Bishop of Goma has reportedly very close links with the Rwandan authorities. He was the

11

S/2004/573

24. In August 2002, UPDF forced the RCD-ML military forces out of Bunia. As
UPC was temporarily in a position to benefit from supply from both Uganda and
Rwanda, it was able to attack and to take control of the Mahagi territory. UPC then
benefited from its alliance with the Aru-based militia of Commander Jérôme
Kakwavu, a former RCD-ML officer. The Mahagi territory then suffered from
massive human rights abuses, included destruction of villages, forced recruitment of
child soldiers by UPC and Jérôme’s militia, as well as sexual violence that UPC
notably resorted to in order to terrorize the local elite and population. As a
consequence of this spillover into Mahagi territory, some Alur notables tried to
create a militia, FPDC. The plan failed, however, because of the reluctance of the
business community to fund it and, above all, the active opposition of the Mahagi
bishop, himself an Alur. Unlike the Catholic clergy in Bunia, throughout the conflict
the diocese of Mahagi was instrumental in conflict management initiatives as well as
preventing armed mobilization within the Mahagi territory.
25. The Lendu attacks became more cruel and destructive after March 2003, when
the support of UPDF for the Hema was terminated. Moreover, after UPDF expelled
UPC from Bunia, the Lendu militias took over stocks of ammunitions and weapons
from UPC. The Lendu youth created self-defence militia groups to protect their
villages, which often lacked any organized hierarchical structure. Even after the
creation of FNI, several Lendu or Ngiti militia groups kept their independence and
often refused to obey the orders of their supposed FNI hierarchy to cease the
hostilities. The combatants forced everybody to be part of the militia, including
women and children. Some community leaders tried to resist while others became
part of the armed groups. Some Lendu elderly advised reviving the old methods of
taking special drugs, wearing amulets and eating some parts of the human body to
give supernatural forces to the combatants. These methods rendered the militia
members more cruel and inhuman.
26. The other ethnic communities such as the Bira, Alur, Nyali, Lugbara, Kakwa,
Ndo Okebo and Lese, who were not directly involved in the conflict, were forced to
take sides and/or were attacked by both parties, who accused them of sheltering the
enemy. This polarization reduced the possibility of continuing to implement local
conflict management initiatives. The various militias were not only terrorizing and
abusing the populations, they were also intentionally preventing local initiatives
from defusing tensions or containing violence. The Bira community, whose territory
includes Bunia, lost the chief of their Andisoma collectivité, Chief Dieudonné
Bulamuzi. Several hundred civilians, including the intellectual elites, were killed,
and health structures, including the largest one at Nyankunde, were destroyed. The
Nyali community, whose territory includes the Kilo Moto gold field, were attacked
by both sides. They lost most of their social infrastructures and many were forced to
leave their villages to go into hiding in the bush.
27. Role of Uganda. Uganda claimed on several occasions to be in Ituri to defend
“its legitimate security concerns” and to be acting for reconciliation and the
protection of civilians. However, although in some cases UPDF did intervene to halt
fighting between opposing forces, its commanders were responsible for the creation
of almost all of the armed groups, training their militias — sometimes even in
Uganda — selling weapons and even lending their soldiers to rich Hema to massacre
Lendu civilians and destroy villages in Walendu Tatsi in 1999. UPDF also carried
__________________

one who introduced Bishop Dhejju to them.

12

S/2004/573

out widespread bombing and destruction of hundreds of villages from 2000 to 2002
in the Lendu/Ngiti collectivités of Walendu Pitsi and Walendu Bindi. The same
UPDF commanders also became businessmen who traded in the resources of Ituri.
In four years, seven Ugandan sector commanders were sent to Ituri: Captain
Kyakabale, Lieutenant Colonel Arocha, Colonel Charles Angina, Lieutenant Colonel
Edison Muzora, Colonel Fred Seka Mwenge, Major Muhozi and Kale Kayura. Only
Charles Angina and Kale Kayura left without serious allegations being levied
against them. Uganda supported first RCD,19 then MLC and RCD-ML. It was also
directly involved in the creation of UPC and in the training and arming of its militia.
28. Uganda reconsidered its support to UPC because of close ties between UPC
and Rwanda, around December 2002. To counter that alliance, Uganda supported
several other Ituri armed groups. UPDF was involved in the creation of FIPI, a
platform including PUSIC, FPDC and FNI/FRPI. However, that Front did not last
long and de facto came to an end in February 2003 after the attack on Bogoro by
FNI. In March 2003, FAPC was created with direct Ugandan support. In March 2003
UPDF commanders also supported FNI/FRPI, which assisted them in removing UPC
from Bunia. Following its commitment to the Luanda Agreement, UPDF withdrew
from Ituri in May 2003. Since then, it has continued to give open support to PUSIC
and FAPC, both spun off from UPC in order to weaken it.
29. Role of Rwanda. On 6 January 2003, RCD-Goma, a Congolese rebel
movement supported by Rwanda, announced an alliance with UPC. Rwanda had
become involved in the Ituri crisis much earlier, however. The Chief of Staff of the
Rwandan army, James Kabarebe Kagunda, was reportedly the biggest advocate of
Rwandan support to Hema militia and was in contact with Chief Kawa, who
negotiated the arms supplies in June 2002. Rwanda reportedly supplied arms by
airdrop to the UPC camps located in Mandro, Tchomia, Bule, Bulukwa and Dhego
and sent military experts to train Hema militias, including child soldiers. Moreover,
some UPC elements (estimated at 150) went for training in Rwanda from September
to December 2002. On 31 December 2002, Thomas Lubanga visited Kigali for the
first time. Kigali also facilitated the transport to Ituri of PRA elements, earlier
trained in Rwanda, and used some Kinyarwanda-speaking Congolese to organize
this support. One ex-UPDF sector Commander of Ituri, Colonel Muzora, who had
left the Ugandan army to join the Rwandan forces, was seen by several witnesses in
the UPC camps, mainly to orient the newcomers from Rwanda. Practically all
witnesses interviewed by MONUC believe that Rwandan nationals occupied posts in
UPC military commands. MONUC obtained testimonies about adults and children
being trained in Rwanda and being sent through Goma, in 2002 and 2003, to fight in
Ituri with UPC.20 It also appears that, when Thomas Lubanga and other highranking UPC officers fled from Ituri in March 2003, they were evacuated by air to
Rwanda. Arms and ammunition were then supplied from Rwanda to UPC by air
before UPC retook Bunia in May 2003. On 11 and 12 May 2003, two aircraft landed
__________________
19 Both Uganda and Rwanda initially supported RCD (1998-1999) before it began to splinter into

different factions, a phenomenon reflecting the end of the Uganda-Rwanda alliance in the
conflict.
20 In September 2002, 107 children and adults were allegedly airlifted from Tchomia to Kigali
airport and driven to the Gabiro training centre. They were reportedly trained in artillery skills
and returned to Ituri in November of the same year. On their way back, they landed in an
Antonov (often based in Goma) at Bunia airport. Each of the trained combatants was given a
sub-machine gun. An officer known as “Safari” led this operation.

13

S/2004/573

at Dhego — not far from Mongbwalu — from Rwanda, with grenades, rocketpropelled grenades, mortars and ammunition. The first of the aircraft was also
carrying back Lubanga and Bosco from Kigali.
30. Role of the Kinshasa Government. Until 2002, the pre-transition
Government in Kinshasa was hardly involved in Ituri. Its first delegation arrived in
Bunia in August 2002, after a visit to Kampala. During a second visit, on 29 August
2002, the Minister for Human Rights, Ntumba Lwaba, was abducted by Hema
militia and freed only after three days in exchange for the release of Lubanga and
several UPC members who had been arrested in Kampala and transferred to
Kinshasa. Early in 2002, the involvement of the Kinshasa Government centred on
military assistance that it provided to RCD-ML in Beni. Kinshasa sent trainers,
weapons and also some military elements, allegedly amounting to four battalions, in
support of APC, which reportedly was sending weapon supplies from Beni to Lendu
militia. FAC and APC were also named by eyewitnesses and victims as parties in
some attacks on Hema villages. It is alleged that, in the last three months of 2002,
some military supplies may also have been sent directly to the Lendu militia,
notably to Rethy, in Djugu territory.
31. The political initiative of the Transitional Government to calm the tension in
Ituri has focused on the deployment of some judicial and police personnel and
sending official delegations. There have also been a number of press statements.
Apart from the delivery of a humanitarian aid shipment early in 2004, humanitarian
aid from the Government to the Ituri victims has been negligible. More concrete
actions and active engagement would be needed to find a solution to the ongoing
crisis. It was planned that the first brigade of the new national army would be
deployed in Ituri before June 2004. However, there are no guarantees that these
troops will receive regular payments and supplies.

IV. Methodology of the investigation
32. For the special report on Ituri, MONUC carried out a total of nine
investigations. More than 1,600 persons were interviewed, including victims,
eyewitnesses, community leaders, intellectuals, health workers and children
associated with armed groups. Additional written testimonies were received from
eyewitnesses and victims through local non-governmental organizations. Witnesses
and other sources were heard in private interviews, so as to keep their accounts
confidential and not expose them to risks of retaliation. Whenever possible, alleged
perpetrators and chiefs of armed groups were confronted with allegations raised
against them. Several field visits were made, to Bunia, Nyankunde, Mambasa,
Bogoro, Mandro, Lipri, Bambu, Kobu, Drodro, Kasenyi, Tchomia, Mahagi, Aru,
Ariwara, Zumbe, Boga, Koga, Katoto, Fataki, Kachele, Kilo and Marabo, all located
in Ituri. MONUC travelled twice to the Beni area and three times to border areas in
western Uganda. In Beni, they received testimonies of displaced persons from Ituri
located in Oicha, Erengeti, Butembo and Beni; the first visit took place after the
Mambasa events of late 2002, the second after the Bunia events of May 2003. In
Uganda, MONUC travelled to the areas of Rwebisengo, Ntoroko and Paidha and
interviewed hundreds of Iturian refugees. Several military and political leaders were
also met in Kinshasa.

14

S/2004/573

33. Until the arrival of the Interim Emergency Multinational Force in June 2003,
MONUC personnel had very limited access to Ituri. Therefore the information on
the human rights situation was gathered through short-term investigation missions to
a limited number of localities. After the opening of a MONUC office at Bunia in
June 2003, the human rights and child protection presence facilitated the
investigations but security restrictions did not allow them to cover each incident of
gross human rights violations that occurred in Ituri. Even after the deployment of
the Ituri Brigade in different parts of Ituri allowed greater access, some areas are
still inaccessible. However, MONUC investigated most of the ethnically targeted
attacks on villages, acts of mass killing and mass destruction of property and social
services that occurred in different parts of Ituri, as well as extrajudicial executions,
abductions of or threats against selected persons such as administrators, nongovernmental organization workers, journalists, teachers and businessmen that
occurred in Bunia, Aru and their surroundings. The Child Protection Section of
MONUC has been focusing on the recruitment and use of children associated to
armed groups.
34. To cover the reporting period as thoroughly as possible, MONUC has also
made use of reports written by national and international non-governmental
organizations and United Nations agencies on the issue of gross human rights
violations and their analysis. When an incident has not been investigated directly by
MONUC, the source of the information will accordingly be noted.

V. Most serious human rights abuses committed in Ituri
district from January 2002 to 31 December 2003
35. All of the armed groups have committed war crimes, crimes against humanity
and violations of human rights law on a massive scale in Ituri. Unarmed civilians
have been deliberately killed, contrary to article 3 common to the Geneva
Conventions, often solely on the basis of their ethnicity. Attacks on villages have
been accompanied by the killing of several thousands of civilians, widespread
looting and destruction of housing and social structures, abduction of civilians,
including women for sexual slavery, rape and torture (see section A below).
36. Lendu combatants engaged in inhumane acts such as mutilation and
cannibalism, often under the effect of drugs prepared by their traditional healers.
They abducted children and women for forced labour and sexual slavery. According
to two eyewitnesses who were released, Lendu combatants told them that they were
not killing Hema children but giving drugs to “transform them into Lendu”.
Hundreds of Hema women were sexually abused and forced into working for the
combatants. Many children and women of Hema origin were never released (see
section A).
37. UPC forces shelled hundreds of Lendu villages without making any distinction
between armed combatants and civilians. Some villages in Djugu territory were the
object of repeated attacks when the inhabitants returned and rebuilt during calmer
periods. Each time that they took control of Bunia — August 2002 and May 2003 —
UPC forces conducted a manhunt for Lendu, Bira, Nande and non-Iturians whom
they considered opponents: many persons were killed and many others disappeared
or chose to leave Bunia. UPC soldiers also committed large-scale rape in the

15

S/2004/573

different areas of the town, sometimes abusing girls as young as 12 (see sections A
and C).
38. Both Hema and Lendu militias repeatedly attacked localities belonging to other
ethnic groups, often bordering their own collectivités, for different reasons: in the
Nyali territory of Banyari Kilo to have access to the gold mines; in Mahagi and Aru
for the customs taxes; and, in other localities, just to punish them for having agreed
to host the party considered to be the enemy (see section B).
39. All of the armed groups have recruited and trained children to turn them into
combatants. According to some estimates, 40 per cent of each militia force could be
composed of children under 18 years of age. Given the uncertain figures for the total
strength of the armed groups, it is impossible to give accurate figures for children.
Current estimates suggest 6,000 children in armed groups, with several thousand
others possibly involved in local defence groups. Children have been used as
combatants but also as labour in the illegal exploitation of natural resources. Girls
have been forced into domestic labour and sexual slavery. Throughout the Ituri
conflict, there have been a number of allegations that Uganda and Rwanda have
been involved in aiding and abetting Ituri armed groups to recruit and train children
(see section D).
40. Some 8,000 civilians lost their lives as a result of deliberate killing or
indiscriminate use of force from January 2002 to December 2003. More then
600,000 have been forced to flee from their homes. The area bordering Uganda and
North Kivu hosted thousands of extremely vulnerable refugees and internally
displaced persons.

A.

Ethnically targeted attacks
41. During attacks on localities occupied by the ethnic groups of the opposite side
and often hosting a UPC battalion or a local Lendu militia group deployed for the
“protection” of civilians, fighting between the armed groups would most often be
intense and of short duration. Attackers often ended up killing civilians, destroying
homes and social infrastructures, abducting women for sexual abuse and looting the
entire village. Lendu militias and UPC justified their actions, stating that all
civilians were part of the armed groups since most of them were given weapons for
self-protection. The attacks described below illustrate some of the most serious
incidents, but the list is not exhaustive. Several other attacks were orchestrated by
both sides, with hundreds of civilian victims, for example in Mahagi, Komanda,
Dungu, Ambé, Gety, Mitega and Fataki.
Collectivité of Walendu Bindi: mass killing and destruction of hundreds
of localities
42. From 9 February to 24 April 2002, UPDF based in Gety, together with Hema
and Bira militia groups, carried out large-scale operations against the Lendu villages
of the Boloma, Bukiringi, Zadhu, Baviba and Bamuko groupements, all located in
the collectivité of Walendu Bindi, in the territory of Irumu. Mass killings continued
for another two weeks after the visit on 4 April of the then Governor of Ituri, JeanPierre Lompondo Molondo, with Colonel Peter Karim, from UPDF, who was sent by
Kampala to investigate abuses committed by UPDF soldiers. Both called upon
UPDF to end the hostilities. A local non-governmental organization reported a total

16

S/2004/573

of 2,867 civilians killed,21 and 77 localities completely destroyed, together with all
social infrastructures, resulting in the displacement of 40,000 civilians. The
collectivité of Walendu Bindi, located in the southern part of Ituri, had not been
involved in the conflict until late 2001.22
43. Early in 2002, UPDF was deployed in Gety, the main town of the collectivité,
reportedly at the request of the Hema South families accusing the Lendu of
allegiance with the Ugandan rebellion. The military operations were not carried out
by the UPDF command based in Bunia, however, but by military who came directly
from Uganda and who were under the command of Colonel Arocha, now appointed
to Bundibujo, in western Uganda bordering Ituri district.23 The sector Commander
Fred Seka Mwenge, based in Bunia, was reportedly not involved in the operation.
The operations on Lendu villages were carried out by UPDF based in Gety together
with Hema militia members from Bogoro, Kagoro, Boga, Mitego, Kyakurundu and
Bukiringi and Bira militias from Talolo. One eyewitness from Gety named a certain
Madilu as one of the UPDF commanders.
Mabanga: ethnic cleansing of a mining town
44. Mabanga, in the collectivité of Mambisa, territory of Djugu, was a multi-ethnic
town because of its gold fields, which attracted non-Iturian gold traders and
workers. On 28 August 2002, after an attack by Lendu militias, the local
Hema/Gegere militia forced the non-Iturians to fight with them to repulse the
attackers. Witnesses interviewed by MONUC stated that, when the reinforcements
came from Iga Barrière, their Commander, T’Sirba Rene, stated that he had seen
non-Iturians among the Lendu forces and gave the order to eliminate the non-Iturian
population.
45. MONUC obtained a number of first-hand witness accounts of the attack. The
father of one victim reported how his son was killed, his body mutilated and his
head and arms brandished around the town. It appears that as many as 150 people
may have been deliberately killed. The chief of operations, T’Sirba Rene, originally
from Mabanga, was living in Iga Barrière.24 UPDF had a military camp in Mabanga;
the Ugandan army did not intervene to stop the killing of civilians but gave refuge to
those who were able to reach the camp. Some 2,000 civilians, who sought refuge in
the Ugandan camp, were escorted to Bunia the day after the event.

__________________
21

The most serious mass killings were the following: on 10 February 2002, attack on the localities
of Tsarukaka, Nombe, Tsubina and Kagaba with 173 civilians killed; on 15 February 2002,
attack and destruction of the localities of Kagaba, Rudjoko, Biro, Kapalayi and Kinyamubaya
with 120 civilians killed; on 21 February 2002, attack on Bukiringi with 220 civilians killed; on
14 March 2002, attack on the locality of Sadji/Kaguma A with 146 civilians killed; on 29 March
2002, massacre of the population of Gety by UPDF based there with 109 civilians killed.
22
In January 2001, several attacks were carried out on localities of Walendu Bindi by APC forces
together with UPDF when Lubanga was Minister of Defence, mostly to destroy the localities
and their social infrastructures. One UPDF helicopter based in Bunia was used to bomb the
localities. The collectivité had a calm period from February 2001 to February 2002.
23
Colonel Arocha was Chief UPDF Sector Commander of Ituri from August 1999 to June 2000,
when he was replaced by Colonel Charles Angina.
24
T’Sirba Rene was condemned to death in 2002 by the Tribunal de Grande Instance of Bunia for
the assassination of the Director of the Mabanga gold field, Lodju Niro.

17

S/2004/573

Bunia: ethnically targeted massacres for the control of the capital city
46. Early in August 2002, the hostilities between RCD-ML and UPC that had
begun in March 2002 with the arrival of Governor Jean-Pierre Lompondo reached
the point of direct confrontation for the control of the town. Jean-Pierre Lompondo
had been sent to Bunia by Mbusa Nyamwisi of RCD-ML as chief of military
operations and Governor of Ituri, to thwart the UPC leader, Thomas Lubanga. The
refusal by Mbusa of the nomination of Bosco by Lubanga as deputy chief of
operations had created further tension. The fighting between the two forces ended
with the withdrawal of RCD-ML from Bunia to Beni after UPDF and UPC on
9 August, shelled the residence of Governor Lompondo. UPC and its ally UPDF and
the Ngiti/Lendu militias both killed civilians, many of them targeted only because of
their ethnicity.
47. On 7 and 8 August, UPC militias and civilian vigilante groups under the
command of Bosco roamed mostly the neighbourhoods of Mudzipela, Bigo I, II and
III and Saio, killing those suspected of belonging to “opposing” ethnic groups. In
Mudzipela, they completely destroyed all houses belonging to Bira, Lendu and
Nande community members. Around 110 civilians, mostly Bira, Lendu and Nande
were killed. According to several witnesses who testified to MONUC, UPC killed
selected individuals according to a pre-established list. They also attacked Lendu
civilians from Lipri market, located at 15 km from Bunia. The Lendu militias
counter-attacked Mudzipela and killed dozens of Hema civilians as an act of
revenge. UPC continued the killing of Bira, Lendu and Nande in Kolomani and the
centre of Bunia until 10 August 2002.
48. While the fighting was going on for the control of Bunia town, Lendu militias
attacked the farm of John Tibasima Ateenyi, the Hema Vice-President of RCD-ML,
located in Lengabo, approximately 20 km from Bunia. According to Human Rights
Watch, they killed 32 Hema workers and their families who were on the farm,
mostly with machetes.25
49. On 9 August, UPDF and UPC attacked Governor Lompondo’s residence using
heavy weapons. The day before, all ethnic groups of Bunia, including a large
number of Lendu, had fled to the Governor’s residence hoping that APC forces
based there would protect them. Jean-Pierre Lompondo and APC troops fled on foot
towards Beni, while UPC massacred the civilian population around the Governor’s
house, as well as near the main hospital in the Bigo neighbourhood and near the
central prison. Around 80 persons were killed at the Governor’s house alone.
Several mass graves were discovered later by MONUC, including two near the
Governor’s house and others near the prison and the hospital. UPC and UPDF,
taking advantage of the chaos in the town, also conducted large-scale looting
operations. UPC closed all the roads out of Bunia erecting roadblocks and
summarily executing several civilians who were trying to flee the town. On
9 August 2002, UPC took complete control of Bunia and established an ethnically
based government with very few non-Hema members. From the first day of its

__________________
25

18

See Human Rights Watch, Ituri: “Covered in Blood”: Ethnically Targeted Violence in Northeastern Democratic Republic of the Congo, July 2003. Available from http://www.hrw.org. Path:
Publications/by country/Democratic Republic of the Congo.

S/2004/573

reign, UPC launched a manhunt in the town, looking for Lendu, Bira and nonIturians.26 The total number of victims of the fighting for the control of Bunia was
never known exactly. However, taking into consideration the accounts of
eyewitnesses, at least 300 persons lost their lives, killed mostly by UPC, but also by
Lendu militias. The fighting also displaced 10,000 families, according to the
humanitarian agencies present in Bunia. Most of the Nande community left Bunia
for Beni in the following weeks. UPC extended its control in all directions,
stabilizing its forces in Nyankunde, and taking the Mahagi-Aru area in the north.
Songolo: massacre of mostly women and children
50. Songolo, located in the collectivité of Walendu Bindi, hosted an important
number of Ngiti from Nyankunde who were targeted and eventually driven out by
the Chief of the collectivité of Andisoma, throughout 2001 and early 2002. In
August 2002, UPC troops came to relieve UPDF in Nyankunde. The aim of this
move was apparently to launch attacks on the bordering Ngiti localities. UPC
reportedly requested the assistance of the Bira community in attacking the Ngiti.
51. On 31 August 2002, at 7 a.m., a group of some 500 UPC soldiers together with
around 50 Bira attacked Songolo. According to a witness, most of the males were
not in the village. The attackers used mortars and rockets before entering the village.
After a short fight with Lendu forces, the attackers went into houses, reportedly
guided by Bira civilians, to kill the inhabitants. Many civilians, mostly women,
children and the elderly, were killed in their sleep. The attack lasted nine hours.
According to witness statements collected by MONUC, the attackers looted the
village and the health centre of Songolo and left with hundreds of cattle. It is
difficult to estimate the number of victims killed. According to Human Rights
Watch, around 140 persons were killed, mostly women and children.27 Survivors
who returned to Songolo after the attack to bury the bodies did a survey among the
population and found that 787 people were missing. Up to now, it has not been
possible to establish how many were killed and how many simply ran away.
According to a Congolese non-governmental organization, UPC abducted 12
civilians.
Nyankunde: “ethnic cleansing” of Bira, Hema and Hema/Gegere groups
52. During and after an attack on Nyankunde and its neighbouring towns and
villages carried out jointly by Ngiti, APC and Mai-Mai on 5 September 2002, more
than 1,000 people may have been victims of deliberate killing because they
belonged to the Hema, Hema/Gegere and Bira ethnic groups. Nyankunde and
apparently many of the 45 localities making up the three groupements (LoyBanigaga, Chini Ya Kilima/Sedzabo and Sidabo/Bagabela) of the collectivité of
Andisoma suffered destruction, looting and massive displacement.
53. Before the devastating attack of 5 September 2002, Nyankunde, the main town
of Andisoma, mostly populated by Bira, was a major centre because of its
commercial activities and its well-equipped hospital, the Centre médical
evangélique, which hosted several international staff and provided high-quality and
specialized care in the region. According to a census done by the local
administration between 2001 and 2002, around 21,000 people were living in the
__________________
26
27

For specific killings, see section B.
See Human Rights Watch, Ituri: “Covered in Blood” ...

19

S/2004/573

collectivité, 14,000 of whom were in Nyankunde. Since September 2002, several
thousand have been displaced to camps in North Kivu and the premises of the
hospital, the Institut d’enseignement médical and the Institut supérieur des
techniques médicales, as well as several other educational and religious institutions,
have been looted and abandoned.
54. Tension had been high between the Ngiti population and the Bira and Hema of
Nyankunde. Throughout 2001 and 2002, the Ngiti were targeted with acts of
intimidation and other abuses. They were eventually forced out of Nyankunde. Ngiti
attacks on Nyankunde and other Bira villages in the collectivité of Andisoma during
the same period further fuelled hatred between the three ethnic groups and were
followed by bloody reprisals, such as the alleged indiscriminate bombing by UPDF
of Ngiti positions after the Ngiti attack on Nyankunde of January 2001. It is reported
that the Chief of the collectivité, Dieudonné Bulamuzi, accused of being pro-Hema,
boarded a UPDF gunship during those reprisal attacks. The attack of
5 September 2002 followed the bloody aggression by UPC forces, reportedly
assisted by Bira elements, on 31 August 2002 on neighbouring Songolo, mostly
populated by Ngiti (see paras. 50 and 51).
55. A few days before the attack of 5 September, a five-member high-level
delegation from Nyankunde, composed of Chief Bulamuzi, the Medical Director of
the Centre medical evangélique and others, had travelled to Bunia to alert MONUC
about the risk of a bloodbath in Nyankunde. MONUC did not have the means or the
mandate to take any preventive action at the time.
56. The attack was apparently launched from three different directions, Singo,
Songolo and Atele. From 5 September to mid-month, Ngiti combatants — many of
whom were former inhabitants of Nyankunde — systematically sought and killed
Bira, Hema and Gegere individuals, mostly with machetes, spears and arrows. The
combatants were wearing civilian clothes, appeared overexcited by drugs and were
wearing vials and fétiches on their chest. MONUC obtained several accounts of
mutilation of victims’ bodies (notably the throat and the heart were removed) by
Ngiti combatants. Apparently these parts of the bodies are used for fétiches.
57. The hospital of Nyankunde, the Centre médical evangélique, was not spared.
Killings and looting were carried out in the hospital compound from the very first
day of the attack. On 10 September, Colonel Kandro Ndekote, the Ngiti commander,
led a search and arrest operation in the hospital. That operation resulted in the
detention in inhumane conditions of some 100 people who were hospital staff or had
sought refuge there. According to some sources, the number of people arrested at the
hospital could be higher. It is alleged that many of the detainees were subsequently
executed extrajudicially or disappeared after being forcibly taken to Bavi, located
between Singo and Olongba, and other Ngiti bases. The fate of the others is
unknown, but there are fears that they were executed extrajudicially.
58. From 80 survivors’ statements gathered by MONUC, it appears that mainly
Ngiti forces were responsible for the killings. APC committed widespread looting
and extortion, but according to witness accounts intervened at least on a number of
occasions to prevent killings or allow the evacuation of survivors. According to a
high-ranking APC officer and other reliable sources, APC Commander Faustin
Kakule negotiated and agreed on the details of the attack on Nyankunde with the
Ngiti Commander, Colonel Kandro. There is no certain information about the terms
of the agreement. However, Commander Faustin claimed to some hospital staff that

20

S/2004/573

he had requested that the hospital not be attacked. APC Commander Bisima from
Komanda reportedly visited Nyankunde, including the Centre médical evangélique,
on 10 September, but left on the same day. APC Commander Hilaire is also reported
to have been involved in the attack.
59. MONUC conducted separate interviews with more than 15 people who had
collected corpses for burial in Nyankunde. The few burials, conducted very much in
a hurry given the prevailing insecurity, were limited to some parts of Nyankunde
and were not completed by 12 September, when hundreds of the inhabitants of
Nyankunde who had sought refuge at the hospital were eventually allowed to leave
the town. According to witness accounts, it appears that several hundred bodies
were found lying in the streets and in the houses. Most of them appeared to be
civilians and many of them had died of machete wounds. In most cases, no graves
were dug and most of the bodies were thrown into latrines. In some cases, bodies
were burned. Individuals from Ngiti villages, including Gety, Songolo and Aveba
and wearing Red Cross aprons also carried out burial of bodies. Their leader was
heard saying that they had to bury the bodies quickly so that nobody could claim
that there had been “genocide” in Nyankunde. According to reports, the Ngiti Red
Cross may have buried or burned hundreds of bodies.
60. MONUC has obtained some 800 names of victims of alleged deliberate
killings or forced disappearance in Nyankunde and neighbouring villages. At the
time of the attack on 5 September, Nyankunde was under the control of UPC forces,
which had entered Nyankunde after the departure of UPDF troops in July 2002.
According to consistent reports, the Ngiti attackers quickly overwhelmed UPC and
the fighting in the streets did not last long. This reduced the number of civilians who
might have been victims of stray bullets. Scores of civilians were also apparently
abducted and forced to carry the loot to Ngiti villages, including Songolo, Singo,
Bavi, Bolo, Gety, Kagaba and Atele. Their exact number is unknown. It appears that
at least 100 of them were killed in Singo. More than 10 people from Nyankunde
who had sought refuge in nearby Marabo allegedly disappeared after being captured
on the orders of Colonel Kandro in the aftermath of the attack. Some 70 people were
allegedly killed in villages of the groupement of Musedzo and in Mambesu
(groupement of Mayarabu), both in the collectivité of Mobala, which were attacked
on the same days.
61. To date, none of those alleged to be responsible for the mass killings in the
collectivité of Andisoma in September 2002 has been brought to justice. After
September 2002, APC Commander Faustin was reportedly arrested in Beni and
detained by APC for letting his troops desert. He was subsequently released and he
is reportedly still a member of APC. The Ngiti Colonel Kandro was allegedly killed
during the sharing of the loot that followed the attack on Nyankunde. However,
other commanders such as Commander Matata are reportedly still leading Ngiti
militias in Irumu.
Bedu-Ezekele: scorched earth operation in 24 villages
62. Bedu-Ezekele, a Lendu groupement, located in the collectivité of Walendu
Tatsi, was attacked several times from January 2001 to March 2003. Several persons
were killed and all of its 24 localities were destroyed at each attack. Zumbe, well
known as one of the headquarters of the Lendu militia, is part of this collectivité,
which may explain the repetition and intensity of the attacks. The attackers were

21

S/2004/573

reportedly UPDF forces under the command of Muzora, together with Hema militias
from Bogoro, Mandro, Tchomia, Kasenyi and Bunia under the command of Chief
Kawa.
63. In 2002 and 2003, the groupement experienced a total of 11 attacks with 445
civilian victims of killing, according to a Lendu teacher who took notes of each
event. The most serious attacks occurred on 15 and 16 October 2002, when Hema
militias, together with UPDF from Bogoro, attacked Zumbe and stayed there for 48
hours. From Zumbe, the attackers burned all the surrounding villages, killed around
125 civilians and planted several anti-personnel mines.
Bogoro: mass killing of civilians and destruction of the entire village
64. Bogoro, a Hema village, was a strategic place for UPC who had a military
camp in the middle of the town. Bogoro is located on the Bunia-Kasenyi main road.
The presence of UPC therefore prevented the Lendu communities of Walendu Bindi
from using the road to reach Bunia. The Lendu (FNI) Chief of Staff at the time,
Mathieu Ngudjolo, who admitted to having organized the attack on Bogoro and
Mandro, told MONUC human rights investigators that his forces carried out the
military operations in order to dislocate UPC military forces, which had been
shelling the Lendu villages around Bogoro for several months. 28 According to
MONUC investigations, however, the Lendu attack was not confined to military
targets but also appeared to be a reprisal operation against the Hema civilian
population.
65. On 24 February 2003, Bogoro was attacked by Lendu and Ngiti militias at
5.30 a.m. The aggressors came from four directions: Kasenyi, Gety, Nyankunde and
Mission. They were reportedly wearing green military combat clothes and civilian
clothes, and used machetes, spears and arrows but also heavy weapons, such as
mortars, rocket-propelled grenades, light machine guns and rocket launchers. UPC
soldiers had their camp around the school and called the civilian population to seek
refuge inside it. Some people were able to reach the camp, others were killed while
fleeing. When UPC forces ran out of ammunition, they opened a corridor through
which they fled, together with some civilians; others left in the direction of Kasenyi.
The Lendu/Ngiti militias reportedly continued killing and looting after UPC
abandoned the village. According to the testimony of 100 survivors, around 260
persons were killed and another 70 are missing. Among the victims, 173 were under
the age of 18.
66. MONUC human rights investigators who travelled to Bogoro on 26 March
2003 saw that most of the buildings and houses on the main road had been destroyed
or burned. They also had a discussion with the Lendu chief of operations still in
control of the town, Commander Dark from FNI, who refused to grant permission
for a thorough visit of Bogoro including the place where the killings allegedly
occurred. According to the Ugandan officials, the reason for his refusal was the
existence of unburied bodies in the vicinity of the local school. Commander Dark

__________________
28

22

This information was confirmed later, during a visit to Zumbe on 23 December 2003, by the
inhabitants of Zumbe and Zekele, two Lendu localities that were attacked and completely
destroyed by Hema militia from Bogoro.

S/2004/573

informed the team that he was under the order of Commander Germain Katanga, the
officer in charge of military operations in the south of Bunia.29
67. According to child soldiers who took part in the operation on the UPC side, the
aggressors were Lendu North, Ngiti from the south, APC and some Ugandan
soldiers. Two of the children claimed to have heard Ugandan Swahili through a
radio communication and to have witnessed the killing of Ugandan military. Other
victims reported having heard soldiers speaking Portuguese. These elements were
thought by some to be FAC special forces who had been trained in Angola.
Lipri, Bambu, Kobu: operation Chikana Namukono
68. On 13 January 2003, around two UPC battalions coming from Mongbwalu
arrived in Nyangaraye at around 5.00 a.m. They forced the population out of their
homes and forced 15 to go into the chapel. They reportedly chopped all of them to
death with machetes and burned their bodies. Eyewitnesses were able to identify two
victims, one of them a child. From Nyangaraye, UPC began carrying out its military
operation called Chikana Namukono30 under the command of Salumu Mulenda. UPC
first took control of Lipri and Kobu on 18 February 2003.
69. From 18 February to 3 March 2003, UPC militias carried out a large-scale
military operation against the villages located between Lipri and Nyangaraye. The
first attack lasted until 23 February; 15 villages were destroyed and most of their
inhabitants killed.31 Witnesses reported that, on 24 February, the UPC Commander,
Salumu Mulenda, sent a written message — a copy of which was provided to
MONUC — to Lendu notables in the area and Lendu militia leaders, including
traditional Chief Djatsi, and the militia commander Kabuli, inviting them to a
pacification meeting. On 25 February when the Lendu leaders, accompanied by 50
persons, came to attend the meeting in Bule, they were all arrested and brought to
Kobu during the night. The prisoners were then taken behind the UPC camp in Kobu
with their hands tied and were attacked with machetes, knives and wooden sticks.
Only two persons, one of them met by MONUC, were able to run away; all of the
others were confirmed killed. According to the persons who buried the bodies, there
were 47 victims. They reportedly found another 53 corpses in the bush around Kobu
and buried them in two other mass graves. In the following days, UPC continued its
manhunt in the Jicho forest. Another 92 persons were reportedly killed in the forest,
most of them dismembered with machetes. During the last days of February, UPC
attacked another eight villages32 using the same methods of killing civilians, looting
and burning all the houses. During this operation, Bambu, the headquarters of the
Kilo Moto gold mining company, was attacked several times: all the offices of the
company, the main hospital of the region, all religious structures, the orphanage and
the schools were looted and all electronic devices, archives and medical equipment
destroyed.
70. MONUC human rights investigators were able to visit Lipri, Bambu and Kobu
on 3 April 2003. The team saw several villages on the way that were burned and
deserted, visited the place where 47 persons were killed in Kobu and interviewed
__________________
29

Commandant Germain is the current Chief of Staff of FNI/FRPI.
In Lingala this means “to take with hands”.
31
Lipri, Ndrè Chupka, Dhepka, Tsili, Ndjaza, Mbidjo, Ngbachulu, Kpaki, Bukpa, Djuba, Bemu,
Nduy, Ngaru, Ndalu and Thali.
32
Jicho, Buli, Ngabuli, Pili, Athe, Bakpa, Lambi and Widde.
30

23

S/2004/573

around 90 victims of abuse or eyewitnesses of killings. The interviewees gave the
team the names of 250 victims, but more victims were identified by another
investigation team in May 2003, and still more during the investigations in the Beni
area in November 2003. Operation Chikana Namukono resulted in the killing of at
least 350 persons and the complete destruction of 26 localities.33 Around 60,000
civilians were forced to flee to the relative safety of the surrounding bush, and the
number of those who died of hunger and sickness remains unknown.
Mandro: attack and mass killing in a stronghold of UPC
71. Mandro, located in the collectivité of Bahema Banywagi, is the birthplace of
Chief Kawa. The village was known from the first period of the conflict as a
stronghold of UPC and was the location of a military and training camp for newly
recruited children. The Lendu population suspected several attacks on their villages
as coming from Mandro. According to corroborating testimonies, Mandro was
attacked several times by Lendu since the beginning of 2003 but the UPC forces
were able to push them back and hold the town.
72. On 4 March 2003, early in the morning, the Lendu and Ngiti attack on UPC
military positions in Mandro lasted for no more than a few hours. The armed groups
succeeded in overrunning Mandro and attacked civilians, killing some 168 persons
according to the testimonies received by MONUC in Mandro and Bunia. According
to the Chief of the groupement, the attackers kidnapped several young men and
girls, who were forced to carry the looted goods. Since the attack did not last long,
few houses were looted but the UPC military camp was completely destroyed. The
aggressors were reportedly Lendu militias from Zumbe and Loga. Interviewed later
in Bunia, the former FNI Chief of Staff, Mathieu Ngudjolo, acknowledged having
organized the attack with the Ngiti in order to stop UPC operations against Lendu
villages. According to him, each person in Mandro was a combatant in possession of
a weapon.
Bunia: chasing of UPC by UPDF and Lendu militias
73. On 6 March 2003, reportedly responding to an attack by UPC on their forces
based in Ndele, UPDF drove UPC out of Bunia and took control of the town with
the assistance of Lendu armed groups.34 On 6 and 7 March 2003, during and after
fighting between UPC and UPDF in Bunia, several civilians were killed, houses and
shops were looted and civilians were wounded by gunshots. According to the
inhabitants of Bunia, fighting between UPC and UPDF began around 6 a.m. and
lasted until the end of the same day. Stray bullets reportedly killed several civilians;
others had their houses shelled. There were also selected killings of Hema civilians
who were known to have financed UPC and selected looting of shops belonging to
Hema businessmen in the market area of Bunia.
__________________
33

According to a reliable local non-governmental organization, the number of civilians killed
during the operation is much higher.
34
On 6 January 2003, UPC signed a military alliance with RCD-Goma. In the following weeks,
RCD-Goma started airlifting troops and weapons to UPC territory. On 23 January, UPC formally
requested Uganda to withdraw from Ituri. Chief Kawa, who had already defected from UPC in
November 2002 and moved to Uganda, expressed a desire for Uganda to remain in Ituri. He
became the new ally of Uganda and he was supported by Uganda as leader of the newly created
FIPI.

24

S/2004/573

74. The local Red Cross buried a total of 54 soldiers and 17 civilians but informed
MONUC that Ugandan forces had buried their nationals. Local non-governmental
organizations carried out investigations into the events on 12 March 2003 and
compiled a list of 52 civilians killed, 30 others injured, 15 houses completely
destroyed, 60 others including offices of the non-governmental organizations Coopi,
Aciar, J-plus, Hellenique and Cemif were completely looted. Eyewitnesses accused
UPDF of being directly involved in the looting of the town. The situation was
brought under control by UPDF on 8 March. Hema community members who had
fled started to come back. The local Red Cross buried the bodies from 6 to 12 March
2003.
Drodro: killing of hundreds of civilians
75. Drodro, well known for its parish and its well built social infrastructure, is part
of the territory of Djugu, collectivité of Bahema Nord, approximately 80 km from
Bunia. After its forced withdrawal from Bunia, UPC and its leader Thomas Lubanga
relocated first in Bule, then in Blukwa and Drodro. On 3 April 2003, because of this
presence and also as part of a revenge operation, Drodro parish (located in Duma
village) and the surrounding villages of Dhassa (Largu), Nyali, Dzathi, Kiza,
Ngazba, Jissa, Kpatiz, Koli, Lera, Ndjala and Kpaluma were attacked between
5.45 a.m. and 8 a.m. by Lendu militias. The attackers killed both military and
civilians using AK-47 and Kalashnikov rifles but also machetes, spears and arrows.
A team composed of personnel of MONUC and personnel of the Office of the
United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights travelled to the affected
areas, and received testimonies of survivors, eyewitnesses, family members and
church and administrative authorities, who reported the killing of 408 civilians, the
serious injury of 80 others, 48 of them still in the local hospital at the time of the
investigation, and the destruction by fire of 150 houses and shops. Two forensic
experts who accompanied MONUC and examined one of the several mass graves in
Largu confirmed that killings had happened. The team saw other mass graves in
Largu, Nyali and Jissa.
76. The attackers were reportedly Lendu combatants from the surrounding Lendu
villages of Andu, Jukr, Masumbuko, Tsoro, Ango and Asso. Some eyewitnesses
reported that they saw also soldiers wearing green uniforms and camouflage
uniforms. According to a Congolese human rights organization, the presence of
Lubanga and Edison Muzora, a former UPDF commander who had joined the
rebellion, during the second half of March 2003 in Drodro would explain the
alliance between Lendu militias and UPDF. This version was rejected by UPDF,
who stated that at that date UPDF troops were in Bule, 30 km from Drodro, and was
not responsible for the Drodro killings.
Bunia, return in strength of UPC and mass flight of the population
77. On 6 May 2003, under pressure from the international community, the last
UPDF soldier left Bunia, after a long presence of four and a half years.35
Approximately 20,000 civilians, mostly Hema and a few from other ethnic groups,
followed them towards Uganda fearing an attack by Lendu combatants. From the
first day of their departure, the city was the scene of fierce fights between UPC and
the Lendu militias, which lasted until MONUC was able to broker a ceasefire
__________________
35

UPDF entered Bunia in November 1998.

25

S/2004/573

agreement, on 17 May. Fighting in various neighbourhoods caused hundreds of
civilian casualties, systematic looting of buildings and destruction by fire of around
1,000 dwellings. Following the ceasefire, the two parties agreed to withdraw their
forces to their respective military headquarters in the town. This situation lasted
until 27 May, when UPC drove the Lendu combatants out of Bunia. Thereafter,
human rights abuses continued to be committed on a smaller scale.
78. Two investigations were carried out into the events by two different MONUC
teams, one in Bunia at the beginning of June 2003 and the second in the camps of
internally displaced persons in the Beni area in November 2003.36 The team
interviewed 311 eyewitnesses and family members of victims. A total of 563 cases
of deliberate killings have been reported to MONUC, 260 of them by UPC and 303
by Lendu combatants. Other victims were killed by non-identified perpetrators. The
Lendu combatants reportedly committed several ethnically motivated killings of
Hema and other ethnic groups somehow associated with them, while UPC
apparently killed at random, although possibly targeting non-natives and some
professions like police officers and taxi drivers. According to a source, UPC killed
several dozen Lendu civilians in Simbilyabo and buried them secretly.
79. Particularly heavy casualties were reported in the Mudzipela area of Bunia,
considered to be a safe heaven for Hema civilians, and the Lumumba area, which is
the city centre. The killing of around 16 Hema civilians and two Hema priests on
10 May 2003 by the Lendu militia in the compound of Nyakasanza church is an
example of ethnically motivated killing. According to corroborating testimonies of
Lendu and Hema survivors of the massacre, some hundreds of Lendu combatants
arrived at 10 a.m. and penetrated the compound after a short fight with the national
police. Both Hema and Lendu internally displaced persons had sought refuge in the
church and were housed in two different halls. After killing two Hema priests in
their rooms, the combatants penetrated the hall containing Hema civilians and one of
them massacred 12 adults and 4 children. The combatants visited the room
containing the Lendu but only took their money. The reason for this particular
massacre was apparently to take revenge for the killing of the Ngiti priest Father
Boniface Bwanalongo by UPC in November 2002 in Mongbwalu. Furthermore,
Father Aimé, one of the Hema priests killed, was publicly known to be a UPC
supporter and had been seen several times driving UPC officials in the church
vehicle.
80. The team received reports of 18 cases of rape, some of the victims being as
young as 11, committed by UPC soldiers, after the ceasefire was signed. Most of the
victims were abducted while they were out to look for food or water, and were taken
to military places or private houses for sexual abuse.
81. Looting started in the town as soon as the Ugandan forces left, carried out first
by Lendu combatants then by UPC elements. They were later joined by civilians
who profiteered from the situation, resulting in systematic looting of private houses
and business premises with no distinction of ethnic affiliation. The market place was
completely devastated. During visits to the neighbourhoods, in addition to the looted
dwellings, the MONUC team saw a considerable number of shops and houses
destroyed by fire. Some thousand houses were set on fire.
__________________
36

26

Investigations were carried out in camps in Erengeti, Oicha, Butembo and Beni.

S/2004/573

82. The MONUC team received reports of numerous cases of threats or
intimidation committed by UPC elements once they had total control of the town.
This is one of the main reasons behind the reported fleeing of around 200,000
people from Bunia and the surrounding villages from 8 to 14 May 2003. The
inhabitants left Bunia mainly using two roads. One group took the road to Beni via
Komanda and another took the route Medu-Bole-Beni, passing through the forest.
One group of Lendu fled to Gety and another to Zumbe. According to humanitarian
agencies, around 74,000 civilians reached the Beni area, passing through Komanda,
at the beginning of June 2003. The total of the new internally displaced persons as a
result of the May events in Bunia was reportedly 180,000 persons.
83. On their way, the group that took the road towards Komanda was attacked in
Chayi by UPC, all their belongings were looted and an unknown number of civilians
were killed. The group that took the road towards Medu and Bole was stopped by
Ngiti combatants who killed the Hema civilians who were part of the group. A
Nande survivor met by MONUC reported the summary execution at Longba on the
basis of ethnic origin, of 13 civilians, mostly Hema and those thought to be Hema,
because of their facial type, by the combatants and their Commander, Matata
Banaloki Justin, known as Cobra. The same witness added that the bodies of the
victims were mutilated and certain organs extracted and eaten by the combatants. An
important number of Hema were reportedly killed also near Olongbo and Masini.
Tchomia: mass killings and abduction of civilians in two different attacks
84. Tchomia used to be a big trading centre of around 12,000 persons, located in
the collectivité of Bahema Banywagi in the territory of Djugu on the shore of Lake
Albert. The locality was also host to an important PUSIC military camp.37
According to the Hema authorities, the area around Kasenyi and Tchomia, both
located by Lake Albert, became subject to insecurity after the capture of Bogoro by
Lendu militia at the end of February 2003.
85. On 31 May 2003, Tchomia was attacked around 5 a.m. and the operation lasted
until 1 p.m. The attackers, allegedly from Zumbe and Loga, approached the town
from three directions and attacked first the military camp and then the civilian
population using rocket-propelled grenades, rifles, mortars, spears, machetes and
axes. They spoke Kiswahili, Kilendu and Lingala. The attackers openly asked
victims about their ethnic origin, which suggests that their objective was to kill only
men from the Hema ethnic group. The majority of the victims identified the
attackers as being Lendu combatants, with some APC and FAC soldiers. The
MONUC human rights investigators who travelled to Uganda to interview witnesses
drew up a list of 96 victims, mostly of summary executions, including 30 patients
who were killed in the hospital beds and 6 victims of abduction. The assistant to the
Administrator of the territory of Kasenyi, who came to Tchomia with Chief Kawa on
the day of the attack, stated that they buried a total of 250 corpses. Chief Kisembo
of Kasenyi stated that a militiaman called Naydo affiliated with the Lendu militia of
Zumbe carried out the operation.
86. According to corroborating information received by MONUC later, in Beni
and Kinshasa, after UPDF left Bunia they based themselves in Tchomia with the
intention of organizing a new attack on Zumbe together with PUSIC. UPDF was still
__________________
37

PUSIC was formed only in October/November 2002. The militia was previously under UPC.

27

S/2004/573

reportedly in Tchomia on the day of the attack, contrary to their previous statement
according to which they left around 20 May, and a large number of UPDF soldiers
were reportedly killed as a result of the attack.
87. On 15 July 2003, Tchomia was attacked for the second time around 5 a.m. by
the same attackers, coming from Zumbe. The attackers killed some 11 civilians,
since the town was almost emptied after the first attack.
Katoto: killing of civilians during several attacks
88. Katoto, a Hema village, is located some 25 km north of Bunia, in the
collectivité of Bahema Nord, in the territory of Djugu. The village suffered from two
severe Lendu attacks in June 2003. On 7 June, 104 people were killed, according to
local authorities and eyewitnesses. On 20 June, a new attack reportedly left 32 more
people killed and an undetermined number of displaced people. It appears that
Katoto had a population of 17,000 before the attacks and was afterwards reduced to
around 7,000. The attacks came from FNI militias led by commanders Ngakpa,
Nyanya, Ngerey, Kame and Lonu, among others, principally from the locality of
Loga, some 10 km north-west of Katoto.
Kasenyi: mass killing and abduction of civilians
89. Kasenyi, a fishing town of around 8,000 inhabitants according to the
traditional chief of the place, located on the shores of Lake Albert in the collectivité
of Bahema Sud, in the territory of Irumu, was the site of an important PUSIC
military camp. The town was attacked twice, on 11 June and 23 July 2003, by Ngiti
combatants seeking to dislodge the PUSIC soldiers there.
90. On 11 June 2003, Kasenyi was attacked around 6 a.m. by Ngiti militias,
reportedly together with some APC and FAC elements. The attackers first dislodged
PUSIC forces and subsequently attacked the civilians in the town. MONUC received
testimonies on the killing of more than 80 civilians and the abduction of 30 others.
A victim, who was abducted and taken to Zumbe, reported that the chief of the
operations was called Mumbere, a Lendu who had taken a Nande name. On the road
to Zumbe, the victim witnessed the execution by machete of six persons because
they were not able to continue walking. The victim was kept in Zumbe for one
week. He later moved with two Alur hostages to Beni, accompanied by 200 persons,
both Lendu militia and APC soldiers. According to the witness, the journey from
Zumbe to Beni had been organized with the aim of bringing ammunition given by
RCD-ML. The father of the two Alur hostages came to Beni to take his children
away together with the witness and brought them to Ntoroko, Uganda. On 23 July
2003, Kasenyi was attacked for the second time by Lendu combatants. MONUC
received testimonies on the killing of 16 civilians and the abduction of 4 others.
Fataki: killing and abduction of civilians in two attacks
91. Fataki, the administrative centre of Djugu territory, was inhabited by around
16,000 persons of mostly Hema origin before the conflict. Fataki was the target of
two serious attacks during July 2003, the first on 19 July and the second on 31 July.
The attack of 19 July resulted in the killing of 51 civilians, the abduction of 50
others, the displacement of hundreds more and the destruction of many buildings,
including the orphanage, two convents, the hospital and the school buildings. The
attack of 31 July was more deadly: around 71 people were identified as having been

28

S/2004/573

killed, including seven survivors of the first attack who were in the hospital.38 As a
result of the two attacks, around 10,000 civilians fled the area.
92. The attackers were identified by the survivors as being Lendu combatants
alone, in the first attack, and Lendu combatants with FAPC members in the second
one. After the second attack, the Lendu militia stayed in the town for a while and
killed a few survivors who came to look for their belongings. The combatants and
FAPC reportedly continued to abduct civilians during August 2003.
Kachele: mass killing of civilians
93. Kachele is a small Hema village located in the collectivité of Bahema Badjere,
in the territory of Djugu. On 6 October 2003, between 5 and 10 a.m., Kachele and
the surrounding villages of Lôkô, Bû, Luguba and Lutsiko were attacked by Lendu
militias from the nearby villages of Laudju and Petro. A total of 65 civilians were
killed, 42 of them children, and another 26 injured.
94. A MONUC investigation team arrived at the scene of the incident the day it
occurred to verify facts, gather evidence and comfort and assist the population. The
following day, a new mission, including human rights observers, continued the
inquiry, drew up lists of victims, gathered new evidence, interviewed survivors and
visited a number of mass graves. Immediately after the attack, the Ituri Brigade was
deployed to Bule and has been conducting several foot patrols in the area from
which the attackers allegedly came. They have already found evidence of the
existence of armed elements and weapons; they also found traces of the withdrawal
from Kachele to the Petro area, which confirms the origin of the attack.

B.

Other mass killings
95. Both Hema and Lendu combatants attacked territories belonging to other
ethnic communities for different reasons: in some cases to punish them for having
hosted enemy combatants, in others, because they took one side or the other in the
conflict. Some towns, such as Mongbwalu, Mahagi and Aru, were attacked for
control of their natural or financial resources. Regardless of the reasons for the
attack, both Lendu and Hema militia parties committed similar types of exactions:
mass killing of civilians, destruction of social infrastructures, looting of goods,
abduction of women for sexual slavery and forced labour.
96. The only attack that can be considered different from the rest is the one named
Opération effacer le tableau carried out by MLC and RCD-N forces with the direct
assistance of UPC in the area of Mambasa (see paras. 105 ff. below).
Walu: killing of civilians, destruction of social infrastructure
97. On 11 May 2002, the village of Walu, located in the collectivité of Babelebe in
the territory of Irumu, was attacked by Hema militias from 5 a.m. to 1 p.m. The
attackers completely burned social infrastructures, including two schools and three
health centres. They killed civilians who were not able to flee. Once the attack was
over, the population came out of hiding to bury the bodies. One of the eyewitnesses,

__________________
38

The real number of deaths may be higher but, owing to the displacement caused by the attack,
the investigators were able to reach only some of the survivors.

29

S/2004/573

who was present at the burials, reported having counted 42 bodies, including that of
the Chief of the village. The village was attacked a second time a few days later by
the same militia, who killed four more civilians. The militia reportedly came from
Mazangina, Kabarole and Sota and was under the command of Kisembo, the Chief
of Kabarole.
Mongbwalu: a town to conquer for its natural resources
98. Mongbwalu, an important gold mining centre, was the second most populated
town in Ituri after Bunia, with around 80,000 inhabitants before the conflict. Though
located in the Nyali collectivité of Banyari Kilo, the majority of its inhabitants were
of Lendu origin. Lendu moved to Mongbwalu to work for the Kilo Moto gold
mining company as labourers beginning in the 1980s. The Lendu families were
concentrated on the outskirts of the town, in the Camp Sayo area, where the workers
compounds were located, while the Hema were living in the cité (town centre). The
town changed hands frequently in a series of attacks and counter-attacks. During the
attack of June 2002 by Hema militia and some bribed APC elements, RCD-ML was
still in control of the town.
99. On 11 June 2002, Lendu workers left the workers camp and sought safety on
the hill where an armed camp of Lendu was located, as they had been informed that
“something” would happen. The same day, the Chief of the cité, Taga Mpigwa
Atenyi, a Hema, reportedly made a speech in which he stated: “tomorrow we’ll have
our coffee in the Lendu area of the town.”
100. On 12 June 2002, the Lendu quarters of Mongbwalu were attacked by APC
soldiers based there, together with Hema inhabitants of the town. APC had been
bribed by rich Hema with the aim of emptying Mongbwalu of its Lendu population.
The attack lasted from 3 a.m. to 7 a.m. The attackers killed an unknown number of
Lendu civilians, threw them into the roadside ditches and set fire to Lendu homes.
The chief of the Hema militia was Bakambu, called le maître because he had been a
teacher in the nearby Bambu mines. Towards the end of the attack, the Lendu
combatants arrived from their encampment. They destroyed Hema homes and killed
approximately 100 Hema civilians in an act of revenge. The majority of the Hema
had enough time to flee to hide in the APC camp and so were saved. The Governor
of the time, Jean-Pierre Lompondo, sent a new APC commander, Papi Yani, to
replace his bribed former one, Commander Alemi. Meanwhile, the notables of the
Nyali community, the traditional rulers of the collectivité, went to see the Lendu
combatants to propose a peace plan. The Lendu accepted their proposal on condition
that the Hema population leave Mongbwalu for Watsa and Ariwara. The Hema left
and the Nyali population stayed with APC and Lendu civilians and militia members.
This first Hema operation to recover Mongbwalu and its gold mines was reportedly
financed by Lombe, who had a gold board in Bunia, and by Mandefu, Kazana and
Labomba, all businessmen. Mongbwalu was attacked again in August 2002 by UPC
forces, but they were pushed back by Lendu combatants and APC. However, UPC
was determined to gain control of the town and went to look for stronger allies such
as MLC, present in the Watsa area.
101. On 8 November 2002, UPC began its operation by shelling Mongbwalu with
heavy weapons. An eyewitness met by MONUC went to the Lendu camp to seek
protection at that time. While there, the witness saw a wounded Lendu combatant
returning from Watsa who said that UPC was advancing under the command of

30

S/2004/573

Bosco. Lendu combatants were able to repulse this first attack and succeeded in
capturing a young UPC militia boy. According to the boy, UPC had prepared a big
operation after receiving assurance of MLC assistance to take Mongbwalu and to
make it the headquarters of Lubanga. From 9 to 17 November 2002, APC went to
fight on the road to Watsa to stop the advance of MLC forces.
102. On 20 November 2002, UPC and MLC jointly attacked Mongbwalu, using
heavy mortars and other explosive devices. The fighting lasted for two days and
resulted in the killing of around 200 civilians and the destruction of infrastructures.
UPC took control of the town on 24 November 2002. According to Human Rights
Watch, an unknown number of civilians, who tried to hide in a church called Mungu
Samaki located in Sayo, were followed by UPC and MLC soldiers.39 The UPC
soldiers found them in the church and slaughtered them. Other civilians were
captured and imprisoned in a military camp, where they were later killed. During its
stay, UPC tried to exploit the gold mines. They called on the Lendu to return
because they had the expertise in gold digging. Since the Lendu refused to go back,
they forced the remaining Nyali population and the Hema who went back to work
for them. Mongbwalu was then occupied by Lendu militias of FNI, when UPC lost
the backing of Uganda in March 2003.
Nizi: mass killing of civilians
103. Nizi, located in the collectivité of Mambisa in the territory of Djugu, was a
wealthy mining village with 20,000 inhabitants before the conflict. On 11 October
2002, Lendu combatants from Bambu and Mabanga attacked Nizi. UPC had a
military camp in Nizi and the Lendu were accusing the inhabitants of Mambisa of
being pro-Hema. According to a local non-governmental organization, a total of 320
bodies were buried. The persons who buried them were able to identify 69 of them.
104. The village was attacked again on 20 July 2003 around 10 a.m. by Lendu
combatants of FNI from Bambu. The attackers killed 22 civilians and abducted 15
others. The number of victims was limited, owing to the arrival of the Multinational
Force, which was able to stop the aggression and arrest four Lendu combatants. On
23 August, Nizi was attacked again by combatants from Zanzi mountain, who
abducted 12 persons and killed 2 of them on their way to their military camp of
Mbao.
Mambasa: Opération effacer le tableau
105. Mambasa is a medium-sized town on the road to Beni, located in the territory
of Mambasa, inhabited by approximately 25,000 people. As Mambasa was not
affected by the conflict raging in the territories of Djugu and Irumu, its inhabitants
had maintained a fairly decent standard of living. Thousands of internally displaced
persons from Ituri had moved to Mambasa, which was then considered safer than the
rest of the Ituri district.
106. On 12 October 2002, the forces of MLC and RCD-N, with the assistance of
UPC, attacked the town for the first time. The aim of the operation, called Opération
effacer le tableau40 was apparently the control of the whole RCD-ML area, notably
the Beni airport and the economically active area of Beni-Butembo. With the
__________________
39 See Human Rights Watch, Ituri: “Covered in Blood” ...
40 Operation “Clean the blackboard”.

31

S/2004/573

Mambasa attack, the region witnessed a new scale of violence characterized by a
premeditated operation and the use of looting, rape and summary execution as tools
of warfare.
107. The MLC and RCD-N forces remained in Mambasa, after taking it for the first
time, from 12 to 29 October 2002, after which the RCD-ML forces were able to
push them out. They were able to retake the town again on 27 November 2002 and
stayed until 5 February 2003; a month later, on 30 December 2002, a ceasefire
agreement was brokered by MONUC in Gbadolite.
108. During those two periods, the MLC and RCD-N forces, although under
different command, committed serious human rights abuses such as summary
executions, systematic rape, systematic looting and acts of cannibalism. After
Mambasa, similar abuses were also systematically carried out in the villages south
of the town and between Komanda and Eringeti, with the involvement of UPC. The
number of rape cases — mainly young girls or women between 12 and 25 years
old — also rose to an alarming level.
109. MONUC interviewed a total of 502 eyewitnesses and family members of
victims from 3 January to 20 January 2003; they reported the killing of 173
civilians, both adults and children, in Mambasa, Komanda and on the two roads to
Beni. The reported cases included 12 incidents of cannibalism. Most of the victims
from Mambasa and neighbouring areas were reportedly killed by MLC or RCD-N
soldiers, whereas the majority of victims from Komanda were reportedly killed by
UPC elements. The incidents targeted mainly the Nande population to which Mbusa
Nyamwisi, President of RCD-ML, belongs, and later also Pygmy populations, who
were accused of assisting APC.
110. The first operation, which lasted from 12 to 29 October 2002, was carried out
under the MLC command of Colonel Freddy Ngalimu, alias Grand Mopao. The
second operation was carried out under the MLC command of Colonel Widdy
Ramses Masamba, alias Roi des imbeciles,41 and lasted from 27 November 2002 to
the end of January 2003, when the last MLC elements left Mambasa. Both
commanders were under the command of General Constant Ndima, located in
Isiro.42 General Ndima reported directly to the MLC Chief of Staff, General Amuli.
He reportedly took the order from General Amuli to replace Freddy Ngalimu with
Colonel Ramses. According to an MLC informer, Colonel Ramses is very close to
General Amuli, a Hema from Ituri.
111. Just after the preliminary findings were made public by MONUC, the MLC
authorities agreed to conduct an inquiry into the events. The report of the team was
the basis for the trial of 27 suspects from the MLC forces. The trial of the 27
individuals accused by MLC of involvement in the atrocities in and around
Mambasa began on 18 February and lasted until 25 February. The United Nations
__________________
41 Widdy Ramses Masamba was appointed in November 2003 as the chief of the Kindu-based

seventh military region.
42 Several sources reportedly stated that General Ndima’s nickname was effacer le tableu and they

reported that he was part of a group known as effacer le tableu established in 2001 during the
existence of FLC. The battalion called effacer le tableu was well known for its tough personnel
and the way it behaved in war time. After the break-up of FLC six months later, the battalion
reportedly remained in Isiro, and some of its companies were sent on tough missions like the
invasion of territories lost in Mambasa.

32

S/2004/573

High Commissioner for Human Rights stated clearly that the trial was both illegal
and illegitimate.
112. Beyond the constitutional issue of its legitimacy, four additional issues about
this trial need to be pointed out. First, the admission as evidence of selfincriminating statements made by defendants held incommunicado during police or
military questioning. Second, the obvious disparity between the charges and the
sentences handed down. For instance, the charge of rape carried a maximum prison
sentence of 13 months. The charge for deserting the armed forces, which routinely is
punishable by death, most surprisingly carried 39 months in this “court martial”.
Third, no one was charged with any of the horrendous crimes against humanity and
war crimes, such as murder, group rape and cannibalism, referred to in the MONUC
report on the events in Mambasa (see S/2003/674). Fourth and finally, since the
sentencing, a wave of arrests of defence witnesses who had testified on behalf of the
accused has begun.
Collectivité of Banyari Kilo: constant insecurity and summary executions
113. The collectivité of Banyari Kilo, in Djugu territory, has been changing hands
between Hema and Lendu militias because of the attraction of its Kilo gold mines.
UPC entered the area around January 2002 and stayed there until March 2003.
While there, UPC organized several attacks on Lendu localities. When they were
chased away by UPDF and Lendu militias in March 2003, Nyali inhabitants,
considered by Lendu as having hosted UPC, were harassed and killed.
114. On 15, 17 and 23 May 2003, Lendu combatants from Nyangaraye and
Ngotochu attacked the localities of Batata, Kilo, Itende and Lisey. They killed
around 50 civilians and abducted 28 girls. All the villages on the routes SindoniKilo and Kilo-Mongbwalu were destroyed and deserted by their inhabitants after
several Lendu militia attacks. At least half of the population of Banyari Kilo, around
40,000 according to the Chief of the collectivité, went into hiding in the forest of
Madombo and Kirongazi during May and June 2003. Five health centres located in
Kilo, Itende, Kabakaba, Kilo-Etat and Kilo-Mission and one maternity centre in
Kilo-Mission were forced to close because they were almost completely looted.
Nioka: mass killing and rape of civilians, serious destruction of
social infrastructure
115. Nioka, a small town of 20,000 persons of mostly Alur origin, is located in the
collectivité of Pandoro, in the territory of Mahagi. Nioka was first occupied by UPC,
then by FAPC under Commander Jérôme Kakwavu following the split with the
former in September 2002. According to a witness, the Alur community had been
paying FAPC to protect them by giving them livestock. However, most of the FAPC
soldiers left on 28 May 2003. A certain Dilo from Nioka decided to gather together
all the inhabitants who had received some military training and organized an armed
group of 15 militia members. On the day of the attack, it was reportedly FAPC that
fired first with rocket-propelled grenades into the barracks housing the new militia
members, probably with the aim of fighting a newly created armed group.
116. On 10 June 2003, Nioka was attacked from 5.30 a.m. until around 2 p.m. by
Lendu militias from Kpandroma and Livo. The militia killed around 55 civilians
according to the testimonies provided to MONUC by victims. Another 60 civilians
were abducted to carry the loot first to Livo, then to Kpandroma. According to an

33

S/2004/573

abducted girl, several girls were forced into sexual slavery. Only 56 of the hostages
were released, most of them after payment by their family members. Three days
later, the inhabitants went back escorted by FAPC to bury the dead. They reportedly
buried 70 bodies, several of them in one mass grave in Nioka. The Lendu militia
visited Nioka several times after this first attack to finish looting and burning all of
the buildings.
117. A certain Lego was reportedly the chief of the operations. Floribert Ndjabu,
the leader of FNI at that time, confirmed that the operation was conducted by Lego
and his 40 followers, without the consent of the FNI authorities of Kpandroma. He
added that Lego and 20 of his men were executed after this operation by FNI in
Kpandroma.

C.

Political killings, abduction and forced displacement of
suspected opponents
118. The militia groups of Ituri executed, abducted, arrested or forced to flee
persons they thought to be political opponents, as well as judges, intellectuals of
enemy ethnic groups, journalists and members of non-governmental organizations.
MONUC was able to carry out investigations into such abuses only in Bunia and
Aru, while they were under the authority of UPC and FAPC, respectively. This does
not mean that the other armed groups did not also commit political killings,
abductions and forced displacement of opponents.

1.

Political killings, enforced disappearances, illegal arrest and forced displacement
of selected persons by UPC
119. Soon after taking power in August 2002 in Bunia and later in other parts of
Ituri, UPC launched a campaign of manhunts, with summary executions, arbitrary
arrests and forced disappearances. According to several witnesses, UPC had a preestablished list of persons to eliminate in Bunia.43 UPC Commanders Bagonza,
Kisembo, Chief of Staff, and Aimable Saba Rafiki, Chief of Security, reportedly
directed the operation in Bunia. Those who were informed in time and were able to
go into hiding had their houses destroyed by fire and their belongings looted, which
suggests a desire to chase them for good. Among the victims were political
opponents, intellectuals, businessmen, religious leaders, journalists and
administrators of mainly Bira, Lendu and Nande origin, non-Iturians but also a few
moderate Hema. In August and September 2002 alone, more than 100 people
reportedly became victims, in Bunia town, of this campaign.44 A new campaign was
launched in May 2003, with the return of UPC to Bunia. This time, the victims were
mostly non-Iturians. Some professions such as taxi drivers and police officers were
specifically targeted.
120. Among the victims of the UPC manhunt campaign in August 2003 were Ileri
Kuba, a 70-year-old Lendu, retired parliamentarian; Nasser Nbuna, 65-year-old nonIturian, a former member of parliament; M. Ngura, Alur, Chef des Travaux of the
Institut supérieur pédagogique together with his daughter; M. Mateso, Lendu

__________________
43 The list was reportedly drawn up by the Hema extremists of Bunia town, including the extremist

intellectuals of the Institut supérieur pédagogique.
44 The number was given by Human Rights Watch in Ituri: “Covered in Blood” ...

34

S/2004/573

director of discipline of the high school of Kigonze; Reverend Basimaki Byabasaija,
an Anglican church minister; Eric Duandro Akobi, a 38-year-old Protestant minister
and theology student; Monaco Mbaduale, a 25-year-old Lendu student of the Institut
supérieur pédagogique; Ngure Gabriel Ukumu, a 45-year-old Alur administrative
secretary of Radio Candip; Selian, a Bira journalist of the same radio; Malili, a
police officer from Isiro; Giselaine Bofende, a Topoke worker of the nongovernmental organization ABC. Several Lendu were also abducted, and taken to
the houses of Bosco, Bagonza or Lubanga. Their fate is unknown to date.45
121. Several traditional chiefs and administrators were killed in the interior of the
district mostly for not collaborating with UPC: Nobamuzi, Chief of the collectivité
of Babelebe, killed in December 2002; Matata, Chief of the collectivité of Basili,
killed in July 2002; Mundukukuwe, Chief of the collectivité of Baboa Bokowe,
killed in December 2002; Bulabato Aloise, Chief of the groupement of Chendabo,
killed in mid-2002; Fundi Kusu, Administrator of Bambu, killed in June 2002;
Richard Bokalala Elanga, RCD-ML Administrator of Djugu territory, killed on
11 May 2002.46
122. Chief Dieudonné Bulamuzi Binmangili, the 52-year-old traditional Chief of
the collectivité of Andisoma, was forcibly abducted in Bunia on 5 September 2002.
Earlier that same day, when Nyankunde was attacked by a coalition of Ngiti and
APC, Chief Bulamuzi was able to escape with a member of the judiciary police. The
two were able to reach Bunia by passing through Sota, Masabo and Badiya. In each
place, they informed the UPC elements of the attack and requested military
assistance. Witnesses interviewed by MONUC stated that, when he reached Bunia,
Chief Bulamuzi was taken to the UPC headquarters; he was interrogated by
Commander Kisembo and apparently tortured; Kisembo accused him of being aware
of the Ngiti attack on Nyankunde. Chief Bulamuzi’s condition was very serious
when he was taken home. Witnesses further stated that, around 6 p.m., six UPC
elements, including Jaguar from the Senga family, arrived and took Bulamuzi away
again. A few minutes after they left, the family heard a gun shot. When they went
out, they saw blood just outside the gate but no body. The same day, the UPDF
commander, who had been informed, went to see UPC commanders Kisembo and
Bagonza for some explanation. They told him that Chief Bulamuzi had been beaten
because of his complicity with the Ngiti and sent to hospital. The body has never
been returned to the family. Instead, the whole Bulamuzi family, being under
constant threat, decided to leave Bunia.
123. Adriko Johnson, a 33-year-old Lubara, assistant Mayor of Bunia and member
of UPC, disappeared on 29 September 2002. It appears that Mr. Johnson left his
home on 29 September 2002 in the afternoon and never returned. The following day,
his brother-in-law found out that he had last been seen on his motorcycle near the
UPC military camp. All the efforts of the family members to have UPC launch an
investigation were frustrated. His body has never been found. It appears that one
possible reason for his disappearance could be the fact that he had given refuge in
his house, in August 2002, to Lendu civilians when UPC troops were searching for
__________________
45 Some names listed by local non-governmental organizations are: Claude, 30, son of Valery;

Zakayo, 24; Claudine, 22; Loba, 48; Ndalo, 29; Justin, 28; Edward Wamba, 54; and Pierre Minzi
Kakado, 30.
46 Reportedly by UPDF soldiers under the command of the Hema political elite.

35

S/2004/573

Lendu. Adriko Johnson had also apparently publicly criticized the targeting and
killing of Lendu and Ngiti.
124. Abbé Boniface Bwanalonga, the Ngiti Roman Catholic priest of Mongbwalu
parish, was arrested shortly after UPC captured Mongbwalu, on 20 November 2002,
together with two nuns. The nuns were later released. When they went back to bring
food to the Abbé, the UPC combatants refused to give them permission to see him
and chased them away. Abbé Bwanalonga has not been seen since. The
disappearance of the Abbé was very badly received by the Lendu/Ngiti community
who held him in high esteem. They later justified the killing of Abbé Ngona of
Nyakasanza as an act of revenge for the killing of Abbé Bwanalonga.
125. Joseph Eneko Nguaza, 47-year-old Alur Governor of Ituri, appointed by UPC
with the aim of gaining wider support using his well-respected personality, was
killed on 21 November 2002. The Governor was based in Aru and was delaying his
departure for Bunia. Meanwhile, he announced that he was dissociating himself
from UPC and initiated peace talks with different groups. UPC sent a delegation
headed by Floribert Kisembo, then Chief of Staff of UPC, to bring the Governor to
Bunia. On 21 November, before leaving for Bunia, the Governor set out for Mahagi
to install a new territorial administrator. Just before his departure, the then UPC
Commander in Aru, Jérôme Kakwavu, changed the Governor’s bodyguards and
driver. The delegation was ambushed 8 km from Mahagi. Except for two bodyguards
who managed to escape, all the passengers were killed: Governor Eneko, his driver,
his secretary, the Chief of the Public Office and five other guards. According to the
testimony of local residents, obtained by Human Rights Watch, the attackers were
UPC soldiers.47 According to the testimony provided to MONUC by two witnesses
who lived in Aru at the time of the event and who had met the two survivors, the
operation was organized by Commander Jérôme, who received a considerable sum
for his services.
126. Jacques Kabasele, the 43-year-old President of the Tribunal de Grande
Instance of Bunia, from Kasai, was arrested on 11 November 2002 by UPC, accused
of having contacts with their enemies. The judge was arrested by two persons from
the Direction générale de migration, which was under the command of Rafiki, and
taken to the prison of that unit. He was kept there for two days without any formal
charges. On the third day, a team came to interrogate him, mainly on his contacts
with Beni, Kinshasa and the outside world. They also told him that the order to
arrest him came from Lubanga himself. He was not physically threatened but was
kept there for 18 days and then released without charge. After his release, he was
threatened and left Bunia in April 2003.47
127. Honoré Musoko, a lawyer and president of the Bunia-based human rights
non-governmental organization Justice Plus, tried to defend several victims abused
by UPC authorities. He also worked for a short period as Minister of Justice under
Jean-Pierre Bemba. He was accused of working with former Governor Jean-Pierre
Lompondo and of being an enemy of UPC. Honoré Musoko was forced to flee the
region in November 2002, but UPC authorities raided his organization, Justice Plus,
on 5 February 2003, after he gave an interview to an international radio network on
the human rights situation in Ituri. The UPC authorities then went to the office of
Bunia Business Communications, owned by Musoko, arrested two workers and
__________________
47 See Human Rights Watch, Ituri: “Covered in Blood” ...

36

S/2004/573

seized the equipment. One of the members of Justice Plus who was also an officer of
Bunia Business Communications was given refuge in the MONUC offices until UPC
sent a letter stating that he had freedom of movement. The offices of Justice Plus
were visited again by UPC in May 2003, all documents and materials looted and its
members forced to go into hiding.47
128. MONUC also received testimony from eight victims of harassment, five Bira,
one Nande, one Ngiti and one Topoke, who were forced to leave Bunia. These
victims are mostly intellectuals, journalists, teachers and civil servants. All were
reportedly on a list of persons to be eliminated and six of them had their houses set
on fire by UPC elements; the parents of the Ngiti victim were killed after he left
Bunia. They all left Bunia between May and September 2003 and have not come
back since.
129. There have also been several cases of harassment of humanitarian workers and
church members, with the aim of halting the delivery of humanitarian assistance to
members of “rival” ethnic groups. According to Human Rights Watch, there have
been more than 30 cases where humanitarian workers have been arrested,
threatened, beaten, or expelled from the area.47 In some cases, UPC soldiers have
arrested aid workers who have refused to provide them with food and medicines.
UPC expelled even the representative of the Office for the Coordination of
Humanitarian Affairs of the United Nations Secretariat from Bunia in November
2003, for protesting against the illegal arrest of humanitarian workers. Priests also
came under threat when they tried to assist Lendu civilians. On 15 January 2003, the
parish of Nioka, where a centre for malnourished children had been set up with the
assistance of an international non-governmental organization, was attacked by four
UPC elements and one Hema called Jabu. The foreign priests working in the centre
were arrested and beaten and the centre completely looted.
130. Mark Deneckere, a Belgian priest of the congregation Missionnaires
d’Afrique, was expelled in early 2003 for having helped a group of displaced Lendu.
In his testimony to Human Rights Watch,47 Father Mark stated that the Lendu came
to seek refuge in August when UPC was attacking Lendu inhabitants of Bunia. UPC
got angry when the international press picked up the story. They said they had not
been informed that 120 Lendu had been given refuge by the Missionnaires
d’Afrique. On 11 February 2003, the priest was called in for interrogation. UPC
accused him of helping the Lendu and of giving them weapons. On 14 February,
Father Mark was given 48 hours to leave Ituri.
131. MONUC received reports of numerous cases of summary executions, threats
or intimidation committed by UPC elements when they again took total control of
Bunia in May 2003. The intimidations targeted mainly the non-natives, the Bira, the
Nande, the few Lendu left in town, some businessmen, journalists, taxi drivers and
police officers. UPC also attacked the non-Iturian civil servants, accusing them of
being pro-Lendu. Even after the installation of the Ituri Brigade, the selected killings
continued, committed by UPC elements dressed in civilian clothes during the night.
The level of violence created the biggest mass exodus in the history of Bunia,
forcing around 200,000 persons from Bunia and the surrounding villages nearby to
flee their homes.
132. A number of members of the national police and taxi drivers stated to MONUC
that the members of their profession were victims of targeted summary executions
by UPC soldiers. The taxi drivers, in majority non-Iturians, were indeed accused of

37

S/2004/573

having driven Lendu out of the town, while the national police officers, most of
them non-Iturians, were considered to be pro-Lendu. From 6 May 2003 to the end of
the month, 11 police officers and 12 taxi drivers were apparently victims of
summary executions by UPC.
2.

Political killings, illegal arrest and forced displacement of selected persons
by FAPC
133. After September 2002, a former RCD-ML commander, Jérôme Kakwavu, took
over Aru in the name of UPC.48 Disagreements between UPC and Jérôme appeared
at an early stage, regarding control of the significant financial benefits of the
territory, where there is an important market at Ariwara where gold, diamonds and
timber can be traded and there are two tobacco companies and the Aru Customs, the
last safe exit point from Ituri. Finally Jérôme left UPC, created FAPC on
6 September 2002 and extended his area of influence to Mahagi after reaching an
agreement with FNI.
134. In the territory under FAPC control, Aru and also Mahagi, since UPC was
driven out in March 2003, mass violence appears to have been limited. However,
there were allegations of killing either to get rid of potential opponents or to
maintain control over part of the economic activities.
135. In August 2003, MONUC human rights investigators were able to visit first
Aru and Ariwara and, the day after, Mahagi, all under the control of Commander
Jérôme. They spoke to a few victims but they were always followed by the civilian
intelligence officers and told not to ask questions about security. In Uganda,
investigators met with well-informed sources from Aru who reported the illegal
arrest of two civilians by Jérôme. According to their testimony, which corroborates
information received from other independent sources, the population under the
control of Jérôme is living under serious psychological threat, with no way of
showing opposition; the few who tried to oppose him were all executed.
136. On 22 May 2003, a group of FAPC elements under Commander Raymond Isala
tried to overthrow Jérôme. The coup failed reportedly thanks to the assistance of
UPDF Commander Justus Basisira, based in Arua, Uganda, who intervened with one
platoon. On the same day, the commander of the airport, Jean Ngoyi Mwanawasa,
was arrested by Jérôme, brought before a so-called tribunal and killed in the
presence of Commander Justus. After this attempt, Jérôme declared that he would
kill anybody who had been close to Raymond Isala. Two civilian victims who were
close to the commander decided to leave Aru on the same day for Arua, together
with Commander Idris Bobale. During the days that followed, the two victims,
Commander Idris and his two body guards were all abducted in Ugandan territory on
different days by a group composed of Jérôme’s militia and elements of Ugandan
military intelligence and put in a military jail under the command of Justus Basisira.
They were kept in jail for 18 days without interrogation until 10 June, when they
were told they would be set free. However, on the same day, Commander Ali,
Jérôme’s chief of military intelligence, arrived, accompanied by a Ugandan
intelligence officer called Chris, and took them by force back to Aru to be put in a
container with other detainees. The container that was used as a detention facility
had also housed the former Administrator of Aru, Kanyi Lubara, for a period of two

__________________
48 Commander Jérôme claims to be Banyamulenge but it is more likely that he is a Banyarwanda

from North Kivu, in Rutshuru territory.

38

S/2004/573

months. The Administrator was released after paying enough money to appease
Jérôme. The two civilian victims and Commander Idris were called the day after by
Jérôme, stripped naked and flogged. After being tortured, the three men were put
back in the container and given no food or water for four days. On the fifth day, the
Ugandan Commander Justus came back and took the two civilian detainees back to
Arua. The victims were kept another two days in jail in Arua and released with no
explanation. The bodyguards of Commander Idris who were taken out of the jail in
Arua by Commander Justus to be brought back to Aru never reappeared and
Commander Idris stayed in the container. As of December 2003, Idris was still in
custody.
137. According to credible sources, Commander Justus of UPDF is paid by Jérôme
to serve his interests. He is also policing Arua and catching military defectors from
FAPC to take them back to Aru. MONUC has obtained the names of three such exFAPC who were reportedly brought back by Commander Justus and killed by
Jérôme.

D.

Children associated with armed groups
138. The information on children associated with armed groups was gathered during
special investigations, as part of MONUC regular monitoring and advocacy work,
through preliminary interviews with more than 200 children associated with armed
groups, with partner organizations, during field visits, including to a small number
of military camps, and interviews with military and other authorities. It is far from
being a complete picture of the presence and use of children given the very limited,
uneven and at times complete lack of access to children in the different groups and
to their communities, both to obtain and to corroborate information. Taking
testimony from children is also particularly sensitive. Nevertheless, as has been
reported and witnessed many times, there can be no doubt that all of the armed
groups have systematically recruited, used and abused children — ranging from 7 to
17 years old — throughout the district of Ituri.49
139. The Democratic Republic of the Congo has ratified both the Convention on the
Rights of the Child and the Optional Protocol thereto on the involvement of children
in armed conflict. Obligations under those international instruments, further defined
under the terms of the African Charter on the Rights and Welfare of the Child and
ILO Convention 182 on the Worst Forms of Child Labour, ban the recruitment of
anyone under 18 years of age into the military forces of a State party. The Protocol
also bans any armed group found within the national territory of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo from recruiting any child below the age of 18. The Rome
Statute of the International Criminal Court, ratified by the Democratic Republic of
the Congo on 30 March 2002, defines as a war crime the conscription or enlistment
of children under the age of 15 into national armed forces or armed groups and their
active participation in hostilities.
140. Presidential Decree Law 66 of December 2000 and article 184 of the Interim
Constitution of the Democratic Republic of the Congo brought these international
obligations into the realm of domestic law, although recruitment has yet to be

__________________
49 The youngest child associated with an armed group interviewed by the Child Protection Section

of MONUC, in Tchomia in September 2003, was a 7-year-old boy who claimed that he had
served for some time with PUSIC.

39

S/2004/573

criminalized. The Luanda Agreement of 6 September 2002, concerning the
resolution of the Ituri conflict and establishing the Ituri Pacification Commission,
expressly recognized these international and national obligations to children
associated with the armed groups in Ituri, including minimum protection measures
for children found among the various armed groups. In April 2003, the Ituri
Pacification Commission, within its peace agreement, made a solemn appeal to
respect those national and international obligations through the creation of
conditions for an environment facilitating the demobilization of those children.
1.

A profile of children associated with armed groups in Ituri: fighting for survival
Children became soldiers because they were orphaned, sought vengeance or did not
have anyone to care for them. Etienne Nembe, Chief of Intelligence, UPC
(interview, 2003)
If I had to give a weapon to a two-year-old [to defend his community] I would do so.
Chief Kawa, PUSIC (interview, 2003)
Many children decide to enrol because they lost their parents after the massacres.
Everyone was obliged to resist, even women and children. Commander Banga, FNI/
FRPI (interview, 2003)
[Children] were looking for protection or support when they joined [my] troops.
Commander Jérôme Kakwavu Bukande, FAPC (interview, 2003)
141. As already indicated, all of the armed groups in Ituri have recruited children
into their ranks over the past few years. Although the exact number of children is
unknown, child protection partners believe that, as a conservative estimate, at least
40 per cent of each militia force are children below the age of 18, with a significant
minority below the age of 15. Contacts and requests for information on the number
of minors in each armed group have been made on a systematic basis since March
2003 but have not so far yielded accurate information, including in the context of
the Comité de concertation des groupes armés. Groups that have recruited children
into their ranks are often hesitant to give child protection agents reliable information
on the full extent of child participation in their forces, and indeed at times have
clearly given blatantly false information. For example, FAPC insisted to the
MONUC Child Protection Section in an interview on 28 December 2003 that they
had gathered all of their children at Aru. When the team travelled later that day to
another FAPC-controlled area 100 km to the south at Kandoy, it was presented with
four child members of the platoon stationed there. In addition, obtaining a fixed
number of children associated with Ituri armed groups proves a difficult task, as the
armed groups have divided and regrouped around the shifting political and military
exigencies of the region throughout the conflict. A number of the children
interviewed recounted how they had passed from one group to another at different
times, some even alleging that they were first recruited by AFDL in 1998. Others
claimed they started with FLC or APC before moving on to other groups.
142. The presence first of the multinational force (Operation Artemis) in June 2003
and its subsequent replacement by the MONUC Ituri Brigade had an impact on the
number of children in armed groups by reducing the level of conflict and facilitating
the release of children. It is difficult to know how many have been released by the
armed groups as not all went through any kind of process, but some progress has
been made (see paras. 156-158 below). Few new reports of recruitment have been

40

S/2004/573

received over the past few months. Nevertheless, current estimates suggest that there
are still several thousand children — possibly around 6,000 — in UPC, FAPC, FNI,
FRPI, FPDC and PUSIC, with many more attached to loosely formed local defence
forces or militia. In addition, the former APC also has numerous children in its
ranks, though most are not in Ituri. In December 2003, MONUC interviewed several
mothers who said that their children had joined APC in Ituri after the massacres of
September 2002 in Nyankunde and remained in APC ranks in and around Beni.
143. Recruitment into all armed groups has been both “voluntary” and through
abduction, often as the children were in the markets or in the streets where they
were forced to get into trucks and taken away. UPC recruitment drives took place
regularly throughout 2002 and early 2003. FAPC was reportedly recruiting as late as
July 2003 around Aru and Mahagi. PUSIC also recruited in 2003, including in
September according to some reports. During the frequent attacks on civilian
settlements perpetrated by militia of one ethnicity against another, children and
families were thrown into the logic of survival at any cost. FNI/FRPI Commander
Augustin Ngabo-Tchepo stated that, in the Bambu area of Djugu territory, almost all
the children of Bambu were recruited during the series of attacks on Bambu (in
January/February 2003). Furthermore, the massive recruitment and utilization of
children of all ethnicities on the part of RCD-K/ML in Ituri prior to the Hema-Lendu
schism left large numbers of children at risk of re-recruitment by the forces that
controlled their home areas at the time.
144. The scope of this report does not include examining in detail the (often
complex) reasons why children joined armed groups in Ituri. As stated in interviews
with children who have been released they include basic survival, the desire for
revenge, especially for the killing of family members, adventure, and ethnic-based
reasons. Whatever the reasons, the term “voluntary” must be treated with caution
given the extremely limited options available. Whether “volunteer” or forced
recruits, most children interviewed said they soon became disillusioned with the
extreme conditions in the training camps and on the battlefield. The child’s choices
to remain or leave at that moment were even more restricted. Even for children
released from an armed group, the risk of re-recruitment remains, although for the
time being there has been a reduction in the level of conflict.
145. When renewed fighting broke out in Ituri in 2003, most of a group of 163
children who had been repatriated from a Ugandan training camp and reintegrated
into their families were cut off from protection agencies. According to the testimony
of SOS-Grand Lacs at the time, 130 were reportedly re-recruited by UPC and sent
into fighting units.50 The Child Protection Section spoke with one of the children
who returned from the UPDF camp at Chakwanzi in 2003. According to the child,
“… in 2003, after the attacks on the [South Hema] town of Bogoro, I went back into
the UPC under Commander Germain”. He was 12 years old at the time.
146. FNI/FRPI, although based in village units and having apparently demobilized a
large majority of their child recruits into their home villages with the help of aid
agencies, are not immune to the practice of re-recruitment of children. A child
protection agency official alleged that FNI may still be using former FNI children in
local defence forces, designed to protect their home villages from attack. The
official further stated that FNI/FRPI know very well that, if the security situation
__________________
50 See Human Rights Watch, Ituri: “Covered in Blood” ...

41

S/2004/573

deteriorates, they will be able to call up these child ex-combatants and reintegrate
them into their militia.
2.

Training of children
147. Once recruited, whether forcibly or voluntarily, children were either trained in
organized camps or in ad hoc sites in villages and towns. The attached map shows
the locations of 28 training camps and 9 military bases, used by FNI/FPRI, UPC,
APC, PUSIC and FAPC, where children were either seen being trained or
themselves claimed to have been trained over the past two years. The training lasted
from several days to several months depending on the capability of the armed group
and/or its foreign backers. As a rule, the Lendu/Ngiti militias (FNI/FRPI) seem to
have been offered a summary training either in their home villages or nearby, given
that recruitment tended to be community-based and according to operational needs.
Kpandroma and Zumbe were, however, known to be regular training sites for FNI/
FRPI. UPC, PUSIC and FAPC were provided with military advisers and undertook
the establishment of more stable camps. By all accounts, training conditions were
generally physically gruelling and extremely hard, in terms of food rations and
punishment regimes (children cited death threats, beatings and in one case an
execution). At times trainers were minors themselves.
148. Rwandan and Ugandan trainers were also said to have been present in some of
the camps, such as those at Mandro, Rwanpara and Montawa. In a number of cases,
children were reportedly transferred to Uganda or Rwanda for specialist training
with adults, the first such large-scale training (of APC child recruits) by Uganda
occurring in 1999. The best known case is that of some 163 UPC children, cited
above, who were located undergoing training in Uganda and returned and
reintegrated into their families in Ituri by UNICEF in 2001. As late as July 2003,
there were allegations of PUSIC transferring more than 200 children from Tchomia
to UPDF training camps in Rwebisengo County and at Kibuku in Uganda. While
PUSIC claimed that the children were taken for security and/or educational
purposes, several boys and a girl interviewed subsequently alleged that they had
received military training before being returned to the Democratic Republic of the
Congo to fight in September 2003. Likewise, allegations that children were taken to
Rwanda, for example in September 2002, for training in artillery have also been
received from different sources. This is in clear violation of the Optional Protocol to
the Convention on the Rights of the Child on the involvement of children in armed
conflict, which condemns recruitment, training and use across national borders.

3.

Use of children in combat and attacks
149. On completion of training, children were frequently used in hostilities,
depending on the military of the time. Sending children into battle constitutes
potential violation of their right to life, survival and development. There is little
precise or complete verified information so far regarding the names and numbers of
children who have died or suffered injuries as a result of taking part in hostilities in
Ituri. Most children interviewed told of having been sent to fight in various battles
in 2002 and 2003. Testimonies of individual children report losses of other children,
for example in Dele and Nyankunde (September 2002); Irumu (November 2002)
including a 10-year-old; Kasenyi (2003); Marabo, Tchai (December 2002/January
2003); Bambu (February 2003); Bule (March 2003); Bogoro (March 2003); Drodro
(April 2003); and Linga (September 2003). Once conditions allow, further research

42

S/2004/573

needs to be done on this issue to document individual cases in detail, if only so that
the families can be informed, but also as part of the documenting of violations
committed by those who recruited the children in the first place.
150. In some cases, children did not necessarily take part in the fighting itself but in
subsequent pillaging. This was particularly true in the case of attacks by Lendu/
Ngiti groups; examples include an FNI attack on Tchomia on 31 May 2003 where
women and children carried loot back to their bases in Zumbe and Loga; and in
April 2003, when Lendu militia, accompanied by women and children, completely
pillaged houses and other buildings and took away many items, as well as cows,
goats and other animals.
4.

Presence and use of girls in armed groups
151. All of the armed groups in Ituri recruited girls (very often forcibly) into their
ranks, although few have been brought forward for official separation. Once
released, a climate of denial, shame and fear prevents many of them from seeking
assistance. Tenuous links with military commanders sometimes persist even after
release. The girls have played a range of roles. Trained to handle weapons they have
taken part in combat and worked as escorts and domestics.
152. For many, however, entry into an armed group meant being subjected to sexual
abuse. A number of accounts indicate that the sexual abuse started in the training
camps, with instructors being responsible, and persisted throughout the training. It
should be noted that two girls interviewed by MONUC said that the presence of
women officers in the respective training camps protected them from sexual abuses
at the time. In some cases, sexual abuse, when it did occur, was of limited duration
or was carried out in a sporadic manner, with different perpetrators depending on the
situation at hand. Other girls were subjected to a more regular pattern of sexual
abuse, effectively repeated rape, over longer periods, assigned to one military officer
for example. These girls are commonly referred to as “war wives”. In many ways
the girls suffer a double jeopardy, many reportedly serving both as fighting elements
in active combat and concomitantly being used to satisfy the sexual appetites of
their commanders. Some, however, were reportedly abducted solely for use as
sexual slaves.51
153. One witness stated that girls as young as 14 were abducted, apparently for
sexual purposes, by members of FNI at Lalu, Goda, Vissa and Kakro villages in
Djugu territory beginning in September 2003. One commander reportedly told the
villagers that it was on his orders that the girls were taken, stating “… the soldier
who takes a girl, that’s his pleasure; the girl is his … he will come to pay the dowry
later ...”. There is little information about the current whereabouts of these girls. A
15-year-old girl allegedly abducted in April 2002 in Luguba by UPC described how
she was handed over to a commander “as his wife” as soon as she arrived at Bule
training camp. In October and November 2003, the Child Protection Section
received information that UPC forcibly abducted girls in another part of Djugu
territory. On one occasion, a witness reported that a woman was beaten to death
trying to prevent her 15-year-old daughter from being forcibly taken. In the same
community, on 30 November, two girls, aged 14 and 15, were reportedly taken from

__________________
51 The Cape Town Principles of 1997 identify any girls used as sexual slaves or “war wives” as

child soldiers for identification purposes, whether or not they received previous training of a
military nature.

43

S/2004/573

their homes by military of the same unit, to be used as sexual slaves. One of the
kidnappers was reportedly an adolescent of Bira ethnicity, aged 18. On 10 June,
Lendu militias reportedly abducted at least seven girls as war wives during an attack
on Nioka, where an FAPC group was based.
154. The deployment of international troops in Ituri in mid-2003 facilitated the
release of some adolescent girls and access to support programmes to help them deal
with some of the consequences. Even while members of armed groups, some of
them had required medical and even hospital treatment for the consequences of
violent abuse. Others are now child-mothers. But it is likely that many still remain
within the groups. The question of the status of the undoubtedly numerous war
wives is a serious one, as many traditional beliefs dictate that once a girl is sexually
“taken” by a man, she is his property. The issue simply becomes one of payment to
the family of a dowry. An FAPC colonel stated in an interview with the Child
Protection Section on 9 November 2003, referring to these girl victims of abduction
and sexual abuse within his ranks, that there would be “… difficulties in taking
these girls out of these forced ‘marriages’”.
5.

Use of children by armed groups in the exploitation of natural resources:
a vicious circle
155. In December 2003, the Child Protection Section visited the Kilo-Etat and Iga
Barrière/Nizi areas, where there are gold fields, the latter controlled by UPC militia
and the former by FNI. In the UPC-controlled Iga Barrière area, the former
headquarters of the Kilo Moto Mining Company, the Section staff saw that three
quarters of a mine pit team were under 18 years of age, most being between 11 and
15. Sources at the site alleged that the children present in the mine were all active or
former child soldiers who worked on behalf of their UPC commanders. At Kilo-Etat,
an FNI commander acknowledged that he had 12 children in his armed group, the
youngest of whom was 11 years old, and also that there were “a lot of child soldiers”
at Bambumines (nearby). These preliminary reports merit further investigation to
assess the extent of the use of children associated with armed groups in exploiting
minerals, the profits of which are subsequently used to purchase weapons, some of
which almost certainly end up in the hands of children.

6.

Prospects for separating children from armed groups
156. Child protection partners and UNICEF have been actively participating in the
planning for disarmament and reinsertion programmes for the Ituri armed groups.
Since the start of the Ituri pacification process, the installation of the Ituri Interim
Administration and the arrival of the multinational force in June 2003,
representatives of armed groups have been changing their attitudes with regard to
children. UPC and later FAPC began unilateral separation of minors from the camps
without prior arrangements with child protection partners. FNI have sent many
children directly back into their home communities, where a measure of school
access has been provided to the children. Sixteen UPC commanders, without
following procedures, reportedly released scores of children in November, telling
them to go to Bunia where they were led to believe that a “school for child soldiers”
had been set up. Many of them turned up at MONUC offices or one of the Transit
and Orientation Centres. The PUSIC leadership even established a transit facility for
former child combatants in the vicinity of Chief Kawa’s residence in Tchomia.

44

S/2004/573

Identification of local partners for child protection and reintegration work in the
different communities is ongoing.
157. The first formal family reunifications from transit care facilities in Ituri started
in September/October 2003. With improved access and communications, contacts
between community networks have facilitated family-tracing activities. MONUC
and the Comité de concertation des groupes armés have carried out verification
missions to proposed regroupement sites, sometimes with child protection partners.
Official figures of minors received are however far short of the real situation, owing
perhaps to the deterrent factor of possible future criminal proceedings. In many
instances, children have been demobilized and sent back to school by the
communities who mobilized them in the first place. UPC commanders released
children without letting them go through any formal process or transit facilities.
158. Prospects for the children still associated with armed groups in Ituri, and even
those already released, will depend very much on the development of security,
access to all parts of the district, and to the start of a viable disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration plan for adults. This is important, as the
investigation team spoke to a number of children demobilized from armed groups in
Ituri who expressed extreme reluctance to return to their home villages for fear of
re-recruitment by armed groups who still exercise control over the local population,
often through intimidation and terror. A child protection worker in Ituri stated the
situation plainly to the Child Protection Section in Bunia: “Even where
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration of children is going well, such as in
the FNI areas, it is clear that, should the situation turn bad, these armed groups
know exactly where these children are and will certainly use them”.

VI. Conclusion and recommendations
159. Despite the disengagement of foreign forces from the Democratic Republic of
the Congo, the establishment of the Transitional Government and the integration of
all of the armed groups into the new Congolese national army, Ituri remains a
battlefield for the proxies of Rwanda, Uganda and Kinshasa. The security conditions
improved by the end of 2003 only thanks to the Operation Artemis, the subsequent
deployment of the Ituri Brigade under Chapter VII, and progress towards restoration
of the rule of law resulting from the efforts of MONUC in cooperation with
members of the international community. For security to stabilize and become
sustainable it is now time for the Government of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo to assume its responsibilities and assert its authority.
160. As a result of the robust action of the Ituri Brigade, some of the local warlords
revised their policies, and created new alliances to actively resist the pacification
efforts of MONUC. This volatile situation does not encourage the large number of
internally displaced persons who are still in camps in Bunia and elsewhere in Ituri,
as well as in North Kivu and Uganda, to return to their places of origin, where their
homes and social structures are often completely destroyed or occupied by military
elements.
161. To bring real peace to the region and end human rights abuses several issues
need to be addressed together by the Government of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo and the international community, including:

45

S/2004/573

(a) Continuation of a robust implementation of the MONUC mandate under
Chapter VII of the Charter;
(b)

State control over natural resources to end their exploitation;

(c) Full restoration of State authority, with adequate police, competent and
impartial administration and military capabilities;
(d) Intervention of the State to revise the land law and all existing land
certificates;
(e) Full implementation of the disarmament,
reintegration programme, beginning with the children;
(f)

demobilization

and

Rebuilding of public infrastructure and repair of private housing;

(g) Information campaigns to encourage the return of communities to their
places of origin;
(h) Restoration of local conflict management initiatives with the aim of
rebuilding trust and reconciliation among all the inhabitants of Ituri.

46

S/2004/573

Annex I
Armed and political groups involved in the Ituri conflict
A.

Ituri armed groups
None of the Ituri armed groups can be considered an armed wing of a political
movement, as they were originally created as military movements. The political
wings were an afterthought, created to facilitate their integration into the local and
national structures and negotiations, and to be used as an interface with the
international community.
Union des patriotes congolais (UPC)
Initial leader:

Thomas Lubanga

Current leaders:

Lubanga for UPC-Lubanga group
Floribert Kisembo for UPC-Kisembo group

Ethnic composition: Predominately Hema North/Gegere
UPC was created as an embryo in January 2001, with funding from a large
Gegere business community and the support of Uganda. Later, it enlarged its
influence to some Hema South, notably Chief Kawa Panga Mandro. However,
personal rivalries, as well as the Hema North monopoly of key positions, led to a
split in September 2002. UPC began existing officially only in mid-2002, when
Lubanga left RCD-K/ML and initiated the battle for control of Bunia. UPC
eventually took control of Bunia in August 2002 with the help of the Ugandan army.
It turned to Rwanda for support and formed an alliance with RCD-Goma in January
2003. Having turned from Uganda politically, it was ousted from Bunia by the
Ugandan army in March 2003 but fought its way back into the town in May. After
the departure of Lubanga for Kinshasa in August 2003, the Chief of Staff,
Commander Kisembo, announced early in December 2003 that he was the new
leader of UPC. This resulted in a split: those responding to Kisembo and located in
Bunia and those responding to Lubanga represented in Ituri by his new Chief of
Staff, Bosco.
Parti pour l’unité et la sauvegarde de l’intégrité du Congo (PUSIC)
Initial leader:

Chief Kawa Panga Mandro

Current leader:

Chief Kisembo Bitamara*

Ethnic composition: Predominantly Hema South
PUSIC was created in October/November 2002 by the former UPC member
Chief Kawa. Its militia receives its supplies mainly from Uganda, as part of its
proxy strategy. Uganda tried to merge it with FNI and FPDC, under the umbrella of
FIPI. That has totally failed. PUSIC allied itself with UPC against the Lendu in
Bunia in May 2003, but that alliance of convenience lasted only a few days. During
June 2003, Chief Kawa spent two weeks in the Libyan Arab Jamahiriya, having
been introduced to Colonel Al-Qadhafi by President Museveni, during which time
he converted to Islam and is now reported to be receiving large monetary
* At the time of writing of the present report.

47

S/2004/573

contributions from the Libyan Arab Jamahiriya. PUSIC is reportedly increasingly
involved in arms trafficking across Lake Albert.
Forces populaires pour la démocratie au Congo (FPDC)
Current leader:

Thomas Unencan (a Member of Parliament during
the Mobutu era)

Ethnic composition: Predominantly Alur
FPDC was created in October 2002 by Uganda. It comprises mostly Alur from
Mahagi with the support of Alur exiled in Paidha, Uganda, to counter UPC. Around
500 Congolese Alur received a brief military training in Uganda, close to Mahagi
territory. It was supported by Uganda as part of the FIPI coalition, which did not last
long. The military branch of the movement was dislocated by FAPC, which took the
control of the Mahagi area with the support of FNI at the end of June 2003.
Forces armées du peuple congolais (FAPC)
Current leader:

Commander Jérôme Kakwavu Bukande (a Banyarwanda
from North Kivu)

Ethnic composition: Mostly non-Iturians
FAPC was created in March 2003 as the political umbrella for Commander
Jérôme’s battalion in control of Aru territory. Commander Jérôme has changed
alliances several times, moving from FAC to RCD-K/ML, to RCD-N, to UPC,
before creating his own group with the support of Uganda. Following an
arrangement to share security and income in Mahagi together with FPDC and FNI,
FAPC attacked its “partners” and claimed control over the town and the territory at
the end of June 2003. Commander Jérôme remains in touch with Ugandans while
claiming to be loyal to the Government of the Democratic Republic of the Congo.
Front nationaliste intégrationniste (FNI)
Initial/current leader: Floribert Ndjabu
Ethnic composition: Predominantly Lendu North
FNI was created at the beginning of 2003 as the political umbrella of the
Lendu armed groups located mainly in Kpandroma and Rethy. The party claims
broad support from the Lendu community in its efforts to oppose UPC. FNI has
benefited from military training and support from RCD-K/ML and, through it, from
Kinshasa. During 2001-2002, one of the Ugandan factions is likely to have supplied
this group with light automatic weapons on an irregular basis. FNI established
alliances with the Lendu militia groups based in Lipri and Zumbe as well as with the
Ngiti FRPI and participated in the political negotiations of the Ituri Pacification
Commission as the Lendu party representing the entire Lendu community. In the
field different geographical armed groups seem to keep their independence,
however. Supported by Uganda as part of the FIPI coalition, it joined the Ugandan
army in driving UPC from Bunia in March 2003.

48

S/2004/573

Front de résistance patriotique de l’Ituri (FRPI)
Current leader:

Commander Germain Katanga

Ethnic composition: Predominantly Ngiti/Lendu South
FRPI was launched in November 2002 as the political umbrella of Ngiti armed
groups mainly from Gety, Bogoro and Songolo. Ngiti militia initially benefited from
the support of Ngiti defectors from APC. They have also received occasional
support from one faction of the RCD-K/ML. FRPI joined the Ugandans in driving
UPC from Bunia in March 2003 and, together with FNI, briefly controlled Bunia in
May 2003. Since then, FRPI has created an alliance with FNI and one of its
commanders, Germain, was appointed Chief of Staff of the united militia.
Front pour l’intégration et la paix en Ituri (FIPI)
Composition: Platform of three ethnic-based parties
A coalition of three parties, PUSIC, FNI and FPDC, created in December 2002
with Ugandan support. Its main objective was getting rid of UPC, with no apparent
programme. After the attack on Bogoro by FNI, the coalition collapsed.
B.

Regional political groups
Mouvement de libération du Congo (MLC)
Current leader:

Jean-Pierre Bemba

Ethnic composition: Mixed ethnic groups
MLC, originally backed by Uganda, was based in Gbadolite. The movement
tried twice to enter Ituri: in 2001 Jean-Pierre Bemba moved to Bunia as the
President of the short-lived FLC coalition of Ugandan-backed rebel groups, and in
2002 MLC attacked Mambasa in western Ituri with the aim of taking control of
Beni, but was forced to withdraw after a ceasefire agreement signed under the
auspices of MONUC. MLC has an alliance with RCD-N and has occasionally fought
alongside UPC. MLC was part of the inter-Congolese dialogue and its leader,
Jean-Pierre Bemba, has one of the posts of Vice-President.
Rassemblement congolais pour la démocratie-Kisangani/Mouvement de
libération (RCD-K/ML)
Current leader:

Mbusa Nyamwisi

Ethnic composition: Predominantly Nande
RCD-K/ML was launched in September 1999 in Kampala when Wamba dia
Wamba split from RCD-Goma. After several splits, and a short-lived alliance with
MLC, because of leadership struggles, Mbusa Nyamwisi eventually took control of
the movement. The RCD-K/ML military wing is the Congolese People’s Army
(APC). RCD-K/ML was part of the inter-Congolese dialogue and its leader is now
Minister for Regional Cooperation. RCD-K/ML was involved directly in the Ituri
conflict via MLC, then on its own and also providing a link for the pre-transition
Government. It left Bunia in August 2002 after it was defeated by UPC and UPDF.
After that date, it continued its support to Lendu militia groups.

49

S/2004/573

Rassemblement congolais pour la démocratie-National (RCD-N)
Current leader:

Roger Lumbala

Ethnic composition: Mixed ethnic groups
Based currently in Isiro and Watsa, in the neighbouring Haut-Uele, RCD-N
was initially supported by the Ugandans in exploiting the diamond riches of
Bafwasende. In 2001 and 2002, RCD-N became a political movement with the
assistance of Jean-Pierre Bemba to act as a politico-military front and provide a
second support group (proxy) for MLC during the inter-Congolese dialogue. It has
never had a military capacity of its own.

50

S/2004/573

Annex II
Chronology of main political events and incidents of gross
violations of human rights in Ituri, 1998 to 2003
1998
30 January 1998

Report on the situation of human rights in the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
submitted by the Special Rapporteur, Roberto Garretón (E/CN.4/1998/65 and
Corr.1).

2 August 1998

RCD rebels launch armed rebellion against the President of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, Laurent-Désiré Kabila. Uganda and Rwanda back the
rebels. The movement rapidly takes control of much of the eastern part of the
country.

November 1998

UPDF establish a base in Bunia.

November 1998

Another rebel movement, MLC, is created in Equateur Province under Jean-Pierre
Bemba with Ugandan backing.

1999
8 February 1999

Report on the situation of human rights in the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
submitted by the Special Rapporteur, Roberto Garretón (E/CN.4/1999/31).

April 1999

Ernest Wamba dia Wamba, the first President of RCD, moves to Kisangani as the
movement starts a series of splits.

May 1999

UPDF Captain Kyakabale appointed Bunia sector commander.

16 May 1999

A new RCD (Goma faction) leader is named: Emile Ilunga. The Goma and
Kisangani factions of RCD ally themselves with Rwanda and Uganda,
respectively.

June 1999

Following abusive and illegal extension of the concessions, the Lendu revolt
against the Hema estate owners and attack their estates. UPDF supports the estate
owners. The collectivity of Walendu Pitsi is completely destroyed by UPDF.
Bombardment of hundreds of Lendu villages by UPDF in the three Lendu
communities of Djugu. Local non-governmental organizations denounce
indiscriminate and disproportionate bombing, of which between 5,000 and 7,000
people are victims.

18 June 1999

Adèle Lotsove, a Hema, appointed Governor of Ituri and Haut-Uele (two districts
in the vast Orientale Province) by UPDF. She is later widely criticized for
inflaming the situation and for her partisan handling of subsequent peace talks.

5 July 1999

Lotsove announces the formation of the “province” of Kibali-Ituri.

10 July 1999

Lusaka Ceasefire Agreement is signed in Zambia by the six States involved in the
conflict. The rebel MLC signs on 1 August. RCD rebels sign on 31 August.

51

S/2004/573

6 August 1999

The Security Council authorizes the deployment of United Nations liaison
personnel in support of the Lusaka Agreement.

September 1999

Military operation in Ame, collectivité of Walendu Pitsi, by UPDF under Captain
Kyakabale. Lendu civilians are killed on the bridge over the River Aruda.

14 September 1999

Major attack by Lendu forces on Dhendro, a Hema village located in the
collectivité of Bahema Nord; 416 Hema reported killed.

18 September 1999

The RCD-Kisangani faction is renamed RCD-ML. Wamba is confirmed
President, with Bunia as his stronghold. Mbusa Nyamwisi and Jacques Depelchin
are appointed prime minister and local administration minister, respectively.

18 October 1999

“Province” of Ituri splits from Haut-Uele district.

October 1999

A United Nations assessment mission declares the human rights and humanitarian
situation in Ituri “catastrophic”, estimating over 100,000 internally displaced
persons and scores of villages burned to the ground. Estimates of deaths range
from 5,000 to 7,000.

October 1999

RCD-ML appoints Jacques Depelchin as the chairman of a peace and security
commission with the aim of promoting dialogue and reconciliation among the
parties.

21 October 1999

First mission of United Nations liaison personnel to Bunia.

November 1999

Divisions between Wamba and Nyamwisi become more serious. Nyamwisi takes
control of Beni.

28 November 1999

Slaughter by UPDF soldiers of 10 Lendu peasants who come to sell their food
products at the market of Bambumines, collectivité of Banyari Kilo.

End of November 1999

Confrontations between Lendu combatants and UPDF soldiers based in
Bambumines, the shopping centre of Kobu. Thousands of Lendu peasants leave
their villages to take refuge in Bambumines, which they regard as a secure refuge
because of the presence of the office of the gold mines of Kilo Moto.

1 December 1999

Killings of Lendu at Bambu, collectivité of Banyari Kilo; 300 civilian deaths
reported.

13 December 1999

According to ICRC, up to 150,000 people are displaced as a result of fighting in
Ituri.

December 1999

According to Wamba, Captain Kyakabale of UPDF is dismissed for “hiring out
soldiers to Hema leaders”. He is replaced by UPDF Lieutenant Colonel Arocha.

16 December 1999

Wamba dismisses Lotsove and replaces her with Ernest Uringi Padolo, an Alur.

20 December 1999

The Depelchin Commission publishes its report and a draft treaty for the
pacification of the region.

52

S/2004/573

December 1999

The human rights organization of the DRC, ASADHO, in Rapport de l’Asadho
sur le conflit inter-ethnique Hema-Lendu en territoire de Djugu dans la Province
Orientale, accuses Captain Kyakabale of massive human rights violations.

December 1999

The former President of Botswana, Ketumile Masire, is appointed to serve as facilitator
of the inter-Congolese dialogue provided for in the Lusaka Agreement.

2000
January 2000

MSF reports 180,000 internally displaced persons in Ituri. Humanitarian
organizations attempt to gear up in a period of relative calm.

18 January 2000

Report on the situation of human rights in the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
submitted by the Special Rapporteur, Roberto Garretón (E/CN.4/2000/42).

24 January 2000

MONUC announces first phase of deployment of liaison officers to Bunia.

29 January 2000

MSF-Holland suspends all operations in Ituri and says that growing distrust
among the population towards MSF with regard to its neutrality has led to a
violent attack on an MSF team.

End of January 2000

The entire community of Walendu Djatsi is engulfed in inter-ethnic war. Many
Lendu villages are set on fire by Ugandan soldiers. More than 1,000 Lendu are
allegedly killed. The Lendu organize and create a military camp in Mbau.

February 2000

A report by the human rights group ASADHO says the conflict was sparked off in
April 1999 when Hema landowners evicted Lendu farmers from land adjoining
theirs, with the support of RCD-ML and the Ugandan authorities. ASADHO
claims that Ugandan soldiers were actively involved in the killing of Lendu.

24 February 2000

The Security Council expands MONUC mandate in resolution 1291 (2000).

March 2000

MONUC deploys liaison officers to Bunia.

24 March 2000

A United Nations inter-agency assessment mission finds humanitarian situation
“close to catastrophic”.

April 2000

Ugandan authorities replace Colonel Arocha with Colonel Charles Angina.

4-10 June 2000

Heavy fighting breaks out between Ugandan and Rwandan forces in Kisangani.

August 2000

Training of Hema militia members in Uganda, in the camp of Kyakwanzi. In six
months, 750 militia members are trained. Thomas Lubanga and Chief Kawa are
reportedly among the trainees.

August 2000

The conflict gradually reaches the collectivité of Walendu Tatsi where several
villages are burned, including the main town of Masumbuko.

September 2000

A group of Lendu seek refuge in the church of Lita located in Walendu Tatsi
because of military operations in the region. Hema militiamen, accompanied by
UPDF based in Katoto, enter the church and massacre the civilians.

53

S/2004/573

5 November 2000

UPDF appoints a new sector commander. Colonel Angina is replaced with
Colonel Edison Muzora.

20 November 2000

Divisions in RCD-ML come to a head. Nyamwisi and Tibasima remove
Wamba from power in the “November putsch”. Uganda appears to give up
protecting Wamba. Meanwhile splits in RCD-ML produce several militias
and two new factions: RCD-ML dissident Roger Lumbala starts a movement
called RCD-National and, in Beni, Governor Bwanakawa Nyonyi sets up the
short-lived RCD-Populair.

2001
December 2000-January 2001

Hema dignitaries of Irumu travel to Kampala to convince President Museveni to
deploy three battalions in the collectivité of Walendu Bindi. Once on the ground,
UPDF battalions target hundreds of villages, schools, dispensaries and parishes.
Many die as a result of indiscriminate and disproportionate attacks.

6 January 2001

Lendu Ngiti militias attack Nyankunde town, killing some 50 persons, mostly
Hema civilians, and displacing thousands.

January 2001

The RCD-ML power struggle results in Governor Uringi and Depelchin being
expelled from Bunia. Wamba remains in Kampala.

15 January 2001

At least 3,500 people, mainly Hema, in the territories affected by the conflict
seek refuge over the border in Uganda.

16 January 2001

President Laurent-Désiré Kabila is shot dead. Joseph Kabila succeeds him.

18 January 2001

Ngiti militias from Irumu attack the UPDF base at Bunia airport in order to
destroy the Ugandan helicopters, which they believe took part in the
bombardment of Ngiti villages in Walendu Bindi. Several Ugandans are
allegedly killed during the operation.

19-21 January 2001

An organized massacre of Lendu inhabitants is carried out in the Mudzipela
area of Bunia. Each Lendu family is visited house by house by Hema of
Bunia, and approximately 250 persons are killed, mostly by nail-studded
sticks distributed before the attack, and their houses are set on fire.

16 January 2001

A new rebel alliance, FLC, is formed after weeks of talks in Kampala. It
combines Bemba’s MLC, RCD-ML and Lumbala’s RCD-National. Bemba is
to lead the group while Nyamwisi is appointed Vice-President and Tibasima
Minister for Mines and Energy. Wamba rejects the deal.

1 February 2001

Report on the situation of human rights in the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
submitted by the Special Rapporteur, Roberto Garretón (E/CN.4/2001/40).

February 2001

A major peace meeting is held in Bunia. A peace agreement is signed by Hema and
Lendu community leaders. Bemba, now the most senior rebel leader in the region,
states: “The militia will have to be disarmed and dispersed.” A follow-up
commission is to monitor and move the process forward.

54

S/2004/573

20 February 2001

The United Nations estimates 140,000 displaced in Ituri.

27 February 2001

Dual Hema and Lendu deputy governors are appointed by FLC.

March 2001

Human Rights Watch publishes a 50-page report entitled Uganda in Eastern
DRC: Fuelling Political and Ethnic Strife, alleging that Ugandan soldiers had
involved themselves in the conflict and had “blatantly exploited Congolese
wealth for their own benefit and that of their superiors at home”.

29 March 2001

Bemba announces an agreement reached with the Mai-Mai militia and
arrangements for the demobilization of the Ugandan rebels of ADF and
NALU.

12 April 2001

The United Nations Panel of Experts issues its first report on the exploitation
of resources in the Democratic Republic of the Congo, concluding that the
Governments of Burundi, Rwanda and Uganda profited from the conflict by
looting gold and other precious minerals, diamonds, timber, ivory and tax
revenues.

26 April 2001

Six ICRC workers, four Congolese, one Colombian and one Swiss, are killed on the
road between Djugu and Fataki. All international humanitarian agencies halt their
activities. A group of Hema professors from the Institut supérieur pédagogique are
alleged to have been among the organizers. Hema militias are alleged to have
executed the killing.

9 May 2001

Colonel Mohammed Buli Bangolo, from Equateur Province, is appointed
Governor of Ituri by FLC.

4 June 2001

Fighting between Bemba’s and Nyamwisi’s troops breaks out in Beni.
Nyamwisi’s forces appear to win. FLC starts to disintegrate, and Nyamwisi
and Bemba part company by August, dividing the territory into spheres of
influence in August. The Nyamwisi faction becomes known as RCDKisangani/ML, and Wamba continues to claim legitimacy as leader of the
original RCD-ML.

11 June 2001

Uganda establishes a judicial commission of inquiry, which later becomes known
as the Porter Commission, into allegations of the exploitation of natural resources
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo.

27 June 2001

Humanitarian agencies resume work in Ituri.

27 June 2001

Nyamwisi and RCD-National of Lumbala announce an alliance. Lumbala is
named as part of Nyamwisi’s delegation to the inter-Congolese dialogue but
remains allied to Bemba.

July 2001

UPC is created with Thomas Lubanga as leader. Lotsove is reportedly a cofounder. The party comes to prominence only a year later.

18 August 2001

Wamba’s rump factions of RCD-ML ally themselves with Bemba’s alliance,
FLC, possibly to secure participation in the upcoming inter-Congolese
dialogue.

55

S/2004/573

November 2001

Colonel Fred Seka Mwenge is appointed new UPDF commander.

11 November 2001

RCD-K/ML sets up as a separate party under Nyamwisi with Tibasima as
Vice-President.

21 November 2001

Bemba’s MLC withdraws troops from Bunia, citing “confusion” in RCD-ML
and RCD-K/ML.

28 November 2001

Appointment of Iulia Motoc as Special Rapporteur on the human rights
situation in the Democratic Republic of the Congo by the Commission on
Human Rights.

December 2001

RCD-K/ML attempts to broaden its base by including Thomas Lubanga as
Minister for Defence and bringing back Wamba and Uringi.

December 2001

Joseph Eneko Nguaza, from Aru, is appointed Governor of Ituri.

2002
January 2002

Bemba and Lumbala make territorial gains against the RCD-K/ML, taking
Isiro, Watsa and Bafwasende.

January 2002

Clashes reported for the first time between Alur and Lendu in Nioka, to the
north of Bunia. Ugandan media report 50 deaths. The Alur and Lendu had
previously been regarded as not hostile to one another.

1 February 2002

Ugandan Defence Minister Amama Mbabazi remarks that the situation in
Bunia is explosive and calls on the United Nations to send troops to take
control of the area.

2 February 2002

Jean-Pierre Lompondo Molondo from the Kasai is appointed Governor of
Ituri by Nyamwisi. Lubanga is sidelined from the military control of RCD-K/
ML.

9 February 2002

Hema militias and UPDF attack Gety. They destroy houses and allegedly kill
35 civilians.

19 April 2002

ICD Sun City peace meetings adjourn after reaching a wide agreement, but
defer key provisions on power sharing. Both Wamba and Nyamwisi attend as
representatives of RCD-ML. Lubanga starts to split from RCD-K/ML and
initiates the creation of UPC.

17 May 02

Attack by Hema militia on Walu, collectivité of Babalebe, Irumu territory. A
witness reports to MONUC having buried 42 bodies.

19 May 2002

A delegation from Kinshasa, including the Ministers of the Interior and
Human Rights, visits Ituri. The Minister for Human Rights, Ntumba Lwaba,
says that three years of fighting have led to 20,000 deaths.

May 2002

Humanitarian agencies estimate 500,000 people are displaced in Ituri.

56

S/2004/573

June 2002

The first UPC delegation, including Chief Kawa, meets Rwandan authorities.

7 June 2002

Lendu militia attack Hema militia training camp at Mandro and claim to have
killed Rwandan trainers.

10 June 2002

Heritage Oil Corporation announces it has signed an agreement with the
Government of the Democratic Republic of the Congo to explore oil
opportunities in a vast swathe of the north-eastern Democratic Republic of
the Congo, including eastern Ituri.

9-12 June 2002

Following an attack by APC and Hema militias, Lendu forces agree not to
attack Nyali provided that the Hema population leaves.

12 June 2002

The former Prime Minister of Senegal, Moustapha Niasse, appointed United
Nations Special Envoy to help to advance the inter-Congolese dialogue.

13 June 2002

Lubanga and others arrested in Kampala and transferred to Kinshasa. At the
same time, UPDF officers maintain close contact with the UPC movement in
Bunia.

Early July 2002

Scores of people die in fighting in Bunia between RCD-K/ML and a militia
supporting Lubanga. UPDF allegedly back Lubanga.

28 July 2002

The Institut supérieur pédagogique is empty, most of the Hema students
having left for the military training camp in Mandro. They will stay there for
two weeks. The students will then be organized, formed in patrols, and some
of them will be given weapons.

30 July 2002

Peace agreement between Rwanda and the Democratic Republic of the Congo
signed in Pretoria.

Beginning of August 2002

Deployment of UPC in Nyankunde.

6-9 August 2002

Fighting starts between UPC and APC in Bunia. UPDF supports UPC. Some
300 civilians are killed.

9 August 2002

Governor Lompondo and APC are chased out of Bunia, and UPC takes control of
the city. UPC and UPDF continue to kill, plunder and destroy houses belonging to
the ethnic group they wish to remove.

9-28 August 2002

Several military operations carried out by UPC against Lendu localities of
Lipri, Zumbe, Penyi, Loga, Za and Ezekere. Villages are burned down and a
large number of civilians killed, including Chief Pilo of Ezekele.

14 August 2002

Mbusa Nyamwisi agrees to withdraw his troops from Irumu in order to
facilitate a negotiated approach, and states that there will be no counterattack against Bunia.

18 August 2002

Cross-roads between Beni, Bunia and Komanda taken by UPC.

23 August 2002

Fighting between Ngiti and UPC in Komanda. High numbers of civilians are
reportedly killed.

57

S/2004/573

23 August 2002

Mission report of the Special Rapporteur on the situation of human rights in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo, the Special Rapporteur on
extrajudicial, summary or arbitrary executions and a member of the Working
Group on Enforced or Involuntary Disappearances: note by the SecretaryGeneral (A/57/349).

August 2002

Kidnapping and summary execution of Lendu and Bira civilians in Bunia and
its surroundings. Other Bira and Lendu intellectuals have their houses burned
but succeed in escaping to North Kivu.

31 August 2002

Military operation of UPC, from Nyankunde, against the Lendu locality of
Songolo. The group finds mostly children and women and reportedly
massacres around 140 of them.

27-29 August 2002

UPC attack is launched against the non-Iturian population in the gold mine of
Mabanga, 32 km from Bunia. Around 150 civilians are killed.

29 August 2002

Human Rights Minister Ntumba Lwaba visits Bunia to bolster peace talks
under way in Kinshasa. He is taken hostage by Chief Kawa in Mandro. The
kidnapping is resolved with the release of nine UPC prisoners, including
Lubanga, from Kinshasa’s custody.

August 2002

In Boga, a Hema militia is organized in the city, with a majority of youths
including minors.

1 September 2002

Community leaders at the Kinshasa peace talks demand the departure of the
Ugandans and their replacement by a police force. Ntumba Lwaba alleges
Rwanda is moving forces into Ituri in preparation for the departure of UPDF.

2 September 2002

A UPC government is formed in Bunia with Lotsove as Finance Minister,
Jean-Baptiste Dhetchuvi as Foreign Minister and Eneko as Governor.

5 September 2002

A coalition of APC, Lendu, Ngiti and Mai-Mai militias attack Nyankunde,
target Hema and Bira ethnic groups, and allegedly kill more than 1,000
people in the town and neighbouring villages.

6 September 2002

Luanda Agreement signed between Uganda and the Democratic Republic of
the Congo. A 100-day timetable is set for UPDF withdrawal after the
establishment of the Ituri Pacification Commission.

10 September 2002

Special report of the Secretary-General notes that, in the Ituri district,
200,000 people have been killed since June 1999, 500,000 newly displaced,
and that 60,000 of those displaced are in Bunia; UPC have captured important
towns on the Mahagi-Bunia-Beni axis and reduced the RCD-K/ML power
base.

16 September 2002

APC and Lendu militia from Kpandroma, collectivité of Djugu, launch an
attack against Mahagi, 53 km from Bunia.

58

S/2004/573

29 September 2002

Interim report on the situation of human rights in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo, submitted by the Special Rapporteur, Iulia Motoc (A/57/437).

7 October 2002

UPC elements occupy Mahagi.

15 October 2002

The second report of the Panel of Experts on the illegal exploitation of
natural resources in the Democratic Republic of the Congo accuses UPDF of
continuing to provoke ethnic conflict for economic gain, particularly in Ituri.

October 2002

Humanitarian agencies encounter difficulties in securing permission to land
flights in Bunia from UPC which controls it. Relations between UPC and
humanitarian agencies remain strained.

20 October-10 November
2002

UPC launches several military operations against the Lendu localities of
Nombe, Kagabe, Songolo, Androzo, Pinga, Singo, Mongbwalu and
Tseletsele. Hundreds of localities are burned down and an unknown number
of civilians massacred.

22 November 2002

The former Governor of Ituri, Joseph Eneko Nguaza, is killed in an ambush
20 km from Mahagi, together with eight representatives of Iturian
collectivités.

November 2002

Stalemate with regard to the Ituri Pacification Commission due to insistence
of Lubanga that Ituri be recognized as a province, not a district. Kinshasa
refuses.

End November-end
December 2002

MLC together with RCD-N and UPC attack Mambasa, conduct systematic
looting, rape and killing of hundreds of civilians. The operation is known to
the population as “effacer le tableau”.

December 2002

UPC reportedly organizes a sizeable military operation in Mongbwalu with
the assistance of MLC and finally succeeds in seizing Mongbwalu.

17 December 2002

Comprehensive peace deal signed at inter-Congolese dialogue talks
in Pretoria.

20 December 2002

Creation of FIPI; including PUSIC, FPDC and FNI/FRPI in Ariwara.

31 December 2002

MLC, RCD-N and RCD-ML sign a ceasefire agreement under the auspices of
MONUC in Gbadolite.

2003
6 January 2003

RCD-Goma announces that it has formed an alliance with UPC.

6 January 2003

Rethy and Kpandroma captured by RCD-K/ML and Lendu militia during
operations against UPC.

15 January 2003

UPC attacks Nioka and destroys the nutritional centre for children established
by an international non-governmental organization. They arrest and beat
priests accused of assisting the Lendu population.

59

S/2004/573

17 February-6 March 2003

UPC attacks the Lendu localities of Lipri, Bambu and Kobu, in the
collectivité of Banyari Kilo, and burns down all surrounding villages.

21 February 2003

The Secretary-General, in his thirteenth Report on the Democratic Republic
of the Congo (S/2003/211), notes widespread insecurity, massive
displacement and severely restricted humanitarian access in Ituri;
displacement of 100,000 persons in the north-east since October 2002;
ongoing human rights violations; ongoing fighting between Hema and Lendu
aligned groups; and difficulties in monitoring by MONUC due to security
conditions.

24 February 2003

Ngiti attack Bogoro, collectivité of Bahema Sud. Execution of around 350
civilians.

4 March 2003

Jérôme Kakwavu creates a new rebel group, FAPC.

6 March 2003

Fighting breaks out between UPDF and UPC in Bunia. UPC is chased out of
Bunia.

17 March 2003

Attack on Drodro Catholic compound results in deaths of 17 students.

20 March 2003

The Security Council in resolution 1468 (2003) requests Secretary-General to
increase presence of MONUC in the Ituri district and to monitor
developments on the ground.

2 April 2003

Final Act of the inter-Congolese dialogue is signed in Sun City.

3 April 2003

Lendu attack on Drodro results in killing of some 400 civilians.

4-14 April 2003

First meeting of the Ituri Pacification Commission in Bunia.

7 April 2003

Joseph Kabila is formally sworn in as President for the transitional period.

15 April 2003

Report on the situation of human rights in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, submitted by the Special Rapporteur, Iulia Motoc (E/CN.4/2003/43).

6 May 2003

UPDF troops leave Bunia.

10 May 2003

Killing of 2 priests and 16 civilians in Nyakasanza church, Bunia, by
Lendu militia.

14 May 2003

Two MONUC military observers reported missing at Mongbwalu (bodies
recovered on 18 May).

6-16 May 2003

Fighting breaks out between Lendu militias and UPC. Some 500 civilians are
reportedly killed. Most of the population of Bunia flees the city.

17 May 2003

Ceasefire is negotiated by MONUC between UPC and FNI.

23 May 2003

Kilo, Itende and Lisey, in the collectivité of Banyari Kilo, are attacked by
Lendu combatants from Nyangaraye; 35 villages are reportedly set on fire.

60

S/2004/573

24 May 2003

Signature of a ceasefire agreement between FNI and UPC under the
patronage of Joseph Kabila and Amos Namanga Ngongi, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General.

27 May 2003

UPC drives FNI troops out of Bunia.

30 May 2003

The Security Council by resolution 1484 (2003) authorizes the deployment of
an Interim Emergency Multinational Force in Bunia until 1 September 2003
to provide protection and security to civilians.

31 May 2003

Attack against Tchomia by Lendu and Ngiti militias with the alleged support
of APC and FAC. Some 90 civilians are killed.

5 June 2003

The European Union Council by decision 2003/432/CFSP authorizes
Operation Artemis in accordance with the mandate set out in resolution 1484
(2003) and establishes the logistics (France is the framework nation, Major
General Neveux is appointed Commander).

10 June 2003

Following a Lendu attack on Nioka, the town is destroyed; according to
investigations carried out by MONUC, some 60 civilians are killed.

11 June 2003

Lendu and Ngiti militias attack Kasenyi and kill at least 80 civilians.

12 June 2003

Operation Artemis begins; 400 soldiers deployed in Bunia and 500 in
Entebbe for logistical support.

19 June 2003

Ceasefire agreement signed in Burundi.

1 July 2003

Transitional Government installed.

6-7 July 2003

Attack against Ambe and its surroundings by Lendu and Ngiti militias. At
least 30 civilians are allegedly killed.

15 July 2003

Attack on Tchomia by Lendu and Ngiti militia results in 10 civilians killed.

19 July 2003

Attack on Fataki by FNI and FAPC; 22 civilians are allegedly killed.

23 July 2003

Attack on Kaseyni by Ngiti militia results in 16 civilians killed.

28 July 2003

By resolution 1493 (2003) the Security Council places the mandate of
MONUC under Chapter VII and authorizes the Mission to take the necessary
measures to protect civilians in Ituri and the Kivus.

5 August 2003

Attack on Fataki by FNI and FAPC. Perhaps as many as 100 civilians killed.

22 August 2003

Reports of massacre in the locality of Gobu, located between Mandro and
Katoto. At least 23 people appear to have been killed.

End August-beginning
September 2003

Reports of new attacks against the population of Fataki and Bule. First reports of
the existence of forced labour camps near Fataki (Habo, Libi, Bali, Aleda, Ali and
Beau Marché) run by Lendu combatants.

15 September 2003

The Multinational Force leaves Bunia and is replaced by the military
elements of MONUC under the name Ituri Brigade.

61

S/2004/573

15 September 2003

UPC organizes demonstrations in Bunia to celebrate its anniversary and
demands that leaders arrested by MONUC be released. The demonstrations
provoke incidents that result in the arrest of 74 people, and 28 the following
day. Kisembo, Rafiki and Lobo are kept under house arrest for a few days,
the rest are released the following day. During the incidents caused by UPC,
at least 12 people are injured.

29 September 2003

Eight police officers arrested in May 2003 are released. Kisembo, Rafiki and
Lobo organize the handover to MONUC. The police officers are transferred
back to Kinshasa.

6 October 2003

Lendu forces attack Kachele, near Bule, in the collectivité of Bahema Badjere,
leaving 65 people dead.

17 October 2003

MONUC arrests Matthieu Ngudjolo, Chief of Staff of FNI.

9 November 2003

MONUC arrests Aimable Saba Rafiki, Chief of Security of UPC.

2004
January

62

Magistrates and members of the Prosecutor’s Office of the Tribunal de
Grande Instance of Bunia return to Bunia with the assistance of MONUC, the
European Union and French Cooperation. Victims of human rights violations
start lodging complaints.
