VI.

Resolutions adopted on the reports_o_f_th_e_T_hl_rd_C_o_m_m_i_tt_ee_ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _
24_1

taining information on the progress made by the Working
Group in the accomplishment of its tasks;
18. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its
forty-first session the item entitled "Alternative
approaches and ways and means within the United
Nations system for improving the effective enjoyment of
human rights and fundamental freedoms".
116th plenary meeting
I 3 December 1985

40/125.

Development of public information activities
in the field of human rigbt'i

The General Assembly,
Reaffirming that activities to improve public knowledge
in the field of human rights are necessary to the fulfilment
ofthe purposes ofthe United Nations set out in Article 1,
paragraph 3, of the Charter of the United Nations,
Reca/ling its resolutions on the status of the lnternational Covenants on Human Rights, 24 including resolution
39/136 of 14 December 1984,
Taking into account the relevant General Assembly resolutions conceming the further promotion of human
rights, including resolution 39/ l 44 of 14 December 1984
relating to the activities ofnational institutions in the field
of human rights,
Welcoming Commission on l-Iuman Rights resolution
1985/49 of 14 March 1985 on the development of public
information activities in the field of human rights, 30
Recognizing the fundamental importance of national
and regional public information activities in the field of
human rights and the catalytic effect that initiatives of the
United Nations can have on these activities,
Reaffirmingthat programmes ofteaching, education and
information in the field of human rights are central to the
achievement oflasting respect for human rights and fundamental freedoms,
Noting the importance of making available United
Nations materials on human rights in national and local
languages, including in simplified form, and of making
more effective use of the mass media and of new technologies in order to reach a wider audience, especially the
less-educated and those in isolated areas,
Believing that the promotional activities of the United
Nations system in the field of human rights should be
enhanced and strengthened,
1. Requests ali Member States to take appropriate
steps, by ali available means, including the mass media, to
give publicity to the activities ofthe United Nations in the
field ofhuman rights and to accord priority to the dissemination, in their respective national and local languages, of
the Universal Declaration of Human Rights, 6 the lnternational Covenants on Human Rights and other international conventions;
2. Ca/Is upon ali relevant bodies ofthe United Nations
system, including the specialized agencies and the regional
commissions, to assist further in the dissemination of
United Nations material on human rights;
3. We/comes the efforts of the Secretary-Genera1 to
issue a personalized version of the Universal Declaration
ofHuman Rights in the six official languages ofthe United
Nations, having in mind the desirability of completing this
task in 1986, and also welcomes the preparation of a list of
157 A/401348 and Add.l and 2.
15g See A/401348/ Add l and 2.

basic reference works on human rights for use by United
Nations information centres and other interested bodies;
4. Takes note with satisfaction of the request of the
Commission on Human Rights to the Secretary-General,
in its resolution 1985/49, to collect relevant material,
including that prepared by specialized agencies, regional
bodies, groups, non-governmental organizations and individuals, with a view to preparing a basic teaching booklet
on human rights in the six official languages ofthe United
Nations;
5. Recommends that all Member States consider including, in their educational curricula, material relevant to a
comprehensive understanding of human rights issues;
6. Urges the Commission on Human Rights to give
special attention at its forty-second session to the development ofpublic information activities in the field ofhuman
rights and to submit to the General Assembly at its fortyfirst session, through the Economic and Social Council, its
views and recommendations on further action;
7. Decides to continue its consideration of this question at its forty-first session under the item entitled "Alternati ve approaches and ways and means within the United
Nations system for improving the effective enjoyment of
human rights and fundamental freedoms".
J16th plenary meeting
13 December 1985

40/126.

New international humanitarian order

The General Assembly
Recalling its resolutions 36/136 of 14 December 1981,
37/201 of 18 December I Cl82 and 38/ 125 of 16 December
1983,
Taking note of the report of the Secretary-General, 157
itelcoming the views and comments of Governments
regarding the proposal to promote a new international
humanitarian order contained in the report of the Secretary-General, 158
Reiterating that the work of the Independent Commission on Intemational Humanitarian Issues, established
outside the framework of the United Nations, could be
useful for further study of the proposal,
1. Expresses its appm ·iation to the Secretary-General
for his report;
2. Takes note of the activities of the Independent
Commission on International Humanitarian Issues, as
described in the report of the Secretary-General, 159 and
looks forward to the outcome of its efforts and its final
report;
3. Invites Governments that have not yet done so to
communicate to the Secretary-General their views regarding the proposal to promote a new international humanitarian order;
4. Requests the Secretary-General, in the light of further views received, to submit to the General Assembly at
its forty-first session an addendum to his report, including
a survey of specific humanitarian issues;
5. Decides to review at its forty-first session the question of a new international humanitarian order.
l 16th pfenary· meeting
/3 Decemher 1985
1 IQ St-e A 401348. annex 11
