S/2021/796

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
15 September 2021
Original: English

Letter dated 7 September 2021 from the Secretary-General
addressed to the President of the Security Council
I have the privilege to address you with respect to the Special Tribunal for
Lebanon.
As you are aware, owing to the uncertain financial situation of the Special
Tribunal, in February 2021, further to consultations with the Government of Lebanon
and the members of the Security Council, I sought a subvention from the General
Assembly in the amount of approximately $25 million. The General Assembly
appropriated an amount of approximately $15.5 million for the Special Tribunal.
Despite the subvention and active fundraising, the Special Tribunal does not
have sufficient funding to undertake the trial in the Ayyash “connected” cases
(STL-18-10) and the proceedings remain stayed by Trial Chamber II as of the writing
of the present letter.
In the light of the financial situation of the Special Tribunal, the Management
Committee of the Special Tribunal has approved a budget in the amount of
$8.3 million for 2022, which will include funding for the completion of the appeal in
the main Ayyash et al. case (STL-11-01), drawdown activities and the commencement
of the residual phase of the Special Tribunal once the Ayyash appeal is completed.
Pursuant to article 5(1) of the Agreement between the United Nations and the
Lebanese Republic on the Establishment of the Special Tribunal annexed to Security
Council resolution 1757 (2007), 51 per cent of the expenses of the Special Tribunal
shall be borne by voluntary contributions from States, and 49 per cent by the
Government of Lebanon.
While Lebanon remains committed to the Special Tribunal, owing to the
continuing socioeconomic and financial crisis in the country, the Government of
Lebanon is currently not in a position to confirm whether it will be able to contribute
to the budget of the Special Tribunal for 2022. Additionally, no Member State has
pledged any funding as of yet for 2022.
Pursuant to article 5, paragraph 2, of the annex to Security Council resolution 1757
(2007), should voluntary contributions be insufficient for the Special Tribunal to
implement its mandate, the Secretary-General and the Security Council shall explore
alternate means of financing the Special Tribunal. In order to enable the Special Tribunal
to complete the appeal proceedings in the Ayyash et al. case, to draw down and to
commence the performance of its residual functions, further to consultations with the
Government of Lebanon and the members of the Security Council, I wish to inform the
Council of my intention to seek a subvention from the General Assembly for the Special
Tribunal for 2022 in the amount of approximately $8.3 million.

21-12953 (E)

170921

*2112953*

S/2021/796

As the Special Tribunal will enter its residual phase upon completion of the
Ayyash et. al. appeal, further to my letter of 10 February 2021 to the President of the
Security Council in which I expressed my intention to undertake consultations, as
soon as possible, on residual functions that may be required to be performed by the
Special Tribunal, I am pleased to inform you that the United Nations and the
Government of Lebanon have agreed on the following framework for the performance
of residual functions at the Special Tribunal.
The residual functions of the Special Tribunal will be performed under a
dormant structure which would maintain the current legal framework, including the
Agreement and the Statute of the Special Tribunal. The Special Tribunal will consist
of minimal administrative offices backed by an ad hoc court structure under which
the judges and senior officials will work primarily remotely, on an as-required basis.
The residual functions of the Special Tribunal will be primarily limited to the
management and preservation of the records and archives of the Special Tribunal,
assistance to national authorities and responses to requests for information, and the
protection and support of victims and witnesses. While the Special Tribunal will
retain the legal authority for other judicial functions currently vested in the Special
Tribunal, there would be no ongoing judicial or investigative activity in the residual
phase, unless circumstances would necessitate the performance of those judicial
functions.
The residual functions will be performed following the completion of the appeal
in the Ayyash et al. case until the end of the current mandate period, February 2023.
If at the end of this period, the performance of these residual functions has not been
completed, the Agreement may be extended for a further period to be determined by
the Secretary-General, in consultation with the Government of Lebanon and the
Security Council, to allow the Special Tribunal to complete its work pursuant to
article 21 of the Agreement.
Upon the closure of the Special Tribunal, the United Nations will be the
custodian of the records and archives of the Special Tribunal.
In the light of the financial situation of the Special Tribunal, the parties have
also agreed that the performance of all or some of the residual functions would be
contingent upon sufficient funding.
I would be grateful if you could bring the present letter to the attention of the
members of the Security Council at the earliest opportunity.
(Signed) António Guterres

2/2

21-12953
