88

(;,•neral A,sembly-Twenly-seventh Session

implemented in Namibia after the withdrawal of South
Africa from the Territory,
l. Expresses its appreciation of the report of the
Secretary-General on the operation of the United Nations Fund for Namibia during 1972 and endorses
the conclusions and recommendations contained
therein;
2. Decides, as a transitional measure, to allocate
to the Fund the sum of $100,000 from the regular
budget of the United Nations for 1973;
3. Authorizes the Secretary-General to continue to
appeal to Governments for voluntary contributions to
the Fund;
4. Invites Governments to appeal once more to their
national organizations and institutions for voluntary
financial contrihutions to the Fund;
5. Urges the Secretary-General to implement the
long-term measures and studies outlined in his report to
the General Assembly at its twenty-sixth session as
soon as the necessary funds become available;
6. Authorizes the Secretary-General to implement
the arrangements for the administration and supervision of the Fund, with the advice of the United Nations Council for Namibia and of the Ad Hoe SubCommittee on Namibia; 40
7. Requests the United Nations High Commissioner
for Refugees, the specialized agencies and other organizations within the United Nations system to render all
necessary assistance to the Secretary-General in carrying out the tasks assigned to him under the present
resolution;
8. Decides, pending the entry into full operation of
the comprehensive programme, that Namibians shall
continue to be eligible for assistance through the
United Nations Educational and Training Programme
for Southern Africa and the United Nations Trust Fund
for South Africa;
9. Requests the Secretary-General to report to the
General Assembly at its twenty-eighth session on the
implementation of the present resolution.
2114th plenary meeting
18 December 1972

3031 (XXVII). Question of Namibia
The General Assembly,
Having considered the question of Namibia,
Having examined the report of the United Nations
Council for Namibia, 41
Having examined the chapters of the report of the
Special Committee on the Situation with regard to the
Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of
Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples relating to the question of Namihia,~~
Having examined the report of the Secretary-General concerning the enlargement of the United Nations
Council for Namibia, 43
40 Established by the Security Council under resolution 28.1
(1970).
41 Official Records of the General Assembly, Twenty-seventh
Session, Supplement No. 24 (A/8724).
42 Ibid., Supplement No. 2 3 ( A.18723/Rev.1 ), chaps. II, 11[
and IX.
4~ A/8934.

Noting with satisfaction the courageous and manifest
will of the Namibian people to achieve freedom and
independence as a single unified entity,
Having invited, in consultation with the Organization of African Unity and through it, representatives
of the national liberation movement of Namibia, the
South West Africa People's Organization, to participate in an observer capacity in its consideration of
the Territory, and having heard the statement of the
representative of the national liberation movement,4 4
Having heard the statements of the petitioners, 4~
Recalling its resolution 1514 (XV) of 14 December
1960, containing the Declaration on the Granting of
Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples, and
its resolution 2621 (XXV) of 12 October 1970, containing the programme of action for the full implementation of the Declaration,
Recalling also its resolutions 2145 (XXI) of 27
October 1966 and 2248 (S-V) of 19 May 1967 and
subsequent resolutions relating to the question of
Namibia, as well as the relevant resolutions of the
Security Council,
Recalling further the advisory opinion of the International Court of Justice of 21 June 1971, 46 delivered in response to the request addressed to it by
the Security Council in its resolution 284 (1970) of
29 July 1970,
Bearing in mind the direct responsibilities of the
United Nations with regard to the Territory of Namibia and its people,
Deeply deploring the continued illegal occupation
of the international Territory of Namibia by South
Africa, in defiance of resolution 2145 (XXI) and in
flagrant violation of its obligations under the Charter
of the United Nations,
Deeply concerned at the efforts of South Africa
to consolidate and perpetuate its occupation of the
Territory by repressive means, including the extension
to Namibia of its policies of apartheid and the further
creation of so-called "homelands" against the wishes
of the majority of the inhabitants,
Deploring the use of the Territory of Namibia by
South Africa as a base for taking actions which violate
the sovereignty and territorial integrity of independent
African States,
Affirming that the basic condition for the fulfilment
of the responsibility of the United Nations towards
Namibia is the removal of South Africa's presence
from the Territory,
Mindful of the obligations of all Member Smtes
under Article 25 of the Charter,
Expressing its satisfaction at the success of the Namibia International Conferenoe, held under the auspices of the South West Africa People's Organization
in May 1972, and commending the declaration and
n:commendations adopted by that Conference, 47
H Official Records of the General Assembly, Twenty-seventh
Session, Fourth Committee, 2018th meeting.
1 ;; /hid., 2014th and 2018th meetings.
4 ,; Le{?al Consequences for States of the Continued Presence
,>/ South Africa in Namibia (South West Africa) notwithstanding Security Council Resolution 276 ( 1970), Advisory Opinion,
/.(;.f. Reports /971, p. 16.
4 7 See Official Records of the General Assemhly, Twentyscvrnth Session, Supplement No. 24 (A/8724), vol. IJ, appendix II.

Resolutions adopted on the rep01·ts of the F'ourth Committee

Aware of the urgent need for the participation of
Namibians in the activities of the United Nations Council for Namibia,
Mindful also that the direct responsibility of the
United Nations for the Territory of Namibia includes
the solemn obligation to protect and safeguard the
rights and interests of the people of the Territory
pending their exercise of self-determination and attainment of independence,
Noting with appreciation the recognition by a large
number of States of the identity certificates and travel
documents issued to Namibians by the United Nations
Council for Namibia,
1. Reaffirms the inalienable right of the people
of Namibia to self-determination and independence,
as recognized in General Assembly resolutions 1514
(XV) and 2621 (XXV) and subsequent resolutions,
and the legitimacy of their struggle by al] means
against the illegal occupation of their Territory hy
South Africa;
2. Affirms that any solution with regard to the question of Namibia must enable the people of the Territory to achieve self-determination and independence
as a single territorial and political entity;
3. Condemns the Government of South Africa for
its continued refusal to terminate its illegal occupation
and administration of the Territory of Namibia and
to comply with the pertinent resolutions of the Security Council and the General Assembly;
4. Calls once again upon the Government of South
Africa to withdraw forthwith from the international
Territory of Namibia;
5. Condemns the Government of South Africa for
its continued efforts to destroy the unity of the people
and the territorial integrity of Namibia through the
establishment of separate "homelands" based on mcial
and tribal distinctions, including the eviction, displacement and transfer of the Namibian people to other
areas, and for its continued extension to Namibia of
the policies of apartheid;
6. Deeply deplores any support given to South
Africa by any State, and by any financial, economic
and other interests operating in Namibia, which enables South Africa to pursue its repressive policies
in the Territory, and calls for the termination of such
support;
7. Calls once again upon all States:
(a) To respect strictly the resolutions of the General Assembly and the Security Council concerning
Namibia, and to take fully into account the advisory
opinion of the International Court of Justice of 21
June 1971;
( b) To refrain from all direct or indir;ect relations,
economic or otherwise, with South Africa, when it
purports to represent Namibia;
(c) Not to recognize as legally valid any rights
or interests in Namibian property or resources purportedly acquired from the Government C1f South
Africa after 27 October 1966;
(d) To take effective economic and other measures
designed to ensur;e the immediate withdrawal of the
South African administration from Namibia, thereby
making possible the implementation of General Assembly resolutions 2145 (XXI) and 2248 (S-V);
8. Commends the report of the United Nations
Council for Namibia to all States and the subsidiary

89

organs of the General Assembly and other competent
organs of the Onitcd Nations, as well as to the specializl:<l agencies and other organizations within tJ1e
United N:1tions syslc'm, for appropriate actinn in conformity with the relevant resolutions of the General
Assen1b[y and the Security Council;
9. Requests the United Nations Ct11mcil for Namibia to continue to discharge its functions and responsibilitit's in accordance with the provisions of the
relevant resolutions of the Genna] 1\s,cmhlY. and in
particular:
·
(a I ·1 o 1cpresent Namibia in intcrnatinnal nrganiD1-ticins, :it conferences and on any other occasion as
may he required;
( h) To ensure th,.: participation in an appropriate
capa,:it_v of the rnpresl'ntatives of the Namibian pl'Opk
m it-; ;1ctivities;
( c) To continue it~ consultations at United Nations
Headquarters, in Africa or cbcwlwre with the rqm: sentativcs of the N:1111ibian pl"(iplc and the Orga11i1a-tion of African Unitv:
(d) To continue to assume responsibility for the
urgent establishment of short-term and long-term co-ordin:1tcd programmes of technical and financial assistance to Namibia in the light of the relevant pro-visions of re~olutil'n 2248 ( S-V) and takinl!: into
account rt>soluti1m 2'8.72 ( XXVl) of 20 December
1971;
,
( e) To continue to expand the t>Xisting scheme for
issuing identity certificates and travel documents to
Namibians hy concluding appropriate agreements with
Governments of Member States;
(f) To continue to promote publicity with regard
to the question of Namibia and to assist the SecretaryGeneral in the discharge of the task entrusted to him
under paragraph 14 below;
(g) To undertake a study on the compliance of
Member States with the relevant United Nations resolutions. taking int,, account the advisory opinion
of the International Court of Justice relating to Namibia;
(h) To examine the question of foreign economic
interests operating in Namibia, and to seek effective
means to regulate such activities as appropriate;
(i) To continue to examine the question of bilateral
and multilateral treaties which explicitly or implicitly
include Namibia, and to seek to rl·place South Africa
as the party representing Namibia in all relevant bilateral and multilateral treaties;
10. Requests all States, United Nations organs and
the specialized agencies and other organizations within
the United Nations system, as well as the non-governmental organizations concerned. to co-operate fully
with the United Nations Council for Namibia in the
discharge of the mandate entrusted to it bv the General Assembly, and in particular:
(a) To refrain from any action which may confer
a semblance of legitim:icy -upon Suuth Africa\ illegal
occup;1tiun of Namibia;
_ ( h) . To render to the Namibian people. in co-operation with the Organintion of African Unity. all moral
and material assistance necessarv to continue their
struggle for the restoration of theCr inalienable right to
self-determination and independence, and to work out,
in active co--or,eration with the United Nations Council
for Namibia and th(' Or!!;:rnization of African Unitv.
concrete progr:imme, ('f ;;s,istancc to Namibia:
-

90

Ge,wral A,,emhly-Twenty-S<•vpnth Sl'ssion

( c) To take effective steps to assist the SecretaryGeneral in disseminating relevant information on this
question under paragraph 14 helow;
11. Invites the Security Council to take effective
measures, in conformity with the relevant provisions
of the Charter, to secure the withdrawal hy Snuth
Africa of its illegal administration from '.'lamibia and
the implementation of the resolutions of the General
Assembly and the Security Council designed to enabk
the people of Namibia to exercise their right to selfdetermination;
12. Decides to enlarge the membl'rshi p of thl'
United Nations Council for Namibia and requests the
President of the General Assembly, in the light of the
relevant report of the Secrctary-General:1 ' to nominate
additional mcmhers during the current ses\ion of the
Assembly;
"
13. Urges the Secretary-General, in conformity with
General Assembly resolution 2871 (XXVI) of 20 December 1971 and in view of the recommendations of
the United Nations Council for Namibia, to undertake
the necessary consultations to nominate as soon as
possible a full-time United Nations Commissioner for
Namibia; 49
14. Requests the Secretary~General, having regard
to the suggestions of the United Nations Council for
Namibia concerning the widespread and continuous
publicity on this question, to take effective steps, including the publication of a regular bulletin on Namibia
and the issue of a series of United Nations commemorative postage stamps, to publicize as widely as
possible, in particular:
(a) The work of the United Nations Council for
Namibia and of other organs on the question of Namibia;

( b) The grave situation in the Territory created
by the further repressive measures taken by the South
African r.:gime against the people of Namibia in violation of the relevant decisions of the United Nations;
( c) The legitimate struggle of the people of Namibia
for self-determination and independence;
( d) The need for increased moral, political and
material assistance to the people of Namihia and their
liberation movement;
15. lm·ites the various organs of the United Nations
concerned tu effect the greatest possible co-ordination
of their respective activities relating to Namibia;
16. Requests the Secretary-General to continue to
provide the necessary assistance and facilities to the
United Nations Council for Namibia and to the United
Nations Commissioner for Namibia for the discharge
of their respective duties and functions;
17. Requests the Secretary-General to report to the
General Asscmhly at its twenty-eighth session on the
implementation of the present resolution.

] 114th plenary meeting
18 December 1972
*

*

At its 2114th plenary meeting, on 18 December 1972, the
General Assembly, pursuant to paragraph 12 of the above
resolution, confirmed the nomination by its President of
BURUNDI, CHINA, LIBERIA, MEXICO, POLAND, ROMANIA and the
UNION OF SOVIET SOCIALIST REPUBLICS as members of the
United Nations Council for Namibia.
As a result, the Council will be composed of the following
/Hember Stall's: BURUNDI, CHILE, CHINA, COLOMBIA, EGYPT,
GUYANA, INDIA, INDONESIA, LIBERIA, MEXICO, NIGERIA, PAKIS·
TAN, POLAND, ROMANIA, TuRKEY, UNION OF SOVIET SOCIALIST
REPUBLICS, YUGOSLAVIA and ZAMBIA.

4BA/8934.
49 For the appointment of the United Nations Commissioner

for Namibia by the General Assembly, see above, p. 10.

*

•

•

*

Other decisions
Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence
to Colonial Countries ancl Peoples
(Item 22)

At its 2114th pl~nary meeting, on 18 December 1972, the General Assembly,
on the recommendat10n of the Fourth Committee, 50 decided to defer until its
twenty-eighth session consideration of the questions of British Honduras, the
Falkland Islands (Malvinas), French Somali land and Gibraltar.
50 Official Records of the General Assembly, Twenty-seventh Session, Annexes, agenda
item 22, document A/8955, para. 26.
