A /71/PV.32

United Nations

General Assembly

Official Records

Seventy-first session

32nd plenary meeting

Wednesday, 26 October 2016, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Thomson . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (Fiji)

The meeting was called to order at 10.05 a.m.
Agenda item 39
Necessity of ending the economic, commercial and
financial embargo imposed by the United States of
America against Cuba
Report of the Secretary-General (A/71/91)
Draft resolution (A/71/L.3)
Mr. Wafy (Niger): I have the honour to speak on
behalf of the Group of African States on a matter of great
importance to the Group, and Africa in general, namely,
the necessity of ending the economic, commercial and
financial embargo imposed by the United States of
America against Cuba.
For more than two decades, this matter has been
brought before the General Assembly against the
background of overwhelming yet unheeded appeals
for the immediate end to the long-standing economic
embargo against Cuba. Today those appeals have taken
on a new dimension and more compelling justification,
given the positive developments and progress made
in relations between the Governments of Cuba and
the United States of America. The new dimension has
been occasioned by the re-establishment of diplomatic
relations, the historic visit by President Barack Obama
to Cuba in March — apparently the first visit by an
American President to that country since 1928 — and
the resumption of commercial airline service between
the two countries in August.

The African Group calls for those ground-breaking
positive steps to go further in lifting the economic
embargo, which continues to inflict economic hardship
on the poor and innocent population of Cuba, and
most certainly makes the achievement of sustainable
development even more elusive, thereby undermining
our collective efforts towards a universal push to
drive the implementation of the 2030 Agenda for
Sustainable Development.
Accordingly, the Group of African States reaffirms
its full support for the General Assembly resolution
on the necessity of ending the economic, financial and
commercial embargo imposed by the United States of
America against Cuba. The Group of African States
further reiterates the call made by the African Union
Assembly of Heads of State and Government and the
overwhelming call from States Members of the United
Nations, for the lifting of the long-standing and unjust
economic, commercial and financial blockade on Cuba.
Mr. Plasai (Thailand): I have the honour to speak
on behalf of the Group of 77 and China on agenda
item 39, entitled “Necessity of ending the economic,
commercial and financial embargo imposed by the
United States of America against Cuba”.
I would like to thank the Secretary-General for
his comprehensive report (A/71/91) on the item we are
discussing today.
The Group of 77 and China would like, first of
all, to sincerely welcome the re-establishment of
diplomatic relations between the Government of Cuba
and the Government of the United States of America.

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of speeches
delivered in other languages. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only.
They should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

16-34312 (E)

*1634312*

A/71/PV.32

The Group also welcomes steps taken towards the
elimination of the United States embargo against Cuba,
which include, among others, the reopening of their
respective embassies in 2015, President Obama’s visit to
Cuba in March and the amendments made in 2015 and
2016 by the United States Department of the Treasury
and the United States Department of Commerce.
While those are positive steps, they remain
inadequate to effectively end the impact of the embargo.
Much more remains to be done, especially action by
the United States Congress with regard to legislative
bills proposing the lifting of blockade sanctions. The
Group also believes that the future President of the
United States can and should exercise more of his
or her executive powers to further modify blockade
regulations in the light of the continued disinclination
on the part of the United States Congress to end those
punitive measures, which are essentially in violation of
the purposes and principles enshrined in the Charter of
the United Nations.
The Group of 77 and China would like to reiterate
our commitment to the principles, purposes and spirit
of the Charter of the United Nations, in particular
the principles of the sovereign equality of States,
non-intervention and non-interference in their internal
affairs, as well as the freedom of international trade
and navigation. The Group believes that it is the duty
and responsibility of every Member State to comply
strictly with those principles. The Group is of the
view that any policy or action that disregards those
principles — in this case the unilateral economic
sanctions against Cuba — should be seriously considered
for immediate repeal. Given that the United States
embargo against Cuba has continued for more than 50
years, the Group of 77 and China would like to express
its deep concern about the prolonged negative effects
that the economic sanctions and travel restrictions have
had on Cuba and its people.
From April 2015 to April 2016, the impact of
the United States embargo on Cuba’s foreign trade
amounted to more than $4 billion. Limited foreign
investment and difficult access to development
assistance have translated directly into economic
hardship and humanitarian impacts for the people of
Cuba. The country’s socioeconomic reforms have
also been hampered by the embargo. The Group of
77 and China are concerned that, if those economic
sanctions continue, Cuba’s development potential, in
both economic and human-development terms, will
2/27

26/10/2016

be unfairly undermined, and it will be impossible for
Cuba to successfully embark upon the path towards
sustainable development envisaged in the 2030 Agenda
for Sustainable Development, for which all Member
States have pledged support.
Over many decades, Cuba has extensively and
continuously contributed to the international community,
particularly through its remarkable provision of
medical assistance to countries in need. Cuba’s
emergency assistance to the African countries affected
by the Ebola crisis in West Africa is a great example
of its solidarity with the international community.
The Group of 77 and China hereby commend Cuba’s
contributions in the form of humanitarian assistance
and would like to express our hope that, if the United
States embargo were permanently lifted, Cuba would
be granted the opportunity that it has long deserved
to fully cooperate with the global community and
international organizations on health, the environment
and agriculture, among other important issues.
The Group of 77 and China would like to reiterate
our strong support for the implementation of the
recommendations of resolution 70/5 and our call for an
end to the economic, commercial and financial embargo
by the United States against Cuba. The urgency and
necessity of our call is further highlighted by the
ongoing global and collective striving to implement the
2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development. The Group
of 77 and China would therefore like to appeal to the
international community to further step up efforts in
support of the lifting of the embargo, not solely for the
benefit of Cuba, but also for the full achievement of the
economic and social development of all members of the
global community as a whole.
Mr. Rattray (Jamaica): It a great privilege for
me to address the General Assembly on behalf of
the 14 member States of the Caribbean Community
(CARICOM).
CARICOM aligns itself with the statement made
by the representative of the Kingdom of Thailand on
behalf of the Group of 77 and China, and with the
statement to be delivered by the representative of the
Dominican Republic on behalf of Community of Latin
American and Caribbean States.
For far too many years, the United States
has maintained a commercial embargo on Cuba,
through various laws, regulations and presidential
proclamations. That pernicious embargo has restricted
16-34312

26/10/2016

the ability of a proud, honourable, independent,
talented and self-reliant people to conduct legitimate
trade, travel and to undertake financial transactions.
The stated purpose of that all-encompassing economic,
commercial and financial blockade was to bring about
political change. However, all these years later, we see
that the intended outcome has failed to materialize,
and the sole result is the undue hardship that has
been caused to the population of Cuba. We fully
agree with President Obama’s characterization of the
embargo as an outdated burden on the Cuban people,
and we appreciate his acknowledgment that what the
United States was doing was not working. Regrettably,
however, his call upon his own Congress to lift the
embargo has fallen on deaf ears.
CARICOM, and virtually the entire international
community, has consistently highlighted the fact that
that unilateral, coercive and anachronistic measure
is inconsistent with international law, transgresses
fundamental humanitarian principles and contravenes
the Charter of the United Nations and the norms
governing peaceful relations between States. In 2015,
during its landmark seventieth session, the General
Assembly voted for the twenty-fourth consecutive year
on the necessity of ending the embargo against Cuba.
The near unanimous vote of 191 countries in favour of
resolution 70/5 reflected an overwhelming attestation
of the international community’s solidarity with the
people of Cuba.

A/71/PV.32

countries to continue to explore ways to increase the
type of cooperation that was evident during the Ebola
crisis in West Africa. The renewal of relations between
those two neighbours signals a new era of engagement
for both countries. CARICOM sees those developments
as important first steps in our hemisphere’s journey
towards a destination that is enveloped in an
environment of lasting peace and security, one where
development can flourish.
CARICOM will once again unreservedly support
the draft resolution on the necessity of ending the
economic, commercial and financial embargo imposed
by the United States of America against Cuba. It is our
hope that this will be the final time that the Assembly
will have to consider this agenda item. Indeed, we
look forward to that becoming a reality in the very
near future.
Mr. Gafoor (Singapore): I have the honour
to address the General Assembly on behalf of the
10 member States of the Association of Southeast
Asian Nations (ASEAN) to express our support for
draft resolution A/71/L.3, on ending the economic,
commercial and financial embargo imposed by the
United States of America against the Republic of Cuba.

It is for that reason that CARICOM welcomes the
re-establishment of diplomatic relations between the
United States and Cuba, which was symbolized by
President Obama’s historic visit to Havana in March
and by the tangible action taken to reopen embassies
in their respective countries. We applaud President
Obama’s recognition that the age-old blockade has
been harmful to the Cuban people, and we salute his
stated desire to bury the last remnant of the Cold War
in the Americas.

The General Assembly has consistently adopted this
annual draft resolution by an overwhelming majority
since it was first introduced, in 1992. ASEAN member
States have voted unanimously in favour of the draft
resolution for the past 15 years. In 2015, a spokesperson
for ASEAN made a statement in the General Assembly
calling for the unilateral embargo against Cuba to be
lifted as soon as possible (see A/70/PV.40). It is our
firm belief that differences between States should be
settled through engagement, not confrontation, and by
inclusion, not isolation. All of that must be done while
bearing in mind the fundamental principles of sovereign
equality, non-interference and non-intervention, as
enshrined in the Charter of the United Nations.

CARICOM and Cuba have had a long and fruitful
relationship, which predates the embargo. Cuba is an
important development partner for the Caribbean, and
our bonds of mutual respect, friendship and cooperation
are deeply valued and treasured. We also enjoy friendly
relations with the United States and cooperate through
various bilateral and regional initiatives. For that
reason, we believe that improved relations between
Cuba and the United States of America can only bode
well for our nations. We therefore encourage both

ASEAN welcomes the restoration of diplomatic
relations between Cuba and the United States of
America. President Barack Obama’s state visit in March,
the relaxation of travel restrictions to Cuba for United
States citizens and the restoration of direct flights
between the United States and Cuba are important
steps towards the normalization of bilateral relations.
They are key to building better regional relations in
the Americas. In ASEAN’s view, a more important
step will be for the United States to end its economic,

16-343123/27

A/71/PV.32

commercial and financial embargo on Cuba. It would
significantly improve the quality of life and living
standards of the Cuban people and contribute to the
economic and social development of Cuba. Bringing an
end to the embargo would also advance the Assembly’s
efforts towards achieving an inclusive 2030 Agenda for
Sustainable Development.
ASEAN encourages the United States and Cuba in
their efforts to chart a new way forward. We recognize
that much remains to be done. ASEAN joins the other
members of the Assembly in reiterating our support for
the lifting of the unilateral embargo against Cuba as
soon as possible.
Mr. Kononuchenko (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We would like to thank the Secretary-General
for having drafted the report (A/71/91) on the need to
end the economic, commercial and financial embargo
against Cuba that was imposed by the United States of
America. The position of the Russian Federation in that
respect remains unchanged.
The embargo of the United States of America
targeting Cuba must be immediately lifted, as it directly
contradicts the fundamental principles of the Charter
of the United Nations regarding the inadmissability of
any measures of discrimination and intervention in the
domestic affairs of sovereign States. The experience of
Cuba does a good job of showing the short-sightedness
and counterproductivity of the imposition of unilateral
economic, commercial and financial coercive measures
for the attainment of political objectives. Above all,
they burden ordinary citizens. They worsen the plight
of those most vulnerable. The outcome of the vote on
draft resolution A/71/L.3, on the necessity of ending
the economic, commerical and financial blockade, will
again reveal the growing international awareness of the
inadmissability of allowing such a state of affairs to
persist.
The persistent American sanctions against Cuba
are a relic of the past. From the outset, they placed Cuba
in a vulnerable position regarding the implementation
of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development. The
sanctions constrain and at times directly undermine
the capacity of that island State to mobilize resources
for the attainment of the Sustainable Development
Goals. In that connection, the international community,
having unanimously assumed the obligation to leave no
one behind, does not have the moral right to continue to
tolerate sanctions against Cuba.
4/27

26/10/2016

On 19 October the State Duma of the Russian
Federation made its annual declaration to the General
Assembly and the Parliaments of Member States
condemning the policy of Washington, which for more
than 50 years has been opportunistically imposing the
most protracted unilateral sanctions in the history of
international relations. The Russian deputies extended
their solidarity to the Cuban people, who are upholding
their freedom and sovereignty despite limitations and
restrictions of a humanitarian nature imposed on them.
The United States’ relaxation of the embargo
does not lift the embargo, as such. The failure to lift
the embargo is, however, at odds with the approach
of seeking to normalize Cuban-American relations.
Cubans continue to face serious obstacles as they
strive to fully engage in the international financial and
economic system. That undermines the entire range of
global integration links and undermines regional and
international cooperation. We hope that Washington,
D.C., will finally acknowledge the imperatives of
the present-day realities and that the process of
strengthening links with Havana — especially with
regard to the embargo — will be furthered and receive
the necessary momentum, regardless of the political
situation and the results of the elections in the United
States.
The Russian Federation would like to affirm
its determination to cooperate in ensuring a fair and
equitable international order founded on the purposes
and principles of the Charter of the United Nations. We
firmly believe that the key to solving the problem lies in
the countries’ goodwill and readiness to seek mutually
acceptable compromises, rather than in using coercion
and blackmail. The principles of integrity, sovereignty,
non-interference in States’ internal affairs, and
cooperation do not permit the use of unilateral coercive
measures, which are in violation of international law.
In that connection, we deplore the continuing United
States sanctions on Cuba and urge all countries to join
us at this seventy-first session of the General Assembly
in voting in favour of draft resolution A/71/L.3, on
the necessity of ending the economic, commercial and
financial embargo imposed by the United States against
Cuba.
The President: I would like to propose that the list
of speakers on the current topic be closed, in view of
the large number of delegations inscribed on the list.
16-34312

26/10/2016

Unless I see any objection, I will take it that the
Assembly agrees to close the list of speakers.
It was so decided.
Mr. Cortorreal (Dominican Republic) (spoke in
Spanish): I have the honour to speak on behalf of the
Community of Latin American and Caribbean States
(CELAC).
CELAC welcomes the progress in the process of
normalizing diplomatic relations between Cuba and the
United States of America, which marks the beginning
of a new chapter in the history of peace and coexistence
among the nations of the Americas. We acknowledge
President Obama’s wish to end the economic,
commercial and financial embargo that the United
States has imposed on Cuba for more than 50 years.
However, we regret the fact that the blockade is still a
reality for the Cuban people. It presents an undeniably
major obstacle to Cuba’s normal development. The
Secretary-General’s report (A/71/91) confirms how
much the policy has cost Cuba and the substantial and
unjustifiable harm that it does to the Cuban people’s
well-being. It is antithetical to the Latin American
peoples’ desire for peace, as enshrined in the 2014
Havana Declaration of the Latin American and the
Caribbean region as a zone of peace. Moreover, the
economic, commercial and financial blockade imposed
on Cuba is contrary to the letter and spirit and the
purposes and principles of the Charter of the United
Nations and of international law.
CELAC reiterates its firm rejection of any
application of laws and measures, such as the HelmsBurton Act, that run counter to international law,
especially those with extraterritorial effects, as well as
the increasing harassment of Cuba in its international
financial transactions, in opposition to the political
will of the international community in general. We
urge the Government of the United States of America
to stop implementing its current policy on the matter.
The United States Congress has the authority to end the
Cuban embargo completely. However, we acknowledge
the executive actions that President Obama has
undertaken since January of last year, including
removing Cuba from the list of countries sponsoring
terrorism — which Cuba should never have been on in
the first place — which illustrate the broad capacity
that the United States President has to modify its unjust
policy of embargo.

A/71/PV.32

CELAC would like to recall its special declaration
on the need to put an end the economic, commercial
and financial blockade imposed by the United States
against Cuba, adopted at its fourth Summit, held in
Quito on 26 and 27 January, in which we requested
“the Government of the United States of America
to fulfil the successive resolutions adopted by the
United Nations General Assembly and, in response
to the repeated calls from the international
community, to put an end to the economic,
commercial and financial blockade against Cuba,
which runs contrary to international law and
severely and unjustifiably damages the well-being
of the Cuban people.”
The United Nations Charter enshrines rights,
obligations and principles that have become part of
the legal heritage, not just of international law but of
humankind in general. They should not be violated or
abused by any Member State, which should ensure that
their national and international actions are in accord
with the rights, obligations and principles enshrined in
the Charter.
In 2015 the resolution on this topic (resolution 70/5)
was adopted with 191 votes in favour, in affirmation of
the universality of its cause. For those reasons, CELAC
will once again give its firm support to this year’s draft
resolution entitled “Necessity of ending the economic,
commercial and financial embargo imposed by the
United States of America against Cuba” (A/71/L.3).
We emphasize the inconsistency of unilateral measures
that are not supported by international law or by the
letter, the spirit and the purposes and principles of the
Charter. We reiterate our call to the United States of
America to accede to the countries of Latin America
and the Caribbean and of every region of the world, and
to harken to the views of its own people, as they urge
it to put an end once and for all to the unjust embargo
of Cuba.
Mr. Alotaibi (Kuwait): I have the honour to make
this statement on behalf of the member States of the
Organization of Islamic Cooperation (OIC).
At the outset, the member States of the OIC welcome
the restoration of diplomatic ties between the United
States and Cuba, the reopening of their embassies
more than a year ago and President Barack Obama’s
visit to Cuba in March, as well as the other significant
steps that have been taken between the two countries’
Governments. The OIC emphasizes the importance that

16-343125/27

A/71/PV.32

those steps will have for efforts to normalize bilateral
ties between both nations, and stresses that improving
relations and moving forward positively would be
mutually beneficial for both peoples.
In spite of those positive steps, however, there
remains the issue of the economic, commercial and
financial embargo imposed by the United States on
Cuba years ago. That unilateral action by the United
States has harmed not only the Cuban economy
but also the well-being of the Cuban people and of
Cuban nationals living in other countries, creating
unnecessary economic hardship for them. Furthermore,
the decades-long embargo has impeded socioeconomic
and development progress, and it will obstruct Cuba’s
efforts to achieve sustainable development as long as
it continues. In addition, the unilateral blockade also
affects third countries, as well as entities and companies
that face fines for conducting commercial activity with
Cuba.
The OIC believes that such unilateral action runs
counter to the purposes and principles of the Charter of
the United Nations. The OIC reiterates its deep concern
about the negative impact that the unilateral blockade
has on the Cuban people and considers its continuation
unjustifiable.
The OIC supports this year’s draft resolution on
this agenda item (A/71/L.3) and calls on the States
Members of the United Nations to vote in favour of
it.The OIC believes that, given the support behind the
draft resolution, entitled the “Necessity of ending the
economic, commercial and financial embargo imposed
by the United States of America against Cuba”, it truly
reflects the international community’s collective view
on this topic.
Mr. Ramírez Carreño (Bolivarian Republic of
Venezuela) (spoke in Spanish): As the current Chair
of the Movement of Non-Aligned Countries, I have
the honour to address the General Assembly on behalf
of the 120 States Members of the United Nations that
comprise this mechanism for consultation and joint
political action.
I begin by extending a warm welcome and
revolutionary salute to the Minister for Foreign Affairs
of Cuba, Mr. Bruno Rodríguez Parrilla.
Twnety-five times the General Assembly has
expressed its overwhelming support for and solidarity
with the Government and the people of Cuba with
6/27

26/10/2016

decisive votes in favour of the draft resolution calling
on the United States to lift the embargo against this
fraternal Latin American and Carribean country.. We
thank the Secretary-General for the presentation of his
report (A/71/91) on this important issue. Last year, 191
Member States voted in favour of resolution 70/5.
The Movement of Non-Aligned Countries has
always reiterated its strongest opposition to unilateral
coercive measures with extraterritorial effects because
they are illegal. The Non-Aligned Movement has
repeatedly called on the Government of the United States
of America to put an end to its economic, commercial
and financial embargo against Cuba, which is contrary
to international law, the Charter of the United Nations
and the norms and principles governing peaceful
relations among States. It also violates Cuba’s right to
interact freely with the international community.
The embargo has had adverse impacts on the wellbeing of the people of Cuba in violating their human
rights. The direct and indirect damage inflicted by the
unjustified embargo against Cuba is enormous. That
illegal policy affects all sectors that are crucial to the
Cuban economy, such as public health, nutrition and
agriculture, as well as banking, trade, investment and
tourism. The blockade denies Cuba access to markets
and to development aid from international financial
institutions, as well as technology transfers. It creates
impediments to the socioeconomic development of
the country. The embargo is also the main obstacle to
broader access to the Internet, the exchange of ideas
and the development of cultural, sport and scientific
relations. The continuation of the embargo is totally
unjustifiable and undermines Cuba’s efforts to achieve
sustainable development.
The economic damage to the Cuban people by the
imposition of the economic, commercial and financial
embargo by the United States of America against Cuba
amounts to $833.7 billion, if one takes into account the
depreciation of the dollar with respect to the price of
gold on the international market. During all these years,
the blockade has caused damage of over $121 billion,
using current prices.
The Movement of Non-Aligned Countries considers
the establishment of diplomatic relations between Cuba
and the United States to be an initial positive step in
the process towards the normalization of bilateral
relations. At the same time, it should be noted that the
blockade has remained unchanged. Indeed, under the
16-34312

26/10/2016

current Administration, the blockade has been further
tightened, and its territorial application has been
intensified through the imposition of 42 fines on entities,
both foreign and American, amounting to $13.2 billion.
While the regulations issued by the Departments of
Commerce and the Treasury on 15 January 2015 were
steps in the right direction in areas such as travel to
Cuba, telecommunication and remittances, they are
limited in scope and only modify some aspects related
to the implementation of the blockade.
Despite the historic decision of the United States
President to notify the Congress of his decision to
remove Cuba from the so-called list of State sponsors
of international terrorism — a list on which Cuba
should never have been included — that has not meant
an easing of the intricacies of all the prohibitions
and restrictions established by the blockade laws and
regulations imposed against this fraternal country.
Given what I have just said, the Movement of
Non-Aligned Countries maintains its call for an end
to the economic, commercial and financial embargo
imposed by the United States against Cuba. That was
reiterated during the seventeenth Summit of the Heads
of State and Government, held on Margarita Island
in the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela on 17 and
18 September. The vote in the General Assembly last
year in favour of resolution 70/5 by 191 Member
States constituted an expression of unanimity within
the international community in demanding the end of
the 50-year embargo and adherence to the principles
of mutual respect and non-interference in the internal
affairs of Cuba.
Currently, over 190 nations have economic and
political relations with Cuba, while the United States
remains alone in pursuing its unjustified policy of
economic sanctions. The Movement of Non-Aligned
Countries once again urges the United States of America
to yield to the will of the overwhelming majority of
the international community and to rectify its failed
policies by fully complying with the General Assembly
resolutions calling for an immediate and complete end
to the embargo imposed on Cuba.
Finally, the Movement of Non-Aligned Countries
reiterates that full respect for the purposes and principles
of the Charter of the United Nations is an essential
element in the maintenance of international peace and
security and that the international community should
continue working to eliminate unilateral coercive

A/71/PV.32

measures, as they are illegal, such as the economic,
commercial and financial embargo imposed by the
United States of America against Cuba.
Now, in my national capacity, I wish to say that the
Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela will vote in favour of
draft resolution A/71/L.3, for we are convinced that the
new statement by the General Assembly rejecting the
blockade imposed by the United States against Cuba
reflects our firm position with regard to unrestricted
respect for the purposes and principles that sustain the
international legal and political order in support of the
maintenance of harmonious and stable relations among
the Member States of this Organization.
The blockade imposed on the brotherly people
of Cuba for 56 years has shown itself today to be a
total failure. Its only objective has been the supposed
desire to restrict the right to self-determination of that
country and to defeat the Cuban revolution. Despite the
obstacles created by that unilateral measure, Cuba has
been able to deal with the illegal action, maintaining
its sovereignty and political independence with dignity
under the banners of international law and the Charter
of the United Nations.
We wish to point out that the American policy of
sanctions has been wrong and has drawn attention to
the extraordinary capacity and political determination
of the Cuban people and the intrinsic moral force of the
heirs of the legacy of José Martí.
Therefore, in contrast to the destabilizing purposes
and plans of the supporters of that illegal policy, Cuba
has been characterized throughout its revolutionary
history, under the leadership of Commander Fidel
Castro and the current President, Mr. Raúl Castro, by
its spirit of solidarity with the sister countries of the
developing world, providing, despite its economic
difficulties, unbiased help and solidarity to peoples with
humanitarian needs arising from natural disasters or
epidemics like Ebola and cholera. It deploys specialized
medical personnel to help victims of those diseases in
any corner of the globe.
Venezuela therefore once again urges the
Government of the United States to put an immediate
end to the economic, commercial and financial
blockade against this Latin American and Caribbean
sister country and to make that happen in harmony with
the process of the normalization of bilateral relations
between the two countries.

16-343127/27

A/71/PV.32

The defeat of the blockade is a moral and political
victory for the people of the Cuban revolution against
the largest empire on Earth. Long live Cuba! Long live
Chavez! Long live Fidel! Venceremos!
Mr. Sandoval Mendiolea (Mexico) (spoke in
Spanish): My delegation associates itself with the
statement made by the representative of the Dominican
Republic on behalf of the Community of Latin American
and Caribbean States.
As in previous years, Mexico once again reiterates
its rejection of the unilateral action against the Republic
of Cuba, including the imposition for more than five
decades of the economic, commercial and financial
blockade, which runs counter to international law and
the relations of friendship and cooperation that must
prevail among States.
Only a month ago, the President of Mexico,
Mr. Enrique Peña Nieto, reiterated before the General
Assembly (see A/71/PV.10) my country’s call for the
lifting of the economic, commercial and financial
blockade against Cuba, which will produce a climate
of detente and understanding in our region. The
Government of Mexico today reaffirms that call
and confirms that it will support the draft resolution
before the Assembly (A/71/L.3), as it invariably has in
previous years.
Mexico welcomes the progress in the process of
normalization of the relations between Cuba and the
United States of America, two important neighbours
and partners for my country, but it is aware that full
normalization requires eliminating the economic,
commercial and financial blockade against Cuba. My
country recognizes the measures that the President of
the United States has implemented to ease the blockade,
but it knows that lifting the blockade is within the
purview of the United States Congress.
The Republic of Cuba is undertaking efforts to
update its economic and social model. The elimination
of the embargo would facilitate the restructuring of the
Cuban economy and allow its full reintegration and
access to international trade flows and investment.
Mexico recognizes the actions taken by the Government
of the Republic of Cuba to fulfil its international
commitments in the field of development. Despite the
adverse circumstances that it has confronted for more
than 50 years, Cuba has high human development
indices in the areas of labour, health, education and
the environment, among others, as recently recognized
8/27

26/10/2016

in the United Nations Development Programme’s
2016 Regional Human Development Report for Latin
America and the Caribbean. With an end to the
blockade, Cuba will be able to implement the 2030
Agenda for Sustainable Development and fully achieve
its 17 Sustainable Development Goals.
My country supports the process of updating
the Cuban economic and social model and intends to
contribute to that process, if so requested.
Mr. Liu Jieyi (China) (spoke in Chinese): China
associates itself with the statement delivered by the
representative of Thailand on behalf of the Group of 77
and China.
A year ago, the United Nations development summit
adopted the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development,
which launched new prospects for international
cooperation for development. The comprehensive
implementation of the 2030 Agenda is, and will be
for some time to come, the central task in the field
of development.
Countries should work on the basis of equality,
engage in cooperation guided by an open and inclusive
approach and seek common development through
win-win cooperation with a view to sharing the fruits
of development. Such circumstances call for putting an
immediate end to the economic embargo and sanctions
imposed by the United States against Cuba.
The General Assembly has for 24 consecutive years
adopted by an overwhelming majority a resolution on
the necessity of ending the economic, commercial and
financial embargo imposed by the United States of
America against Cuba, and urging all States to comply
with the Charter of the United Nations and the norms of
international law, and rescind or abolish measures that
have extraterritorial effects affecting the sovereignty
of other States, the legitimate interests of entities or
persons under their jurisdiction and the freedom of
trade and navigation.
It is regrettable that for so many years none of
those resolutions have been implemented, and the
economic, commercial and financial embargo imposed
by the United States against Cuba still remains in
effect. Such violations of the purposes and principles
of the Charter of the United Nations and the relevant
General Assembly resolutions have caused enormous
economic and financial losses for Cuba and impeded
the efforts of the Cuban people to eradicate poverty and
16-34312

26/10/2016

promote sustainable economic and social development.
It has not only undermined the Cuban people’s right
to life and development, but has also affected the
normal economic, commercial and financial exchanges
between other countries and Cuba.
China has always stood for respect for the right
of countries to freely choose their social systems and
their path towards development. It opposes unilateral
sanctions against other countries by military, political,
economic or any other means. China has always strictly
complied with and implemented the relevant General
Assembly resolutions. China and Cuba have maintained
economic, commercial and personal exchanges, and a
friendly and mutually beneficial cooperation in various
areas between our two countries has been steadily
developing. Not long ago, Premier Li Keqiang visited
Cuba, at which time the leaders of our two countries
reached a broad common understanding on the further
deepening of the pragmatic cooperation between
China and Cuba in line with the aspirations of our two
peoples and in the interest of the economic and social
development of Cuba.
In our times, characterized by multipolarization,
economic globalization, cultural diversity and the
democratization of international relations, the general
trend is towards exchange and cooperation among
countries on an equal footing. Dialogue among equals
and amicable consultations represent the best way to
resolve differences.
Mr. Zamora Rivas (El Salvador), Vice-President,
took the Chair.
China has taken note of the measures taken by the
United States to ease the constraints it has imposed on
Cuba with regard to commerce, trade and tourism, and
we hope that the United States and Cuba will continue
to work towards the normalization of their relations. We
hope that the United States will fully repeal its embargo
policy against Cuba at an early date and develop normal
State-to-State relations with it, in accordance with the
purposes and principles of the Charter of the United
Nations and the basic norms governing international
relations. That is in the common interest of both
countries and their peoples and in the interest of the
peace and stability of the Americas and the common
development of the international community.
China will once again vote in favour of the draft
resolution, A/71/L.3, submitted by Cuba.

A/71/PV.32

Mrs. Nguyen (Viet Nam): At the outset, I would
like to extend my warmest welcome to Mr. Bruno
Rodríguez Parrilla, Minister for Foreign Affairs of the
Republic of Cuba.
Viet Nam aligns itself with the statements delivered
by the representatives of the Group of 77 and China,
the Movement of Non-Aligned Countries and the
Association of Southeast Asian Nations.
We greatly appreciate the Secretary-General’s
comprehensive report (A/71/91), which lays out the
positions of Member States on ending the economic,
commercial and financial embargo against Cuba and
assessments by United Nations agencies of the impact
of the blockade.
On 27 October 2015, Viet Nam joined with 190 other
delegations in voting in favour of resolution 70/5. The
adoption of that resolution by an overwhelming majority
once again sent a strong message from the international
community calling on the United States of America
to end its embargo against Cuba. It is our principled
position that Viet Nam opposes the imposition of any
unilateral embargo and coercive measures by one State
on another.
Today Viet Nam will vote unreservedly in favour
of draft resolution A/71/L.3 in its entirety. By its vote
Viet Nam wishes to reiterate its firm belief that the
United States blockade against Cuba, which has lasted
for more than five decades, is contrary to international
law and the fundamental principles of the Charter of
the United Nations and has caused untold hardship
to the Cuban people. That policy runs counter to
the common intentions of all nations in the world to
build international relations on a sound and equitable
basis, regardless of their political systems and with
respect for each nation’s right to choose its own path
of development.
Viet Nam welcomes the restoration of full
diplomatic ties between Cuba and the United States
and the outcomes of President Barack Obama’s visit to
Cuba in March. We also welcome the latest decision by
the United States President to issue his policy directive
on Cuba on 14 October and to announce a group of
measures to modify the application of some aspects of
the embargo. We hope that such progressive steps will
create a political dynamic that will eventually lead to
the repeal of the blockade, which poses an essential
obstacle to the normalization of relations between the
two countries.

16-343129/27

A/71/PV.32

Once again, Viet Nam joins with other delegations
to call on the United States to put an immediate end
to the economic, commercial and financial blockade
against Cuba. The lifting of the embargo would meet
the aspirations of both the American and the Cuban
peoples. It would be beneficial both for the people of
the region and for peace, stability and prosperity in the
region and the world.
My delegation wishes to take this opportunity
to reiterate Viet Nam’s friendship, cooperation and
solidarity with Cuba. We will continue to do our utmost
to help the people of Cuba to overcome the difficulties
and challenges imposed by the embargo.
Mr. Llorentty Solíz (Plurinational State of Bolivia)
(spoke in Spanish): At the outset, Bolivia welcomes
the presence among us of Comrade Bruno Rodríguez
Parrilla, Minister for Foreign Affairs of Cuba.
Once again, Bolivia joins the concert of the
nations of the world to condemn and repudiate, most
energetically, the unilateral, immoral, unjust, illegal,
anachronistic and criminal economic, commercial and
financial embargo imposed by the United States against
Cuba for more than half a century.
I will take advantage of these few minutes to pay
tribute to the Cuban people and its revolution. I am
convinced that the best way of doing so is to pay tribute
to the person who, as the Argentine writer Julio Cortázar
said, was the sculptor of the revolution. I am thinking
here about Fidel Castro Ruz, who, as the world knows,
recently celebrated his ninetieth birthday. He resisted
throughout the terms of 11 American Presidents, and
he won. He has survived more than 600 attacks against
his life organized by the empire. Never in the history of
humankind have there been so many plans and so many
resources devoted to ending the life of a single person.
Fidel has a special place — a privileged place — in the
hearts and in the history of the liberation of peoples. He
has shaped the most solidary-replete revolution in the
history of humankind and has brought us closer to the
utopia of a better world.
Cuba’s people, our people, have witnessed the
marvellous solidarity of the Cuban revolution. My
brothers and sisters from Africa know what I am
talking about. Cuba is the only non-African country
that fought against the regime of apartheid. Another
titan of history, Nelson Mandela, said the following,
10/27

26/10/2016

“I am a loyal man, and I will never forget that, in
the darkest moments of our country in the fight
against apartheid, Fidel Castro was on our side.”
Our brothers and sisters of Asia and Pacific also
know the Cubans, because Cuba has been in the front
lines helping victims of earthquakes and typhoons in
distant regions. Ho Chi Minh, the great Vietnamese
leader, said that Cubans, with Fidel as their leader, were
in solidarity with his people and their struggle, and that
the Vietnamese would never forget that support. In
my own region, in Latin America and the Caribbean,
countless lives have been saved by Cuban doctors.
Countless people know how to read and write thanks to
teachers from Cuba. Our President Morales Ayma has
noted that the Cubans shared the little that they had,
and they did so in a disinterested way; they never asked
anything from anyone — no mining, oil or forestry
resources — for their solidarity.
From this rostrum Fidel not only encouraged
humankind, but he led the fight against arms, against
nuclear weapons, against debt, against the pillaging
of our natural resources, against the anti-democratic
financial and monetary system, against climate change
and against hunger, disease and inequality — in
summary, against capitalism and imperialism and for
the building of a new international order.
Today we are not only voting against the blockade;
we are voting for hope and for the marvellous possibility
of making a better world. Cuba is the example to be
followed, and Fidel is the symbol of the dignity of
our peoples.
I wish to apologize to you, sir,, but when one is full
of gratitude in one’s heart, the last thing one is thinking
about is protocol. That is why I wish to conclude by
saying, “Long live Fidel! Long live Cuba!”
Mr. Lal (India): India associates itself with the
statement by the representative of Thailand on behalf
of the Group of 77 and China and the statement by the
representative of Venezuela on behalf of the Movement
of Non-Aligned Countries.
We welcome the Foreign Minister of Cuba among
us here today.
India welcomes the restoration of diplomatic
relations between Cuba and the United States of
America, the historic visit of the President of the United
States to Cuba in March and the further developments
in that regard since then.
16-34312

26/10/2016

For more than two decades now, the General
Assembly has considered annually the issue of the
economic, commercial and financial embargo imposed
by the United States against Cuba. It has consistently
rejected the imposition of laws and regulations with
extraterritorial impact and all other forms of coercive
economic measures that hurt the progress and
prosperity of people the world over. The Assembly has
also called upon all States, in conformity with their
obligations under the Charter of the United Nations
and international law, to refrain from promulgating and
applying laws and measures that have extraterritorial
effects affecting the sovereignty of other States, as well
as to repeal and invalidate any such laws. There can be
little doubt that the continued existence of the embargo
against Cuba, in contravention of world opinion as
expressed by the Assembly, undermines multilateralism
and the credibility of the United Nations itself.
As the world’s largest democracy, with an abiding
faith in multilateralism, India stands in solidarity
with the international community in its unambiguous
rejection of domestic laws having extraterritorial
impact. Embargoes impede the full achievement of
economic and social development by the population of
the affected country, in particular where children and
women are concerned. They also hinder the overall
enjoyment of human rights, including the right to
development, food, medical care and social services,
among other things.
Successive reports of the Secretary-General have
established — and this year’s report (A/71/91) is no
exception — that the embargo, particularly through
its extraterritorial effects, has adversely affected
the Cuban people and the development efforts of the
country. At the same time, we would like to acknowledge
the notable socioeconomic and developmental
achievements of the Cuban people, in particular the
high Human Development Index ranking of Cuba and its
achievement of several of the Millennium Development
Goals. The continued embargo would severely impact
Cuba’s ability to implement the comprehensive 2030
Agenda for Sustainable Development.
Cuba’s expertise in health care, achieved despite
the conditions imposed by the embargo, enabled it to
respond quickly, effectively and in a substantial manner
to the call made by the General Assembly two years ago
to all nations to respond to the Ebola crisis in Africa.

A/71/PV.32

In launching the transformative 2030 Agenda for
Sustainable Development, world leaders again strongly
urged all States to refrain from unilateral economic,
financial or trade measures not in accordance with
international law and the Charter of the United Nations.
The international community needs to redouble its
efforts to promote an environment free from sanctions
and embargoes.
India hopes that the ongoing positive developments
in the relations between Cuba and the United States will
lead to the withdrawal of the embargo at the earliest
possible date. India supports draft resolution A/71/L.3,
submitted by Cuba.
Mr. Mangisi (Tonga): Let me start by recognizing
and welcoming the Minister for Foreign Affairs of
Cuba, His Excellency Mr. Bruno Eduardo Rodríguez
Parrilla.
We also align our statement with that delivered by
the representative of the Kingdom of Thailand as Chair
of the Group of 77 and China.
As speakers have reiterated before me, and as
undoubtedly the majority will do so after me as well, the
decades of the operation of the economic, commercial
and financial embargo imposed by our friend the
United States on another friend of ours, Cuba, has
caused and continues to cause significant economic
damage, counted in the billions of dollars, resulting in
the continuing immeasurable suffering of the people
of Cuba. As the longest-lasting system of unilateral
sanctions ever applied to one country, it unjustly hinders
the economic and social development of the Cuban
people. As a fellow small island developing State facing
similar challenges, we feel and recognize the injustice
of the embargo. We therefore join the call to end the
economic, commercial and financial embargo imposed
against Cuba.
Our call this morning cuts deeper, at a more
personal level as well. In talking about friendships
between our country and the United States and Cuba,
our solidarity regarding the hardships and challenges
imposed on the Cuban people should be understood at
a personal level, given that we have nationals who are
living side by side with the Cuban people on the ground
as students. As a friend of the United States, we wish
to reiterate again to the United States that the effects of
such an archaic form of interference and intervention in
the domestic and sovereign affairs of Cuba also results
in undue difficulty to the lives of our nationals who are

16-3431211/27

A/71/PV.32

26/10/2016

striving, along with the Cuban people, to get by on a
daily basis.

enduring full support for and solidarity with the people
and the Government of Cuba.

My Permanent Representative, who unfortunately
cannot be here today because of official travel, looks
forward to presenting his credentials in Havana next
month and to meeting with our nationals in the hope of
getting some reprieve for them because of the difficult
situation that they are living in owing to the challenges
imposed on them by the embargo, and thereby, by
extension, on Tonga as a country. It is more personal
to us to that extent, and, as a friend to a friend, we
reach out to the United States to encourage it to see
the negativity that the embargo creates, not only in
terms of its relationship with Cuba but also for other
countries that may be, or are, unduly affected as well
by the embargo, like my own.

This year has witnessed important developments
in the bilateral relations between Cuba and the United
States, including the visit by the United States President
to Cuba last March. We welcome such developments
in bilateral relations and encourage further steps along
that path. Nonetheless, the economic, commercial and
financial embargo imposed by the United States against
Cuba remains in place. The impact of such unilateral
measures and the cost imposed on the Cuban people
and economy are staggering. Between March 2015
and March 2016 the cost of the sanctions imposed on
Cuba has been estimated at over $4.68 billion — a
staggering amount.

We recognize the positive steps that the United
States has taken to date in its relationship with Cuba.
Clearly, though, those steps may not be enough, as
the Cuban people, along with our own nationals, are
still experiencing challenges, which we often do not
recognize, and they are being deprived of things that
we take for granted here in the comforts of New York
and at Headquarters. With elections looming here in
the host country, we pray that the good works of the
current Administration will be carried forward and
that, in the meantime, the President of the United
States will still use his executive powers to improve
further its relations with Cuba before having to resort
to congressional action.
We therefore reiterate our support for the right
of the Cuban people to enjoy full freedom in their
economic and social development, and we call for an
end to the embargo imposed upon them.
Mr. Moustafa (Egypt) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I align myself with the statements delivered
by the representative of Thailand on behalf of the
Group of 77 and China, by the representative of
Venezuela on behalf of the Movement of Non-Aligned
Countries, by the representative of Kuwait on behalf
of the Organization of Islamic Cooperation and by the
representative of the Niger on behalf of the Group of
African States. I would also like to make the following
additional brief remarks.
It is with great pleasure that we welcome His
Excellency Mr. Bruno Rodríguez Parrilla, Minister
for Foreign Affairs of Cuba, and assure him of Egypt’s
12/27

As I mentioned earlier, Egypt will always be a
steadfast supporter of the rights of the Cuban people
and their demands to end the current situation. We
reject the current unilateral embargo policy, which
transgresses international legitimacy. For five decades
that policy has adversely affected the Cuban people’s
access to food, medicines, education and advanced
technology.
We encourage the United States to take brave
decisions and steps to immediately lift of the embargo
imposed on Cuba. We hope that such steps will pave
the way for the normalization of the bilateral relations
between the two countries in all spheres.
Mr. Mminele (South Africa): South Africa aligns
itself with the statements delivered by the representative
of the Kingdom of Thailand on behalf of the Group of
77 and China and by the representative of Venezuela
on behalf of the Movement of Non-Aligned Countries.
We also acknowledge the presence of the Foreign
Minister of Cuba.
My delegation supports draft resolution A/71/L.3.
We believe that it provides a good basis for finally
ending the embargo against Cuba and its people. South
Africa and Cuba have a long-standing relationship and
solidarity dating back to the struggle against apartheid
and colonialism in Southern Africa. We take note of
the report of the Secretary-General (A/71/91) issued on
21 July, which provides an assessment of where we are
on the issue.
The Government of South Africa welcomes the
historic rapprochement between the United States of
America and Cuba and the visit to Cuba by President
16-34312

26/10/2016

A/71/PV.32

Barack Obama in March — the first visit to Cuba by a
sitting President of the United States in nearly 90 years.
We hope that the next United States President will carry
forward that rapprochement, as well as take all the
necessary measures within his or her broad executive
powers to deal with all outstanding issues.

and medical sciences, over 2,800 South African students
are currently undertaking medical training in Cuba in
order to help them qualify as medical doctors. So far,
500 South Africans from disadvantaged backgrounds
have graduated as medical doctors after receiving
training in Cuba.

South Africa remains seriously concerned about
the illegal nature of the imposition of the blockade and
about the immense human and economic suffering and
hardship endured by the people of Cuba for more than
half a century. Almost two years after the Governments
of Cuba and the United States decided to rekindle their
diplomatic relations and begin a process towards the
normalization of their diplomatic relations, there have
been no substantial changes in the application of the
embargo policy in the national banking system.

In conclusion, the Republic of South Africa
reiterates its unconditional support for the
implementation of this year’s draft resolution on the
embargo. We take this opportunity to appeal once again
to the international community to redouble its efforts
to promote constructive and transparent dialogue
between the two countries with a view to achieving the
objectives of all the many previous resolutions adopted
by the United Nations on the matter and to ensuring the
sustainable further progress of the people of Cuba. The
international community cannot, and should not, wait
any longer for this matter to be resolved, if we are truly
committed to leaving no one behind.

Cuban monetary assets abroad continue to be
persecuted by the embargo and its repercussions. That
unhealthy state of affairs cannot be allowed to carry on,
as it adversely affects the economic aspirations of Cuba
and its people. It is critical that banking institutions in
Cuba be permitted to make financial transactions in
United States dollars so that bilateral and commercial
relations between the two countries can be tangible
and meaningful.
The current dire situation is aggravated by the
state of uncertainty faced by banks in third countries.
We would like to request Member States to support
Cuba and its people by scrapping any domestic laws or
regulations that continue to hamper the development of
Cuba and its people.
Cuba continues to be a beacon of hope for many
developing countries, and it plays its role in making this
world a better place for all humankind. However, for
Cuba the embargo remains the most significant obstacle
in its quest to realize its development objectives,
including those enshrined in the 2030 Agenda for
Sustainable Development.
In the midst of the current global challenges and
related uncertainties that continue to hamper the
economic development of the Global South, there are
positive activities taking place under South-South
cooperation. In that regard, South Africa would like
to make a special mention of one of Cuba’s many
contributions to South Africa.
Under the auspices of the South Africa-Cuba
agreement on cooperation in the fields of public health

Mr. Sobrai Duarte (Brazil) (spoke in Spanish): My
delegation aligns itself with the statements made by the
representative of Thailand on behalf of the Group of 77
and China and by the representative of the Dominican
Republic on behalf of Community of Latin American
and Caribbean States. I make the following statement
in my national capacity.
For decades the Brazilian Government has
supported the normalization of the relations between
the United States of America and Cuba. It was with
great satisfaction that Brazil received the news of the
re-establishment of diplomatic relations between the two
countries, thus overcoming anachronistic animosities
and generating positive effects for our entire region. It
is especially symbolic that, almost 90 years after the
last United States presidential visit to Cuba, President
Barack Obama visited Havana in March this year.
We
enthusiastically
welcome
the
recent
appointments of the Cuban Ambassador to Washington
and the United States Ambassador to Havana, which is
still awaiting approval from the United States Senate.
We also welcome the concrete measures directly
affecting the lives of citizens in both countries, such as
the establishment of aerial, maritime and postal links
and the facilitation of financial remittances.
Despite those advances, the well-being of the Cuban
people, particularly those who are the poorest and most
vulnerable, continues to be negatively affected by the
blockade. We recognize the efforts of the President of

16-3431213/27

A/71/PV.32

the United States to put an end to the embargo, and we
consider it essential that the United States Congress
begin discussions regarding the elimination of the
embargo. The lifting of the embargo against Cuba has
the indisputable support of the international community,
made clear by the 191 votes in favour of resolution 70/5
at the previous session of the General Assembly.
My delegation is confident that the time has come
for dialogue and cooperation, which could promptly
lead to the end of the blockade.
Mr. Sevilla Borja (Ecuador) (spoke in Spanish):
The unilateral blockade imposed by the United States
against Cuba for 56 years is a blatant example of the
reprehensible implementation of power politics. It will
remain in the annals of history as a clear demonstration
of abusive behaviour by a super-Power against a
dignified and proud people who jealously cling to their
sovereignty. This is shameful disregard by that superPower for international law and the virtually unanimous
opinion of the international community, which year
after year at the General Assembly has demanded an
end to that policy.
That behaviour comes from a country that in 1776
inspired the peoples of the world with its struggle
for decolonization, independence and freedom. It is
the country that joined the Allies to defeat nazism
and fascism, thereby saving humankind. An original
signatory of the Charter of San Francisco, its people,
under the leadership of Martin Luther King, Jr., and
Malcolm X, fought for the equality of human beings
without regard for the colour of their skin. We hope that
President Obama, who has lately taken bold, positive
steps with regard to Cuba, will now, at the end of his
term, adopt measures consistent with the best traditions
of the history of his country.
With draft resolution A/71/L.3, which we will adopt
in a few minutes, such anti-historical stubbornness
to maintain an illegal and abusive blockade will be
morally condemned once more, to the embarrassment of
its practitioners. The Cuban people already triumphed,
and their revolution persists and serves as an example.
Mrs. Rubiales de Chamorro (Nicaragua) (spoke
in Spanish): We thank our dear colleagues from Cuba,
including our brother and comrade Foreign Minister
Bruno Rodríguez, for their presence here today.
We appreciate the updated information for the year
2016 that we have received in the Secretary-General’s
14/27

26/10/2016

report on the impact of the criminal economic, financial
and commercial blockade against the people and the
Government of Cuba (A/71/91).
Cuba knows of and can be assured of our support
and our unconditional solidarity. The Cuban revolution
started with firmness and determination in its first
steps towards dignity and the restitution of the
political, economic and social rights of the peoples
of Latin America and the Caribbean. After a more
than five decades of resistance, the Cuban people and
Government have created values personalizing dignity
and sovereignty, reaffirming their socialist revolution
and humanist values.
Cuba has always been the first to respond to our
needs of all kinds in disasters or emergency situations.
With reference to the Cuba of Fidel and Raúl and all
their daughters and sons, Commander President Daniel
Ortega rightly said at the ninetieth birthday celebration
of Fidel:
“We have learned so much from Fidel. He has
taught us so much by his ardent words, his
eloquence, his unique mission of justice, solidarity
and complementarity in our efforts to unite
and develop together our vigor and talents, our
cultures and our citizenship in a free, sovereign
and independent nation. Our American and
Caribbean peoples — homeland and fighting
peoples, homeland and valiant peoples, homeland
and peoples who have forged revolution and
evolution in dignity and pride.”
We are delighted with the restoration of the
relationship between Cuba and the United States of
America. However, it is disappointing to note that the
blockade continues. Despite the measures announced,
the blockade persists. There are also the persistent
will and policies to promote and impose changes in
the economic, political and social order of Cuba, and
the intention to continue developing programmes of
interference.
It is unacceptable to our country that coercive
and unilateral economic measures are being used as
a selective political instrument to attack independent
peoples and to implement policies of regime change.
The prolonged negative effect of the blockade has
been and continues to be the main obstacle to the
sustainable development of the Cuban people. It is
totally contrary to the approval of the 2030 Agenda for
Sustainable Development and its implementation, to
16-34312

26/10/2016

which all Member States have committed. The historic
and anachronistic blockade imposed on that heroic
people and Government in violation of international
law has been rejected by 191 countries, affirming that
the mobilizing role of the international community has
been, and will continue to be, essential for the lifting of
the blockade.
While the Government of the United States of
America persists in its failed and isolated policy
against the people and Government of Cuba, and while
it continues to ignore the universal call by the peoples
of the world, including its own, the General Assembly
will continue to demand the end and total dismantling
of its inhumane, illegal and criminal blockade, which
is supported by just two countries that have rebelled
against the will of the international community. As
long as the United States does not abandon its policy of
interference and imposition, whether through coercive
measures or efforts to achieve a change of Government,
against Cuba and other developing countries, we will
have to continue presenting draft resolutions on the
topic to the General Assembly. My delegation will
continue to support such draft resolutions, including
that in A/71/L.3, presented today by our sister country
of Cuba. We will vote in favour of it.
The international community hopes that in 2016
the United States will finally demonstrate greater
political will so that this draft resolution can be adopted
without a vote and we can finally witness the end of the
blockade against Cuba, which will require guarantees
ensuring the practical, total and complete dismantling
of the blockade. Then the United States will be acting
in harmony with the desires and aspirations of the
international community.
In conclusion, I reiterate that Latin America and the
Caribbean will continue to demand that the Government
of the United States change its policy towards our
continent. We want peace, respect and non-interference
and the final and complete dismantling of the criminal
blockade against Cuba, as well as the return to the
fraternal Cuban people of their legitimate territory of
Guantánamo.
Ms. Power (United States of America): For more
than 50 years, the United States had a policy aimed at
isolating the Government of Cuba. For roughly half of
those years, Member States voted overwhelmingly for
a General Assembly draft resolution condemning the
United States embargo and calling for it to be ended.

A/71/PV.32

The United States has always voted against this draft
resolution; today the United States will abstain. Let me
explain why.
In December 2014, President Obama made clear
his opposition to the embargo and called on our
Congress to take action to lift it. Yet while the Obama
Administration agrees that the United States embargo
on Cuba should be lifted, it is not for the reason
stated in the draft resolution before us (A/71/L.3).
All actions of the United States with regard to Cuba
have been, and are, in conformity with the Charter of
the United Nations and international law, including
applicable trade law and the customary law of the
sea. We categorically reject the statements in the draft
resolution that suggest otherwise.
But the draft resolution being voted on today is
a perfect example of why the United States policy of
isolation towards Cuba was not working — or worse,
how it was actually undermining the very goals it
set out to achieve. Instead of isolating Cuba, our
policy has, as President Obama has repeatedly said,
isolated the United States, including right here at the
United Nations.
Under President Obama we have adopted a new
approach: rather than to try to close off Cuba from the
rest of the world, we want the world of opportunities
and ideas to open its doors to the people of Cuba. After
over 50 years of pursuing the path of isolation, we have
chosen to take the path of engagement, because, as
President Obama said in Havana, we recognize that the
future of the island of course lies in the hands of the
Cuban people.
In the nearly two years since President Obama
announced the shift in our approach, we have
amended the regulations implementing the embargo
six times — most recently on 14 October — while
finding ways to increase engagement between our
Governments and our peoples. We have re-established
diplomatic relations with the Government of Cuba,
reopened embassies in our respective capitals, resumed
regularly scheduled commercial flights between the
United States and Cuba, facilitated people-to-people
travel, eased restrictions on American businesses and
entrepreneurs who want to do business in Cuba, and
stopped limiting how often Cuban-Americans can visit
their families on the island.
President Obama memorably became the first
sitting United States President to visit Cuba since 1928;

16-3431215/27

A/71/PV.32

and, in a much more modest journey here in New York,
I made the first visit by a United States Ambassador
to the United Nations to Cuba’s Permanent Mission to
the United Nations since the Cuban revolution. Today
we add to that list the first United States abstention on
the General Assembly draft resolution calling for the
embargo to be ended.
Abstaining on the draft resolution does not mean
that the United States agrees with all of the policies
and practices of the Cuban Government. We do
not. We are profoundly concerned by the serious
human rights violations that the Cuban Government
continues to commit with impunity against its own
people — including arbitrarily detaining those who
criticize the Government, threatening, intimidating
and at times physically assaulting citizens who take
part in peaceful marches and meetings and severely
restricting the access that people on the island have to
outside information.
As President Obama made clear when he travelled
to Havana, we believe that the Cuban people, like all
peoples, are entitled to basic human rights, such as the
right to speak their minds without fear and the right
to assemble, organize and protest peacefully. We say
that not because those views reflect a United Statescentric conception of rights, but rather because they
are universal human rights — enshrined in the Charter
of the United Nations and in the Universal Declaration
of Human Rights — that all 193 Member States are
supposed to respect and defend. They are rights
that are essential for the dignity of men, women and
children regardless of where they live or what kind of
Government they have.
Let me be among the first to acknowledge that,
as our Cuban counterparts have often pointed out, the
United States has work to do in ensuring those rights
for our own citizens. We know that at times in our
history United States leaders and citizens have used the
pretext of promoting democracy and human rights in
the region to justify actions that have left a deep legacy
of mistrust. We recognize that our history, in which
there is so much that makes us proud, also gives us
ample reason to be humble.
We also recognize the areas in which the Cuban
Government has made significant progress in advancing
the welfare of its people, from significantly reducing its
child mortality rate to ensuring that girls have the same
access to primary and secondary school as boys.
16/27

26/10/2016

But none of that means that we should stay
silent when the rights of the Cuban people are being
violated — as Member States here at the United
Nations have too often done. That is why the United
States raised those concerns directly with the Cuban
Government during our historic dialogue on human
rights in Havana on 14 October, which shows that, while
our Governments continue to disagree on fundamental
questions of human rights, we have found a way to
discuss those issues in a respectful and reciprocal
manner. We urge other Member States to speak up
about those issues as well.
The United States believes that there is a great
deal that we can do together with Cuba to tackle global
challenges. That includes here at the United Nations,
where the decades-long enmity between our nations
has at best been a distraction from and, at worst, an
obstacle to carrying out some of the most important
work of this institution and helping the world’s most
vulnerable people.
Let me conclude by giving just one example — a
very moving example. In 2014, we were confronted with
the deadliest outbreak of Ebola in our planet’s history.
The most dire predictions estimated that more than
1 million people could be infected within a few months.
Yet while experts made clear that the only way to
stop the epidemic was to confront it at its source, the
international community was slow to step up. Many
were paralysed.
It was in that context that President Obama decided
to deploy more than 3,000 United States personnel
to the epicentre of the outbreak, where they joined
hundreds of Americans working for non-governmental
organizations and humanitarian agencies in the
hardest-hit areas. President Obama also set about
rallying other Member States to do their part. One
of the very first countries to step forward was Cuba,
which sent more than 200 health professionals to the
region — an awe-inspiring contribution for a country
of just 11 million people.
One of them was a 43-year-old Cuban doctor
named Félix Báez Sarría, who was dispatched to an
Ebola treatment unit in Sierra Leone. In the course of
treating those infected, Dr. Báez Sarría came down with
the symptoms of the virus, and he quickly went from
being the doctor to being a patient. As his condition
deteriorated, he was airlifted to Geneva, where for
two days he drifted in and out of consciousness. He
16-34312

26/10/2016

nearly died, yet miraculously he pulled through, and
eventually returned to Havana, where he says he
regained his strength by cradling his 2-year-old son.
I would like members to think, just for one
moment, about what it took to save the life of Dr. Báez
Sarría — a man who risked his life to save people
from a country on the other side of the world. He
was initially treated in the clinic where he worked,
which had been built with the help of a United Statesbased non-governmental organization. From there he
was transported to a clinic run by doctors from the
British Ministry of Defence. Then he was airlifted to
Switzerland aboard a medical transport plane operated
by an American charter service. Upon arriving at the
hospital in Geneva he was treated by Swiss doctors
with a Canadian-developed experimental treatment.
Look at all the nations that played a part in saving
the life of that brave doctor — a doctor who, after
recuperating in Havana, actually chose to return to
Sierra Leone so that he could rejoin his colleagues
in the field in saving the lives of Sierra Leoneans.
Dr. Báez Sarría and all his colleagues belonged to
Cuba’s Henry Reeve Contingent, which responds to
international disasters and epidemics. It takes its name
from a young American born in Brooklyn, who at the
age of 19 travelled to Cuba to join the country’s struggle
for independence and gave his life, in 1876, fighting
alongside Cubans for their freedom.
The President returned to the Chair.
When Dr. Báez Sarría returned to Sierra Leone he
was asked why he had come back after all he had been
through. He said simply,
“I needed to come back. Ebola is a challenge that I
must fight to the finish here in order to keep it from
spreading to the rest of the world.”
What I have just described is what the United
Nations looks like when it works. Noble efforts like
those are precisely why the United States and Cuba must
continue to find ways to engage, even as our differences
persist. Today we will take another small step to be able
to do that. May there be many more — including, we
hope, finally ending the United States embargo once
and for all.
The President: I now give the floor to His
Excellency Mr. Bruno Rodríguez Parrilla, Minister for
Foreign Affairs of Cuba, to introduce draft resolution
A/71/L.3.

A/71/PV.32

Mr. Rodríguez Parrilla (Cuba) (spoke in Spanish):
Almost two years have passed since President Barack
Obama announced his willingness to use his executive
powers and to work with Congress to lift the blockade
against Cuba. During that period, the three Cuban
anti-terrorist fighters returned; the unjustifiable
inclusion of Cuba on the so-called list of State sponsors
of international terrorism was eliminated; diplomatic
relations were restored and embassies were reopened in
the respective capitals; and the President of the United
States, the Secretary of State and other members of the
Cabinet visited Havana, along with dozens of senators,
representatives and persons from many sectors.
There is no doubt that progress has been made in
dialogue and cooperation on issues of common interest,
and a dozen agreements rendering reciprocal benefits
have been signed. And now the United States has just
announced that it will abstain in the voting on draft
resolution A/71/L.3.
However, the economic, commercial and financial
blockade persists, harming the Cuban people and
hindering the country’s economic development. Given
its marked extraterritorial character, the blockade
also directly affects all States Members of the United
Nations. The United States leader and other senior
officials have described it as obsolete, useless in
advancing American interests, failed, meaningless and
unviable, a burden for citizens that harms the Cuban
people and causes the United States to be isolated. The
embargo should be lifted.
It has taken 24 years to change the lone vote of
the United States of America in this Hall. It has been
24 years, as Ambassador Samantha Power has said, of
isolation and failure. The 58 years of heroic resistance
by our people serve as a backdrop for what is occurring.
At this time, I am thinking of my people, of Fidel and
Raúl, and of the young Cubans who have inherited our
long, glorious struggle.
Some people have asked me why I am introducing
the draft resolution again to the General Assembly. I
cannot in any way underestimate the powerful political
and moral message that the Assembly is sending to
the peoples of the world. Truth always opens the way;
justice ends up winning. The abstention just announced
is certainly a positive step for the future of improving
relations between the United States and Cuba. I thank
Ambassador Power for her words and efforts.

16-3431217/27

A/71/PV.32

26/10/2016

However, most of the executive regulations and
laws establishing the blockade remain in force and
are being rigorously implemented by United States
Government agencies. We recognize that the executive
measures adopted by the Government of the United
States are positive steps, but they have a very limited
scope and effect. The measures taken in the area of
telecommunications, unfortunately, pursue openly
declared political and interventionist objectives, but
they show how broad the powers of the President are.
If he wanted to, he could authorize, tomorrow, trade,
private loans and investments in all sectors of the
Cuban economy.

in our country nor joint ventures, not even for the
production of Cuban pharmaceutical and biotechnology
products — whose commercialization and distribution
in the United States has, fortunately, been authorized,
provided they receive approval from the United States
Food and Drug Administration.

The measures relating to trade with small private
businesses — which measures are also, unfortunately,
explicitly politically motivated — will not work on a
substantial scale as long as the economic organization
and structures of Cuba’s foreign trade are not taken
into account. Nevertheless, they show that in the area
of trade there could be progress even if the blockade
laws remain unchanged.

For its part, the United States Congress has not
approved any of the 20 amendments or legislative
initiatives that, with bipartisan support, have proposed
eliminating some restrictions in the blockade, or
even the whole policy. On the contrary, more than 50
legislative initiatives have been introduced that threaten
to reinforce basic aspects of the blockade and to prevent
the President from issuing new executive orders or
from implementing the measures already adopted. Nor
have specific Government actions been undertaken in
that regard.

Some United States spokespersons have said that
the Cuban system hinders the implementation of such
measures. They know that that is not correct. It is the
whole of the embargo that determines the current reality.
It is obvious and well known that the President of the
United States has broad executive powers that he has
not used. He could substantially modify the practical
implementation of the blockade and its humanitarian
and economic impact. Does this change of vote mean
that he will use those powers with determination?
Only 12 days ago, the United States Department
of the Treasury and the Department of Commerce
announced new measures that, although positive,
have very limited scope. Mostly they are designed to
broaden previously authorized transactions. Rather
than benefit Cuba and the Cuban people, they favour
the United States.
There is some good news. From now on, United
States citizens who are authorized by their Government
to visit Cuba or are travelling to other countries,
will be allowed to buy and carry with them in their
personal luggage Cuban products, without a limit on
value, including rum and tobacco — whatever will fit
into their personal luggage. Nevertheless, exporting
those products to the United States is still prohibited.
Why is that? Unless there are specific licenses, the
new measures allow neither United States investments
18/27

Exports from the United States to Cuba have not
been expanded beyond the previously authorized
limited sales, which exclude key sectors of the Cuban
economy. No announcement has been made of other
changes in the financial sector, thus the ban on opening
transfer accounts by Cuban banks in similar United
States institutions is still in effect.

It is therefore necessary to judge on the basis of
the facts. The most important and obvious step is
to dismantle the blockade — more important than
speeches, press statements or even the vote of a
delegation in this Hall. To reiterate, we must judge on
the basis of the facts.
The human damage resulting from the blockade is
incalculable. There is no Cuban family or industry in
the country that has not suffered its effects on health,
education, food, services, the prices of goods and
wages and pensions. The imposition of discriminatory
and onerous conditions, together with the deterrent
effects of the blockade, restricts food purchases and
acquisitions on the United States market of drugs,
reagents, spare parts for medical equipment and
instruments and others.
The United States company Medtronic could not
establish contracts with Cuban companies to sell its
deep brain stimulators to treat Cuban patients with
Parkinson’s disease and other neurological disorders.
Very recently it claimed this was due to restrictions of
the blockade. Nor was it possible for the multinational
company Sigma-Aldrich to provide means of protection
and chemical and biotechnological products requested
16-34312

26/10/2016

by the Cuban company Farmacuba for the manufacture
of drugs in the country.

A/71/PV.32

In May, the United States Nuclear Regulatory
Commission notified the United States branch of the
German company Eckert and Ziegler that it would deny
its application for a license to provide its products to the
Dutch company Philips, which is the calibration source
for medical equipment acquired by the Oncology
Institute in Cuba in 2013, affecting a vital service for
cancer patients.

the transfer services of the Commerzbank of Germany
and KBC Bank of Belgium. Under the shameful
Cuban Medical Professional Parole Program for
Cubans working in other countries, the United States
attempts to hamper medical cooperation and to deprive
those countries and my own of indispensable, highly
qualified human resources. Last month, banks based in
Pakistan refused to open a letter of credit requested by
a company of that country for the purchase of 100,000
doses of the hepatitis B vaccine, on the grounds that
Cuba was a country under United States sanctions.

On 26 September, the Italian supplier of medical
equipment Emildue notified the Cuban company
Medicuba that the United States company Boston
Scientific Corporation refused to sell a radio-frequency
generator of the Cosman brand for diagnosing cancer.
The blockade also affects the interests of American
citizens themselves, who could benefit from various
services in Cuba, including health care.

The legal ban preventing American citizens from
freely travelling to Cuba remains in force, which is a
violation of their civil liberties and rights — though
travel has been facilitated, under general licenses,
only for purposes corresponding to the 12 categories
authorized by United States law. A United States citizen
runs the risk of paying a $100,000 fine for having
travelled to Cuba accompanied by several persons.

I express thanks to Ambassador Samantha Power
for her heartfelt words, and I share her sentiments
concerning the symbolic case of Dr. Félix Sarría Báez.
That is an example of how much we could accomplish
when there is international cooperation.

The blockade continues to be a massive, flagrant
and systematic violation of the human rights of all
Cuban men and women and qualifies as an act of
genocide under the Convention on the Prevention and
Punishment of the Crime of Genocide, of 1948. It is an
obstacle to international cooperation in humanitarian
areas.

However, it cannot be forgotten that during the
tragic time of the Ebola epidemic in West Africa,
the deployment of Cuban medical aid was hampered
by the refusal of the British Standard Chartered
Bank to make transfers between the World Health
Organization and the Cuban Medical Brigades, whose
members — including Dr. Sarría Báez — risked their
lives serving in direct contact with patients. Even
under those extreme conditions, such transfers required
specific authorizations from the Treasury Department.
The Uganda branch of that bank closed the personal
accounts of Cuban health workers in that country, and
a Barclays Bank subsidiary also prevented them from
making transfers to Cuba. The same thing happened
with the Cuban cooperation personnel in the education
sector in other countries.
These examples demonstrate the complex reality
between the United States and Cuba. Nevertheless, this
morning’s focus is encouraging. Given the United States
change in vote, one could ask whether such practices
will cease.
No transfers were possible in August in cases
involving maternal, child and ophthalmological
services in Algeria, owing to refusals on the part of

According to rigorous, careful and conservative
estimates, between April 2015 and March 2016, the
direct economic damage incurred by Cuba owing
directly to the blockade amounted to $4.68 billion in
today’s dollars. The economic damage accumulated
over almost six decades amounts to $753,688 billion,
taking into account the depreciation in the price of
gold. At current prices, that amounts to more than
$125 billion dollars.
The blockade is the main obstacle to the economic
and social development of our people. It constitutes
a flagrant violation of international law, the Charter
of the United Nations and the Proclamation of Latin
America and the Caribbean as a Zone of Peace. Its
extraterritorial application adds greater magnitude to
its character as a violation of international law. How
can one object to these claims? It suffices to read the
legal documents.
We welcomed the announcement by the United
States Department of the Treasury authorizing
my country to use the United States dollar in its
international transactions. Thus far, however, Cuba has

16-3431219/27

A/71/PV.32

been unable to make payments or cash deposits in that
currency, owing to fines and the intimidating effects of
the blockade. And in third-party countries we have seen
an increase in the cessation of operations, the closure of
Cuban bank accounts abroad, the denial of credit and
the rejection of transfers to or from Cuba.
When trying to access from Cuba the website of the
Norton division of the Symantec company — which,
among other things, provides services for blocking and
removing malware and computer viruses — one reads,
“In compliance with applicable United States laws,
we are unable to process your request.” Many other
websites respond that the user does not have permission
to access an Internet address from their server, or
simply state “access denied”.
Other factors in addition to the blockade contribute
to our economic difficulties. These include the unjust
international economic order, the global crisis, the
historical distortions and structural weaknesses
of underdevelopment, high dependence on energy
and food imports, the effects of climate change and
natural disasters, as well as — something that we do
not hide — our own mistakes. Our people and the
Government have fought hard to overcome that reality.
On 17 April, President Raúl Castro Ruz said,
“We have the will to develop a respectful dialogue
and build a new kind of relationship with the United
States, such as has never existed between the two
countries, because we are convinced that it can
only result in mutual benefits.”
More recently, on 17 December, he added,
“We reaffirm our desire for relations of civilized
coexistence with the United States, but Cuba will
neither renounce even one of its principles nor
compromise on its sovereignty and independence.”

26/10/2016

The presidential policy directive published on
14 October states that the Government of the United
States recognizes the sovereignty and self-determination
of Cuba and that it is up to the Cuban people to make
their own choices about their future. However, its
misleading language does not hide the intent to alter
the constitutional order and promote changes in the
economic, political, social and cultural system of Cuba.
Nor does it hide the intention to continue to develop
interventionist programmes that serve the interests of
the United States, nor the intention to infiltrate them
into sectors of Cuban society.
The directive says that the United States will not
pursue regime change in Cuba, but it admits that the
United States will
“support Cuba’s emerging ... civil society; and
encourage partners and non-governmental actors
to join us in advocating for reforms. While
remaining committed to supporting democratic
activists ... we will also engage community leaders,
bloggers, activists, and other social-issue leaders
who can contribute to Cuba’s internal dialogue on
civic participation.”
The directive continues, stating that United States
will continue its
“democracy and broadcasting programmes, while
protecting our interests and assets, such as the
Guantánamo Bay Naval Station .... The United
States Government has no intention to alter the
existing lease treaty and other arrangements related
to the Guantánamo Bay Naval Station”.
When the directive was presented, it was said that
“We cannot simply sit back and wait for Cuba to change
without getting involved.”

Historically, the Government of the United States
initially intended to annex Cuba, and when that failed,
it tried to exercise domination over it. On the triumph
of the Cuban revolution, the United States Government
set out to

The directive claims that Cuba remains indebted
to the United States Government for bilateral debts
incurred before the Cuban revolution. Maybe they
think that the Cuban revolution will pay the debts of
the bloody dictator Fulgencio Batista? They should
understand that we are already free, precisely because
in 1959 we rid ourselves of United States imperialism
and the dictatorship that it imposed on us.

“provoke disappointment and discouragement
through economic dissatisfaction and hardships
... denying Cuba money and supplies to reduce
nominal and real salaries to provoke hunger,
desperation and overthrow the Government”.

George W. Bush’s “Initiative for a New Cuba” of
19 May 2002 sought to link the easing of the travel and
trade bans in place to internal political and economic
changes. Cubans responded on 26 June this year with
8 million signatures in support of the constitutional

20/27

16-34312

26/10/2016

A/71/PV.32

amendment — which is part of the Constitution of the
Republic of Cuba — that proclaims the irrevocable
nature of socialism in our country.

cease. The change in vote that Ambassador Power just
announced is a promising sign. We hope that it will be
reflected in reality.

It would be worthwhile to acknowledge that change
in Cuba is a sovereign matter of Cubans alone and
that Cuba is a truly independent country. That is so
because it gained its independence on its own and has
defended it, and will continue to defend it, at the price
of the greatest sacrifices and risks. It must known that
our people seized power, they empowered themselves
long ago, and they daily exercise sovereign power, the
people’s power. Only that explains why we are here
today.

We are deeply grateful to all the Governments
and peoples, parliaments, political parties and
social movements, civil society representatives and
international and regional organizations that have
contributed their voices or votes, year after year, to
support the justness and urgency of the abolition of
the blockade.

We are proud of our history and our culture, which
are our most prized treasures. We will never forget our
past, because that is the way to never go back to it. We
have already chosen our path towards the future. We
know that it is long and difficult, but we will not deviate
from it out of naiveté or because of sirens’ songs or by
error. No force on Earth can force us to do that. We
have seen many dreams come true, both ours and those
we have shared with other peoples. We have plenty of
dreams that have yet to be realized. But they are our
dreams. We do not need dreams that are alien to our
culture or to our history.

The President: We have heard the last speaker in
the debate on this item.

The Cuban revolution was made, and is being
made every day, for the young people and by the young
people. Cuban youth, who seem to be so much of their
time, are just as patriotic and anti-imperialist as their
parents and grandparents. We have defended, and we
will defend, our own values ​​and symbols, which we
will be enriching, but they will always be Cuban. We
will never change them for others that are alien to us.
We will struggle to build a nation that is sovereign,
independent, socialist, democratic, prosperous and
sustainable. We will not return to capitalism. As was
stated by the Leader of the Revolution, Fidel Castro
Ruz, on last 19 April:
“We will improve what needs to be improved,
with steadfast loyalty and united strength,
as Martí, Maceo and Gómez did during their
unstoppable march.”
The lifting of the blockade is the key to our
being able to advance towards the normalization of
relations with the United States. It is what will give
some meaning, depth and soundness to what has been
achieved. The blockade is unjust, inhuman, immoral
and illegal, and should unilaterally and unconditionally

We convey our sincere gratitude to the American
people for their growing support for this lofty cause.

We shall now proceed to consider draft resolution
A/71/L.3.
Before giving the floor to the speaker in explanation
of vote before the voting, may I remind delegations
that explanations of vote are limited to 10 minutes and
should be made by delegations from their seats.
I now call on the representative of Israel.
Mr. Danon (Israel): Israel welcomes the progress
achieved in the relations between the United States of
America and Cuba and hopes that it will lead to a new
era in the region.
The President: We have heard the only speaker in
explanation of vote before the voting.
The General Assembly will now take a decision on
draft resolution A/71/L.3, entitled “Necessity of ending
the economic, commercial and financial embargo
imposed by the United States of America against Cuba”.
A recorded vote has been requested.
A recorded vote was taken.
In favour:
Afghanistan, Albania, Algeria, Andorra, Angola,
Antigua and Barbuda, Argentina, Armenia,
Australia, Austria, Azerbaijan, Bahamas, Bahrain,
Bangladesh, Barbados, Belarus, Belgium, Belize,
Benin, Bhutan, Bolivia (Plurinational State of),
Bosnia and Herzegovina, Botswana, Brazil, Brunei
Darussalam, Bulgaria, Burkina Faso, Burundi,
Cabo Verde, Cambodia, Cameroon, Canada,
Central African Republic, Chad, Chile, China,
Colombia, Comoros, Congo, Costa Rica, Côte

16-3431221/27

A/71/PV.32

d’Ivoire, Croatia, Cuba, Cyprus, Czech Republic,
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea, Democratic
Republic of the Congo, Denmark, Djibouti,
Dominica, Dominican Republic, Ecuador, Egypt,
El Salvador, Equatorial Guinea, Eritrea, Estonia,
Ethiopia, Fiji, Finland, France, Gabon, Gambia,
Georgia, Germany, Ghana, Greece, Grenada,
Guatemala, Guinea, Guinea-Bissau, Guyana, Haiti,
Honduras, Hungary, Iceland, India, Indonesia, Iran
(Islamic Republic of), Iraq, Ireland, Italy, Jamaica,
Japan, Jordan, Kazakhstan, Kenya, Kiribati,
Kuwait, Kyrgyzstan, Lao People’s Democratic
Republic, Latvia, Lebanon, Lesotho, Liberia,
Libya, Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg,
Madagascar, Malawi, Malaysia, Maldives, Mali,
Malta, Marshall Islands, Mauritania, Mauritius,
Mexico, Micronesia (Federated States of), Monaco,
Mongolia, Montenegro, Morocco, Mozambique,
Myanmar, Namibia, Nauru, Nepal, Netherlands,
New Zealand, Nicaragua, Niger, Nigeria, Norway,
Oman, Pakistan, Palau, Panama, Papua New
Guinea, Paraguay, Peru, Philippines, Poland,
Portugal, Qatar, Republic of Korea, Republic of
Moldova, Romania, Russian Federation, Rwanda,
Saint Kitts and Nevis, Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent
and the Grenadines, Samoa, San Marino, Sao
Tome and Principe, Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Serbia,
Seychelles, Sierra Leone, Singapore, Slovakia,
Slovenia, Solomon Islands, Somalia, South
Africa, South Sudan, Spain, Sri Lanka, Sudan,
Suriname, Swaziland, Sweden, Switzerland,
Syrian Arab Republic, Tajikistan, Thailand, the
former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, TimorLeste, Togo, Tonga, Trinidad and Tobago, Tunisia,
Turkey, Turkmenistan, Tuvalu, Uganda, Ukraine,
United Arab Emirates, United Kingdom of Great
Britain and Northern Ireland, United Republic
of Tanzania, Uruguay, Uzbekistan, Vanuatu,
Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of), Viet Nam,
Yemen, Zambia, Zimbabwe.

26/10/2016

delegations that explanations of vote are limited to 10
minutes and should be made by delegations from their
seats.
Mr. Ružička (Slovakia): Slovakia extends its
congratulations to the Cuban delegation.
I have the honour to speak on behalf of the European
Union (EU) and its member States. The candidate
countries the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia,
Montenegro, Serbia and Albania; the country of the
Stabilization and Association Process and potential
candidate Bosnia and Herzegovina; Liechtenstein, a
European Free Trade Association country and member
of the European Economic Area; and the Republic of
Moldova align themselves with this statement.
Since the re-establishment of diplomatic relations
between Cuba and the United States and President
Obama’s appeals to the United States Congress to
start working towards the elimination of the embargo,
the situation has further evolved. The EU warmly
welcomes the measures already taken and encourages
their further implementation through relevant steps
by both sides. In the meantime, however, fundamental
restrictive measures are still in place. Under the new
circumstances, they are even more of an anachronism.

Draft resolution A/71/L.3 was adopted by 191 votes
to none, with 2 abstentions (resolution 71/5).

Beyond the damaging impact of the embargo
on ordinary Cubans, the effects and side effects
of extraterritorial legislation and of unilateral
administrative and judicial measures are also negatively
affecting the economic interests of all. This requires
even more urgent action, given the greater opening
of the Cuban economy. American legislation such as
the Cuban Democracy Act and the Helms-Burton Act
extended the effects of the United States embargo to
third-party countries. In the framework of its common
commercial policy, the European Union has firmly and
continuously opposed such extraterritorial measures.
While recognizing the decisions of the United States
Government to lift sanctions and restrictions on
remittances and family travel to Cuba, to allow the
provision of certain telecommunications, Internet and
financial services and to export tools and building
materials in order to support the Cuban people, we
cannot accept the unilaterally imposed measures that
impede economic and commercial relations with Cuba.

The President: Before giving the floor to speakers
in explanation of vote after the voting, may I remind

In that context, we warmly welcome the United
States and Israeli abstention in the voting.

Against:
None
Abstentions:
Israel, United States of America.

22/27

16-34312

26/10/2016

Contrary to our expectations, the situation for EU
financial operators in and with Cuba that are targeted
by extraterritorial sanctions has not improved, and has
even worsened in some ways. This constitutes undue
interference and problems for EU citizens, businesses
and non-governmental organizations living, working or
operating in Cuba. We expect an early solution to those
problems, as normalization with Cuba should apply to
all interested parties.
At a summit between the European Union and the
United States in London in May 1998, a package was
agreed upon that also sought to alleviate the problems
with extraterritorial legislation. We advocate the
prompt and full implementation of that agreement.
The negotiations on a political dialogue and
cooperation agreement concluded in March. That
agreement aims to consolidate relations and create
an enabling framework for more effective dialogue,
improved cooperation and expanded economic relations.
The agreement is now being finalized and is slated to be
signed in the coming months. The bilateral agreement
will put the entire EU-Cuban relationship on a new and
solid legal footing. It will also be a game-changer for
our relationship and will open more doors and forums
for dialogue with Cuba, including on the issues on
which we still have fundamental differences.
Human rights are at the core of EU external
relations. The second high-level discussion on these
issues took place in Havana in June. We are encouraged
that no subject will be off limits in those processes.
The EU remains determined to pursue a comprehensive
dialogue with the Cuban authorities and all sectors of
Cuban society.
We reiterate the right of Cuban citizens to
make independent decisions about their future. We
call on the Cuban Government to fully grant its
citizens internationally recognized civil, political
and economic rights and freedoms, including the
freedom of assembly and the freedom of expression
and free access to information, as well as to ratify the
International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights
and the International Covenant on Economic, Social
and Cultural Rights. Following the visit of the United
Nations Special Rapporteur on the right to food, the
Cuban Government should extend invitations to other
rapporteurs to visit Cuba.
We note with concern the continued high
frequency of short-term arrests, but at the same time

A/71/PV.32

we welcome the continued broad application of Cuban
citizens’ freedom to travel. We also welcome Cuban
achievements in health care and education. On the
other hand, the slow pace of economic modernization
seriously hampers Cuban economic development. In
that context, we recall the August 2011 adoption of a
package of economic and social reforms by the Cuban
Government. We expect that they will be extended and
implemented in a manner that will address the key
needs of the Cuban population.
The economic, commercial and financial embargo
imposed by the United States contributes to the
economic problems in Cuba, thus negatively affecting
the standard of living of the Cuban people and
aggravating the humanitarian situation there. Lifting
the United States embargo could facilitate the opening
of the Cuban economy, to the benefit of the people of
Cuba. We again express our rejection of all unilateral
measures directed against Cuba that negatively affect
third parties’ interests and thereby violate commonly
accepted rules of international trade.
In the framework of our comprehensive agreement,
we will work with Cuban counterparts to consolidate
and expand improvements in all of the areas I
mentioned. Through its cooperation and the future
framework agreement, the European Union is ready
to accompany Cuba along its path of reform and
modernization. Substantial progress has been achieved
in a constructive spirit on the topics of human rights,
governance and civil society, inter alia.
Against that background, the member States of
the European Union unanimously voted in favour of
resolution 71/5. Once again, I congratulate the Cuban
delegation for the result of the voting.
Mr. Ri Tong Il (Democratic People’s Republic
of Korea): The delegation of the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea would like to join the previous speaker
in extending its warm and heartfelt congratulations to
the Cuban delegation.
Let me first express our intention to associate
ourselves with the statements by the representative of
Venezuela and the representative of Thailand on behalf
of the Movement of Non-Aligned Countries and the
Group of 77 and China, respectively.
The delegation of the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea voted in favour of resolution 71/5,
on the necessity of ending the economic, commercial

16-3431223/27

A/71/PV.32

and financial embargo imposed by the United States
of America against Cuba. My delegation condemns
the United States embargo against Cuba as an active
encroachment upon its sovereignty, a crime against
humanity and an infringement of human rights, in
violation of the Charter of the United Nations. The
United States has been imposing a unilateral economic,
commercial and financial embargo against the Republic
of Cuba since its foundation.
The unilateral United States embargo, which has
threatened the sovereignty of Cuba and its right to
exist, is an act of hostile United States policy against
Cuba. The damage done to the economy of Cuba due
to the United States economic embargo is estimated
to have reached astronomical figures. In spite of the
establishment of diplomatic relations between the two
countries last year, the atrocious United States economic
embargo continues to this day. There have been only a
few modifications to its implementation measures, but
the overall United States policy towards Cuba to bring
about regime change through an economic embargo has
never changed.
The adoption of resolution 71/5 at the current
session, as a follow-up to resolutions adopted in
previous sessions, is a reflection of the goodwill of the
international community and shows the Government
and the people of Cuba the General Assembly’s support
and solidarity.
The delegation of the Democratic People’s Republic
of Korea takes this opportunity to extend its strong
support for, and solidarity with, the Government and
the people of Cuba as they struggle to safeguard their
dignity and civility in their stand against the continuance
of the unilateral embargo by the United States.
Mr. Rzheussky (Belarus) (spoke in Russian):
I would like to take this opportunity to congratulate
the Cuban delegation on the outcome of the voting on
resolution 71/5.
The Republic of Belarus welcomes the positive
steps made since 2015 in terms of restoring diplomatic
relations between the United States of America and
Cuba, the holding of meetings between leaders of the two
countries and the easing of certain restrictive measures
against Cuba, including the decision announced today
about abstaining in the voting on today’s resolution.
We also welcome the signing of an agreement on the
normalization of relations between the European Union
and Cuba.
24/27

26/10/2016

The easing by the United States of America of
certain sanctions against Cuba in the banking and
tourism sectors, the restoration of direct postal and
trade communications and the delisting of Cuba from
the Department of State’s list of State sponsors of
terrorism are important steps in the right direction.
However, those steps are clearly insufficient as long as
a general trade embargo against Cuba remains in effect.
We have repeatedly stressed that the imposition
of unilateral coercive measures as a means of exerting
political and economic pressure on developing countries
contravenes the core principles of international law
enshrined in the Charter of the United Nations and
in the Declaration on Principles of International Law
concerning Friendly Relations and Cooperation among
States in accordance with the Charter of the United
Nations. Any attempts by certain States to alter the
internal political systems of other States through
military, political, economic or other means of coercion
are inadmissible and counterproductive. That such
measures are counterproductive was acknowledged
today by the Permanent Representative of the United
States, Ms. Samantha Power.
President Obama’s recent decision to extend the
trade sanctions against Cuba for another year is at
odds with the recent steps and statements by officials
in Washington. Not only does the decision hamper the
development of the Cuban economy and encroach upon
the rights and interests of both American and Cuban
citizens, it also casts doubt upon the willingness of the
United States to genuinely normalize relations with
Cuba.
Belarus urges a prompt and full lifting of the
economic, financial and trade embargo against Cuba
by the United States of America. Only a full lifting
of sanctions can demonstrate the intent of the United
States to normalize bilateral relations with Cuba.
Ms. Mejía Vélez (Colombia) (spoke in Spanish): I
congratulate the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Cuba,
Mr. Bruno Rodríguez Parrilla, and his entire delegation
on the adoption of resolution 71/5. The voting on the
resolution we witnessed a few minutes ago was a historic
event, as those who previously opposed this annual
resolution have taken into account the rapprochement
and improvement of relations between the United States
and Cuba and decided to abstain.
As stated by all of those who have spoken before
me, the economic, commercial and financial embargo
16-34312

26/10/2016

imposed by the United States against Cuba is contrary
to international law and the spirit and the letter of the
principles set out in the Charter of the United Nations.
Since the adoption of resolution 47/19 in November
1992, Colombia, like all countries in Latin America and
the Caribbean and the immense majority of Member
States, has expressed its unrestricted support for Cuba
and voted in favour of subsequent iterations of that
resolution, including the one we have just adopted
today.
Today was no exception. Support was reflected
in the 191 votes in favour, which matched that for the
resolution adopted at last year’s session (resolution
70/5), which emphasized the need to put an end to a
policy of more than 50 years — as the President of
Colombia, Mr. Juan Manuel Santos Calderón, has
expressed on repeated occasions.
My country reaffirms its policy of respect for
international law and for the principles of political
independence,
self-determination
of
peoples,
non-intervention and non-interference in the
internal affairs of other nations. Colombia believes it
indispensable that Member States make progress in
building relations of cooperation and friendship based
on multilateralism and respect for the principle of
sovereign equality enshrined in Chapter I of the United
Nations Charter.
We note with optimism the renewal of diplomatic
relations between Cuba and the United States of
America, as well as steps taken to improve their
relations, with the understanding, as we have heard
here, that a great deal remains to be done. We trust
that, in following this path, the embargo will finally
be lifted.
Mr. García Moritán (Argentina) (spoke in
Spanish): At the outset, I wish to welcome the presence
of Cuba’s Minister for Foreign Affairs, Mr. Bruno
Rodríguez Parrilla, and to thank him for his very
detailed statement.
Argentina fully aligns itself with the statements
made by the representative of Thailand on behalf of
the Group of 77 and China and by the representative
of Dominican Republic on behalf of the Community of
Latin American and Caribbean States, and wishes to
make the following points in our national capacity.
The historic position of Argentina has been, and
continues to be, that the economic, commercial and

A/71/PV.32

financial embargo bythe United States against Cuba
is contrary to international law and must urgently be
lifted. In the framework of our absolute commitment to
the Charter of the United Nations and to multilateralism,
Argentina is opposed to the use of unilateral coercive
measures, the extraterritorial implementation of
national laws and the adoption of discriminatory
commercial practices. In that regard, Argentina is in
accord with the demand of the international community
to lift the blockade and the laws and regulations that
support that policy.
Argentina has traditionally supported resolutions
of the General Assembly against the blockade and has
spoken against the blockade on every occasion when
the subject has arisen, in both regional forums and
other international organizations. Argentina expressed
its satisfaction and optimism about the process initiated
at the end of 2014 by the Governments of the United
States and Cuba to normalize bilateral relations and
congratulates both Governments on the decision to
undertake the path of dialogue, which will allow them
to resolve all pending questions — including the lifting
of the blockade.
We welcome the progress achieved in the past
nearly two years, which includes the reopening of
embassies in both capitals and the visits of the President
of the United States to Cuba and Cuban authorities
to Washington, as well as the executive measures
implemented by the United States Department of the
Treasury and the Department of Commerce, which
introduced amendments to regulations. Those steps in
the right direction mark a new era of Cuban-American
bilateral relations that seeks to leave behind a history of
disagreement and assumes a mutual recognition by both
Governments as legitimate and equal interlocutors.
Nevertheless, we regret that the laws underpinning
the embargo are still in effect. Their implementation
continues to impede the full development of the Cuban
people.
We welcome the fact that there were no votes
against the adoption of today’s resolution. We hope
that this will be the last time the General Assembly
adopts a resolution on this issue. We furthermore hope
that next year the provisions of the resolution will
become abstractions, thereby consigning the economic,
commercial and financial embargo against Cuba to the
past.

16-3431225/27

A/71/PV.32

Mr. Rosselli (Uruguay) (spoke in Spanish): At
the outset, I welcome the presence of the Minister for
Foreign Affairs of Cuba, Mr. Bruno Rodríguez Parrilla.
Frankly, this is the type of statement that I would
prefer not to have to make — in the first place because
the embargo is still in place, but also because for more
than 30 years I have been making statements of this
type here, in the old General Agreement on Tariffs and
Trade, in the World Trade Organization, in the Union
of South American Nations, in the Latin American
Integration Association, in the Common Market of the
South and in the Community of Latin American and
Caribbean States (CELAC). We would have preferred
seeing that the situation had already changed.
As in previous years, Uruguay voted in favour of
the resolution 71/5, introduced by the delegation of
Cuba, because the blockade against Cuba runs counter
to the rules of international law and the purposes and
principles of the Charter of the United Nations, in
particular non-intervention, peaceful settlement of
disputes and the legal equality of States.
On principle, Uruguay rejects and does not recognize
in its own national legislation the extraterritorial
application of domestic laws of other States and direct
or indirect measures that constitute unilateral action
by any State that has as its objective sanctioning the
sovereign decisions of another country in the political,
economic, commercial, social and cultural spheres or
any other area. In that connection, we condemn the
application of unilateral coercive measures by the
United States against Cuba.
We welcome the re-establishment of diplomatic
relations between the Government of Cuba and the
Government of the United States, which we acknowledge
to be a positive step towards a new chapter in relations
between the two countries. We welcome the removal of
Cuba from the list of State sponsors of terrorism.
Nevertheless, we must put an end to the effects of
the blockade that is still in place and affects the Cuban
people with an economic and humanitarian burden. We
certainly welcome the change of vote by the United
States delegation to abstention, which means that the
resolution was adopted today without opposition.
Our country believes that the sanctions and
extraterritorial laws imposed against Cuba not only are a
violation of international law, but also have inestimable
consequences for the economic development of the
26/27

26/10/2016

Caribbean country. They are a way of depriving the
Cuban people of the right to development, and they
inflict a level of damage against their dignity and
sovereignty that is impossible to quantify.
In voting in favour of resolution 71/5, Uruguay
reiterates its commitment to multilateralism as a
legitimate instrument for solving such disputes between
States and an efficient way to promote international
cooperation, human rights, security and understanding
among people.
Uruguay aligns itself with the statements made by
the representative of the Dominican Republic on behalf
of CELAC and by the representative of Thailand on
behalf of the Group of 77 and China.
Mr. Mra (Myanmar): I take the floor today to
explain the vote of my delegation on resolution 71/5,
entitled “Necessity of ending the economic, commercial
and financial embargo imposed by the United States of
America against Cuba”, which was just adopted by an
overwhelming majority of Member States.
My delegation aligns itself with the statements
made by the representative of Singapore on behalf of
the Association of Southeast Asian Nations, by the
representative of Thailand on behalf of the Group of 77
and China and by the representative of Venezuela and
the Movement of Non-Aligned Countries.
Myanmar voted in favour of the resolution to
demonstrate once again our firm opposition to any
unilateral economic, commercial and financial
embargoes imposed against any country. We fully
understand the degree of loss and suffering caused
by sanctions, because we have gone through similar
experiences for decades. In the end, sanctions are
counterproductive and affect only the innocent people
of the country concerned.
As a member of the Non-Aligned Movement,
Myanmar has steadfastly adhered to the principled
position of the Movement in opposing the use of
unilateral economic and trade sanctions. Sanctions
are also contrary to the Charter of the United Nations,
as well as to the international law principle of goodneighbourliness. Myanmar has always maintained
that the relations among members of the international
community should be based on mutual respect, and
differences should be resolved through peaceful
consultations.
16-34312

26/10/2016

Myanmar welcomes the re-establishment of
diplomatic relations between Cuba and the United
States represented by the reopening of their respective
embassies in Havana and Washington, the historic visit
by President Obama to Cuba in March and the easing
of restrictions, including steps taken by the United
States with regard to the Cuban draft resolution. These
are important steps in enhancing bilateral relations and
charting a new road map in order to build a brighter
future for the present and future generations of both
countries. Myanmar hopes that those important
undertakings will lead to the earliest possible lifting
of all the remaining restrictions imposed against Cuba.
Last September, world leaders gathered here at the
United Nations to adopt the ambitious 2030 Agenda for
Sustainable Development to move everyone, including
our planet, towards a sustainable future. Member
States also committed to working tirelessly for the
full and effective implementation of the Goals and
targets because they will open up new prospects and
opportunities for global development and cooperation.
One significant thing about this historic Agenda is that
it calls for not leaving anyone behind. We are of the
view that sanctions should be completely eliminated so
that everyone will have the opportunity to achieve the
Goals and targets of the 2030 Agenda.
For the reasons I mentioned, Myanmar once again
voted in favour of the resolution. I offer congratulations
to the Cuban delegation for the impressive result.
Mr. Phansourivong (Lao People’s Democratic
Republic): The Lao People’s Democratic Republic
aligns itself with the statements delivered by the
representative of the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela
on behalf of the Movement of Non-Aligned Countries,
by the representative of the Kingdom of Thailand
on behalf of the Group of 77 and China, and by the

A/71/PV.32

representative of the Republic of Singapore on behalf of
the Association of Southeast Asian Nations.
Cooperation and engagement are key factors for
peaceful coexistence and mutual benefit in the era
of interdependence. In that respect, the Lao People’s
Democratic Republic welcomes the important progress
made in the past year on the re-establishment of
diplomatic relations between the Republic of Cuba and
the United States of America, including the reopening
of embassies in both respective capitals, as well as the
historic visit to Cuba by President Barack Obama, which
has opened a new chapter in the relations between the
two countries, which have been stalled for decades. The
Lao People’s Democratic Republic also welcomes the
decision of the United States to abstain in voting on
resolution 71/5, which is another positive step.
With the current positive developments in relations
between the Republic of Cuba and the United States
of America, the Lao People’s Democratic Republic
strongly hopes that the progress made thus far will be
further enhanced, leading to the lifting of the unilateral
embargo against the Republic of Cuba in the near
future. The Lao People’s Democratic Republic believes
that lifting the embargo will be beneficial not only to
both countries, but to the international community.
Furthermore, the lifting of the embargo will create an
environment conducive to further enhancing dialogue
and cooperation between the two countries and enable
Cuba to engage in trade and economic exchange with
nations around the world, including the United States of
America, thereby contributing to improving the wellbeing of the Cuban people and the development of their
country. I warmly congratulate the Cuban delegation.
The President: We have heard the last speaker in
explanation of vote for this meeting. We shall hear the
remaining speakers at 3 p.m. here in the Hall.
The meeting rose at 1 p.m.

16-3431227/27
