General Assembly-Thirty-seventh Session

182

contained in its reports 32 and to submit their views and
comments to the Secretary-General;
8. Requests the Commission on Human Rights to continue to undertake the functions set out in article X of the
Convention and invites the Commission to intensify, in cooperation with the Special Committee against Apartheid, its
efforts to compile periodically the progressive list of individuals, organizations, institutions and representatives of
States deemed responsible for crimes enumerated in article
II of the Convention, as well as of those against whom or
which legal proceedings have been undertaken;
9. Requests the Commission on Human Rights to take
into account General Assembly resolutions 33/23 of 29 November 1978 and 35/32 of 14 November 1980, as well as
relevant documents of the Commission and its subsidiary
organs reaffirming, inter alia, that States giving assistance
to the racist regime of South Africa become accomplices in
the inhuman practices of racial discrimination and apartheid;
10. Calls upon all States parties to the Convention and
competent United Nations organs to continue to provide the
Commission on Human Rights, through the Secretary-General, with information relevant to the periodic compilation
of the above-mentioned list, as well as with information
concerning the obstacles that prevent the effective suppression and punishment of the crime of apartheid;
11. Requests the Secretary-General to distribute the
above-mentioned list among all States parties to the Convention and all Member States and to bring such facts to
the attention of the public by all means of mass
communication;
12. Invites the Special Committee against Apartheid and
the Centre against Apartheid of the Secretariat to publicize
the above-mentioned list and related particulars as widely
as possible;
13. Appeals to all States, United Nations organs, specialized agencies and international and national non-governmental organizations to step up their activities in enhancing
public awareness through denouncing the crimes committed
by the racist regime of South Africa;
14. Requests the Secretary-General to intensify his efforts, through appropriate channels, to disseminate information on the Convention and its implementation with a
view to further promoting ratification of or accession to the
Convention;
15. Calls upon all States to participate actively in the
Second World Conference to Combat Racism and Racial
Discrimination, to be held in 1983, and to contribute to
achieving effective results at that Conference;
16. Requests the Secretary-General to include in his
next annual report under General Assembly resolution 3380
(XXX) of 10 November 1975 a special section concerning
the implementation of the International Convention on the
Suppression and Punishment of the Crime of Apartheid.
90th plenary meeting
3 December 1982

37/48.

International Youth Year: Participation, Development, Peace

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 34/151 of 17 December 1979
and 35/126 of 11 December 1980, by which it decided to
designate and observe 1985 as International Youth Year:
Participation, Development, Peace,
32

IV.

Recalling also its resolution 36/28 of 13 November 1981,
by which it endorsed the Specific Programme of Measures
and Activities to be undertaken prior to and during the
International Youth Year, 33
Recalling further its decision 35/318 of 11 December
1980 on the appointment of the members of the Advisory
Committee for the International Youth Year,
Recognizing the profound importance of the direct participation of youth in shaping the future of mankind and the
valuable contribution that youth can make in the implementation of the new international economic order based
on equity and justice,
Considering it necessary to disseminate among youth the
ideals of peace, respect for human rights and fundamental
freedoms, human solidarity and dedication to the objectives
of progress and development,
Convinced of the imperative need to harness the energies,
enthusiasms and creative abilities of youth to the tasks of
nation-building, the struggle for self-determination and national independence, in accordance with the Charter of the
United Nations, and against foreign domination and occupation, for the economic, social and cultural advancement of
peoples, the implementation of the new international economic order, the preservation of world peace and the promotion of international co-operation and understanding,
Emphasizing again that the United Nations should give
more attention to the role of young people in the world of
today and to their demands for the world of tomorrow,
Recalling the topicality of assessing the needs and aspirations of youth, and reaffirming the importance of current
and projected United Nations activities designed to increase
the opportunities for young people and for their active participation in national development activities,
Believing that it is urgently desirable to consolidate the
efforts of all States in carrying out specific programmes
concerning youth and to improve the activities of the United
Nations and the specialized agencies in the field of youth,
including youth exchanges in the cultural, sporting and other
fields,
Aware of the valuable contribution which the United
Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization
is making to the promotion of international co-operation in
the field of youth,
Reaffirming the necessity of better co-ordination of efforts
in dealing with specific problems confronting young people
and in examining the manner in which those problems are
being treated by the specialized agencies and by various
United Nations bodies,
Convinced that the preparation for and observance in 1985
of the International Youth Year with the motto "Participation, Development, Peace'' will offer a useful and significant opportunity for drawing attention to the situation
and specific needs and aspirations of youth, for increasing
co-operation at all levels in dealing with youth issues, for
undertaking concerted action programmes in favour of youth
and for involving young people in the study and resolution
of major national, regional and international problems,
Confident that the International Youth Year will serve to
mobilize efforts at the local, national, regional and international levels in order to promote the best educational,
professional and living conditions for young people, to ensure their active participation in the overall development of
society and to encourage the preparation of new national
and local policies and programmes in accordance with each
country's experience, conditions and priorities,

E/CN.4/1358. sect. IV; E/CN.411417, sect. IV; E/CN.4/1507, sect.
" A/36/2 I 5, annex, sect. IV. decision I (I).

VI.

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

Recognizing that the preparation for and observance of
the International Youth Year will contribute to the reaffirmation of the goals of the new international economic order
and to the implementation of the International Development
Strategy for the Third United Nations Development Decade, 34
Recalling also in this connection its decision 35/424 of
5 December 1980 and Economic and Social Council resolution 1980/67 of 25 July 1980 on the question of guidelines
for international years and anniversaries,
Aware that, for the International Youth Year to be successful and to maximize its impact and practical efficiency,
adequate preparation and the widespread support of Governments, all specialized agencies, international intergovernmental and non-governmental organizations and the public
will be required,
Noting with great satisfaction the interest of Member
States, various United Nations bodies and specialized agencies, as well as youth organizations, in the implementation
of the Specific Programme of Measures and Activities to be
undertaken prior to and during the International Youth Year,
Taking note of the report of the Advisory Committee for
th~ International Youth Year on its second session, held at
Vienna from 14 to 23 June 1982, 35 as well as of the report
of the Secretary-General, 36
l. Endorses the recommendations made by the Advisory Committee for the International Youth Year for the
further implementation of the Specific Programme of Measures and Activities to be undertaken prior to and during the
International Youth Year;3 7
2. Requests the Secretary-General to transmit the recommendations of the Advisory Committee to all States,
Unite~ ~ations bodies, specialized agencies and regional
commissions, as well as to the international intergovernmental and non-governmental organizations concerned, with
a view to their early implementation;
3. Invites all States that have not already done so to
establish national co-ordinating committees or other forms
of co-ordination for the International Youth Year;
4. . Re_quests the Secretary-General to take all necessary
organizational measures to ensure the success of the regional
meetings devoted to the International Youth Year;
5. Stresses again the importance of active and direct
participation of youth organizations in the activities organized at the local, national, regional and international levels
for the preparation for and observance of the International
Youth Year;
6. Requests the Secretary-General to continue to take
the necessary measures to ensure the proper co-ordination
of the implementation of and follow-up to the Specific Programme of Measures and Activities, including the provision
?f in~orm~tion, and_ to report to the General Assembly at
its th1rty-e1ghth session on the implementation of the present
resolution;
7. Also requests the Secretary-General to convene the
third session of the Advisory Committee during the first half
of 1984, to provide it with all necessary assistance and to
sub~it to it a progress report on the implementation of the
Specific Programme of Measures and Activities and of the
recommendations made by the Advisory Committee at its
second session;
8. Further requests the Secretary-General to continue
to take concrete measures, through all the communications
media at his disposal, to give widespread publicity to the
34

Resolution 35/56, annex.
A/37/348, annex.
36
A/37/237.
17
A/37 /348, annex, appendix 111.

183

activities of the United Nations system in the field of youth
and to increase the dissemination of information on youth:
9. Welcomes the voluntary contributions so far made
for the International Youth Year, expresses its appreciation
to all contributors and again appeals to all States, to international governmental and non-governmental organizations
and to the public to make in due time generous voluntarv
contributions to supplement funds provided under the regular budget of the United Nations for the costs of the Specific
Programme of Measures and Activities and requests the
Secretary-General to take all appropriate measures for obtaining such voluntary contributions;
10. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its
thirty-eighth session the item entitled "International Youth
Year: Participation, Development, Peace" and to grant it
high priority.

90th plenary meeting
3 December /982

37/49.

Efforts and measures for securing the implementation and the enjoyment by youth of human rights, particularly the right to education
and to work

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 36/29 of 13 November 1981 , in
which it, inter alia, recognized the need to intensify efforts
and to adopt appropriate measures for securing the implementation and the enjoyment by youth of human rights.
particularly the right to education and to work,
Recalling also its resolution 34/ I 5 I of 17 December 1979,
by which it decided to designate 1985 as International Youth
Year: Participation, Development, Peace,
Convinced that it is necessary to ensure full enjoyment
by youth of the rights stipulated in the Universal Declaration
of Human Rights, 38 the International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights 39 and the International
Covenant on Civil and Political Rights, 39 with special regard
for the right to education and to work,
Aware of the fact that insufficient education and the unemployment of youth limits their ability to participate in the
?evelopment process, and, in this regard, emphasizing the
importance of_ secondary and higher education of youth, as
well as of thetr access to appropriate technical, vocational
guidance and training programmes,
Expressing its serious interest in the success of the forthcoming International Youth Year which should, inter alia,
promote increasing participation of youth in the socioeconomic life of their country,
I. Calls upon all States, all governmental and nongovernmental organizations and the interested bodies of the
United Nations and specialized agencies to pay continuous
atte~tion to the iI~plementation of General Assembly resolution 36/29 relating to efforts aimed at the promotion of
~uman rights ~nd their enjoyment by youth, particularly the
nght to education and vocational training and to work, with
a view to resolving the problem of youth unemployment;
2. Requests the Advisory Committee for the International Youth Year to give full attention to resolution 36/29
and to all relevant international human rights instruments
in the preparation for and in the course of the International
Youth Year, in particular in elaborating its recommendations concerning the Y -:ar.
90th plenary meeting

3 Dl'Cember 1982

35

'" Resolution 217 A (III).
''' See resolution 2200 A (XXI). annex.
