th
MEETING:

1.5 AUGUST

1973

CONTENTS
Page

Provisional

agenda (S/Agenda/ 1739)

,,. .. .. .. . ,. ... . . ,,. .. .. .. .. . .

1

Adoption

of the agenda

. .. , . .. .. ,.. ,. , .. ,. .. .. .. ,. .. . .. .., . . .

1

The situation in the Middle East:
Letter dated 1 I August 1973 from the Permanent Representative of Lebanon to
the United Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council
(S/10983)
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . ...*...

1

S/PV. 1739

NOTE
Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined with
figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United Nations document.
Documents of the Security Council (symbol S/. . .) are normally published in quarterly
Supplements of the Official Records of the Security Council. The date of the document
indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which information about it is given.
The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a system
adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Resolutions and Decisions of the
Security Council. The new system, which has been applied retroactively to resolutions
adopted before 1 January 1965, became fully operative on that date.

SEVENTEEN

HUNDRED

AND THIRTY-NINTH

Held in New Uorlr on Wednesday,
Pwsiderzt:

Mr. John SCALI (United States of America).

Present:
The representatives of the following States:
Australia, Austria, China, France, Guinea, India, Indcnzsia,
Kenya, Panama, Peru, Sudan, Union of Soviet Socialist
Republics, United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern
Ireland, United States of America and Yugoslavia.
Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/l739)
1. Adoption

of the agenda.

2. The situation in the Middle East:
Letter dated 11 August 1973 from the Permanent
Representative
of Lebanon to the United Nations
addressed to the President of the Security Council
(S/l 0983).
Tile rnecting was culled to order at 12.20 p.m.
Adoption of the agenda
Tlze agenda was adopted.
The situation in the Middle East
Letter dated 11 August 1973 from the Permanent Representative of Lebanon to the United Nations addressed to
the PresideM of the Security Council (S/10983)
1. The PRESIDENT:
In accordance with the decision
taken at our 1736th meeting, I shall now, with the consent
of the Council, invite the representatives of Lebanon and
Israel to take places at the Council table in order to
participate in the di’scussion, without the right to vote,
At
tlzc inviturion of the President, Mr. E. Gholra
(Lebauorz)
a& Mr. J. Barmore (Israel) took places at the
SecltritJI Council tuble.
2. The PRESIDENT:
I shall next, in accordance with our
previous
decisions, and with the consent of the Council,
invite the representatives of Iraq, Egypt and the People’s
Deniocratic
Republic of Yemen to take the places reserved
for them at the side of the Council chamber.
A f the invitation of the Presidelzt, Mr. A. K. Al-Shaikhly
(Iraq),
LW. A. E. Abdel Meguitl (Egypt) and Mr. A. S.
Ashtal (Democratic
Yemen) took the places reserved for
tlrcr?~ ut the side of the Council chamber.

15 August

MEETING
1973, at 11 a.m.

3. Mr. PEREZ DE CUELLAR (Peru) (interpretation f?om
SparzishJ:Mr. President,my delegationand I personallyare
very happy to seeyou presidingover the Security Council.
We are convinced that with your ability and the experience
that you have so rapidly acquired you will continue to
preside over our work with the sameskill that you have
thus far shown.
4. May I also take this opportunity to extend the thanks
of my delegation to Sir Colin Crowe and Mr. Kenneth
Jamieson for the extremely effective way in which they
presided over the meetingsof the Security Council during
the month of July. I should also like to offer a warm
welcome to the newrepresentativeof the United Kingdom,
Sir Donald Maitland. We are surethat he will perform his
dutieswith the samebrilliance ashispredecessors.
5. We have listened with careful attention to the statements made by the representativesof Lebanon and Iraq
regarding the incident that occurredon 10 August. Wehave
listened with the sameattention to the statementsof the
representative of Israel defending the position of his
Government. I do not believe that there are any further
arguments to add to those that have already been presented. We should examine all those argumentsand try
calmly to draw the necessaryconclusions.
6. May I first of all say that the statementof the eventsas
submitted by the representativeof Lebanon hasnot been
gainsaidor corrected by the representativeof Israel.Rather,
those events were confirmed to a certain extent by the
Minister of Defence of Israel in the statementhe madeon
12 August when he said that this had been a perfectly
planned act. We are therefore forced to conclude that this
act was a deliberateviolation of the air spaceof another
State, an inexcusablediversion of a civilian plane entailing
harassmentof and danger to the lives of innocent passengers.Thus, principles of international law asembodied
in the Charter of the United Nations have been violated,
and the Convention on international civil aviation and the
interim agreementwhich preservethe sovereignty of contracting States over their air spacehave alsobeenviolated.
7. My delegation believes that the gravity of theseviolations call for somereaction on the part of the Security
Council, which hasbeen informed of them. In that way we
can avoid the creation of the dangerousprecedent of
ignoring a violation of international norms in matters as
important as freedom of communication. Furthermore,
there can be no denial of the fact that this reprehensible
incident will make more difficult the efforts to solvethe

problem of the Middle East, .which, as we all know,
matter of constant concern to the Council.

Panama will always be ready to condemn terrorisa
whether committed by States, groups or individua]!
Furthermore, we believe that this unprecedentedact make
much more difficult the efforts for peacebeing undertake,
by the Secretary-General through his Special Represtn
tative, AmbassadorGunnar Jarring, and we considerthat tl
be most disturbing.

is a

8. As I have said, my delegation has listened carefully to
the defence presented by the representative of Israel. We
are forced to conclude that the act committed cannot be
:ermed an act of self-defence as defined in Article 5 1 of the
Charter, for reasons that flow not only from a mere reading
of that Article, but also from the way in which the
premeditated incident took place. Therefore, in accordance
with the firm condemnation of terrorism that my Government has always expressed and without, of course, ignoring
those attacks perpetrated against Israel, we do not beIieve
that the best way of fighting terrorism is by taking justice
into one’s own hands, and far less by combatting one crime
with another crime.

14. For thoseof us who haveplaced our faith in the worll
Organization as that force which can bring peaceto t]~,
Middle East, any act that hinders the achievementof 111,
fundamental objective or makesits attainment more&f[i
cult is discouraging and depressing.We have heardl]t,
reasonsadducedby Israelto justify its action of 10Angllsl
and we have alsoheard the angry protests of Lebanonan,
other Arab States.

9. I must say that I am rather sorry to find this
accumulation of negative notes, which might give the
impression that the position of my delegation is partial or
subjective, particularly when dealing with a subject that pits
two countries against each other, countries with which Peru
maintains normal relations.

15. But, sadly, we mustnote that the event with whichW,
are now dealingis a great obstacleto the searchfor peaceii
the Middle East. And we feel sadbecause,as Ambassada
Boyd stated in this Chamber:
“Panama considers itself linked by special ties o
friendship to both partiesto the conflict, and it isfor t]ja
reasonthat we shall always endeavour cralmlyto find jujs
and equitable solutions within the framework of t]lr
principlesand tenets of the United Nations Charteralrdij
keepingwith the normsof international law.

10. However, I did want to put before the Council very
clearly the views of my delegation and explain why we feel
constrained to support any draft resolution that condemns
the act committed on 10 August.
1 1. Mr. RIOS (Panama) (interpretation
from Sparzishl:
Mr. President, may I congratulate you on your assumption
of the presidency of the Security Council. During this
month of August you will have a very weighty responsibility upon your shoulders,but we are surethat with yol~r
wisdom and ability you will be able to dischargeyour
functions. My delegation would also like to expressits
appreciation to Sir Colin Crowe and Mr. Kenneth Jamieson,
for the very wise way in which they presided over our
debatesduring the month of July.
12. My delegation has made very clear its position OJI the
problem of the Middle East on a number of occasions,and
most recently on 14 June 1973 /I726t11 meeting/. Therefore, I do not need to go into the matter at length at this
meeting. That being the case,we merely want to state our
opposition to the action taken by the Government of Israel
on 10 August. We are confronted by two specific facts:
first, the penetration of Lebaneseair space by Israeli
military pianes; and second,the diversion by force of a civil
aircraft to a military airport, endangeringthe lives of many
innocent passengers.
13. There is no doubt that that was a violation of the
sovereignty of a State Member, of the United Nations, in
lontraverltion of the normsand tenets of international civil
aviation, as well as the use of force in the solution of a
controversy. We also considerthat the act of 10 August is a
typical example of what was discussedduring the recent
meetings of the Ad Hoc Committee on International
Terrorism and defined asState terrorism, which in the very
near future will be condemned by the United Nations.

Litho

in United

Nations,

New York

Price:

$U.S.

“The Jews of Panamahave contributed significantly1~
the nation’s economic development and to its socialand
cultural progress; they constitute a highly respected
community in our country, and one that exerts consider.
able influence on important facets of the life of lhs
country.
“The Arabs of Panama,becauseof their own attributes,
becauseof the many customs they have inherited from
Spain, and becausethey are hard-working and industrious
and have mixed with the other people of the cou111~~
have earnedthe affection of the Panamanians.”/I 7Xrlr
meeting, paras. 3 7-39.1

16. We sincerely desirepeace in the Middle Eastso&at
the immenseresourceswhich arc today being squandered
on equipmentof death and destruction can be freed to tlclp
in the economicand socialdevelopment of that sorelybest
region.
17. In conclusion, we must once again invoke resolulion
242 (I 967) as the basic instrument on which negotiationi
in good faith and honesty must be undertaken soasto
achievethe peacewe all desirefor our friends in Israeland
in the Arab world before it is too late. When I speakofom
yearning for peacein the Middle East, I think alsoof world
peace. For no one in today’s world can feel securewhik
there are threats of armed conflict in any region of the
planet.

1.00 (or equivalent

The meetirlg rose at 12.35 p.m.

in other

currencies)

82001-May

1979-2,200
