United Nations

S/PV.6753

Security Council

Provisional

Sixty-seventh year

6753rd meeting
Thursday, 19 April 2012, 10.45 a.m.
New York

President:

Ms. Rice . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(United States of America)

Members:

Azerbaijan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Colombia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Germany . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Guatemala . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
India . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Morocco . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Pakistan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Portugal . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
South Africa . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Togo . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . .

Mr. Mehdiyev
Mr. Li Baodong
Mr. Osorio
Mr. Briens
Mr. Wittig
Mr. Rosenthal
Mr. Hardeep Singh Puri
Mr. Loulichki
Mr. Tarar
Mr. Cabral
Mr. Churkin
Mr. Sangqu
Mr. Menan
Mr. Parham

Agenda
Maintenance of international peace and security
Nuclear non-proliferation, disarmament and security
Letter dated 5 April 2012 from the Permanent Representative of the United
States of America to the United Nations addressed to the Secretary-General
(S/2012/194)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-506.

12-29927 (E)

*1229927*

S/PV.6753

The meeting was called to order at 10.55 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Maintenance of international peace and security
Nuclear non-proliferation, disarmament
and security
Letter dated 5 April 2012 from the Permanent
Representative of the United States of America
to the United Nations addressed to the
Secretary-General (S/2012/194)
The President: The Security Council will now
begin its consideration of the item on its agenda.
I wish to draw the attention of Council members
to document S/2012/194, which contains a letter dated
5 April 2012 from the Permanent Representative of the
United States of America to the United Nations
addressed to the Secretary-General transmitting a
concept paper on the item under consideration. I also
wish to draw the attention of members to document
S/2012/207, which contains a letter dated 9 April 2012
from the Permanent Representative of the United States
to the United Nations addressed to the SecretaryGeneral.
I welcome the presence of the Secretary-General,
His Excellency Mr. Ban Ki-moon. I should like to
inform Council members that the Secretary-General
will have to leave for another important engagement at
11.15. I now give him the floor.
The Secretary-General: I commend the United
States for convening this follow-up meeting to the
Security Council summit presided over by President
Obama in September 2009 (see S/PV.6191). Many
welcome developments have occurred since then. The
2010 Review Conference of the Parties to the Treaty on
the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons adopted a
64-point action plan for nuclear disarmament,
non-proliferation and the peaceful uses of nuclear
energy. I look forward to constructive discussions at
the first session of the Preparatory Committee for the
2015 Review Conference, which will start at the end of
this month.
The Russian Federation and the United States are
reducing their deployed nuclear arsenals under the
New START agreement — and, together with other

2

nuclear-weapon States, they are holding consultations
on implementing disarmament commitments and
increasing transparency around their nuclear arsenals.
For the first time, NATO has put the goal of a nuclearweapon-free world on its agenda. The upcoming NATO
Summit in Chicago will be an important opportunity to
develop a common approach.
There have also been innovative efforts by
non-nuclear-weapon States. They include efforts to
conclude a nuclear-weapon convention backed by
strong verification; the 10-nation Non-Proliferation and
Disarmament Initiative; the establishment of the
African Commission on Nuclear Energy; and further
progress towards a Southeast Asia nuclear-weapon-free
zone treaty. We are also preparing for a conference in
Finland later this year on establishing a zone free of
nuclear weapons and all other weapons of mass
destruction in the Middle East.
The 2010 Nuclear Security Summit in
Washington, D.C., agreed on a detailed work plan
aimed at improving nuclear security, securing nuclear
materials and preventing nuclear terrorism. I welcome
the new commitments made at the 2012 Seoul Nuclear
Security Summit, as well as the focused discussion on
increasing the synergy between nuclear safety and
security. I thank President Lee Myung-bak of the
Republic of Korea for his leadership. At that Summit, I
highlighted the need for us to strengthen our efforts to
prevent the financing of proliferation and terrorismrelated financing. I am therefore encouraged that
today’s draft presidential statement recognizes the
importance of proliferation financing.
The Security Council Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1540 (2004) is enhancing
international cooperation aimed at preventing terrorists
from acquiring weapons of mass destruction. I
commend the decision of the Council to extend the
Committee’s mandate until April 2021. In order to help
strengthen the legal framework for preventing nuclear
terrorism, I will convene a high-level event this fall to
promote universal adherence to, and the full
implementation of, the International Convention for the
Suppression of Acts of Nuclear Terrorism.
In spite of such progress, much work remains to
be done. Tens of thousands of nuclear weapons
continue to threaten humankind. Billions of dollars are
being spent to modernize them, despite pressing social
needs and growing global expectations for progress on

12-29927

S/PV.6753

disarmament. Sixteen years after its adoption by the
General Assembly, the Comprehensive Nuclear-TestBan Treaty has not yet entered into force. I warmly
welcome its ratification by Indonesia and call on all
other annex 2 States to follow suit.
Meanwhile, the Conference on Disarmament
(CD) remains deadlocked. Let me repeat, the current
stalemate is unacceptable. If the Conference cannot
begin work this year, then the General Assembly must
exercise its primary responsibility in carrying forward
the disarmament process. To facilitate negotiations in
the CD, the five nuclear-weapon States may consider
elaborating elements on a fissile material cut-off treaty.
As Secretary-General, I am willing to consider
establishing a group of eminent persons to help in that
task.
The tragic nuclear accident at Fukushima
underscored the urgent need to enhance nuclear safety
and the international emergency response framework. I
commend the International Atomic Energy Agency for
its work. At the Seoul Nuclear Security Summit, I set
out five areas for strengthening the global nuclear
safety regime and promoting synergy between nuclear
safety and nuclear security. The Final Document of the
2010 Review Conference of the Parties to the Treaty on
the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons recognized
the importance of addressing those challenges and
sharing best practices. The first session of the
Preparatory Committee for the 2015 Review
Conference should devote specific time to those issues.
Let me also stress the importance of full
compliance with Security Council resolutions. I
welcome the Council’s presidential statement of
16 April (S/PRST/2012/13), which strongly condemned
the launch of a so-called application satellite by the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea. The Council
has sent a firm and unified message. I urge the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea to immediately
comply fully with its obligations under resolutions
1718 (2006) and 1874 (2009). As demanded by the
Council, it should not conduct any further launches that
use ballistic missile technology, any further nuclear
tests or any further provocation. I renew my call on the
authorities of the Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea to build confidence with neighbouring countries
and improve the lives of its people, who face serious
food and nutrition needs. I also reaffirm my
commitment to working for peace and stability on the
Korean peninsula.

12-29927

On Iran, the only acceptable outcome is a
peaceful settlement that restores international
confidence in the exclusively peaceful nature of Iran’s
nuclear programme, in conformity with the Treaty on
the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons. In that
regard, I welcome the initial round of talks held in
Istanbul between Iran and the E3+3. I hope that the
parties will build upon that at their next meeting, in
Baghdad. It is important to agree on concrete and
reciprocal steps towards a comprehensive negotiated
solution.
I once again commend the focus of this meeting. I
hope that the Security Council will continue to
highlight that the proliferation of weapons of mass
destruction and their means of delivery constitute a
threat to international peace and security, as
highlighted in relevant resolutions, including resolution
1887 (2009). These discussions should be sustained at
the highest levels.
As I have often said, the 2009 Security Council
summit presided over by President Obama (see
S/PV.6191) should not be a one-time event. I invite
Council members to seriously consider follow-up at the
opening of this year’s session of the General Assembly.
The international community looks to the Security
Council to continue its leadership in generating the
political momentum needed to achieve the peace and
security of a world free from nuclear weapons.
The President: I thank the Secretary-General for
his statement.
I shall now give the floor to the members of the
Council.
Mr. Osorio (Colombia) (spoke in Spanish): I
would like to thank the Secretary-General for his
important statement.
This Security Council debate on nuclear
non-proliferation, disarmament and security is a timely
opportunity to reiterate the need for all Member States
to fully comply with their obligations and
commitments with regard to arms control, disarmament
and all aspects of the non-proliferation of every type of
weapon. We believe that international peace and
security will only be fully achieved when the world is
free of weapons of mass destruction, the threat they
pose and the risk that they could be used by terrorists
and non-State actors.

3

S/PV.6753

In 1967, with the adoption of the Treaty of
Tlatelolco, the Latin American and Caribbean region
became the world’s first densely populated nuclearweapon-free zone. That Treaty served as a model for the
establishment of other such zones in Africa, the South
Pacific, South-East Asia and Central Asia, as well as for
the recognition of Mongolia as a nuclear-weapon-free
country. The rejection of the possession, use or
manufacture of this type of weapon by more than 100
States members of nuclear-weapon-free zones provides
an important contribution to non-proliferation, while
also serving as a confidence-building measure in the
area of disarmament, thereby contributing to the
maintenance of regional and international peace and
security.
Colombia, as a State party to the Treaty on the
Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons and a country
that does not possess nuclear weapons, has been an
advocate for the universalization and effective
implementation of that international instrument. In
fulfilment of its obligations, Colombia has established
a safeguards agreement with the International Atomic
Energy Agency, as well as an additional protocol
thereto.
Although there has been progress in reducing
nuclear arsenals — in connection with which I should
like to commend the entry into force, on 5 February
2011, of the Treaty between the United States of
America and the Russian Federation on Measures for
the Further Reduction and Limitation of Strategic
Offensive Arms — much remains to be done to achieve
their total elimination. All nuclear-weapon States
without exception should make progress on that
commitment in a verifiable, irreversible and definitive
manner.
As a State party to annex 2 of the Comprehensive
Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty, we would like to reiterate the
importance of the Treaty’s entry into force. While the
declarations of moratoriums on nuclear tests made by
various nuclear-weapon States constitute progress on
the issue, only a legally binding commitment will
prevent the carrying out of new nuclear explosions and
their negative effects on international peace and
security, as well as on human beings and the
environment.
As a State member of the Conference on
Disarmament, Colombia believes that, in order to
overcome existing differences between nuclear and

4

non-nuclear-weapon States, there is a need to adopt a
legally binding instrument on negative security
assurances.
While the treaties establishing nuclear-weaponfree zones include additional protocols aimed at
ensuring respect for non-nuclear status and against the
use or threat of use of nuclear weapons, so long as
general and complete nuclear disarmament is not
achieved and the category of nuclear-weapon State
continues to exist, it will continue to be urgent and
necessary for the Conference on Disarmament to make
genuine substantive progress on negotiating an
agreement on this issue.
A fissile material cut-off treaty is another legally
binding instrument that remains to be negotiated in that
multilateral forum in order to contribute significantly
to non-proliferation — for non-proliferation also
entails preventing access to fissile materials and
technologies, including knowledge and information
about nuclear weapons. We reiterate our willingness to
work with every member of the Conference on
Disarmament to ensure that the Conference resumes
negotiations on pending international agreements in the
area of disarmament and is able to emerge from the
paralysis it has experienced for the past decade.
Nuclear terrorism poses a threat for every State
without exception. It is therefore necessary that we join
efforts to effectively confront it. Colombia, which
understands the scope of the threat, has undertaken the
necessary domestic legislative steps to ratify the
Convention on the Physical Protection of Nuclear
Material and its Amendment, as well as the
International Convention for the Suppression of Acts of
Nuclear Terrorism.
I should also like to refer to resolution 1540
(2004), which not only complements international
efforts in the areas of disarmament, the
non-proliferation of weapons of mass destruction and
combating terrorism, but also identifies the new threat
posed by the possession by terrorists and non-State
actors of such weapons, their delivery systems and
related material. The resolution provides for
international cooperation and assistance to be provided
to States to ensure its effective implementation as a
central element of prevention.
With the support of the Organization of American
States, the Stimson Centre and the Stanley Foundation,
the first Andean workshop on resolution 1540 (2004)

12-29927

S/PV.6753

was convened in our country. At the workshop, the
countries of the region provided information about the
progress they had made in the implementation of the
resolution and their requirements in that respect.
Finally, my country views nuclear disarmament
and non-proliferation as part of a comprehensive
process aimed at achieving general and complete
disarmament in all its aspects and with regard to all
types of weapons. It is thus important that all United
Nations organs, within their respective purviews,
commit themselves in a resolute manner to achieving
the tangible objectives that have been set, which
include the adoption of an arms trade treaty,
strengthening the implementation of the Programme of
Action on Small Arms and Light Weapons, and the
early entry into force of the Comprehensive NuclearTest-Ban Treaty.
Mr. Mehdiyev (Azerbaijan): First of all, I would
like to thank the Secretary-General for his
comprehensive briefing. Azerbaijan shares the position
of the Non-Aligned Movement (NAM) on the issue, as
reflected in the letter and the annexes thereto contained
in document S/2012/223.
Azerbaijan shares the common concern of the
international community over the growing nuclear
dangers and risks. Since the very first days of its
independence, my country has attached great
importance to nuclear security. We acknowledge the
international efforts made to ensure the strict global
implementation of the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation
of Nuclear Weapons (NPT).
At the same time, we see that the international
mechanism and verification regime are not strong or
effective enough to prevent the illegal proliferation of
nuclear technologies. In that regard, there is a need to
further strengthen the concept of the generally accepted
legally binding commitments concerning the non-use
of nuclear weapons and nuclear technologies for
military purposes.
International cooperation has always been at the
centre of Azerbaijan’s efforts in the field of nuclear
security and safety. Our activities have been targetoriented and conducted in a spirit of mutual respect and
cooperation. Azerbaijan, which recognizes and
commends the central role of the International Atomic
Energy Agency in the development of nuclear security
regulations and standards, has engaged in successful

12-29927

cooperation with the Agency on various aspects of
nuclear security.
Needless to say, nuclear security and
non-proliferation issues are closely interconnected. We
believe that Azerbaijan’s proposal on the creation of a
nuclear-weapon-free zone in the South Caucasus will
be supported by the neighbouring countries and the
broader international community.
Against the background of emerging proliferation
threats and due to my country’s geographic location,
we attach the utmost importance to the prevention of
the use of our territory as a transit route for illicit
nuclear trafficking. In close cooperation with our
international partners and in line with international
standards, we have developed a comprehensive
national export control system with a solid legislative
basis. To date, the system has proved to be a reliable
mechanism in the prevention of illicit nuclear
trafficking.
At the same time, due to the continued
occupation of the territories of Azerbaijan by
neighbouring Armenia, we are unable to ensure proper
control over a considerable part of our State border.
We believe that nuclear security and safety needs
should be directed primarily at the enhanced security
and safety of civilian nuclear facilities, taking into
account geographical peculiarities and transboundary
environmental implications in the light of possible
nuclear incidents.
In that regard, we are seriously concerned about
the nuclear safety situation in our region, which is
affected by the presence of the outdated Metsamor
nuclear power plant in neighbouring Armenia.
According to international monitors, that nuclear
power plant represents a danger to the entire region,
and its reactor belongs to the oldest and least reliable
category of all 66 Soviet reactors built in Eastern
Europe and the former Soviet Union. Moreover, the
plant in question is situated in a highly seismically
active mountainous terrain and lacks suitable water
resources for cooling its ageing reactor. We believe that
the operation of the Metsamor nuclear power plant
must cease without delay to prevent a tragic accident in
future.
As contribution to international efforts on nuclear
security and as a country committed to combating
nuclear terrorism, Azerbaijan has become a party to

5

S/PV.6753

key international instruments in the field of nuclear
security, including the International Convention for the
Suppression of Acts of Nuclear Terrorism and the
Convention on the Physical Protection of Nuclear
Material. I am also pleased to announce that Azerbaijan
recently endorsed the statement of principles for
joining the Global Initiative to Combat Nuclear
Terrorism in its capacity as a partner country.
Mr. Hardeep Singh Puri (India): India
welcomes the initiative taken by the United States to
convene a meeting of the Security Council on nuclear
security. I would also like to thank the SecretaryGeneral for his briefing.
India fully shares international concerns about the
serious threat posed by nuclear terrorism and
clandestine proliferation to international security. In
recent years, there has been heightened awareness of
the threat of terrorists and traffickers seeking access to
nuclear material and technologies for malicious
purposes. Addressing that threat requires sustained
and effective international cooperation to supplement
responsible national actions.
India’s resolution in the General Assembly on
measures to deny terrorists access to weapons of mass
destruction, which has been adopted by consensus
since 2002, and the recently extended work of the
Security Council Committee established pursuant to
resolution 1540 (2004) are important in that regard. So
are international legal instruments on national security,
the Convention on the Physical Protection of Nuclear
Material and its 2005 amendment, and the International
Convention for the Suppression of Acts of Nuclear
Terrorism. We support the universalization of those
instruments and the central role of the International
Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) in strengthening the
international global nuclear security architecture.
We welcome the successful outcome of the
Nuclear Security Summit held on Seoul on 26 and
27 March 2012, which sets new benchmarks for
nuclear security and new frameworks for international
cooperation. India’s Prime Minister participated in the
Summit. India has contributed to the Nuclear Security
Summit process, including by hosting a Sherpa
meeting in New Delhi this year.
While nuclear security is primarily a national
responsibility, there are benefits to supplementing
responsible national actions through sustained and
effective international cooperation.

6

We have made progress in the establishment of
the global centre for nuclear energy partnership. The
physical infrastructure for the centre is being set up,
and cooperation agreements have been signed with
several countries and the IAEA. Off-campus courses
are already under way.
India will contribute $1 million to the IAEA’s
Nuclear Security Fund for the years 2012 and 2013 and
will participate in the Agency’s 2013 International
Coordinating Conference on various nuclear security
activities, including the Global Initiative to Combat
Nuclear Terrorism, of which we are a member.
India intends to host a 1540 workshop this year to
strengthen its implementation. We believe that the best
guarantee of nuclear security is a world free of nuclear
weapons. The Rajiv Gandhi action plan, submitted
nearly 25 years ago, remains the most comprehensive
and elaborate proposal to achieve the objective of
global nuclear disarmament in a time-bound
framework.
Attaining the goal of a nuclear-weapon-free
world will require commitments embedded in an
agreed multilateral framework involving all States
possessing nuclear weapons. This should include
measures to reduce nuclear dangers by reducing the
salience of nuclear weapons in security doctrines and
by increasing universal restraints on the first use of
nuclear weapons. Working towards the common goal of
a world free of nuclear weapons will require a steadfast
commitment to multilateralism, which has proved its
worth in the case of conventions banning two other
categories of weapons of mass destruction.
The United Nations disarmament machinery,
especially the Conference on Disarmament as the
single multilateral disarmament negotiating forum,
should play its role. We support the early
commencement of negotiations in the Conference of
Disarmament in Geneva on a fissile material cut-off
treaty, which has since 1993 been envisaged as a
significant contribution to non-proliferation in all its
aspects.
States should fully and effectively implement the
obligations arising from the agreements and treaties to
which they are parties. The role of the Security Council
should be in accordance with the Charter and
applicable provisions of international agreements that
provide for such a role. India has never been a source
of proliferation of sensitive technologies. We are

12-29927

S/PV.6753

determined to further strengthen our export control
systems to keep them on a par with the highest
international standards. We have already adhered to the
guidelines of the Nuclear Suppliers Group and the
Missile Technology Control Regime.
As a country with the ability and willingness to
promote global non-proliferation objectives, we
believe that the next logical step is India’s membership
in the four export control regimes. All States have the
right to develop and utilize nuclear energy for peaceful
purposes, in accordance with the international
obligations they have undertaken. Given India’s
growing energy demands, we see nuclear energy as an
important component of our energy mix. We are taking
forward our three-stage nuclear programme based on a
closed-fuel cycle, with new safety features and
proliferation-resistant technologies. Our goal is to
generate 62,000 megawatts from nuclear energy by
2032. We are determined that our expanding nuclear
power programme will follow the highest standards of
nuclear safety and security.
We hope that this meeting of the Security Council
will help draw attention to the challenges posed by
nuclear terrorism and reinforce national and
international commitments to strengthen nuclear
security and contribute to the enhancement of the
global nuclear security architecture.
Mr. Loulichki (Morocco) (spoke in French): The
debate on nuclear non-proliferation, disarmament and
security, which you, Madam President, have taken the
initiative of including on our agenda, is at the heart of
the concerns of the international community. We would
like to thank the Secretary-General for his introductory
statement.
We believe that this debate is taking place in an
international environment marked by progress in
conventional arms control and by the desire to
strengthen international cooperation aimed at
addressing the challenges we face. However, that
context stands in contrast with the lethargy of actual
disarmament mechanisms. All countries support the
promotion of multilateralism and have reached
agreement on the importance of the effective
implementation of all the provisions of international
treaties in the field of disarmament and
non-proliferation, so as to build a world that is based
on peace and security for all.

12-29927

Morocco’s commitment to the subject of
disarmament is a strategic choice that reflects our
commitment to peace and security and to the principle
of the peaceful settlement of disputes. We are a State
party to the full range of multilateral instruments
pertaining to weapons of mass destruction. Morocco
remains committed to strengthening multilateralism for
general and complete disarmament, in particular with
regard to the disarmament of nuclear weapons in a
verifiable, irreversible and definitive manner.
The destruction of weapons of mass destruction is
crucial, as they pose an ongoing risk that places a
burden on the future of the world. Collective security
requires a renunciation of proliferation and further
commitments towards achieving complete and total
disarmament. In the absence thereof, the risk of the
acquisition of such weapons by non-State actors is not
a mere hypothesis. It is therefore our duty to do our
utmost to achieve the goals of the Treaty on the
Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons (NPT), which
remains the cornerstone of the global disarmament and
non-proliferation regime and of the peaceful use of
nuclear energy.
It is undeniable that the universalization of a
treaty as important as the NPT must be a common
objective for our collective security. As a result of the
successful outcome of the eighth NPT Review
Conference, in 2010, we have seen that through
dialogue it is possible to attain commitments that allow
us to make progressive steps towards attaining the NPT
objectives. At the same time, it remains necessary for
all States parties to play their role fully and to shoulder
their responsibilities, in order to build upon the
progress that has been made.
Morocco underscores the importance of
adherence to the NPT and the conclusion of
comprehensive safeguards agreements with the
International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) by all
States of the Middle East region, including Israel. We
believe that it is crucial to abide by the 2012 deadline
for the holding of a conference on the establishment of
a zone free of nuclear weapons and other weapons of
mass destruction in the Middle East, by carrying out
the Plan of Action for the implementation of the 1995
resolution on the Middle East. The 2012 conference
will be a historic opportunity to trigger a process that
will make it possible to free this zone of weapons of
mass destruction. In that context, we welcome the
appointment of the facilitator and of the host country,

7

S/PV.6753

as well as the consultations that have been convened,
which we hope to see intensified so that the conference
can be convened as soon as possible.
Morocco remains firmly convinced that the
establishment of a nuclear-weapon-free world requires
the use of United Nations disarmament mechanisms, in
particular the Conference on Disarmament (CD). The
efficacy and the strength of these mechanisms depend,
of course, on the political resolve of States, as well as
on their compliance with the obligations and
commitments they enter into. The lethargy that for
years has been the hallmark of the Conference on
Disarmament stands in marked contrast to the
evolution of the international situation and the new
security challenges that the world faces, which are
undermining the shared goals of the international
community, namely, the achievement of general and
complete disarmament. We share the view that the
problems of the CD are due to political events. We
appeal for political flexibility so that the Conference
can reach agreement on a programme of work that is
balanced and makes it possible for the Conference to
play its full role as a negotiating forum in the field of
disarmament.
Based on a complete prohibition of nuclear tests,
my country regrets the late entry into force of the
Comprehensive Nuclear Test-Ban Treaty (CTBT). In
that regard, we reiterate our appeal to all States that
have not yet done so to ratify the Treaty. Morocco,
which from 2009 to 2011 worked together with France
in order to facilitate the entry into force of the Treaty,
is encouraged by the new ratifications and the possible
ratification by an annex 2 State.
In order to meet non-proliferation objectives and
to enact the nuclear security measures that have been
established by the relevant international entities in this
field, it is crucial that all agreements be scrupulously
and universally observed. Morocco welcomes the
central role played by the IAEA in that regard. We call
for support for those efforts and for increasing the
Agency’s financial and human resources. While
adapting to meet the new global challenges,
strengthening these norms and standards, however,
should not become in itself an obstacle to development
and to the peaceful use of nuclear energy for reasons of
economic and social development. In this spirit, my
country welcomes the outcome of the IAEA conference
on nuclear safety, as well as the holding of the highlevel meeting on nuclear safety and security held at the

8

initiative of the Secretary-General. We hope that the
political will that was expressed on those two
occasions will coalesce and lead to tangible measures
that support the IAEA’s activities, in particular its Plan
of Action for strengthening nuclear security.
Morocco welcomes the outcome of the Seoul
Summit. We believe that our active participation in a
number of multilateral initiatives, such as the Global
Initiative to Combat Nuclear Terrorism and the summit
process on nuclear security, is a reflection of the
importance that my country attaches to strengthening
international and regional cooperation on nuclear
security and on the fight against illicit trafficking in
radioactive nuclear material. The exchange of expertise
and experience in such initiatives helps to strengthen
multilateral action in the field of non-proliferation and
nuclear security. Accordingly, Morocco has organized a
number of activities, including an international
exercise on the response to a malicious act involving
radioactive material, which was held in Rabat in March
in collaboration with our international partners,
including the IAEA.
One week from now, the first meeting of the
Preparatory Committee for the 2015 Review
Conference of the Parties to the NPT will be held in
Vienna. In the following months, the Review
Conference of the Programme of Action to Prevent,
Combat and Eradicate the Illicit Trade in Small Arms
and Light Weapons in All Its Aspects and the United
Nations Conference on an Arms Trade Treaty will take
place. All of those opportunities make it necessary that
we demonstrate political will and harness our efforts in
order to ensure a successful outcome to those meetings,
showing our firm commitment to multilateralism in the
field of disarmament and non-proliferation.
In conclusion, I would like to reiterate that peace
through disarmament is a common good of humankind
and we must spare no effort in order to help build a
nuclear-weapon-free world to help break away from
the arms race and to focus instead on the fight against
poverty, pandemics and the obvious environmental
deterioration.
Mr. Cabral (Portugal): I would like to thank you,
Madam President, for convening this important and
timely meeting. This is indeed the right moment to take
stock
of
international
efforts
on
nuclear
non-proliferation, disarmament and security and to
reaffirm our shared commitment to seek a safer world

12-29927

S/PV.6753

for all. I also thank the Secretary-General for his
statement and for his support.
Nuclear disarmament and preventing proliferation
are at core of our common concerns when addressing
international security priorities. Portugal is deeply
committed to global disarmament, non-proliferation
and arms control. Like most countries around the
world, we believe that the proliferation of nuclear
weapons, as well as other weapons of mass destruction,
represents a major threat to international peace and
security, and we call for a coordinated and resolute
response by the international community as a whole.
We are conscious of, and encouraged by, the
enormous amount of work and resolute efforts that
were accomplished in recent years. We stand by the
basic deal that President Obama outlined in Prague
three years ago to build on a consensus that all nations
have the right to peaceful nuclear energy, that nations
with nuclear weapons have the responsibility to move
towards disarmament, and that those without such
weapons have the responsibility to forsake them. There
have been positive developments, but it is crucial to
continue advancing the agenda with energy and
persistence. Nuclear-weapon States have to do more,
and the non-proliferation regime has to be strengthened
in a credible and verifiable way. In that regard, I will
limit myself to a few key issues and priorities.
First, we have to reaffirm that the Treaty on the
Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons (NPT) remains
the core of global nuclear disarmament and
non-proliferation. We have to build on the positive
outcome of the 2010 Review Conference of the Parties
to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear
Weapons, taking forward the three pillars of the NPT in
a comprehensive and balanced approach. The Treaty
must be strengthened and must become universal. We
must also promote and universalize the safeguards
regime of the International Atomic Energy Agency and
ensure sufficient resources and means to enhance the
monitoring and verification capabilities of the Agency.
Secondly, the Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban
Treaty is a vital element of the international
disarmament machinery. We urge all remaining States,
especially those whose signatures and ratifications are
necessary for the Treaty’s entry into force, to renew
their political commitment and to take all the necessary
measures in order to achieve that crucial goal.

12-29927

Thirdly, we have to address the risks posed by
terrorist groups acquiring the equipment and the
technology to produce a nuclear device. In that regard,
we have to ensure the effective implementation of, and
full compliance with, resolution 1540 (2004), as well
as the enforcement of strict export controls for
sensitive materials and technologies. We have to make
full use of non-proliferation mechanisms, like the
Nuclear Suppliers Group and other international
cooperative instruments, as well as the Global
Initiative to Combat Nuclear Terrorism and the
Proliferation Security Initiative.
Fourthly, we are concerned about the paralysis in
the multilateral negotiations in the Conference on
Disarmament in Geneva. A consensual programme of
work should be formulated and negotiations on the
fissile material cut-off treaty should begin without
delay. In that regard, Portugal is convinced that the
question of the expansion of the membership of the
Conference should be recognized as an important step
to revitalize disarmament negotiations.
Finally, issues of security are indivisible and
global. Compliance, enforcement and verification are
key concepts to be put into practice if we want to move
forward on those matters. We must strengthen mutual
trust and confidence. That is why we attach great
importance to the promotion of nuclear-weapon-free
zones, in particular in the Middle East. We are
confident of the necessary follow-up to the 2010 NPT
Review Conference to start a process for the
establishment of a Middle East zone free of nuclear
weapons and other weapons of mass destruction.
As recent events have shown, the Middle East is
one of the most unstable regions in the world, where
serious risks of internal and international conflict are
present. Furthermore, any conflict in the region has a
particular potential to reverberate in a much wider
area, with a serious danger of increasing any
confrontation. To add nuclear weapons to that situation
only reinforces existing mistrust and fear. It is for that
reason that I very much wish for the success of the
diplomatic conference to be hosted by Finland. A
successful outcome, which rests on the engagement
and support of the countries in the region and other
stakeholders, will substantially contribute to peace and
stability at the regional as well as at the global level.
The United Nations has a pivotal role to play in
nuclear non-proliferation, disarmament and security. In

9

S/PV.6753

that context, I would like to conclude by reaffirming
Portugal’s full support and active contribution to our
common goals.
Mr. Li Baodong (China) (spoke in Chinese): I
would like to thank Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon
for his briefing. I would also like to thank you, Madam
President, for your efforts in convening this meeting.
Continuing
to
promote
international
nuclear
non-proliferation, nuclear disarmament and nuclear
security is of great significance to the maintenance of
international peace and security. China supports the
Security Council in playing its role in that regard. With
regard to the common efforts of the international
community, the areas of arms control and
non-proliferation
have
seen
some
positive
developments. At the same time, the nuclear
proliferation issue remains acute. We have a long way
to go to achieve nuclear disarmament. The nuclear
security situation remains grave. The international
community needs to enhance its coordination and
cooperation in that regard and join hands to face the
challenge.
China believes that to maintain international
peace and stability and to achieve general security in
the world, we must uphold a new security concept
based on mutual trust, benefit, equality and
coordination, with a focus on building a peaceful and
stable international environment, building inter-State
relations based on mutual trust and understanding,
adhering to multilateralism, consolidating collective
security with the United Nations at its core, adhering to
the purposes and principles of the Charter of the United
Nations, and resolving hotspot problems and
international
disputes
through
dialogue
and
negotiations so as to eliminate the root cause of nuclear
proliferation and nuclear terrorism.
We must honestly address nuclear disarmament,
nuclear non-proliferation and the peaceful use of
nuclear energy in a balanced manner. We must
vigorously promote the nuclear disarmament process,
maintain global strategic balance and stability, and
abandon nuclear deterrence policies based on the
concept of first use of nuclear weapons to effectively
reduce the threat of nuclear weapons. We must
consolidate international nuclear non-proliferation
mechanisms, fully respect the rights of countries to the
peaceful use of nuclear energy and avoid double
standards. At the same time, we must adhere to
scientific and rational concepts of nuclear security,

10

strengthen capacity-building in that regard, deepen
international communication and cooperation, raise the
global level of nuclear security and achieve the
common goal of general nuclear security.
Safeguarding peace and stability on the Korean
peninsula and in the Northeast Asian region and
promoting denuclearization on the peninsula are the
common interest and responsibility of all. Dialogue
and consultation is the only correct way to address the
peninsula issue. We hope that all sides will make
efforts to maintain and implement the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea-United States 29 February
common understanding. We also hope that all sides
will maintain calm and show restraint, remain engaged
in dialogue, commit to the Six-Party Talks, promote the
denuclearization process in the shared interest of
maintaining peace and stability on the peninsula and in
Northeast Asia.
Committing to dialogue and negotiation in
addressing the Iran nuclear issue is of great
significance for maintaining stability and peace and
avoiding greater upheaval in the Middle East region.
All sides must maintain the existing common
understanding, engage in constructive dialogue,
cooperate in good faith, gradually build mutual trust
and eventually address the Iran nuclear issue in a
comprehensive, just and appropriate manner.
Nuclear non-proliferation, nuclear disarmament
and nuclear security are long-term tasks before us.
China is prepared to work with the international
community in strengthening communication and
cooperation and make our contribution to promoting
the relevant processes and building lasting peace and
shared prosperity for all.
Mr. Wittig (Germany): At the outset, I would like
to thank the Secretary-General for his briefing on
nuclear non-proliferation, disarmament and security. I
would also like to thank him for his leadership in that
important area over the years.
Non-proliferation, disarmament and arms control
play a key role in Germany’s foreign and security
policy. We are therefore pleased that those topics are
high on the international agenda again. We see the
Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons
(NPT) as the cornerstone of the international nuclear
non-proliferation regime. We believe that the NPT is in
need of constant strengthening.

12-29927

S/PV.6753

In 2010, NPT States parties reaffirmed their
commitment to the Treaty in all its aspects. The parties
adopted a comprehensive Action Plan covering all
three pillars of the Treaty. That outcome was extremely
important at a time when the global non-proliferation
regime had been confronted with serious proliferation
challenges. The 2010 Action Plan sets a broad agenda.
It spells out a commitment by the nuclear-weapon
States to make further efforts to advance the
disarmament of all types of nuclear weapons, with the
final objective of a world free of nuclear weapons.
Along the same lines, I should like to express my
appreciation to the United States presidency, which has
organized today’s important briefing at the Security
Council. We welcome the opportunity to take stock of
the achievements made during almost three years since
the historic Security Council summit (see S/PV.6191)
that adopted resolution 1887 (2009). In that resolution,
the Council expressed its commitment to creating the
conditions for a world without nuclear weapons.
My Government actively supports the vision
presented by President Obama in his 2009 Prague
speech of “a world without nuclear weapons”. The
entry into force of the New START agreement between
the United States and the Russian Federation was a
first step in the right direction. More steps towards that
long-term goal are necessary. Together with partners in
the 10-country Non-Proliferation and Disarmament
Initiative, Germany has made concrete proposals to
promote the implementation of the key elements of the
Action Plan adopted by the NPT Review Conference in
2010.
It is our firm belief that non-proliferation and
disarmament are joint security interests of all nations
and have to be pursued simultaneously. We also
promote accession to the Non-Proliferation Treaty with
a view to its universalization.
Likewise, we hope for an early entry into force of
the Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty (CTBT)
and urge the eight remaining annex 2 States to sign and
ratify the CTBT. We see a fissile material cut-off treaty
as the next crucial step towards achieving the
ambitious goal of a world free of nuclear weapons. We
remain entirely engaged in supporting an early start of
the negotiations. In that context, Germany wishes to
see a Conference on Disarmament in Geneva that is
working effectively.

12-29927

Germany sees nuclear non-proliferation and
disarmament as mutually reinforcing processes — or,
as we say, two sides of the same coin — based on our
firm conviction that progress in disarmament can
contribute to diminishing proliferation risks. At the
same time, in order to make substantial disarmament
possible, we need an effective non-proliferation
regime.
We therefore cannot turn a blind eye to the
ongoing proliferation crises. They threaten the very
foundation of the global non-proliferation regime, in
particular the Non-Proliferation Treaty. They also
endanger regional stability.
We are directly involved in the efforts with regard
to the Iranian nuclear programme. Germany remains
engaged in finding negotiated and sustainable solutions
to the outstanding questions. We strongly advocate
negotiations and dialogue to find a long-term
comprehensive solution that restores international
confidence in the exclusively peaceful nature of Iran’s
nuclear programme.
The last meeting with Iran in Istanbul opened
prospects for a new negotiation process. Our efforts in
the framework of the E3+3 are aimed at facilitating a
sustained and intensive process of serious dialogue.
That dialogue must lead, in a short time, to concrete
confidence-building measures based on reciprocity. We
do not want talks for the sake of talks. We have to
ensure that Iran meets all obligations, while fully
respecting Iran’s right to the peaceful use of nuclear
energy. We are convinced that the measures taken
played an essential role in moving Iran back to the
negotiation table, so we must maintain the pressure.
On North Korea, the Security Council clearly
stated, just a few days ago (see S/2012/PRST/13), that
the recent launch using ballistic missile technology
constituted a serious violation of its relevant
resolutions. As further provocations cannot be ruled
out, the international community must remain firm and
united with regard to the Democratic People’s Republic
of Korea: no more nuclear tests, no launches using
ballistic missile technology, a retraction of the
announcement of withdrawal from the NPT, the
abandonment of existing nuclear programmes, and a
swift return to International Atomic Energy Agency
safeguards. We will stay the course and remain firm in
our efforts to leave no room for doubt that all countries

11

S/PV.6753

must be held accountable for their obligations under
the NPT.

make sure that we have put in place the best possible
security measures to safeguard nuclear materials.

Both the fight against terrorism and the
proliferation of weapons of mass destruction lie at the
very heart of Germany’s foreign and security policy. If
the two were to merge, we would all be confronted
with the most dangerous and devastating situation of
our globalized world. We welcome that the Council,
which is tasked to deal with the maintenance of
international peace and security, has seized the
opportunity today to deal with this sensitive issue of
the utmost importance.

Let me conclude by stressing the importance of
nuclear disarmament, non-proliferation and security.
Disarmament does not endanger our security, it
increases it. So do non-proliferation and securing
nuclear and radioactive materials. Those are the three
pillars for greater global security and stable peace
around the world. Let us continue to work together
towards that end.

Of all of the non-proliferation initiatives that
Germany is supporting, one deserves particular
attention, in particular from the New York perspective.
Under the wise leadership of my South African
colleague, Ambassador Sangqu, the Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1540 (2004) helps
States to prevent weapons of mass destruction and their
means of delivery from being proliferated to non-State
actors. We welcome the 10-year extension of the
mandate of that important Committee.
To demonstrate our support, Germany and the
United Nations Office for Disarmament Affairs are
organizing a conference in Wiesbaden, to take place
next week. At that conference, the Committee will seek
direct interaction with relevant industries and industry
groups on ways to jointly facilitate the implementation
of resolution 1540 (2004).
Nuclear security is a precondition for nuclear
non-proliferation. Securing nuclear material is a
common global challenge. In an age marked by
globalization and international terrorism, a lack of
security in just one of our countries poses a serious
threat to all of us. A chain is only as strong as its
weakest link.
Following the successful 2010 Nuclear Security
Summit in Washington, D.C., on the protection of
weapons-grade materials, we welcome the Seoul
Nuclear Security Summit, held less than a month ago.
My Minister emphasized that we must now focus our
efforts on civilian uses. They, too, pose a risk,
especially with regard to the threat of a dirty bomb.
Almost every country in the world has
radioactive sources for civilian purposes. Those are
often indispensable in medicine, research and industry.
We must, however, act to prevent their misuse and

12

Mr. Churkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): As one of the more advanced nations from
the standpoint of developing nuclear energy
technologies, the Russian Federation attaches great
importance to ensuring the maintenance of a high level
of nuclear security, not only in our country but also
worldwide. We are fully implementing our
international obligations in the area of nuclear
disarmament, nuclear non-proliferation and nuclear
security, and we reaffirm the political obligations in
that context set forth in the final documents of the
Nuclear Security Summits held in Washington, D.C.,
and Seoul.
In Russia, the physical protection of nuclear
material remains at the requisite level. All nuclear
material in our territory and corresponding installations
has been provided with reliable, physical protection.
On Russian territory, no nuclear material or installation
entails a level of physical protection that could cause
fear. Russia continues to enhance those protections
according to the norms governing physical and
technical nuclear security.
We are maintaining our consistent policy of
supporting international efforts aimed at strengthening
nuclear security across a broad spectrum on this topic,
including through the organization in Russia of
international training courses to train experts in that
area on various subjects.
We are pleased with our engagement with the
International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) on those
issues. Our reaffirmed intention to support the Agency
in that area is represented by our decision to earmark,
beginning in 2010, annual voluntary contributions to
the IAEA Nuclear Security Fund.
The recent Nuclear Security Summit held in
Seoul saw the President of the Russian Federation
announce Russia’s plan to hold in Russia, in the third

12-29927

S/PV.6753

quarter of 2012, exercises under the Global Initiative to
Combat Nuclear Terrorism on the theme of curbing the
illicit movement of nuclear material and radioactive
sources. We anticipate that they will involve numerous
representatives from Member States participating in the
initiative from various regions worldwide. We also
hope that they will serve as a concrete contribution to
developing the unique and important area of ensuring
physical nuclear safety.
In the area of nuclear crime, we are currently
accelerating our work within the country as well as our
international cooperation. We are strengthening our
system for monitoring the movements of nuclear and
radioactive materials, including customs controls. In
the area of Murmansk, we are developing a pilot
programme for the prevention of illicit trafficking in
radioactive materials.
We have set forth in greater detail our
achievements in the area of physical nuclear safety in
our memorandum prepared for the Seoul Nuclear
Security Summit, which has been published on the
official website of the Russian Foreign Ministry. It is
unfortunate that, for various reasons, many countries
have still not given due attention to those important
issues.
The world continues to face the threat of nuclear
terrorism and the possibility of trafficking in nuclear
materials and radioactive substances. In that context,
export-control measures are not always sufficiently
effective. We are also concerned that States are not
hurrying to assume their specific legal obligations in
that area. In particular, the Convention on the Physical
Protection of Nuclear Material and the Amendment
thereto, as well as the International Convention for the
Suppression of Acts of Nuclear Terrorism, have not yet
become fully universal legal instruments.
The Russian Federation intends to build on its
capacities in the area of nuclear energy, viewing it as
one of the strategic areas for our country’s
development. We are certain that despite the gravity of
the accident at the Fukushima Daiichi nuclear power
plant, alternatives in the near future to nuclear energy
do not exist. Without that, it will not be possible to
meet the challenge of supplying humankind with
energy.
As of today, among the major sources of energy,
nuclear energy is not only environmentally friendly

12-29927

and cost-effective, it is also a safe source of energy —
if one treats it responsibly, of course.
A mandatory condition for the use of nuclear
energy is ensuring and maintaining a high level of
physical and technical safety. The accident at
Fukushima demonstrated the need to strengthen the
international legal basis for ensuring the safety of
nuclear energy facilities, in terms of building and
operating such installations.
In that respect, in 2011 the Russian Federation
introduced amendments to the Convention on Nuclear
Safety and to the Convention on Early Notification of a
Nuclear Accident and also initiated the strengthening
of the IAEA nuclear safety standards. We are confident
that the early adoption of our proposals will help to
avoid or to minimize the negative consequences of
nuclear accidents in the future.
Mr. Menan (Togo) (spoke in French): First of all,
Madam President, I would like to welcome your
country’s selection of the theme for this very important
debate, which is directly in line with the international
efforts
aimed
at
supporting
initiatives
on
non-proliferation, disarmament and the peaceful use of
nuclear energy.
Following the adoption of resolution 1887
(2009), which reaffirmed the leading role of the
Security Council in the field of non-proliferation and
disarmament, many events of no less importance have
occurred on those topics, thereby proving the existence
of a climate conducive to dialogue and negotiation. In
that context, the high-level meeting of the General
Assembly on 24 September 2010, preceded by the
Nuclear Security Summit in Washington, D.C., on
13 March 2010, may be cited as examples and as
reaffirming multilateralism as the fundamental
principle underpinning negotiations on nuclear
disarmament and non-proliferation.
The entry into force of the new Treaty between
the United States of America and the Russian
Federation on Measures for the Further Reduction and
Limitation of Strategic Offensive Arms, on 5 February
2011, represents an important milestone in the process
of reducing nuclear stockpiles. The Paris meeting on
30 June and 1 July 2011 of the five permanent
members of the Security Council, as part of the 2005
London conference on confidence-building measures
towards nuclear disarmament and non-proliferation,
has enabled the nuclear-weapon States to renew their

13

S/PV.6753

full support for the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of
Nuclear Weapons (NPT), which is the cornerstone of
the non-proliferation regime. I should not fail to
mention the latest Nuclear Security Summit, held in
Seoul on 26 and 27 March. Togo welcomes those
various initiatives, which attest to the growing political
resolve of nuclear-weapon States and the international
community
to
promote
disarmament
and
non-proliferation.
Today’s debate is therefore taking place at a time
when the international community is continuing its
efforts to make further progress in those areas. Our
enthusiasm, however, cannot conceal the fact that the
non-proliferation regime is still facing considerable
difficulties, in particular the threat of nuclear arms or
materials falling into the hands of non-State actors,
especially terrorists.
It is in that context that violations by certain
States of their commitments continue to be of concern
to my country inasmuch as they shake the confidence
of the international community and undermine the
integrity of the NPT regime. In that regard, the Islamic
Republic of Iran and the Democratic People’s Republic
of Korea are particularly notorious and have also been
subject to sanctions in connection with their nuclear
programmes. The launch on 12 April of a missile by
the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea, intended,
it claimed, to be put into orbit as an Earth observation
satellite, confirmed that that country has not halted the
development of its military nuclear programme, despite
the Council resolutions prohibiting it.
Iran, for its part, has continued to pursue its
sensitive nuclear activities, according to the latest
report of the International Atomic Energy Agency
(IAEA), also in violation of the relevant resolutions of
the Council. While we reaffirm the right of those and
all other countries to use nuclear power for peaceful
purposes, Togo asks that they comply with the relevant
resolutions of the Security Council and with their
commitments under the international legal instruments
to which they are party. We also ask them to spare no
effort in continuing good-faith negotiations aimed at
reaching agreements that preserve the rights of all the
parties and that help ensure international and regional
peace and security.
While article IV of the NPT permits all countries
to acquire nuclear technology for peaceful purposes,
developing countries, in particular those in Africa, do

14

not currently derive genuine benefit from that right, as
the severe energy crises they have faced in recent years
have shown. Besides helping them to deal with such
energy issues, nuclear technology should be available
for them to use in the fields of health, industry,
agriculture and other related activities. Doing so would
enable them to cope with the numerous challenges they
face in meeting the Millennium Development Goals.
My country believes, however, that African countries
will be able to achieve those goals only in the context
of cooperation with nations that possess such
technology.
All States, whether or not they are parties to the
NPT, should contribute to the global goal of
disarmament by helping to create the necessary secure
environment, to reduce regional tensions, to promote
collective security, to ensure that the international
nuclear non-proliferation regime remains solid and
reliable and to make progress in all areas of
disarmament. In that regard, my delegation wishes to
reiterate its firm commitment to the goal of general and
complete disarmament, as well as to the elimination of
all nuclear stockpiles. We remain convinced that
cooperation in the field of non-proliferation must also
involve strengthening the regime established pursuant
to resolution 1540 (2004) on weapons of mass
destruction. In addition to being a key element of the
fight against terrorism, resolution 1540 (2004) is also a
crucial instrument in combating weapons of mass
destruction. In that connection, we welcome the efforts
that the representative of South Africa, as Chair of the
Security Council Committee established pursuant to
resolution 1540 (2004), has made in this area.
Multilateralism and international cooperation
remain essential to achieving the goals of nuclear
disarmament, non-proliferation, security and the
peaceful use of nuclear energy. That is why
negotiations on all matters involving disarmament and
non-proliferation must be conducted in a spirit of
openness and commitment, with the single aim of
preserving international peace and security through the
adoption of confidence-building measures and the
protection of nuclear sites. We therefore believe that it
is crucial that negotiations be resumed within the
Conference on Disarmament on every subject area,
including fissile material. The Conference can no
longer be held hostage by a small minority of States at
a time when humankind is haunted by the potential
threat of terrorists acquiring such materials.

12-29927

S/PV.6753

My country requests that the International Atomic
Energy Agency continue to play a central role in
negotiations
on
nuclear
disarmament
and
non-proliferation. The IAEA remains the go-to
international mechanism on issues of nuclear security,
while giving international efforts coherence and
consistency. It should therefore continue to receive
sufficient financial resources.
In conclusion, Togo believes that the international
community must spare no effort in responding more
firmly to nuclear proliferation crises, supporting the
work of the IAEA and pursuing concrete efforts
towards achieving nuclear disarmament while also, as
the NPT stipulates, cooperating in order to promote the
responsible development of non-military nuclear
technology.
Mr. Briens (France) (spoke in French): I thank
the Secretary-General for his statement and commend
his personal commitment to disarmament and
non-proliferation.
I would also like to thank you, Madam President,
for organizing this debate. Three years after the
Council’s groundbreaking summit on nuclear
disarmament and non-proliferation of September 2009
(see S/PV.6191) and the unanimous adoption of
resolution 1887 (2009), it is important that the Council
address once again the issue of the proliferation of
weapons of mass destruction and their delivery
systems, which continues to be one of the chief threats
to international peace and security.
Three years ago, along with the other heads of
State and Government at the Council summit on
nuclear disarmament and non-proliferation, the
President of France reiterated our commitment to
seeking a safer world for all and to working with all
States to establish the conditions necessary for a
nuclear-weapon-free world, in accordance with the
aims of the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear
Weapons (NPT). Various successes and initiatives
testify to the new momentum that the international
community has demonstrated since then. I am thinking,
first of all, of the success of the NPT Review
Conference held in May 2010. The adoption by
consensus of a concrete, balanced Action Plan based on
the three pillars of the Treaty — disarmament,
non-proliferation and the peaceful uses of nuclear
power — and on the Middle East, was a result of major
importance. It demonstrated the shared commitment of

12-29927

the international community to strengthening the
international non-proliferation regime, and is testament
to its deep appreciation for the NPT, an irreplaceable
instrument of our collective security.
That Action Plan is our shared road map for the
years ahead; its implementation is the responsibility of
all of us. It is up to each State party to fulfil its part of
that contract so that we can move towards a safer
world. France, together with its partners, the other four
permanent members of the Council, is ready to
shoulder its responsibilities.
We have made significant efforts with regard to
nuclear
disarmament,
including
quantitative
reductions, irreversible steps, transparency and
confidence-building measures, and having to do with
doctrine.
Our willingness to work with other nuclearweapon States is also quite clear. In July 2011 in Paris,
France organized the first meeting of the five
permanent members of the Security Council (P-5) to
follow up the Review Conference of the States Parties
to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear
Weapons. That successful meeting made it possible
once again to underscore the determination of the five
nuclear-weapon States to pursue the implementation of
concrete efforts aimed at ensuring full respect for the
commitments undertaken with regard to the Treaty.
I also welcome the progress made during the
discussions among the P-5 and the member countries
of the Association of Southeast Asian Nations with
regard to the Protocol to the Bangkok Treaty on the
creation of a nuclear-weapon-free zone in South-East
Asia. We hope that the Protocol will be signed very
soon.
Moreover, I welcome the fact that the United
States and the Russian Federation, the two countries
whose arsenals constitute almost 95 per cent of the
world’s nuclear weapons, agreed on important steps
with the signing and entry into force of the New
START agreement. We also welcome the recent
ratifications of the Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban
Treaty, in particular by Indonesia, which is an annex 2
State, as well as by Guatemala.
Additional success in other disarmament areas
should also be underscored, such as the entry into force
of the Oslo Convention on Cluster Munitions and the

15

S/PV.6753

positive outcome last December of the Review
Conference of the Biological Weapons Convention.
Some progress was also possible with regard to
non-proliferation, including new ratifications of the
Additional Protocol, the 10-year extension of the
mandate of the Committee established pursuant to
resolution 1540 (2004) by resolution 1977 (2011), and
developments in the Nuclear Suppliers Group. And, of
course, we welcome the fact that, a few days following
the Seoul Summit, meaningful efforts were made at the
highest level to improve nuclear security and to better
understand the threat posed by nuclear terrorism and
the need to secure the most vulnerable sources. Those
efforts must be pursued in the run-up to the third
Summit, to be held in the Netherlands in 2014.
With regard to the peaceful uses of nuclear
energy, many initiatives have been launched to
promote nuclear safety following the accident at
Fukushima. In that regard, I have in mind the adoption
of the International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA)
Action Plan on Nuclear Security. France actively
contributed to the Plan, in particular by organizing, in
June 2011 in Paris, an international seminar on nuclear
safety.
Lastly, with regard to the implementation of the
1995 resolution on the Middle East, the preparatory
process led by the facilitator, Ambassador Jaakko
Laajava, is moving in the right direction. We should all
work together on conditions conducive to the holding
of the Conference this year with all the stakeholders
concerned.
All those efforts will be in vain if we do not
respond to the current challenges facing the
non-proliferation regime, and especially if we do not
firmly address the serious proliferation crises before
the Council. The number one priority is combating
proliferation. Let us be clear: nuclear proliferation
threatens the security of all. By undermining mutual
confidence, it poses an obstacle to the development of
civil nuclear cooperation. It also slows down progress
on nuclear disarmament.
In order that the right of the vast majority of
States to the peaceful uses of nuclear energy not be put
into question, the international community must deal
firmly with those who violate the common rules.
Above all, that means responding to the major
proliferation crises before the Council. The situation
since September 2009 has not improved — far from it.

16

In November 2010, a secret enrichment
programme was uncovered in the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea, in violation of resolutions 1718
(2006) and 1874 (2009). As we know, with the
launching of a missile in recent days, the Council was
faced a new violation of those resolutions.
With regard to Iran, last Saturday in Istanbul the
E3+3 resumed discussions with that country on its
nuclear programme. The E3+3 were once again united
in its determination to carry out a serious dialogue with
Iran, with the goal of ensuring that the country
responds to the concerns of the international
community with regard to the nature of its programme
and that it fully respects its international obligations.
Future discussions will be important. Iran must take
concrete steps to restore confidence, in accordance
with the resolutions of the Council and of the IAEA
Board of Governors.
More generally speaking, strengthening the
non-proliferation regime is also a priority, including
universalizing the IAEA safeguards system, in
particular by general acceptance of the additional
protocol. Lastly, we must take concrete steps to halt the
spread of proliferation and continue our efforts to
combat the threat posed by nuclear and radiological
terrorism.
Secondly, we should also pursue disarmament
efforts in every area. I should recall that France fully
meets its responsibilities under article VI of the Treaty
on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons (NPT).
We are prepared to continue those efforts but, as
recalled in resolution 1887 (2009), all of us should
make progress together. Every State, whether it has
nuclear weapons or not and whether or not it is a party
to the NPT, should contribute to disarmament by
creating the necessary security environment and
making progress in all areas of disarmament.
With regard to nuclear disarmament in particular,
there is indeed a need for reductions but, first of all,
there is a need to stop arming. In addition to halting
nuclear tests, that entails that all States concerned put
an end to the production of fissile material for nuclear
weapons and to dismantle the relevant facilities, as
France has already done. That also requires that we
step up our efforts to ensure that all States that have
not yet done so ratify the Comprehensive Nuclear-TestBan Treaty and that the Disarmament Commission

12-29927

S/PV.6753

immediately start negotiations on a treaty banning the
production of fissile material for nuclear weapons.

document S/2012/223. Allow me, however, to make
some remarks in my national capacity.

Thirdly, and lastly, we must ensure the
responsible and sustainable development of civil
nuclear energy. In order to overcome the challenges of
climate change, we cannot deprive ourselves of the
contribution of nuclear energy. However, the
Fukushima accident has reminded us that it is not
possible to use nuclear energy without public
confidence. It also shows the degree to which we need
to strengthen safety rules throughout the world, as well
as to put in place national and international capabilities
to respond in the event of an accident. That is the
reason that we should apply the most rigorous
standards in the areas of non-proliferation, nuclear
safety and security, and environmental protection, all
the while promoting universal adherence to the
conventions in force on nuclear responsibility.

Guatemala reaffirms the validity of the norms
that underpin the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of
Nuclear Weapons (NPT), as well as the commitments
that we have undertaken, particularly in the framework
of the Review Conferences of the parties to the Treaty,
most recently in 2010. While it is true that the new
challenges that we currently face have given rise to
divergent views regarding our next steps, we cannot
lose sight of the fact that the Treaty was adopted as the
cornerstone of disarmament, arms control and the
peaceful prevention of the proliferation of nuclear
weapons.

Those are all things we can do, not in the distant
future but in the months and years to come, in order to
together create a safer world.
Mr. Rosenthal (Guatemala) (spoke in Spanish): I
would like to thank you, Madam President, for
convening this meeting on topics supposedly related to
nuclear disarmament and nuclear non-proliferation. I
say supposedly as a reflection of our disappointment
that, after several days of discussing a draft
presidential statement as the outcome document to
crystallize the results of this meeting, nothing remains
on the matter of nuclear non-proliferation. At any rate,
we appreciate the concept paper (S/2012/194, annex)
circulated by your delegation to substantiate our
debate, Madam President, which by itself has the merit
of focusing on the differences that persist on the matter
between the members of the Council.
In spite of that, recent circumstances have
demonstrated that it has become more pressing and
necessary than ever to advance on the road towards a
world free of nuclear weapons — a goal that your own
head of State, Madam President, articulated in a
visionary manner as the ultimate goal that we must
aspire to. Nuclear disarmament is the only sensible
way to forge a more secure world. Nothing would
contribute more to reducing the risk of the proliferation
or use of nuclear weapons than their total elimination.
With respect to the issues under consideration
today, Guatemala’s position reflects that of the
Non-Aligned Movement (NAM), which is contained in

12-29927

Guatemala believes in the universality of the NPT
and the strict observance of each of its provisions. We
stress that compliance is a legal obligation and that all
States parties must give clear evidence of their
commitment to the spirit and the letter of that
international legal instrument.
Furthermore, we deem it crucial to maintain the
moratorium on nuclear tests until the Comprehensive
Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty enters into force. We wish to
take this opportunity to reaffirm our country’s support
for the Treaty, which we signed on 20 September 1999
and ratified, as was recalled by the representative of
France, on 12 January 2012.
We must devise ways to strengthen activities
aimed at nuclear disarmament, which requires, above
all, an expression of clear political will on the part of
nuclear-weapon States, as well as a set of concrete,
time-bound and verifiable actions that will make it
possible to abandon the type of rhetoric that obliges us
to acknowledge progress even as nuclear weapons
continue to exist in vast quantities and attempts are
being made to broaden their scope.
We note certain positive political signals
emanating from the nuclear-weapon States that suggest
their renewed commitment to nuclear disarmament at
the bilateral and multilateral levels, and we hope that
this will translate into concrete measures in the near
future. In that respect, we view the New START treaty,
signed between the United States and the Russian
Federation, as a step in the right direction. In the same
vein, we believe that initiatives aimed at promoting
nuclear security and the agreements that were reached
between the countries that participated in the Seoul and
Washington, D.C., summits represent an important

17

S/PV.6753

contribution to the process of reviewing nuclearweapons-related security doctrines.
We are convinced that to ensure that those
agreements yield the best possible results, we must
keep in mind at all times that just as progress must be
made on nuclear disarmament, we must also make
advances in the area of non-proliferation. In that
regard, we the non-nuclear-weapon States must also
comply with own responsibilities under the NPT,
reaffirming our commitment not to acquire nuclear
weapons while preserving our inalienable right to
accede to, develop and, in future, participate in nuclear
technologies for exclusively pacific uses.
On the other hand, nuclear terrorism and the
illicit trafficking in nuclear material pose a grave threat
to security, which must be addressed through a global
commitment. It is imperative that all States comply
with the provisions of resolution 1540 (2004).
Finally, all of these measures — in the areas of
both disarmament and non-proliferation — must be
implemented in an environment that is conducive to
verification and transparency, with a view to restoring
confidence among the parties to the Treaty. We
therefore underline the role of the International Atomic
Energy Agency in the verification of the exclusively
peaceful use of nuclear energy.
Guatemala is proud to be a party to the Treaty of
Tlatelolco, which established the first inhabited
nuclear-weapon-free zone on the planet and has served
as an example and an inspiration for the creation of
other such zones. The consolidation of a nuclearweapon-free zone in Latin America and the Caribbean
was also aimed at preserving the area from the risk of a
nuclear threat.
In closing, we wish to affirm that this meeting
represents an opportunity to assess the goodwill of all
parties in terms of meeting and honouring their
commitments and the resultant expectations. We must
not renege on those commitments; rather, we must
reaffirm the unequivocal pledges that have been made
to date and address the new challenges that we face. It
is on the basis of that understanding that together we
must progress towards agreement on a common agenda
to maintain international peace and security.
Mr. Sangqu (South Africa): At the outset,
Madam President, allow me to thank your delegation
for having convened this timely debate on the issues of

18

nuclear proliferation, nuclear disarmament and nuclear
security. My delegation also wishes to thank the
Secretary-General for his briefing to the Council
earlier today.
We align ourselves with the letter dated 13 April
2012 (S/2012/223) from the Chair of the Coordinating
Bureau of the Movement of Non-Aligned Countries
addressed to the President of the Security Council.
It remains South Africa’s firm conviction that
weapons of mass destruction do not guarantee security
but, rather, detract from it. As long as those weapons
exist, humanity will continue to face the threat of
catastrophe. That conviction informs our firm
commitment to the principles of nuclear disarmament
and non-proliferation, which are both key contributions
to the system of collective security envisaged in the
United Nations Charter. South Africa remains fully
committed to a world free of nuclear weapons and to
the multilateral system that seeks to advance that
objective.
The Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear
Weapons (NPT) remains the cornerstone of the nuclear
disarmament and nuclear non-proliferation regime. The
NPT represents a historic bargain between the nuclearweapon States and the non-nuclear-weapon States, in
terms of which the former have undertaken to eliminate
their nuclear weapons based on the reciprocal
understanding by the latter not to pursue the nuclear
weapons option.
On the issue of nuclear disarmament, South
Africa wishes to reiterate its principled position that
nuclear disarmament and nuclear non-proliferation are
mutually reinforcing and that efforts aimed at nuclear
non-proliferation should be parallel to simultaneous
efforts aimed at nuclear disarmament. In acting on
behalf of the States Members of the United Nations, we
therefore believe that it is imperative for the Council to
address both nuclear disarmament and nuclear
non-proliferation dimensions with equal vigour. In that
regard, South Africa welcomes as a positive
development the fact the Security Council again
reaffirmed the need for all Member States to comply
fully with their obligations and fulfil their
commitments in relation to nuclear disarmament and
nuclear non-proliferation in all its aspects.
While the implementation of all nuclear
non-proliferation commitments no doubt remains
essential, the attainment of true international peace and

12-29927

S/PV.6753

security also requires the implementation of nuclear
disarmament commitments, while ensuring that the
inalienable right of States to use nuclear energy for
peaceful purposes is upheld. South Africa is of the
view that non-nuclear-weapon States have on the
whole made great strides in their efforts to implement
their non-proliferation obligations, including pursuant
to resolution 1540 (2004). It is essential that nuclearweapon States similarly abide by their own
commitments and obligations.

Pakistan is fully committed to nuclear security.
We are active participants in global nuclear security
efforts and in the activities of the International Atomic
Energy Agency (IAEA) on nuclear security. We have
worked closely with other Governments within the
Nuclear Security Summit process and have attended
such Summits at the highest level. We have
participated constructively in the Global Initiative to
Combat Nuclear Terrorism and in its implementation
and assessment group.

While remaining firm in our view and in our
resolve to combat proliferation, the international
community must remain respectful of the need for
developing countries to use nuclear energy in the
context of sustainable and accelerated economic
growth. Our approach to nuclear issues should also
strike an acceptable balance between the concerns of
States regarding their energy security and the
non-proliferation of sensitive nuclear technologies,
while upholding the right enshrined in article IV of the
NPT. State choices and decisions in the field of the
peaceful uses of nuclear energy should be respected
without jeopardizing their policies or international
cooperation agreements and arrangements for peaceful
uses of nuclear energy and their fuel cycle policies.

Pakistan’s perspective on nuclear security was
clearly articulated last month by Prime Minister Syed
Yusuf Raza Gilani at the Seoul Nuclear Security
Summit. He made the following major points.

South Africa welcomes the progress made by
States to strengthen nuclear security at a national level
and through the relevant multilateral organizations,
especially the International Atomic Energy Agency. We
should, however, remain vigilant regarding the
continued risk posed by nuclear terrorism, illicit
nuclear networks and criminal acts, and the use of
nuclear or other radioactive material for malicious acts.
South Africa believes that through a cooperative
approach with the relevant multilateral organizations,
the international community can effectively deal with
those risks.
In conclusion, South Africa affirms that the
international community needs to work together
towards the goal of the elimination of all weapons of
mass destruction, especially nuclear weapons. That
endeavour should not be undercut by any process
outside of the already established multilateral
negotiating processes.
Mr. Tarar (Pakistan): We thank the United States
of America for convening this meeting and we take
note of the briefing by the Secretary-General.

12-29927

The international community together has taken
steps to create a secure world that will not live under
the fear of nuclear terrorist attack. We firmly believe
that nuclear materials must never fall into the hands of
terrorists. National measures are the most important
part of our efforts to enhance nuclear security. If
nations do not move, nothing will move. If nations
move feebly, nuclear risks increase many times.
Nations need to move together and to learn from each
other.
As a party to the Convention on the Physical
Protection of Nuclear Material, the Convention on
Nuclear Safety, the Convention on Early Notification
of a Nuclear Accident and the Convention on
Assistance in the Case of a Nuclear Accident or
Radiological
Emergency,
Pakistan
has
been
contributing substantively to the nuclear security
framework. Our commitment is evidenced by our
consistent observance of the IAEA Code of Conduct
and our participation in the Agency’s illicit trafficking
database.
Nuclear security within States is a national
responsibility. Within this framework we have worked
with international partners, and will continue to
explore cooperation on nuclear security through
voluntary national actions plans and in pursuance of
international obligations. The existing international
framework, which is quite extensive, covers the
measures taken by the IAEA, by the United Nations
and by various conventions and initiatives. The
Nuclear Security Summit participants therefore agreed
that there was no need for a new, parallel institution or
mechanism for nuclear security. In that context, we

19

S/PV.6753

reaffirm the essential responsibility and central role of
the IAEA.
Pakistan’s nuclear security regime has four
pillars.
First, we have a well-defined, robust command
and control system, comprising the National Command
Authority, the Strategic Plans Division and the
Strategic Forces Command. That mechanism exercises
control over all aspects of policy, procurement,
operations and, most important, nuclear security. The
Strategic Plans Division develops technical solutions,
personnel reliability programmes and intelligence
capabilities
to
deal
with
nuclear
security,
non-proliferation, accidents and weapons of mass
destruction terrorism.
Secondly, we have a rigorous regulatory regime
covering all matters related to nuclear safety and
security, including physical protection of materials and
facilities, material control and accounting, transport
security, the prevention of illicit trafficking, border
controls, and plans to deal with possible radiological
emergencies. The Pakistan Nuclear Regulatory
Authority, an autonomous oversight body, regulates the
safety and security of civilian nuclear materials and
facilities. It works closely with the IAEA and benefits
from its recommendations and guidance.
Thirdly, we have a comprehensive export control
regime. Our export control laws are at par with
international standards.
Fourthly, we engage in international cooperation
consistent with our national policies and interests, as
well as international obligations.
Pakistan is focused especially on capacitybuilding and interaction with the international
community, in particular with the IAEA. We have
established a centre of excellence for training that
conducts specialized courses in nuclear security,
physical protection and personnel liability. We have
offered the centre as a regional and international hub
for training. We are deploying special nuclear material
portals at key entry-exit points to detect, deter and
prevent illicit trafficking in radioactive materials. We
are implementing our nuclear security action plan in
cooperation with the IAEA. We have also developed a
strong nuclear emergency response mechanism.
Pakistan fully supports the globally agreed
objectives of promoting nuclear non-proliferation and

20

disarmament. We will continue to cooperate with all
international efforts that seek to promote fair and
equitable
solutions
to
disarmament
and
non-proliferation challenges. Pakistan shares the
majority view among the Members of the United
Nations that the Security Council should refrain from
assuming stewardship over global non-proliferation
and disarmament issues. The Council, composed of
15 States, is not a representative body. Global
disarmament and non-proliferation can be achieved in
a more universal forum where all States have the right
to participate, negotiate and evolve agreed outcomes.
Pakistan is a nuclear-weapon State and cannot
accept unrealistic references, including in resolution
1887 (2009), calling for joining the Treaty on the
Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons (NPT) as a
non-nuclear-weapon State.
We underline the importance of recognizing
regional realities in South Asia and the need for
mainstreaming non-NPT States into the NPT regime.
Pakistan’s position on the fissile material cut-off treaty
has been unequivocal. The Conference on
Disarmament is not a single-agenda-item body. The
Conference has more pressing agenda items, such as
nuclear disarmament and negative security assurances,
which have been pending matters for decades. Progress
on those two most consequential issues would advance
the goal of a world without nuclear weapons.
We wish to recall that the Non-Aligned
Movement, comprising 120 Member States, has
transmitted its views on nuclear security as well as on
the larger disarmament and non-proliferation issues.
Those letters are contained in document S/2012/223.
We fully support its contents and its annex.
Safe and sustainable nuclear energy is essential to
advancing our economic agenda. In view of Pakistan’s
growing energy needs and existing energy shortfall,
and to respond to the future requirements of a growing
population and economy, the National Command
Authority has approved the Nuclear Power
Programme-2050.
We
urge
the
international
community to give Pakistan access to nuclear
technology for peaceful uses on a non-discriminatory
basis.
Pakistan qualifies to become a member of the
Nuclear Suppliers Group and other export-control
regimes. Last year, the IAEA Board of Governors
unanimously approved the safeguards agreement in

12-29927

S/PV.6753

connection with our two civil nuclear power plants.
That shows the international community’s continued
confidence in the safety standards and security
measures maintained by Pakistan.
Mr. Parham (United Kingdom): I thank the
Secretary-General for his briefing earlier this morning.
We all agree that nuclear terrorism is one of the
greatest threats to global peace and security. The recent
Nuclear Security Summit in the Republic of Korea
reinforced political will and mobilized the technical
expertise necessary to fulfil the commitments made in
Washington, D.C., two years earlier. In Seoul, we saw
53 countries make more than 100 new commitments to
improving global nuclear security.
To maintain that momentum, we need a serious
discussion around standards and common rules for
nuclear security. To that end, we encourage countries to
engage with international nuclear security initiatives
and adhere to relevant conventions and for those that
have not yet done so, to ratify the International Atomic
Energy Agency (IAEA) amended Convention on the
Physical Protection of Nuclear Material and the United
Nations International Convention for the Suppression
of Acts of Nuclear Terrorism. We also encourage all
States to work with and through the Nuclear Suppliers
Group in the context of civilian nuclear use.
For our part, the United Kingdom Government is
committed to the long-term objective of a world
without nuclear weapons and has pledged to press for
multilateral disarmament in line with our commitment
under the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear
Weapons (NPT). We are determined to work with the
international community to control proliferation, to
make progress on multilateral disarmament, to build
trust and confidence between nuclear and non-nuclearweapon States and to take tangible steps towards a
safer and more stable world where countries with
nuclear weapons ultimately are able to relinquish them.
The United Kingdom wants to work with the
international community to tackle effectively those
nuclear programmes of concern. On Iran, the United
Kingdom is committed to a peaceful negotiated
solution to the nuclear issue. We welcome the most
recent round of E3+3 talks, on 14 April, as a first step
towards that objective. We now need agreement on
urgent practical steps to build confidence that Iran does
not intend to build a nuclear weapon.

12-29927

We are also deeply concerned about the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea’s failed
satellite launch on 13 April, which is a clear violation
of resolution 1874 (2009). We urge the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea to suspend all missile and
nuclear-related activity and to commit to re-engaging
with the international community, including by
returning to the Six-Party Talks. In that area, as in any
other, all Member States should comply fully with their
obligations under Security Council resolutions.
A fissile material cut-off treaty is a critical
component of achieving the long-term goal of a world
without nuclear weapons. That treaty would put a stop
to the future production of fissile material for nuclear
weapons purposes and a limit on the amount of such
material available globally. The United Kingdom is
committed to achieving a fissile material cut-off treaty
and to the immediate start of negotiations in the
Conference on Disarmament in Geneva. Unilaterally,
we have had a moratorium on the production of fissile
material for weapons since 1995. The international
community expects progress. Let us be clear. Progress
in the Conference on Disarmament in delivering
meaningful negotiations on a fissile material cut-off
treaty will determine the Conference’s continuing
viability.
The United Kingdom continues to work to
universalize the Non-Proliferation Treaty and to
strengthen the non-proliferation architecture. We want
to see a universal, strengthened, safeguards system,
with the IAEA comprehensive safeguards agreement
and the additional protocol as the universal standard
and norm for verification. We are committed to
supporting the expansion of civil nuclear use while
ensuring that neither safety nor security is
compromised, nor nuclear proliferation tolerated.
The United Kingdom looks to see the
forthcoming session of the Preparatory Committee
build on the success of the 2010 Review Conference of
the Parties to the NPT, at which a cross-pillar Action
Plan was agreed by consensus for the first time. We
must maintain that positive momentum right through
this review cycle to the 2015 Review Conference.
The Council has a unique responsibility to ensure
that the atom is used for peace, and not as a threat to
peace and security. Working with the wider United
Nations community and Member States, we can ensure
that agreed rules and norms are enforced and

21

S/PV.6753

commitments met so that nuclear proliferation is
prevented, and the risk of nuclear terror with it, so that
a world without nuclear weapons is made a reality and
so that the atom is used to power development and
stability, not conflict.
The President: I now shall make a statement in
my capacity as the representative of the United States.
I want to thank the Secretary-General for his
participation and leadership on this issue, as well as my
fellow Council members for today’s discussion of an
issue at the very top of our agenda and for their
agreement to the presidential statement that I will read
out shortly.
When it comes to the urgent nuclear threats we
have discussed today, including nuclear terrorism, the
Security Council must embrace its primary
responsibility for the maintenance of international
peace and security. As President Obama stated three
years ago this month in Prague, the explosion of a
single nuclear weapon would have catastrophic
consequences for our global safety, our security, our
society, our economy and even our very survival. We
all share an interest in preventing and containing
nuclear threats. During the Security Council’s historic
September 2009 summit on non-proliferation and
nuclear security (see S/PV.6191), heads of State
reaffirmed that shared interest by adopting the
landmark resolution 1887 (2009), which resolved, in its
first preambular paragraph, to “seek a safer world for
all and to create the conditions for a world without
nuclear weapons”.
Resolution 1887 (2009) was the Council’s first
comprehensive action on those issues since the
mid-1990s. Building on the momentum of the 2009
summit, the Security Council and the world have made
significant progress. In a historic first, the 2010
Review Conference of the Parties to the Treaty on the
Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons resulted in a
final document that included a comprehensive Action
Plan, adopted by consensus, on the steps to strengthen
all three pillars of the Treaty.
There is no denying that the Treaty remains the
cornerstone of the nuclear non-proliferation regime and
the foundation for the pursuit of nuclear disarmament
and the peaceful use of nuclear energy. As President
Obama said in Seoul last month,

22

“we’ve upheld the basic bargain of the NPT.
Countries with nuclear weapons, like the United
States and Russia, will move towards
disarmament. Countries without nuclear weapons
will not acquire them. And all countries can have
access to peaceful nuclear energy.”
The International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA)
has continued to play an essential role in implementing
safeguards and promoting the safe, secure and peaceful
use of nuclear energy. The combination of an NPT
safeguards agreement and an additional protocol is
widely recognized as the standard for strengthened
IAEA safeguards.
To date, 115 States, including the United States of
America, have brought into force an additional
protocol granting to the IAEA expanded rights of
access to information and sites. We continue to seek
partners in the effort to expand and accelerate IAEA
activities in order to strengthen the Agency’s ability to
detect and deter undeclared nuclear activities.
In 2011, the Security Council adopted resolution
1977 (2011), which extended the mandate of the
Committee established pursuant to resolution 1540
(2004) for an unprecedented 10 years. The 1540
Committee’s work to help States prevent the
proliferation of weapons of mass destruction to
non-State actors is a crucial part of the international
non-proliferation regime. The United States fully
supports 1540 implementation efforts and made a
voluntary contribution of $3 million last year to
promote the work.
Finally, the 2010 Nuclear Security Summit, held
in Washington, D.C., was followed by a second summit
last month. More than 50 heads of State met in Seoul
and reaffirmed their commitment to combat nuclear
terrorism and increase nuclear security. The actions and
commitments undertaken by participating States are
being translated into tangible steps to protect against
nuclear terrorism.
The United States is also strengthening global
non-proliferation and disarmament efforts. The 2010
United States Nuclear Posture Review outlined our
approach to reducing the role of nuclear weapons and
pursuing the goal of a world without such weapons.
Through the Posture Review we announced that the
United States will not use or threaten to use nuclear
weapons against non-nuclear-weapon States that are
party to the NPT and in compliance with their nuclear

12-29927

S/PV.6753

non-proliferation obligations. We also emphasized our
collective interest in ensuring that the record of more
than six decades of nuclear non-use continues forever.
The New START agreement between the United
States and the Russian Federation, which entered into
force on 5 February 2011, is being implemented
successfully. The Treaty illustrates yet again the strong
commitment of the United States to meeting its
disarmament obligations. When the Treaty is fully
implemented, the deployed strategic nuclear forces of
the United States and Russia will reach their lowest
level since the 1950s. The rigorous provisions of the
New START agreement testify to the importance of
transparency and effective verification in providing
predictability and stability in international relations.
Continuing the process of engagement by the five
permanent members of the Security Council (P-5)
established through the 2009 London and 2011 Paris
P-5 conferences, the United States will host a P-5
conference in Washington, D.C., later this year to
continue discussions on verification, transparency and
confidence-building measures. The P-5 process now
under way expands the long-standing United StatesRussia nuclear disarmament dialogue into an ongoing
process of P-5 engagement on issues related to nuclear
disarmament, consistent with our obligations under
article VI of the NPT and our commitments under the
2010 NPT Action Plan.
The entry into force of the Comprehensive
Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty is also an essential step
towards a world without nuclear weapons. The United
States remains committed to working towards our
ratification of the Treaty and its entry into force. We
continue to maintain our voluntary moratorium on
nuclear explosive testing, which went into effect two
decades ago. We call upon all States to refrain from
nuclear explosive testing.
Despite those many multilateral and national
efforts, much work remains to be done. We must
continue to strengthen global nuclear non-proliferation,
disarmament and security efforts. We cannot let our
guard down.
Certain countries continue to pursue nuclearweapon capabilities, in violation of Security Council
resolutions and contrary to the clearly expressed will of
the international community. The dangers we face and
the price of complacency remain much too high. We
cannot, for example, allow the NPT to be weakened by

12-29927

tolerating non-compliance with its requirements or
violations of international safeguards agreements. The
implications of any case of non-compliance, whether
by North Korea or Iran, concern more than just the
offending country and its neighbours. Every violation
of the NPT has the potential, if left unchecked, to erode
confidence in the global nuclear non-proliferation
regime. We cannot, and we will not, let that happen.
Beginning negotiations on a fissile material cutoff treaty is the next logical step in nuclear arms
control. It is therefore a great disappointment that, due
to one country, the Conference on Disarmament has
been unable to agree to move forward. The Conference
should agree to commence negotiations without further
delay.
We must also sharpen our commitment to nuclear
safety and security. The terrible accident at the
Fukushima plant last year was a reminder of our shared
vulnerability as much of the world looks increasingly
to nuclear power to fuel economic growth and
development.
The choice safely to develop and maintain
nuclear power is, and should remain, a national one.
However, we will continue strongly to support
international efforts, led primarily by the IAEA, to
facilitate better nuclear safety training and cooperation
and to improve accident response capacities. The
United States believes that it has a moral responsibility
to lead and act now, in cooperation with members of
the Council and the international community, to seek
the peace and security of a world without nuclear
weapons. Today’s meeting and draft presidential
statement mark a milestone on that path. As President
Obama remarked in Seoul last month, “no one nation
can do this alone.”
I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.
After consultations among members of the
Council, I have been authorized to make the following
statement on their behalf:
“The Security Council reaffirms that
proliferation of weapons of mass destruction, and
their means of delivery, constitutes a threat to
international peace and security.
“The Security Council remains gravely
concerned about the threat of terrorism, and the
risk that non-State actors may acquire, develop,

23

S/PV.6753

traffic in or use weapons of mass destruction and
their means of delivery.
“The Security Council reaffirms the need
for all Member States to comply fully with their
obligations and fulfil their commitments in
relation to arms control, disarmament and
non-proliferation in all its aspects of all weapons
of mass destruction and their means of delivery.
“The Security Council reaffirms its support
for the multilateral treaties whose aim it is to
eliminate or prevent the proliferation of nuclear,
chemical or biological weapons and the
importance for all States Parties to those treaties
to implement them fully in order to promote
international stability.
“The Security Council reaffirms resolution
1540 (2004), which affirms that States shall take
effective measures to prevent non-State actors
from acquiring weapons of mass destruction and
their means of delivery and to establish domestic
controls to prevent proliferation of nuclear,
chemical or biological weapons, their means of
delivery and related materials, recognizes States’
progress in implementing resolution 1540 (2004),
endorses the work carried out by the Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1540 (2004),
and, in that regard, recalls resolution 1977
(2011), which extends the mandate of the 1540
Committee for 10 years.
“The Security Council recognizes the
importance of the 2012 and 2010 Nuclear
Security Summits, the 2012 and 2010 Nuclear
Security Summit communiqués and the 2010
Nuclear Security Summit work plan.
“The Security Council welcomes the
commitments made by Nuclear Security Summit
participants to take national actions, as
appropriate, to increase nuclear security
domestically and to work through bilateral and
multilateral mechanisms, in particular the
International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA), to
improve nuclear security and encourages all
States to take national actions to this end.
“The Security Council reaffirms, in this
context, its relevant resolutions, in particular
resolution 1887 (2009).

24

“The Security Council recalls that effective
IAEA safeguards are essential to prevent nuclear
proliferation and to facilitate cooperation in the
field of peaceful uses of nuclear energy, and
renews its call on all States to cooperate fully
with the IAEA.
“The Security Council affirms the essential
responsibility and central role of the IAEA in
strengthening the international nuclear security
framework and also supports the IAEA Nuclear
Security Plan for 2010-2013.
“The Security Council welcomes the
adoption of the IAEA Action Plan on Nuclear
Safety, recalls the IAEA June 2011 ministerial
conference on nuclear safety and the September
2011 United Nations high-level meeting on
nuclear safety and security convened by the
Secretary-General
and
values
various
international initiatives and efforts to that end.
“The Security Council stresses the
importance of international efforts to establish
self-sustaining nuclear security support centres
and the IAEA’s plan to establish the international
network for nuclear security training and support
centres.
“The Security Council welcomes the
additional ratifications of the 2005 Amendment to
the Convention on the Physical Protection of
Nuclear Material and the recent adherences to the
International Convention for the Suppression of
Acts of Nuclear Terrorism.
“The Security Council emphasizes the
importance of the progress made by the Global
Initiative to Combat Nuclear Terrorism.
“The Security Council recognizes the
progress made by the Global Partnership against
the Spread of Weapons and Materials of Mass
Destruction and values its extension beyond
2012.
“The Security Council encourages States to
participate in the IAEA illicit trafficking database
programme.
“The Security Council appreciates the
efforts of the International Criminal Police
Organization in the field of countering illicit
nuclear trafficking, including through the

12-29927

S/PV.6753

establishment of its radiological and nuclear
terrorism prevention unit.
“The Security Council takes note of
international efforts towards preventing the
financing of proliferation-related activities and
takes note of the work of the Financial Action
Task Force.
“The Security Council welcomes the
establishment of the European Union chemical,
biological, radiological and nuclear risk
mitigation centres of excellence.
“The Security Council calls upon States that
have not yet done so to submit a first report on
implementation of resolution 1540 (2004), and
encourages all States to provide, when
appropriate or upon the request of the 1540
Committee,
additional
implementation
information.
“The Security Council calls upon all States
Parties to the Convention on the Physical
Protection of Nuclear Material to ratify the
Amendment to the Convention as soon as
possible and encourages them to act in
accordance with the objectives and purposes of
the Amendment until such time as it enters into
force, and also encourages all States that have not
yet done so to adhere to the Convention and
adopt its Amendment as soon as possible.
“The Security Council encourages all States
that have not yet done so to become party to the
International Convention for the Suppression of
Acts of Nuclear Terrorism and encourages
discussions among States parties to consider
measures
to
effectively
implement
the
Convention.
“The Security Council underlines the
importance for States to share best practices with a
view to improved nuclear security practices to
reduce the risk of nuclear terrorism, with the aim
of securing all vulnerable nuclear material from
such risks, encourages all States to implement the
IAEA’s most current recommendations on physical
protection of nuclear material and nuclear facilities

12-29927

(INFCIRC/225/Rev.5), encourages efforts to
secure radioactive sources, and calls for States to
support the IAEA Nuclear Security Plan for 20102013 and to make voluntary contributions to the
Nuclear Security Fund.
“The Security Council calls upon all States
parties to improve their national capabilities to
detect, deter and disrupt illicit trafficking in
nuclear materials throughout their territories, in
accordance with their national authorities and
legislation and consistent with international law,
including relevant international legal obligations,
and calls upon those States in the position to do
so to work to enhance international partnerships
and capacity-building in this regard.
“The Security Council, in this regard,
encourages States to take all appropriate national
measures in accordance with their national
authorities and legislation and consistent with
international law, to strengthen export controls, to
control access to intangible transfers of
technology and to information that could be used
for weapons of mass destruction and their means
of delivery, to prevent proliferation financing and
shipments and to secure sensitive materials.
“The Security Council encourages all States
to manage responsibly and minimize to the
greatest extent that is technically and
economically feasible the use of highly enriched
uranium for civilian purposes, including by
working to convert to the use of low-enriched
uranium fuels and targets research reactors and
radioisotope production processes taking into
account the need for assured supplies of medical
isotopes.”
This statement will be issued as a document of
the
Security
Council
under
the
symbol
S/PRST/2012/14.
There are no more names inscribed on the list of
speakers. The Security Council has thus concluded the
present stage of its consideration of the item on its
agenda.
The meeting rose at 1.10 p.m.

25
