VI.

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee
--

ties of El Salvador will continue mvestigations leading to
the punishment of those responsihle:
6. Recognizes the efforts made by the Government of
El Salvador related to the result ofthe most recent investigations designed to determine the responsibility of the instigators of the assassination of Monsignor Romero and
also recognizes the importance of the return to El Salvador of the political leaders of the Frente Democrático
Revolucionario;
7. Expresses its satisfaction at the fact that, with the intention of humanizing the conflict, the Government of El
Salvador and the Frente Farabundo Martí para la Liberación Nacional agreed this year that future evacuations of
the war-wounded and war-injured for medica! attention
would not be made contingent on further prisoner exchanges and negotiations;
8. Urges the Government of El Salvador and the
Frente Farabundo Martí para la Liberación NacionalFrente Democrático Revolucionario to continue the dialogue, within the framework of the agreement, signed at
Guatemala City, until the achievement of a global political
solution that will end the armed conflict and promote the
broadening and strengthening of a pluralistic and participatory democratic process that will involve the promotion of social justice, respect for human rights and t he foil
exercise of the right of the Salvadorian people to determine freely and without externa! interference of any kind
its economic, political and social system;
9. Requests the competent bodies of the United Nations system to provide any advice and assistance that thc
Government of El Salvador may require in order to enhance the promotion and protection of human rights ami
fundamental freedoms;
10. Requests the Commission on Human Rights at its
forty-fourth session to consider the situation of human
rights in El Salvador and the manda te of its Special Representative, taking into account the evolution of the situation ofhuman rights in El Salvador and the developments
linked to the fulfilrnent of the agreement ,igned at
Guatemala City:
11. Decides to keep under consideration, during its
forty-third session, the situation of human rights and fundamental freedoms in El Salvador in order to re-examine
this situation in the light of the information provided by
the Commission on Human Rights and the Economic ami
Social Council.
93rd plenary meeting
7 f)l'Cemher 1987
42/138.

Assistance to student refugees in southern
Africa

The General Assemh/y,
Recal/ing its resolution 41 / 136 of 4 December 1986, in
which it, inter afia, requested the Secretary-General, in
co-operation with the United Nations High Commissioner
for Refugees, to continue to organize and implementan effective programme of educational and other appropriate
assistance for student refugees from South Africa and Namibia who have been granted asylum in Botswana, Lesotho, Swaziland and Zambia,
Having considered the report ofthe High Commissioner
on the assistance programme to ·,tudn1t refugee-; from
South Africa and Narnibia, 1'"
159 A/4'.'/496

229

-

I\foti11g with appreciation that sorne of the projects
recommended in the report on assistance to student refugee~ in '"uthern Africa , untinue to be successfully implemented,
Noling with concern that the discriminatory and repressive policies that continue to be applied in South Africa
and Namibia cause a continued and increasing influx of
student refugees into Botswana, Lesotho, Swaziland and
Zamh1a.
Conscwus of the burden placed on the limited financia!,
material and administra! ive resources of the host count ries hy the increasing numher of student refugees,
Apprecialing the etforts ofthe host countries to deal with
their ,tudent refugee populations, with the assistance of
the international community,
\
lakes note with satisfaction of the report of the
Un1ted Nations High Commissioner for Refugees;
2. Expre~ses its appreciation to the Governments of
Bots\\ana, Lesotho, Swaziland and Zambia for granting
asylum and making educational and other facilities available to the student refugees, in spite of the pressure that
the continuing influx of those refugees exerts on facilities
in the1r countries;
A /so exprcsses it~ appreciation to the Governments
or Bot~wana, Lesotho, Swaziland and Zambia for the cooperation that they have extended to the High Commis-;ione1 on matters concerning the welfare of the refugees;
4. Notes with appreciatiun the financial and material
support provided for the ~tudent refugees by Member
Sta te-,, t he Office of the U nited Nations High Commis,ione1 for Refugees, other hodies of the United Nations
systern and intergovernmental and non-governmental organi1ations:
5. Requests the High Commissioner, in co-operation
with the Secretary-General. to continue to organize and
implernent an etfective programme of educational and
other appropriate assistance for student refugees from
South A.frica and Namibia who have been granted asylum
in Bohwana, Lesotho, Swaziland and Zambia;
6.
Urges ali Member States and intergovernmental and
11011-governmental organizations to continue contributing
generously to the assistance programme for student refugees, through financial support of the regular programmes
of the High Commissioner and of the projects and programmes, including unfunded projects, that were submitted to the Second International Conference on Assistance
to Refugees in A.frica. held at Geneva from 9 to 11 July
1Q84 lHl

7 A/so urge\ ali Mernber States and ali intergovernrnenlal and non-governmental organizations to assist the
countries of asylum materially and otherwise to enable
thern to conti11ue to discharge their humanitarian obligatirn1, towards refugees;
8. Appea/s to the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees, the United Nations Development Programrne and ali other competent United Nations
hodies, as well as other international and nongovernmental orga1111ations, to continue providing
humanitarian a11d dt",clopment assistance so as to facilitatc a11d expedite the settlement of student refugees from
South Africa and Namibia who have been granted asylum
111 llnhwana. l ,e-;ntlw Swaziland and Zambia;
q
( 'ali\ 11pon agerwies and programmes of the United
l\;;it11•11, w~tcm In co11tmue c'O operating with the Secre-

230

General Assembly-Fort)'-second Session

tary-General and the High Commiss1oner in the implementation of huma11itaria11 programmes of assistance
for the student refugees III sout hern A frica;
10. Request.1 the High Cornmissioncr, in co-operation
with the Secretary-General, to co11ti11ue to kecp the rnatter
under review, to apprise the Economic and Social Council,
at its second regular session ol 1988, of thc curren! status
ofthe programmes and to report to the General Assembly
at its forty-third session 011 rhe impkmentation of the
present resolution.
(J3rd plenary meeting
7 D<'Cemher 1987

42/139.

Assistance to displaced persons in Ethiopia

The General Assembly,
Recalling ali its resolut1011s. 111 particular resolution
41/141 of 4 December 1986. as wcll as al] those of the
Economic and Social Council. on as,istam:e to displaced
persons in Ethiopia,
Taking note ofthe report ofthc Sccrctary-General on assistance to displaced persons 111 Et hiopia, 161
Having considered thc report of the l '111ted Nation~
High Commissioner for Refugees. IOQ
Recognizing the increasmg 11urnhn of \oluntary returnees and refugees in Et hiopia.
Deeply concerned at the situatio11 of displaced persons
and voluntary returnees in the countrv. which has been
aggravated by the dcvastating dl'ect ·of the prolongcd
drought,
Aware of the heavy burden placed 011 t he Ciovernment of
Ethiopia and of the nccd for adequate assistance to displaced persons and vietims of natural disastcrs. as \\ ell as
to voluntary returnees and relügecs.
l. Commends the Ollice ot the Unttcd Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees and international organiza,
tions and voluntary agencies for their assistance to refu
gees and voluntary retumecs in Ethiopia.
_2 .. Appeals to Mernber States ami to mtcrnational orga
mzattons and voluntary agencies to provide Ethiopia with
adequate material, financia! and technical assistance in arder to carry out relief and rchabilitation programmcs for
displaced persons, voluntary rcturnees and refugees;
3, Requests the United Nations High Commissioner
for R~fug,ees to continuc his clforts in mobilizing
humanttanan ass1stance for the relief, rchabilitation and
re~ettlement of volu11tary rl'I 11111ees :llld refugees in Ethi
opta;
~- Requ~sls the Secrctary Cieneral, 111 co-operation
w1th the Htgh Cornmissioner, !() apprise the Economic
and Social Council, at its sccond regular session of 1988,
of the implernentation of the present resolution and to re
por~ thereon to the General /\ssembly at its forty-third
sesston.
<J3rd r!c•1w~· 111,·e1111g
•., 1 i; ,c1,1h, 1 ! Wil

161 A/42/499

42/140.

Measures to improve the situation and ensure
the human rights and dignity of all migrant
workers

l'he General A \semhly,
Reafjirming once more the permanent validity of the
principies and standards set forth in the basic instruments
regarding the international protection ofhuman rights, in
particular in the Universal Declaration of Human
Rights, 2 the International Covenants on Human Rights, 13
the International Convention on the Elimination of All
Forms of Racial Discrimination 3 and the Convention on
the Elimination nf Ali Forms of Discrimination against
Women, 52
Bearing in mind the principies and standards established
within the framework ofthe International Labour Organisation and the United Nations Educational, Scientific and
Cultural Organization, and the importance ofthe task carried out in connection with migrant workers and their
families in other specialized agencies and in various organs of the United Nations,
Reiterating that. in spite of the existence of an already
established body of principies and standards, there is a
need to make further efforts to improve the situation and
ensure the human rights and dignity of ali migrant workers and their families.
Recalling its resolution 34/ 172 of 17 December 1979, in
which it decided to establish a working group open to ali
Member States to elaborate an international convention
011 the protection of the rights of ali migran! workers and
their families,
Recalling also its resolutions 35/198 of 15 December
1980, 36/160 of 16 December 1981, 37/170 of 17 December 1982, 38/86 of 16December 1983, 39/102 of
14 December 1984, 40/130 of 13 December 1985 and
41/151 of4 December 1986, in which it renewed the mandate of the Working Group on the Drafting of an International Convention on the Protection of the Rights of Ali
Migrant Workers and Their Families and requested it to
nmtinLJe its work.
Having examined the progress made by the Working
Group at its sixth inter-sessional meeting, held from 1 to
12 June 1987, and at the curren! session of the General
Assembly, from 22 September to 2 October 1987, during
which the Group continued with the second reading ofthe
draft convention,
I, Takes note with satisfaction of the two most rccent
reports ofthe Working Group on the Drafting of an International Convention on the Protection ofthe Rights of Ali
Migrant Workers and Their Families 162 and, in particular,
of the progress made by the Working Group on the draft1ng, in second reading, of the draft convention;
2. Decides that, in order to enable it to complete its
task as soon as possible, the Working Group shall again
hold an inter-sessional meeting of two weeks' duration in
New York, immediately after the first regular session of
1g88 of the Econornic and Social Council;
.'\. Invites the Secretary-General to transmit to Gova:rnments the tw(> most recent reports of the Working
Group so as to enable the members of the Group to conrmue the drafting, in second reading, of the draft convention during the inter-sessional meeting to be held in the
,pring of 1988. as well as to transmit the results obtained
ti that meeting to 1he General Assembly for consideration
-luring its forty-tlmd ,ession;
