S/2001/408

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
25 April 2001
Original: English

Letter dated 25 April 2001 from the President of the Security
Council addressed to the Secretary-General
I have the honour to inform you that, following consultations, the members of
the Security Council have agreed to dispatch a mission to the Great Lakes region in
the second half of May 2001. The members have agreed on the terms of reference of
the mission, a copy of which is enclosed herewith. Consultations on the precise
dates and the composition of the mission are continuing.
I should be grateful if you could have the Secretariat make all the necessary
arrangements to facilitate the work of the mission.
(Signed) Jeremy Greenstock
President of the Security Council

01-34964 (E) 250401

*0134964*

S/2001/408

Annex
[Original: French and English]

Terms of reference for the Security Council mission to the
Great Lakes region
The situation in the Democratic Republic of the Congo
1.
The meetings of the Security Council to which it invited the members of the
Political Committee for the implementation of the Lusaka Ceasefire Agreement in
February 2001 led to the adoption of Security Council resolution 1341 (2001) of 22
February 2001, which sets out a roadmap to implement the Lusaka Ceasefire
Agreement (S/1999/815) and the relevant Security Council resolutions.
2.
In accordance with paragraph 27 of resolution 1341 (2001), the mission will
monitor progress by the parties in implementing the provisions of this resolution,
especially:
(a) Respect for the ceasefire and cooperation with the United Nations
Organization Mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUC);
(b)
conflict.

Disengagement of forces to the positions agreed to by the parties to the

3.
The mission will encourage the parties to commit themselves to the next steps
of the peace process, in keeping with the impetus created by resolution 1341 (2001),
in which the Security Council urges the parties to the Lusaka Ceasefire Agreement
to prepare by 15 May 2001:
(a) A precise plan and schedule which, in accordance with the Lusaka
Ceasefire Agreement, would lead to the completion of the orderly withdrawal of all
foreign troops from the territory of the Democratic Republic of the Congo;
(b) Prioritized plans for the disarmament, demobilization, reintegration,
repatriation or resettlement of the armed groups referred to in annex A, chapter 9.1,
of the Lusaka Ceasefire Agreement.
The mission will discuss with the parties, including during a meeting with the
Political Committee, concrete ways to advance the peace process on the two abovementioned issues and, accordingly, the next steps for MONUC, in advance of the 15
June 2001 deadline for the renewal of its mandate.
4.
The mission will also support the implementation of the Inter-Congolese
Dialogue, one of the core elements of the Lusaka Ceasefire Agreement, without
prejudice to the mandate and the competence of the Facilitator, Sir Ketumile Masire,
and of the Organization of African Unity. It will meet with the Facilitator, preferably
at an early stage of the Mission.
5.
The mission will bear in mind the responsibilities of the Security Council in
two areas:
(a) The co-location of MONUC and the Joint Military Commission (JMC) in
Kinshasa to facilitate the implementation of the peace process;

2

S/2001/408

(b) The link between the exploitation of the natural resources of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and the continuation of the conflict in the light of
the conclusions that the Council will have drawn from the report of the Panel of
Experts.
It will also take every opportunity to express the Council’s concern over the
humanitarian and human rights situation, and reports of violations of international
humanitarian law in the territory of the Democratic Republic of the Congo.

The situation in Burundi
6.
In agreement with the Facilitator, Nelson Mandela, the Mission will meet with
the parties to the Arusha Agreement. It will support the peace process and the action
of the Facilitator. It will encourage all the Burundian parties to reach a cessation of
hostilities and call for the full implementation of the Arusha Agreement.
7.
The mission will consider the linkage between the conflicts in Burundi and the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and will encourage the Burundian and Congolese
authorities to continue their dialogue.

3
