S/2021/617

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
30 June 2021
Original: English

Letter dated 30 June 2021 from the President of the
Security Council addressed to the Secretary-General and
the Permanent Representatives of the members of the
Security Council
I have the honour to enclose herewith a copy of the briefings provided by the
Secretary-General, António Guterres, Henrietta Fore, Executive Director, United
Nations International Children’s Fund (UNICEF), Forest Whitaker, Advocate for
Children Affected by War with the Office of the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for Children and Armed Conflict, Goodwill Ambassador for Peace and
Reconciliation of the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Orga nization
(UNESCO), and Laban Onisimus, Education Specialist, Plan International Nigeria, as
well as the statements delivered by Kersti Kaljulaid, President of Estonia, Mohamed
Bazoum, President of the Niger, Michael D. Higgins, President of Ireland, Linda
Thomas-Greenfield, Permanent Representative of the United States of America and
Member of the Cabinet of President Biden, Jens Frølich Holte, Deputy Minister for
Foreign Affairs of Norway, Keisal M. Peters, Minister of State with responsibility for
Foreign Affairs and Foreign Trade of Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, Harsh Vardhan
Shringla, Foreign Secretary of India, Dang Hoang Giang, Deputy Minister for Foreign
Affairs of Viet Nam, and James Cleverly, Minister of State at the Foreign,
Commonwealth and Development Office of the United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland, as well as by the representatives of China, France, Kenya, Mexico,
the Russian Federation and Tunisia, in connection with the videoconference on
“Children and armed conflict” convened on Monday, 28 June 2021.
In accordance with the understanding reached among Council members for this
videoconference, the following delegations and entities submitted written statements,
copies of which are also enclosed: Afghanistan, Algeria, Andorra, Argentina, Armenia,
Austria, Bahrain, Belgium, Brazil, Bulgaria, Canada, Chile, Colombia, Costa Rica,
the Dominican Republic, Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador, the European Union, Fiji, Georgia,
Germany, Greece, Guatemala, Indonesia, Iran (Islamic Republic of), Italy, Japan,
Kazakhstan, Lebanon, Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Malta, Myanmar,
Nepal, Pakistan, Panama, the Philippines, Poland, Portugal, Qatar, the Republic of
Korea, San Marino, Saudi Arabia, Slovakia, Slovenia, Somalia, South Africa, Sp ain,
Switzerland, Thailand, Turkey, Ukraine, the United Arab Emirates and Yemen.
In accordance with the procedure set out in the letter dated 7 May from the
President of the Security Council addressed to the Permanent Representatives of the
members of the Security Council (S/2020/372), which was agreed in the light of the
extraordinary circumstances caused by the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic,
these briefings and statements will be issued as a document of the Security Council.
(Signed) Sven Jürgenson
President of the Security Council

21-09006 (E)

100821

*2109006*

010921

S/2021/617

Annex I
Briefing by the Secretary-General of the United Nations,
António Guterres
I thank the Government of Estonia for convening today’s open debate on
children and armed conflict.
Conflict devastates societies and hits children particularly hard.
The start of 2021 has been no exception and, although monitoring of violations
against children committed during 2021 will not be reported until my report of next
year, I call on all parties to conflict to prioritize the prevention of violations against
children and to engage in dialogue, ceasefires and peace processes.
During 2020, almost 24,000 grave violations were committed against 19,30 0
children in the 21 situations covered by this mandate. The disregard for children ’s
rights at times of conflict and upheaval is shocking and heartbreaking.
The most prevalent verified violations continued to be the recruitment and use
of children, the killing and maiming of children, and the denial of humanitarian access
to children.
Moreover, new and deeply concerning trends emerged: an exponential increase
in the number of children abducted, and in sexual violence against boys and girls.
We are also seeing schools and hospitals, constantly attacked, looted, destroyed
or used for military purposes, with girls’ educational and health facilities targeted
disproportionately.
As we mark the twenty-fifth anniversary of the creation of the children and
armed conflict mandate, its continued relevance is sadly clear and it remains a proven
tool for protecting the world’s children.
My Special Representative and the United Nations on the ground, along with
civil society and other partners, are fully mobiliz ed to better protect children and to
prevent violations against them from occurring in the first place.
To do this, they use all available tools put in place by this Council ’s 13
resolutions on ending and preventing violations against children.
They monitor and document violations, engage with parties to conflict and
develop action plans and commitments.
They advocate for the release of children, provide technical and capacity building assistance, and support this Council’s working group on children and armed
conflict.
The annual report, with its accountability and engagement components, is a
crucial instrument.
As a result, 17 action plans are being implemented and at least 35 new
commitments were made by parties to conflict during 2020. Last year alone, more
than 12,300 children were released.
The COVID-19 pandemic has added new dimensions to this vital work – and
new stresses. I salute the dedication and professionalism of United Nations staff and
partners, who adapted swiftly to support host countries in the pandemic response and
ensure the continued monitoring of violations while engaging with conflict parties on
behalf of children. I cannot stress enough the need to fund child protection positions
in the field, as our ability to protect children rests on the presence of such staff.

2/152

21-09006

S/2021/617

There are many challenges to be overcome if we aim to better protect children
and prevent violations against them in the years to come.
This agenda is central to conflict resolution and prevention. As armed confli cts
evolve and as children face multiple threats, the framework for the protection of
children must also adapt. We need to ensure the inclusion of child protection language
in peace processes, and to enhance data analysis, early warning and advocacy for
early action.
The report now before us is grim.
But we can also draw hope from the local and international commitments to this
work; from the efforts of our child protection specialists; and, most importantly, in
hearing the voice of the children behind the numbers.
I applaud the young people, who, after enduring so much trauma and pain, still
stand up for, and help, others.
We need to elevate children’s voices and best interests in peace processes and
political decision-making. Last year, Member States asked me to develop a vision to
better address current and future challenges to advance our common agenda; now
children, youth and future generations must be an important part of this effort and I
will do everything possible to highlight this aspect.
I call on the Security Council and all Member States to strongly support the
protection of children in all ways at all times.
There is no place for children in conflict, and we must not allow conflict to
trample on the rights of children.

21-09006

3/152

S/2021/617

Annex II
Briefing by the Executive Director of the United Nations
Children’s Fund, Henrietta H. Fore
UNICEF thanks President Kaljulaid for convening this debate – and for
Estonia’s continued support to children affected by armed conflict. And we thank the
Secretary-General and Special Representative Gamba for their ongoing commitment
to protect these young lives.
The COVID-19 pandemic has been devastating for children around the world.
But especially for the children living through the horrors of conflict. Fo r the children
living through the 21 conflicts outlined in the report, the challenges of daily life under
COVID-19 are magnified. School closures. Increased risks of violence and abuse
under lockdowns. Mental health impacts and being separated from their f riends and
peers. Negative coping mechanisms like child marriage and child labour. All against
the backdrop of protracted conflicts and a global socio-economic crisis that threatens to
roll back decades of progress and increase the risk of recruitment and use of children.
We had hoped that parties to conflict would turn their attention from fighting
each other, to fighting the virus. That’s why UNICEF joined the Secretary-General in
calling for a global ceasefire. Sadly, as this annual report shows, this call went
unheeded. Parties to conflict did not lay down their arms. They did not stop fighting.
They did not allow a sufficient level of humanitarian access so our agencies and
partners can reach these children in need. And lockdowns and travel constraint s made
the already challenging work of supporting these children all the more difficult.
Affecting our ability to reach children with lifesaving support. Constraining our work
to release children from the ranks of armed groups. And slowing our efforts to t race
and reunify children with their families and begin the long process of reintegration.
The children trapped within these emergencies paid a high price. The United
Nations verified grave violations against over 19,000 children in humanitarian
situations last year, many of whom were subjected to more than one violation of their
rights. Thousands of children killed or maimed. Recruited and used in the fighting.
Abducted, sexually abused and exploited. On average, over the last five years, the
United Nations has verified at least 70 children every day who experienced grave
rights violations. The actual numbers are much higher. Each case is another sad
addition to the more than one-quarter million violations recorded since the monitoring
mechanism began.
While our agencies are doing all that we can to prevent these violations and
protect children, we urgently need the support of Member States, partners and the
Council in four key areas.
First – we urge the Council to give this issue the priority it deser ves in its
decisions and deliberations. Surely, if there is one priority around which all States can
rally behind, it must be the protection of children. And despite political differences,
the Council has managed to shape an overall framework for complianc e with
international law and accountability to end these violations – including through the
resolutions, statements, and the Working Group dedicated to this issue. We urge the
Council to continue placing this issue at the centre of its peace and security w ork
every day, and to support our call to all Member States to endorse and implement the
Paris Principles and the Safe Schools Declaration.
Second – we call on States and on all parties to conflict to avoid the use of
explosive weapons in populated areas. Last year, explosive weapons and remnants of
war were responsible for nearly half of all verified child casualties. They were used
to attack schools, hospitals, and water and sanitation facilities. All of the vital systems
4/152

21-09006

S/2021/617

upon which people depend. All vital to preventing epidemics, hunger and disease and
specifically critical for children. And they are a huge driver of displacement – causing
children and families to flee their homes because of the constant danger.
We call on all Member States to follow the lead of Ireland and others and make
an unequivocal political commitment to avoid the use of explosive weapons in
populated areas. Doing so would have an immediate and positive effect on the safety
and futures of millions of children living through conflict and post-conflict.
Third – we call on Member States to invest in women and girls and prevent
gender-based violence in conflict. The report of the Secretary-General shows a
staggering increase in verified cases of rape, sexual violence and abduction . Girls
were not only the victims of one-quarter of all violations – they represented 98 per
cent of the victims of rape and sexual violence.
While our organizations are doing all we can to prevent and respond to these
horrifying violations against girls, we need Member States to take all action possible,
including to dramatically increase investment in the capacities of frontline
responders – especially women and girl-led organizations.
And fourth – we call on Member States to help us increase child protection
capacity across the board. We thank Estonia for highlighting this issue, in particular.
Because without increased investment and capacity, UNICEF and our United Nations
and NGO partners cannot document cases, engage with parties to conflict, or su pport
children and families to the extent needed. Many frontline workers put their lives on
the line to support these children … to listen to and document their experiences … and
to carry these findings back to the world – and to the Council – so we can shape our
responses accordingly.
This work is absolutely critical to negotiating and implementing the action plans
supported by the United Nations – now 17 in total. And it gives United Nations
leadership and child protection staff the information and data they need to respond.
From providing prosthetics to children who have lost limbs. To reuniting children
with their families. To reintegrating children into their communities wit h mental
health support. To counselling girls who have been raped, so they can deal with the
trauma they’ve endured. We need Member States to bolster this vital, lifesaving work
by supporting the frontline workers who risk their lives to do it, each and ev ery day.
Council Members – this new report demonstrates how far we’ve come in
understanding the devastating impact conflicts have on children. But it also shows
how little progress the world has made in protecting children from the scourge of war
since Graca Machel’s groundbreaking report 25 years ago.
Conflicts are longer. They are increasingly complex. And the impacts on
children and young people continue to devastate futures. Each violation against
children – reported or unreported – represents a stain on our humanity. And on our
ability, as a world, to fulfil a basic function – to protect and care for the youngest and
most vulnerable people in our world. And to match their bravery and resilience with
our best efforts. Children and young people bear n o responsibility for conflict. And
yet they bear the deepest scars. They pay the highest price.
Through decisive political action and increased investment in the humanitarian
heroes who are supporting these young lives in the midst of violence and war, w e can
begin to turn this around – through and beyond the COVID-19 pandemic.
UNICEF stands ready to support these efforts in any way we can, and we will
continue working with partners like Estonia to shine a light on this issue.

21-09006

5/152

S/2021/617

Annex III
Briefing by the Advocate for Children Affected by War with the
Office of the Special Representative of the Secretary-General for
Children and Armed Conflict, Forest Whitaker
I would like to personally thank Mrs. Kaljulaid, President of the Republic of
Estonia and Chair of the Council. My recognition goes also to Mr. Guterres,
Secretary-General of the United Nations, and his Special Representative,
Mrs. Gamba, for their dedication in addressing the fates of children and adolescents
affected by conflict.
This is the second time that I have had the honour of addressing the Security
Council on the issue and it is encouraging to observe that the momentum behind this
issue has grown stronger. Indeed, lasting peace, which constitutes the core mission of
this institution, is at stake when children are subject to the six grave violations that
the Secretary-General detailed in his report. Each of these violations is chilling,
whether it is the killing and maiming of children; the recruitment or use of children
as soldiers; sexual violence against children; abduction of children; attacks against
schools or hospitals; or the denial of humanitarian access to children.
These violations also have invisible impacts that last much longer than the
violations themselves. I see at least three of them. First of all, these children lose
months or years of education.
Such gaps will turn into jeopardized careers and reduced opportunities. And, in
many cases, their opportunities will be also limited because of a second invisib le
impact of the grave violations, social stigma. Their families and communities often
refuse to take them back or care for them. Many will end up on the streets or join
gangs. Stigma is one of the most recurring issues in the discussions I have with the
former child soldiers who join my organization, like Auma Susan. She is 24 today as
Female Youth Counsellor of her town. A respected community leader, she teaches
peace education in schools and mediates land disputes. But her childhood is a story
of depravation and grief. Auma was abducted by the LRA on her way to school when
she was seven. For three months, she was forced to cook, fetch water, and babysit.
She was regularly beaten and could escape only after taking shrapnel in a leg. But her
suffering was not over. For years, people rejected her and called her names – adding
insult to injury. For years, before she could rebound and thrive, her whole life was
defined by stigma.
For Auma and so many former child soldiers, stigma dramatically aggravated
the effects of a third invisible impact, trauma. Not all children involved in conflict
will suffer from wounds and injuries – but all will suffer from inner scars, trapped in
inner cages for which they have no key.
During my time in Uganda, I met an aid worker from Denmark at a football
match played by former child soldiers who had become refugees and students. The
aid worker was sitting next to me and seemed like he was carrying a profound sadness.
He told me he had started a program for some of the players, to return the child
soldiers whose families were still alive back to their homes. The night before this
game, he had placed the first boy back into his childhood home with his family.
The aid worker’s eyes filled with tears as he told me that once this boy returned
home, he killed his eight-year old sister. The boy’s brain had been transformed to only
know violence. He’d been freed from the war but had yet to be freed from his own
mind.

6/152

21-09006

S/2021/617

This story reminds us that children affected by conflict cannot walk out of their
night in a day. Reintegration will not succeed without patience and determination. We
need to offer them a continuum of care that will span childhood, adolescence, and
youth, addressing their needs in terms of education, economic o pportunities and
psychosocial support.
I have worked at this for the past decade through my foundation, the Whitaker
Peace and Development Initiative (WPDI), in South Sudan, Uganda, and other
countries. We work to rekindle the link between children affected by conflict and their
community, providing them skills, opportunities, and trauma healing. We are not
alone in this effort. Other organizations are working in the same direction. I can think
of my friend Sam Okello, one of the first former child soldier s I came to meet, who
created a campus, Hope North, to provide shelter and skills to children and youth
affected by conflict. I could name another figure, Sister Rosemary Nyirumbe and the
orphanage she runs in Gulu to teach tailoring to girls rescued from armed groups.
Larger institutions are very active across different continents, like War Child with
their programmes around the world.
Our approaches and resources may be different, but we share the conviction that
seen as real people whose capacity for resilience can be nurtured with unique benefits
for the community.
They have the right to a second chance. This is what Benson, a WPDI volunteer
from Northern Uganda told me. Benson Lugwar was abducted in 2004 at the age of
eight by the LRA in a raid that killed his parents and siblings. For two years, he was
forced to witness and commit acts of violence, including during the infamous Lira
massacre in a camp of internally displaced persons. His trials forged him and, despite
what we may expect, they gave him the will to become a change-maker, a
peacebuilder. “Never again” became his motto: he did not want other children to go
through the same ordeal as he did. When he enrolled with us, in 2017, we took this
energy and trained him for over a year to develop the skills and the confidence he
needed to fulfil his dreams. After years implementing projects at our side, Benson has
become a respected figure in his community. He has created a business, mediated
conflicts and informed populations on such issues as Gender-Based Violence or, more
recently, COVID-19. He hosts a weekly radio talk show and has recently been elected
in an official position. Benson recently told us of his journey with us and I want to
quote him because his words fully capture the reason why w e are gathered today: “I
did not lose sight because the seeds of hope were planted and nurtured in me. From
being a former child soldier to a role model that influences many youths within my
community and outside.”
These are the words of a young man who, like many children and youths affected
by conflict, has been sacrificed and traumatized, children and youths that society too
often stigmatizes and marginalizes. Yet, here they come to us with a message of hope
and resilience. And they ask simple questions of us and the members of this assembly:
Will you take the time to listen to us? Will you have the strength to see the positive
in us?

21-09006

7/152

S/2021/617

Annex IV
Briefing by the Education Specialist of Plan International Nigeria,
Laban Onisimus
I thank the President for inviting Plan International to give a briefing on children
in armed conflict with a specific focus on girls’ lived realities.
My name is Laban Onisimus. I work for Plan International as an Education
Specialist in Nigeria, leading teams in humanitarian operations in conflict-affected
regions of Nigeria focusing on gender-responsive child protection and education in
crises.
In my three years working for Plan International I have witnessed the protracted
crisis in the Lake Chad Basin take its toll on the 17 million people living in the region.
It has affected countless lives, causing death, destruction, fear, vulnerability,
insecurity – needless human suffering. It remains one of the most severe humanitarian
emergencies in the world, spanning parts of Nigeria, Cameroon, Chad and Niger, not
forgetting the crisis in the Sahel region – Mali and Burkina Faso, as well as the
ongoing and neglected conflict in Northwest Southwest Cameroon.
The impact on children, and on girls’ lives, has been catastrophic. In 2020 alone,
the Secretary-General has reported the killing and maiming of 124 children, including
39 girls in Nigeria. The United Nations has verified that these atrocities were carried
out by state and non-State armed groups. This is the tip of the iceberg: we believe that
these numbers are much higher.
I will be speaking today on the specific impact of grave violations against
children in armed conflict, in particular on girls.
Security Council resolution 2427 (2018) was the first resolution on children and
armed conflict to acknowledge the specific needs and vulnerabilities of both girls and
boys, but we have a long way to go to recognize, understand, an d address the
experiences of girls in armed conflict who are subjected to all six of the grave
violations. In the Lake Chad Basin, girls are being specifically targeted in attacks,
and we are seeing an exponential growth in violations against girls, who ma ke up 50
per cent of victims. I am here today to call upon the Security Council to increase
efforts to protect girls, who are on the frontlines of these attacks.
Abduction of children
The attacks on girls were brought to global attention following th e abduction of
276 girls in Chibok in 2014. As I speak today, some of these girls are yet to return
home. Some parents have died while waiting for their children to return. Most
abductions do not make international news, and the number of abducted girls is in
fact much higher.
There has been some positive response on the side of the Government –
including endorsing the Safe Schools Declaration, and hosting the Safe Schools
conference later this year in October. But more needs to be done to domesticate the
framework at the community level – I believe that will go a long way in helping us to
address the problem holistically.
Sexual violence against girls
2020 saw an alarming 70 per cent rise in rape and other forms of sexual violence
compared to the previous year in countries on the children and armed conflict agenda,
with girls comprising 98 per cent of all victims. We are horrified to hear this large
increase, which is still likely far lower than the true number.
8/152

21-09006

S/2021/617

Having worked directly with victims of sexual violence I can attest to the
physical and mental health consequences and trauma faced by survivors, who often
do not have access to adequate healthcare, an issue that has severely worsened due to
targeted attacks on healthcare facilities.
Girls’ traumatic experiences together with stigma impact their ability to pursue
their education and move on with their lives in other important ways.
Attacks against schools
Thousands of adolescent girls have been denied their right to education and a
dignified life because of this 11 year crisis, a root cause of which is hostility toward
secular education, with repeated attacks on schools, universities, teac hers,
administrators, and students. 2,295 teachers have been killed trying to protect
children’s lives and their right to education. More than 1,400 schools have been
destroyed. And to date more than 600,000 children have lost access to education.
I have personally supervised the rebuilding of several blocks of classrooms that
have been destroyed as a result of the crisis and have repeatedly seen these being
destroyed and burned down by armed groups.
Schools should be places of safety, and no child should have to choose between
their education and their life – but schools are now a soft target and schools for girls
are especially targeted as a tactic of war.
Permit me to read a quote from one of the girls that has regained her freedom
after an attack on her school.
“After the attack, I told my parents I would never go back to school. Before the
attack, I was so passionate to study and achieve my dream of being a lawyer. But now,
this experience has completely demoralized me .... I told my father that I will never
go back because of threats and what I saw that night”.
Recruitment and use of girls
In Northern Nigeria girls are targeted by armed groups for use as suicide
bombers. Between June 2014 and February 2018, about 468 women and girls have
been deployed or arrested in 240 suicide attacks, the most any terrorist movement has
used – killing roughly 1,200 and injuring some 3,000.
Almost all the female suicide bombers are adolescent girls who have often been
influenced or forced to carry out these attacks.
Denial (delay and diversion) of humanitarian access
In Northeast Nigeria, humanitarian hubs have also been deliberately attacked.
The denial of humanitarian access disproportionately impacts girls and women, who
comprise the majority of those in need of humanitarian assistance in the Lake Chad
region. Gender inequalities shape and influence vulnerabilities in times of crisis –
with adolescent girls affected in distinct ways. There are clear connections between
food insecurity, child and forced marriage and disruptions to the right to education.
Yet in spite of this, girls are mostly not consulted in decision-making to ensure that
humanitarian response is meeting their needs. The outright denial of humanitarian
access – including through blockages or direct attacks only worsens their situation.
Our recommendations to the Security Council and the international community
Despite the challenges they face, adolescent girls in the Lake Chad region and
all of the countries where we operate demonstrate resilience, entrepreneurial skills, a
commitment to hard work, a desire to help others, optimism for the future – attributes
21-09006

9/152

S/2021/617

essential for any society if it hopes to transition towards a peaceful, prosperous and
secure future.
Plan International is calling on the Security Council and the international
community to:
• Recognize and take immediate steps to address the fact that girls are being
specifically targeted in conflict, and are subjected to all six grave violations
against children in armed conflict.
• Address the use of girls as a weapon of war. Girls asso ciated with armed forces
and armed groups have unique experiences, face specific risks, and must be
included in the design of gender and age-sensitive programmes and policy.
• Demand and pursue accountability for all those who target and attack schools,
kill and maim students and teachers, and abduct girls, ensuring all parties to
conflict fulfil their obligations under international law.
• Help us to make the safe and unimpeded delivery of humanitarian assistance to
children a reality, by allowing humanitarian access and humanitarian personnel
to do our important and life-saving work.
• Lastly, the Security Council, Member States, and the United Nations must do
better in conflict prevention. Conflicts today that could have been prevented or
cut short are lasting for years. We urge the Council to uphold its commitment to
mainstream child protection in conflict prevention, conflict, and post -conflict
situations with the aim of sustaining peace and preventing conflict.
Children and adolescent girls deserve to survive, to recover, and to have their
youth full of safety, stability, and hope. They will one day lead our world and we owe
it to them to give them a chance. We must not fail them.

10/152

21-09006

S/2021/617

Annex V
Statement by the President of Estonia, Kersti Kaljulaid
First of all, I would like to thank all our briefers for their clear, urgent and deeply
moving messages.
A girl – her name is Graciela – was born in a small mining town in the Central
African Republic. Her mother died when she was just a baby. And she also lost her
father, when a rebel group attacked her hometown in 2014. She fled, but encountered
another armed group on the road and had no choice but to join them. She had to cook
for the group, but also train to fight. She hated that.
Fortunately by now, she has been able to start a new life. After being denied
access to education for a long time, she was able to go back to school. This has been
a success story.
But what would have this story been like during a pandemic? How has the
pandemic affected numerous children in situations like these since spring 2020?
These are complex, uncomfortable, important questions we need to ask ourselves.
As we are discussing the findings of the annual report of the Secretary-General
today, I want to encourage us not to display difficult situations better than they
actually are. It is humane from us to want to see and search for success and
development. But we must be bold enough to admit if we could all learn and do better,
taking next steps forward.
In 2020, the situation of children in armed conflict was marked by a sustained
high number of grave violations. As the pandemic has roamed on in 2021, we have
had to admit that as we’ve implemented lockdown policies, we have also created
challenges that task forces on the ground have needed to overcome to document and
verify those violations, and to engage with parties to prevent and end those violations.
Schools and child friendly spaces being closed, families having lost their
income, children are an easy target – for example, to be recruited by armed groups,
or to be married off, abducted, raped.
The report of 2020 contains an overview of more than 26 000 verified grave
violations against children. We can only guess how many violations have gone
unnoticed and unreported due to the pandemic.
Despite the work the United Nations and its partners have done, the situation is
worsening in many countries. Multitude of children grow up without knowing
anything but war – among them, a whole generation in Syria.
The war in Yemen has had serious consequences for children. “The biggest war
is to destroy children and the mothers who grieve from them, ” said the mother of an
8-year-old Omar. He was wounded on his way home from school and his 13-year-old
brother was killed.
Children have been killed by regime forces in Myanmar. And in the first 3
months this year in Afghanistan, more than 150 children were recorded killed and 400
injured – and in just these few weeks, numerous schools have been damaged,
preventing thousands of students from returning to classrooms.
As every crisis, hopefully this one has also helped highlight where solutions
might be. We need to think how we can use technology better. Even the basic level of
mobile connection can help us to register and know where our children are. Only then
can we help them.

21-09006

11/152

S/2021/617

Education is the key of prevention. Schools must be protected from attack. This
means education for girls, but also for boys. Until abduction o f girls from schools is
also done as an attack against the idea of girls’ education, we need to educate boys,
future men – brothers and husbands – to think differently from their parents.
A crucial part of prevention is ensuring accountability at the ear liest stages
possible. We must make sure that no one is above the law. No perpetrator should
escape justice. We need strong national accountability measures for grave violations
against children and for cooperation with relevant international accountabilit y
mechanisms, including the International Criminal Court.
All parties must comply with international law, including international
humanitarian law and international human rights law.
This year marks the twenty-fifth anniversary of the creation of the children and
armed conflict agenda, including the mandate of the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for Children and Armed Conflict. A strong monitoring and
reporting mechanism on grave violations against children is a part of it. We need to
recognize here in the Security Council, that the protection of children is relevant for
every situation on the Security Council’s agenda. It is crucial to ensure, preserve and
strengthen the United Nations child protection capacity, including in mission
transitions and drawdowns.
In conclusion, I invite us to close this open debate today with at least one
actionable item every single individual here will take, and at least one every entity,
every country here will take and follow through in the next few weeks to really move
us all forward in finding meaningful solutions. Action brings hope of more action.
Estonia – to start with ourselves – will continue funding the Office of the Special
Representative for Children and Armed Conflict and UNICEF. We will also m aintain,
as we have until now, a strong focus on the protection of children as a member of the
Security Council.

12/152

21-09006

S/2021/617

Annex VI
Statement by the President of the Niger, Mohamed Bazoum
[Original: French]
I would like to warmly congratulate Estonia on its presidency of the Security
Council. The Niger welcomes Estonia’s decision to make the issue of children in
armed conflict a priority of its term of office on the Council.
I would like to reiterate my congratulations to Mr. António Guterres on his
re-election as Secretary General of the United Nations and to welcome his
commitment, and that of Ms. Henrietta Fore and Mr. Whitaker, to the important issue
of the protection of children in armed conflict. I also welcome the presentation on
this subject made by Mr Onisimus.
The Niger is committed to helping to strengthen the protection of children in
armed conflict. Those children fall victim to the combined effects of humanitarian
crises, climate-related security risks and economic insecurity accentuated by the
coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic.
Today, conflict-related security and humanitarian crises are fuelling suffering
around the world, as more than 79.5 million people have been forcibly displaced, with
children the primary victims. It is therefore crucial that w e collectively work to build
a world of peace where all children can flourish.
Conflicts and security-related and humanitarian crises undermine systems for
protecting the most vulnerable, including children. For example, over 26,400 grave
violations against children have been recorded in 21 situations.
Approximately 75 million children have had their education disrupted by
conflict, violence and insecurity in 35 countries. Owing to the pandemic, access to
schools has been interrupted for 168 million people, a fact which has also highlighted
the need to close the chasm of inequality between countries with regard to access to
digital education.
In the Sahel region in particular, the number of schools closed as a result of the
security crisis and attacks on schools by terrorist groups has increased sixfold since
2017, with approximately 5,000 schools closed, disrupting the education of more than
700,000 children and depriving more than 20,000 teachers of the opportunity to
practise their profession.
The Niger is also concerned about the particular vulnerabilities of girls in the
context of conflict. In countries affected by conflict, girls are half as likely to be
enrolled in school as those living in countries at peace. Every school that closes is a
door of opportunity that closes.
In the face of this alarming situation of violations against children in armed
conflicts, it is essential to develop an appropriate, contextual and sustained response.
The Niger is making a formal call for concrete action to protect schools. The statement
by the President of the Security Council on protecting schools from attack, adopted
last September under the presidency of the Niger (S/PRST/2020/8), and the Safe
Schools Declaration, remain important instruments in this regard.
The protection of children in armed conflict must be approached in a cross sectoral manner, building on existing regional and national mechanisms. Gendersensitive rehabilitation and reintegration support programmes, including support for
education and training for children and young survivors of armed conflict, are
essential.

21-09006

13/152

S/2021/617

That is because the process of rebuilding communities and consolidating peace
requires a focus on these children and young people, who are at risk of exclusion and
social stigmatization, and who are easy targets for terrorist groups that recruit them
into their ranks.
Accordingly, the Niger has set up a centre that works closely with communities
to ensure successful reintegration, with psychological support, for these distressed
children whose only wish is the opportunity to lead a new life.
The current health crisis has already become a crisis of children ’s rights. When
health systems break down on such a scale, so do protection and prevention
mechanisms. The suspension of major immunization campaigns could lead to the
emergence of preventable diseases affecting children.
The medium- and long-term impacts of the pandemic on violations against
children affected by conflict will be devastating if nothing is done. There is a real
prospect of an increase in violations, such as child labour, re -recruitment and child
marriage and its impact on access to education, especially for young girls who are
less likely to return to school after a closure.
In this context, the Niger is calling for the effective implementation of Security
Council resolution 2565 (2021) in order to facilitate equitable and affordable access
to vaccines in situations of armed conflict, post-conflict situations and humanitarian
emergencies.
While the current pandemic has challenged our ability to address the grave
violations suffered by children in times of armed conflict, it also reminds us that
global systemic change, including a change in our child protection efforts, is needed.
I stress the need to integrate child protection into the peace process from the
earliest stages, in order to significantly reduce violations against children and create
the conditions for sustainable peace.
I would like to emphasize once again access to quality education for all,
including girls, and the creation of conditions for the professional development of
young people, to enable them to contribute to the development of their country.
Education is a pillar of conflict prevention, and in countries experiencing security and
humanitarian crises, education is at the forefront of peacebuilding efforts.
We are talking about a collective responsibility for all Member States. This is
an essential prerequisite for achieving the peace and security objectives to which the
international community aspires.

14/152

21-09006

S/2021/617

Annex VII
Statement by the President of Ireland, Michael D. Higgins
May I, first of all, congratulate the President on Estonia’s achieving of such a
successful presidency of the Council and indeed thank her for organizing today ’s
important debate. We are all, I am sure, grateful for the powerful insights and
motivation we have received today from Secretary-General Guterres, Executive
Director Fore, Mr. Whitaker and Mr. Onisimus.
I take the opportunity, too, to renew my congratulations to the Secretary -General
on his appointment to a second term, director of a global institution that is our best
hope for seeing a recognition that global issues require a global response – a response
beyond any narrow interests.
While there has hardly been a child that has not been affected by the COVID -19
pandemic, its impacts are, and have been, heaviest among the least resourced and most
vulnerable, and additionally, of course, most severe for children affected by armed
conflict.
This Council holds the grave responsibility of vindicating children ’s rights,
protecting them from harm, and holding accountable those responsible for violating
the experience of childhood.
We are at an acute crisis as to the future of children. From the Sahel to Syria,
Afghanistan to the Horn of Africa, children are bearing the brunt of unspeakable
violations. In so many places of war, such as Syria, Palestine and Yemen, children
have grown up knowing only war. They have inherited the pain and trauma , as we
have heard, of occupation and unresolved conflicts.
In Tigray, Ethiopia, children are facing famine, while girls have been the victims
of horrific sexual violence. Rape and sexual assault are the shameful practice of a
growing number of military assailants.
Today, may I focus on three specific issues: education, protection and
accountability, which I believe are foundational principles for us to advance from this
nightmare.
Education
I am sure that we can all agree that it is morally reprehen sible that one in every
three children living in countries affected by conflict or disaster is out of school.
Rather than their becoming targets, as they are becoming in some conflict areas,
schools should be a protected, be a safe shelter and space for l earning and
development.
The report of the Secretary-General before us shows that parties to conflict are
not just continuing to violate such a sanctuary, and that attacks on schools are actually
increasing: over 26,000 grave violations were verified by the United Nations in 2020.
These included attacks on schools and hospitals and denial of the right to
humanitarian access.
There were 101 verified attacks on schools in the Democratic Republic of
Congo, 62 in Afghanistan and 53 in Somalia, to highlight ju st three countries. 2021
is sadly following the same trend. For example, in just over one week in Gaza, more
than 140 educational facilities were bombarded, many left in ruins. In Myanmar, the
occupation of schools by the military has compounded an existin g learning crisis for
almost 12 million children.

21-09006

15/152

S/2021/617

The deliberate targeting, the attacks on, and invasion and occupation of schools
and hospitals by armed groups are actions that can never be justified. They constitute
action that must be brought to an end – and it requires new and urgent action.
Ireland prioritizes access to education in emergencies. We have committed to
spend €250 million on global education by 2024, and that is why we are launching
the Girls Fund to support grassroots groups led by girl s, advancing gender equality in
their own communities.
Protection
My second and very related point, is on the issue of Protection.
Last year, more than 8,000 children were killed or maimed in situations of
conflict. The United Nations has also verified alarming increases in cases of
abduction and sexual violence during 2020. Child protection is of such importance
that it must be given ever greater and more urgent reporting at the heart of the
Council’s work. Such will give us our best hope for the future.
Ensuring the safety and security of children helps, of course, break the cycles
of conflict and insecurity that must not be the legacy for future generations. I wish
the Council courage in calling for and ensuring that United Nations peacekeepi ng
operations have the mandates, resources and capacity to save children ’s lives and
secure their welfare. This must extend to safeguarding child protection in
peacekeeping transitions, and with an acknowledged privileged role for the
experience and views of women who have experienced conflict. These essential
protections serve as the foundation for future peace.
I do so commend United Nations child protection staff, monitoring teams and
civil society partners for protecting children and monitoring violati ons, often in
dangerous environments. Humanity is indebted.
Accountability
My third point, accountability, is a theme which Ireland champions at the
Council.
Pervasive impunity for egregious violations is unacceptable. Eschewing
legitimation for actions, it threatens every shred of democracy, undermines
multilateralism and meaningful cooperation. This is why the annual report of the
Secretary-General, and particularly its listing mechanism, is critical in the effort to
publicly identify the parties responsible and to ensure accountability.
The United Nations must, of course, ensure that the impartiality and integrity of
this monitoring and reporting mechanism is protected and maintained. Landmark
rulings, such as Lubanga and Ongwen, demonstrate the influence and power the
International Criminal Court can have.
However, with the principle of complementarity existing at its very core,
together with its own requirement for action, the work of the International Criminal
Court must be accompanied by greater efforts at national level. For example, in the
Democratic Republic of Congo, the courage of 178 survivors who testified helped to
secure the conviction of Ntabo Ntaberi last year sent a powerful message of hope that
impunity will not be tolerated.
Any child associated with an armed group, we must always recognize of course,
is primarily a victim.
As such, while the release of nearly 13,000 children last year is a cause for
celebration, as a means to help restore some aspects of their childhoods, a
16/152

21-09006

S/2021/617

comprehensive, gender- and age-sensitive approach to re-integration, inclusive of
children with disabilities, is vital in the efforts to recover and sustain peace.
In conclusion, as we mark the twenty-fifth anniversary of the creation of the
children and armed conflict agenda, let us confront all of the uncomfortable realities
of where our actions are insufficient. We are all looked to give a lead on this.
Since 1996, the Council has shaped and advanced such an agenda, and its actions
have profoundly improved the lives of many children affected by conflict. Let us
commit to generating even greater political will, and the provision of resources, for
the integrity, safety and fulfilment of all children and the hope of our future
generations.

21-09006

17/152

S/2021/617

Annex VIII
Statement by the Representative of the United States of America to
the United Nations, Linda Thomas-Greenfield
I thank Estonia for hosting this important debate today. I also would like to thank
the Secretary-General for his presentation. I want to thank Director Fore for her
presentation and everything that UNICEF does around the world to protect children.
I also thank Mr. Whitaker and Mr. Onisimus for their briefings today.
Over the course of my nearly four decades serving as an American ambassador
and American diplomat, I have visited countless refugee camps, and I ’ve met with so
many victims of armed conflict. Of all the tragedies we see, those invol ving children
break our hearts the most. Children will tell us stories that no child should be able to
recount. Of being conscripted at gunpoint. Of being raped. Of being forced to murder
their own siblings, their own parents. These children are often no t aller than the guns
they actually carry. They are taught to commit war crimes before they even know how
to count. To choose just one example, earlier this month, in the village of Solhan in
the Sahel region, a non-State armed group killed more than 130 civilians – many of
whom were children. That armed group? Mostly 12- to 14-year-olds. Children killing
children – children killing children.
I also recall, more than 20 years ago, meeting a young 15-year-old who had been
abducted in Sierra Leone from her family at age 12. And she was taken to the bush,
she was gang raped, she was married to a combatant, and she was trained to fight.
And when she finally escaped and found her way home to her family, she was rejected.
I still recall her dark eyes, and I still hear the sound of her hollow voice, ringing in
my ears, saying, “All I want is my mommy.” And in certain countries, where the
majority of populations are under 18, this is more than a tragedy. It is the decimation
of an entire generation. It’s murdering the future. From Sierra Leone to Colombia,
Somalia to Afghanistan, countless boys and girls are facing violence, or being forced
to commit violent acts themselves.
We established the children and armed conflict agenda 25 years ago. A quarter
of a century later, we have not done enough. And as a result of the pandemic, this year
has been one of the worst. Because of the pandemic, countless schools shut down. I
visited a UNICEF exhibition in early March on the United Nations compound
displaying empty chairs and backpacks, showing that 214 million children had missed
three-quarters of their in-person learning, and more than 880 million continued to
face disruption. Without schools, children became much more vulnerable to domestic
violence in isolation. Girls in particular face systemic discrimination and their
communities are at higher risk of gender-based violence and sexual exploitation both
during and after conflict. Even the fear of attacks on schools are often enough for
parents to keep their girls home, disrupting their education and stifling their futures.
Imagine being a parent now in northern Nigeria, as we heard from Mr. Onisimus,
where schools are regularly attacked and children abducted for ransom. Those
descriptions that we heard were chilling. Just last month, we saw a horrific attack in
Afghanistan on schools in which at least 90 girls were killed. This can no longer be a
side-issue for us. This is a generation-defining crisis. And we need to act now. At a
minimum, the United Nations must ensure that where child protection advisers are
mandated and funded, they are trained and deployed immediately. We must be
deliberate and thoughtful – and acknowledge the unique and distinct risks faced by
girls and boys and make certain that our approach is informed by genderdisaggregated data.

18/152

21-09006

S/2021/617

In addition, we need to focus on some of the hotspots where children are facing
the most dire threats, like in Syria, in Burma, in Cameroon, and now in Ethiopia. In
Burma, we’ve seen the Tatmadaw unlawfully recruiting children and subjecting them
to violence. The Syrian regime continues to have no regard for the welfare of
vulnerable children or youth. In the Cameroon Anglophone region, we are deeply
concerned by the impact of the continued violence on children. Children have been
threatened, and in some cases killed, for attending school. This is a generational loss,
my colleagues. And it is truly unacceptable. We need to deploy ev ery diplomatic tool
we have to advance dialogue and end the violence. Hold accountable perpetrators and
get kids back in school.
Similarly, we must focus on emerging conflicts where children face acute
protection challenges, like in the Tigray region of Ethiopia. It is high time the Security
Council met publicly on this issue. So, again, I thank the President for Estonia hosting
this important debate. And it is past time we take the immensity of children ’s’
suffering more seriously.
Around the world, if we want to give the future a fighting chance, we need to
act now. The United States is the leading donor to UNICEF. We ’re a strong believer
in its core mandate. And we urge others to generously contribute. Because this is not
some small subset of the population. In many places, particularly in countries facing
conflict, children are most of the population.
I once had the great honour and fortune of a lifetime to meet Nelson Mandela.
And I think of his far-seeing leadership often and I believe his mighty words should
steer our vision now. Madiba once said, and I quote, “there can be no keener
revelation of a society’s soul than the way in which it treats its children.” Today the
world’s soul is at stake. Let us avert our eyes no longer. Let us protect our children.
Let us treat them right. And let’s right this wrong, now.

21-09006

19/152

S/2021/617

Annex IX
Statement by the Deputy Minister for Foreign Affairs of Norway,
Jens Frølich Holte
I thank the President for hosting this year ’s annual debate on children and armed
conflict. I would also like to thank the Secretary-General and Executive Director Fore
as well as Mr. Onisimus from Plan International Nigeria and Mr. Whitaker for their
statements.
Earlier this year, we asked children in Norway what they think is the most
important issue for the Security Council. One child said ‘to work for peace and
children’s rights. Another stated that all children must be able to attend school, also
during war, and have a safe childhood. I could not agree more. This underscores why
protection of civilians is one of Norway’s main priorities for its term on the Security
Council. Since we took our seat on the Council, we have worked to make protection
of children in conflict a cross-cutting issue on its agenda.
We are approaching the twenty-fifth anniversary of the mandate on children and
armed conflict. Those who were children when the mandate was adopted, have long
since become adults. Protecting children from the devastating effects of conflict is
more important than ever. We must act now to prevent new cycles of conflict and
build sustainable peace.
To succeed, we must work to ensure that the mandate shapes the behaviour of
state and non-State actors to end and prevent violations against children. This requires
dialogue with parties to conflict and commitments that translate into concrete action.
We thank the Special Representative of the Secretary-General and the United Nations
monitoring and reporting mechanism for their untiring work. Norway, i ncluding as
member of the Council, reaffirms our strong support for the mandate. As chair of the
working group on children and armed conflict we are committed to strengthening the
partnership with the Special Representative of the Secretary -General on children and
armed conflict.
The annual report of the Secretary-General on children and armed conflict
clearly shows the devastating impact war and conflict have on children. In many
ways, childhood is the first victim of war. The United Nations has verified a total of
26,425 grave violations against children in 2020. The highest numbers of violations
were the recruitment and use of children, followed by the killing and maiming of
children. Verified cases of abduction and sexual violence against children incr eased
alarmingly by 90 and 70 per cent, respectively. This in a year that access for
monitoring has been hampered by the pandemic.
The pandemic has made the vulnerable even more vulnerable. It has severely
magnified the risks children face and increased their need for protection. And it is
threatening to undo the gains made in the protection of children in conflict.
For example,
• Loss of family income, closure of schools and disruption of protection activities
have left children more exposed to recruitment and use by armed forces and
groups, as well as to sexual violence.
• Progress achieved on release and reintegration programmes for children
associated with armed forces and groups has been reversed, and ill-treatment in
detention has increased.
Violations against children are always unacceptable and these trends are deeply
concerning.
20/152

21-09006

S/2021/617

We must have the facts to be able to respond adequately. Therefore, the
monitoring and reporting mechanism of the United Nations must be given full access,
and the political and financial support it needs.
Maintaining the independence, impartiality and credibility of the mandate is
crucial. The criteria applied in listing and delisting decisions must be objective.
We must ensure that child protection provisions and operational capacity are
included in mandates all relevant of United Nations peacekeeping operations and
special political missions.
President,
Norway strongly condemns the continued attacks against schools and hospitals.
We are also concerned about the increased use of schools for military purposes. We
know that attacks and insecurity have resulted in the closure of thousands of schools,
and denied millions of children education. The civilian character of schools and
hospitals must be respected. These attacks deprive children of their rights to health
and education, and of the protective environment that schools should normally
provide. This has long-term negative consequences for children and their
communities.
Norway would like to emphasize the invaluable role of educational institutions.
Schools and universities reflect the past, present and future of a community; they are
vital to individuals and to societies, economies, and cultures. They are part of the
social framework that can support people through crises. They provide individuals
with a lifelong foundation, for no one can deprive them of what they have learned
while attending school. With education comes dignity. People affected by conflict
consistently identify safe access to education for their children as a priority.
Protecting these institutions is essential to achieving peace and security and has a firm
place on the Council’s agenda. We must do more to safeguard educational institutions
from military use and attacks, and we must invest more in education in situations of
crisis and conflict. Norway urges all countries to join the 109 States, 10 of which are
on the Council, that have endorsed and are working together to implement the Safe
Schools Declaration.
Norway has been a long-standing advocate for treating children recruited and
used in armed conflict, including children associated with armed groups and terrorist
organizations, primarily as victims. We urge Member States to treat these children in
line with their obligations under international law, including international
humanitarian law and the Convention on the Rights of the Child. We also call on all
States who have not yet done so, to ratify the Optional Protocol on children in armed
conflict, and to endorse the Paris Principles.
The Secretary-General has put forth a number of recommendations in his report.
Norway supports these and urges all States, parties, and other relevant actors to
implement them along with the conclusions agreed in the Working Group on Children
and Armed Conflict.
Children living in conflict have no time to lose. Their childhood and our
common future is at stake. Let’s join forces and act now to ensure a better life for the
millions of children living in armed conflict.

21-09006

21/152

S/2021/617

Annex X
Statement by the Minister of State with responsibility for Foreign
Affairs and Foreign Trade of Saint Vincent and the Grenadines,
Keisal Peters
Let me begin by thanking our distinguished briefers, the Secretary -General,
António Guterres, the Executive Director of UNICEF, Henrietta Fore, the Advocate
for Children Affected by War, Forest Whitaker, and the Education Specialist at Plan
International Nigeria, Laban Onisimus, for presenting, in very clear terms, the
urgency with which we must act in service of our children.
Saint Vincent and the Grenadines takes this opportunity, in the twenty -fifth year
since the emergence of the children and armed conflict mandate, to acknowledge the
remarkable progress in shifting consciousness and in creating national mechanisms
to protect and promote the wellbeing of children in fragile and conflict affected
countries and regions. Against this backdrop, we congratulate the Office of the
Special Representative of Children in Armed Conflict upon receiving the Sapienza
Human Rights Award 2020; another signal and most deserving achievement.
In spite of progress made, the number and severity of verified grave violations
against children, in 2020, remains worryingly unchanged. This is especially
concerning, given the challenges encountered by the Monitoring and Reporting
Mechanisms (MRMs), as a result of COVID-19 containment measures globally. As
we have heard this morning, children, particularly refugee and displaced children,
suffer the worst effects of the ever changing and complex natu re of armed conflict.
The report of the Office of the Special Representative of the Secretary -General and
UNICEF, on the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic, paints a grim picture of how the
situation for children is further compounded by the current health an d related
economic crises. There is urgent need for adherence to the call for a global ceasefire,
and to ensure that the pandemic response and recovery programmes are both child centred and gender-responsive.
Emerging child protection actions, mechanisms, and related adaptation
measures must embed critical gender analysis. This will ensure appropriately tailored
responses for girls and boys who are differently affected by violence in armed
conflict. Although significantly underreported, the overwhelming ma jority of sexual
violence is perpetrated against girls; a situation made worse by the reduced capacity
of national, regional and international actors to engage in prevention, and protection
work, and to provide psychosocial support for children. Girls are also
disproportionately affected by school closures and overall attacks against education.
They are far less likely to return to schools and suffer increased risk of experiencing
sexual violence in these contexts. Boys are however far more likely to be vic tims of
the most prevalent verified violations. They are killed and maimed, and recruited and
used at much higher rates when compared to girls. In addition, boys are more likely
to be detained in state institutions and to be held by armed groups.
We welcome necessary developments to improve accountability and implement
increased child protection measures. These developments include:
1.
The appointment of a Minister Counsellor to the President on child
protection and the Promulgation of the Child protection code criminalizing child
recruitment in the Central African Republic;
2.
The November 2020 launch of the child protection policy by the Ministry
of the Interior in Afghanistan, where there exists an alarmingly high number of
children killed and maimed; and

22/152

21-09006

S/2021/617

3.
Advances on the implementation of the Safe Schools Declaration, through
a draft law on the protection of education against attacks in Mali.
Saint Vincent and the Grenadines underscores the importance of actions which
emphasize rehabilitation, reintegration and the consistent application of handover
protocols in line with juvenile justice standards established in the Convention on the
Rights of the Child and its Optional Protocol on the involvement of children in armed
conflict; recognizing, of course, that children are, first and foremost, victims of armed
conflict. We are gravely concerned about the erosion of progress on child protection,
as what we are now witnessing is a rapidly deteriorating humanitarian situation,
linked to increasingly complex and challenging security contexts, globally.
Certainly, a combination of political will and national ownership; cooperation
between the United Nations and regional bodies; and consistent and predictable
funding is required to ensure compliance, by States, with their obligations to protect
children, as enshrined in the relevant international accountability mechanisms . These
include adherence to international humanitarian law, human rights law and refugee
law, juvenile justice standards under the Convention on the Rights of the Child, and
all other relevant international accountability mechanisms.
In closing I wish to recall analysis drawn from the 2017 policy on child
protection in peacekeeping operations. We must ensure that relevant child protection
provisions are consistently included in the mandates of all United Nations
peacekeeping operations and special political missions.
We must remind ourselves that children bear no responsibility for violent
conflict. Yet, they remain most adversely affected. Let us seize this moment of
collective and renewed commitment to embark on truly transformative actions for the
sake of all the world’s children.

21-09006

23/152

S/2021/617

Annex XI
Statement by the Foreign Secretary of India, Harsh
Vardhan Shringla
I congratulate the delegation of Estonia for organizing this important annual
open debate as we mark the twenty-fifth anniversary of the creation of the children
and armed conflict agenda. I note with appreciation the presence of António Guterres,
Secretary-General of the United Nations, Henrietta Fore, Executive Director of
UNICEF and Forest Whitaker, United Nations Goodwill Ambassador. I als o thank
Virginia Gamba, Special Representative of the Secretary-General for Children and
Armed Conflict and other briefers for sharing their insights with us today.
Mahatma Gandhi said (and I quote) “If we are to reach real peace in this world
and if we are to carry on a real war against war, we shall have to begin with children;
and if they will grow up in their natural innocence, we will not have to struggle; we
will not have to pass fruitless idle resolutions, but we shall go from love to love and
peace to peace, until at last all the corners of the world are covered with that peace
and love for which consciously or unconsciously the whole world is hungering ”.
(Unquote.)
Unfortunately, we are not living in an ideal world today. As noted by the
Secretary-General in his report, the scale and severity of violations perpetrated
against children in armed conflict remains on the rise. It is clear that there remain
significant challenges to the effective implementation of this mandate.
The COVID-19 pandemic has further negatively affected children in situations
of armed conflict, including by hampering their access to education, health and social
services. It has made them susceptible to grave violations, particularly through
recruitment and abduction. It is, therefore, important that States keep child protection
concerns at the core of their pandemic response measures and recovery plans.
National Governments have the primary responsibility for protecting the rights
of the child as mandated by the Convention on the Rights of the Child. We encourage
Member States to ratify the Optional Protocol to the Convention on the Rights of the
Child on the involvement of children in armed conflict and to adopt robust legal
frameworks for protection and promotion of child rights. The aim should not be
merely protecting children from child-related crimes but also to provide them with
holistic development opportunities, including free and compulsory education.
We are witnessing a dangerous and worrying trend in global terror ism and that
is an increase in the number of children that are being recruited and involved in
terrorism-related activities. Terror groups take advantage of the fact that children are
the most susceptible to manipulation. School closures due to the pandemi c have
provided an even greater opportunity to these terrorist groups to target children,
including through online avenues, for radicalization and indoctrination in violent
extremist ideologies. We believe that there is a need for a more coordinated approa ch
in implementing the child protection and counter terrorism agendas. States need to
demonstrate greater political will to hold the perpetrators of terrorism and their
sponsors to account, and to fulfil the Council’s child protection obligations.
We also call for ending impunity for all actors responsible for inciting and
perpetrating grave violations against children. There must be greater accountability
and sincere efforts to bring the perpetrators to justice by Governments from whose
territory such entities operate.
Close cooperation between the United Nations and its Member States concerned
is critical for developing an effective and sustainable policy for repatriation and
24/152

21-09006

S/2021/617

reintegration of children affected by armed conflict. States should adopt an in clusive
approach to provide protection to child victims during the rehabilitation and
reintegration process in post-conflict situations. Assistance to national Governments
for capacity-building and strengthening legal and operational tools for child
protection is vital. The monitoring and reporting mechanism of the United Nations
should ensure continuous involvement of and close cooperation with the Member
States concerned, including ensuring the veracity and reliability of data collection.
Based on our experience in United Nations peacekeeping over the decades, we
recognize the importance of having sufficient resources and requisite number of child
protection advisers in peacekeeping missions for the effective implementation of
child protection programmes. The Council may consider incorporating adequate child
protection provisions and capacities in all relevant mandates of United Nations
peacekeeping operations.
Despite the Council’s clear mandate, we note with concern that the report of the
Secretary-General includes situations that are not situations of armed conflict or
threats to the maintenance of international peace and security. We must be cautious
as attempts to selectively expand the mandate politicizes the agenda, diverting
attention from real threats to international peace and security and to children in armed
conflict.
We note with appreciation that the engagement of the United Nations,
particularly the Office of the Special Representative of the Secretary -General for
Children and Armed Conflict, with parties engaged in armed conflict has resulted in
the release of 12,643 children over the last year. This positive trend must continue.
Let me conclude by reiterating India’s firm commitment to supporting the
United Nations in its endeavours to protect children in situations of armed conflict.

21-09006

25/152

S/2021/617

Annex XII
Statement by the Deputy Minister for Foreign Affairs of Viet Nam,
Dang Hoang Giang
Viet Nam would like to thank the Secretary-General and all briefers for their
insightful remarks. We also thank the Estonian presidency for convening this
important debate.
Our resistance war ended almost half a century ago. Yet the legacy of tragic
losses and sufferings, especially when it comes to children, lingered on. As such,
protecting children from hostilities and deplorable abuses in armed conflict is an issue
that Viet Nam holds dear to our hearts and a continued priority from our first tenure
at the Council in 2008–2009. Sadly, the situation has been worsening over time.
We are deeply concerned over the unacceptably high level of grave violations
against children, according to the Secretary-General’s latest report. Regrettably, the
figures in the report are just the tip of the iceberg.
We strongly condemn all acts of violence and abuse against children and call
for an immediate cessation of such wrongful practices.
Since the creation of the children and armed conflict agenda 25 years ago,
positive changes have been made thanks to the tremendous efforts of the United
Nations and the international community. Hundreds of thousands of children have
been rescued and freed from armed groups, reintegrated into their families, and
returned to school.
Yet our work is far from over. With that, I would like to highlight the following
points:
First, saving children emanates from acts to stop violence, end wars and sustain
peace in every corner of the world. This is the prerequisite to ensure children are
protected and live to their full potentials. We urge all parties to conflict to promptly
implement the Secretary-General’s call for a global ceasefire in 2020.
Second, we call for full respect for and compliance with the international law,
especially the international humanitarian law. Greater strides should aim at ensuring
unhindered access of children to humanitarian assistance, including COVID-19
vaccines. Together with coordinated efforts of the Council within its mandate, the role
of UNICEF, UNDP, WHO and other relevant actors should be fully leveraged in
facilitating humanitarian relief activities on the ground.
Third, the protection of essential civilian infrastructure, especially schools and
hospitals, must be ensured. We welcome the significant efforts of Member States in
implementing Security Council resolutions 2143 (2014), 2286 (2016) and 2573
(2021), and we believe that these should continue to be vigorously pursued.
Having said that, Viet Nam endorsed the Safe Schools Declaration and
encourage States that have yet done so to consider joining this commitment to enable
the continuity of safe education for all children in armed conflicts.
Last but not least, child protection should be put at the core of peacekeeping.
We urge the continued integration of child protection components in the mandates of
all relevant United Nations peacekeeping operations and political missions. In doing
so, the United Nations blue helmets and other United Nations agencies present on the
ground can help break the vicious cycle of violence and poverty and sow the seed for
durable peace.

26/152

21-09006

S/2021/617

Let me conclude by sharing a story about Vietnamese peacekeepers in South
Sudan and Central African Republic. They taught English to the local children
wherever possible, be it in a playground, a garden or a deserted school, with tables
and chairs made from recycled wooden box. They helped the children there enlighten
a hope for a better future and equip themselves for that journey. I believe there are
plenty of such stories around the world waiting to be told and spread.
Let us all build a brighter future for our children, starting from today.

21-09006

27/152

S/2021/617

Annex XIII
Statement by the Minister of State at the Foreign, Commonwealth
and Development Office of the United Kingdom, James Cleverly
I would like to thank the President of the Security Council for convening this
vital debate, and the briefers for their insightful presentations.
The of the Secretary-General shows, even 25 years on from the mandate, how
far we still need to travel to end the suffering of children.
The scale and severity of the violations committed against children is appalling.
I am particularly concerned about the increase in countries already on the
Council’s agenda, like Somalia.
This reinforces the urgency of holding elections, so the Government can refocus
on the country’s many challenges, not least protecting its children.
The UK stands ready to support Somalia, both bilaterally and through United
Nations channels.
The Working Group on Children and Armed Conflict must continue to hold
parties-to-conflict to account for their actions.
I am pleased to see Tatmadaw have been relisted for recruitment of child ren. It
is critical they implement the joint action plan on the non-recruitment of children
signed in 2012.
Greater transparency on listing decisions would ensure the reputation of the
monitoring and reporting mechanism of the United Nations is not only sustained, but
strengthened.
I would also like to draw attention to the plight of children in Ethiopia and
Mozambique.
In the Tigray region of Ethiopia, children have been subjected to horrific sexual
abuse. Unaccompanied minors have been forced to flee their homes as refugees, and
according to IPC data, thousands of children face famine.
Seven months on, there is no end to the conflict in sight, though we continue to
call for a cessation.
In Mozambique we have reports of children being kidnapped and forcibly
recruited, as well as horrific stories of beheadings of children as young as 11, by
terrorist insurgents in Cabo Delgado.
I hope next year’s report highlights these atrocities.
This year’s report shows how the pandemic has disproportionately affected the
world’s most vulnerable, and been devastating for children in conflict.
COVID-19 has tested the resilience of the monitoring and reporting mechanism,
which must continue its evidence-based approach, and rise above politics to focus on
the interests of every child.
COVID-19 has also increased the challenge of accessing education in conflict.
Last week, I met with young people from Afghanistan, Iraq, Palestine and Syria.
The words of a young Afghan girl have stayed with me.
She said:

28/152

21-09006

S/2021/617

“When I was holding my pen and notebook in my hands and left for school with
thousands of wishes, I was thinking ‘I am one step closer to my dreams’. But,
now, I am under the ground with all my dreams … What did I do wrong? Why
was I your target?”
Her words should serve as a rallying call for the Security Council to condemn
the alarming increase in attacks on schools and in abductions of and sexual violence
against girls.
Colleagues here will know that girls’ access to education is even lower in times
of crisis. In losing access to school, girls not only lose the opportunity to learn, but
also the protection that schools afford: from domestic violence, early and forced
marriage and teenage pregnancy.
It is a matter of urgency that we incorporate gender perspectives into all our
thinking about children in armed conflict.
The United Kingdom is committed to leaving no girls behind, and 12 years of
quality education by 2030.
More than ever, with the terrible impact of the pandemic, it i s imperative that
girls’ education remains at the top of the agenda, so we can achieve Sustainable
Development Goal 4 by 2030.
Looking forward, and with the words of that young Afghan girl in mind,
Members have a moral responsibility to mainstream child protection across United
Nations mandates, resolutions and sanctions and through special political missions,
United Nations agencies and country teams.
I call on all Members to ratify the Optional Protocol to the Convention on the
Rights of the Child, on the involvement of children in armed conflict and to
implement the Paris Principles, Safe Schools Declaration and Vancouver Principles.
These instruments demonstrate our commitment to listen to children, and to
provide them with the safety and security they all deserve.

21-09006

29/152

S/2021/617

Annex XIV
Statement by the Permanent Representative of China to the
United Nations, Zhang Jun
[Original: Chinese]
I welcome the chairing of this meeting by Ms. Kaljulaid, and thank Secretary General Mr. Guterres, Ms. Fore and all those who have given briefings.
This year marks the twenty-fifth anniversary of the establishment of the mandate
of the United Nations Special Representative for Children and Armed Conflict. Over
the past 25 years, the international community has made many efforts to protect
children from the harms of war. The protection of children has been integrated into
all aspects of United Nations peacekeeping and peacebuilding work. These
achievements are inseparable from the unremitting efforts and hard work of the
Secretary General and his special representatives, the United Nations Children ’s Fund
(UNICEF) and all the workers on the front line of child protection.
Sadly, today, 25 years later, children remain the most innocent victims of war.
More than 26,000 grave violations against children were recorded in the 2020 report
of the Secretary General alone. In Afghanistan, the local security situation has taken
a turn for the worse as foreign troops begin to withdraw. Two attacks on students took
place in less than two weeks from the end of April to the beginning of May, with
nearly 100 girls killed in the 8 May attack. In the Occupied Palestinian Territories,
the 11-day conflict in May of this year killed 72 Palestinian children and 2 Israeli
children. More than 30 schools in the Gaza Strip were destroyed by artillery fire,
forcing the suspension of classes for nearly 600,000 students. Nadine Abdel Taif, a
ten-year-old Palestinian girl, burst into tears at the sight of her ruined home. She kept
asking herself: “What did I do wrong? Why must I endure this?” This is a question
for the entire international community. What can we do for these children? How can
we reduce the harm to children caused by armed conflict? This is precisely the issue
we need to explore and resolve here at this meeting.
Achieving peace is the best protection for children. Only ceasefires and an end
to violence can heal children’s war wounds. Continuing war and chaos can only mean
suffering for more children. All parties to conflict should actively respond to and
implement the appeal of the Secretary General for a global ceasefire, and resolve their
differences through dialogue and consultation. The Security Council should continue
to promote the political resolution of hotspot issues, and pro mote child protection
throughout the entire process of conflict prevention, conflict resolution, and
peacebuilding, as an important element of good offices mediation, peace negotiation,
and disarmament and demobilization. The Practical Guidance for Mediato rs to Protect
Children in Situations of Armed Conflict, formulated by the Office of the Special
Representative of the Secretary General for Children and Armed Conflict, is a useful
initiative, and we hope that it will play its due role as it is put into pr actice.
Grave violations against children must stop immediately. The six types of grave
violations against children stipulated in the resolutions of the Security Council breach
the boundaries of international humanitarian law and challenge the bottom line of
human conscience. They should be consigned to a zone of prohibition for all parties
to conflicts. China condemns all grave violations against children, including the
killing of civilians and children by foreign troops in Afghanistan, and those
responsible should be held accountable. China calls on parties to conflicts that have
signed child protection action plans with the United Nations to put them into effect,
and parties to conflicts that have not yet signed such an action plan to do so as soon
as possible. The Security Council provides powerful tools for child protection,
including the monitoring and reporting mechanism on grave violations of children ’s
30/152

21-09006

S/2021/617

rights in situations of armed conflict, the annual reports of the Secretary General, and
the country-specific conclusions of the Working Group on Children and Armed
Conflict. All of these should be used well and adequately. In the final analysis,
protecting children depends on the efforts of the countries involved. The international
community should urge all countries to ratify and implement the Convention on the
Rights of the Child, and increase funding and technical support to help the countries
concerned to improve their child protection capabilities. In the Secretary General ’s
reports, the listing and delisting of parties to conflict involving grave violations
against children should be evidence-based and should adhere to the principles of
humanitarianism and non-politicization.
We must step up efforts to achieve the all-round development of children. Tens
of millions of children in conflict are suffering from malnutrition and disease,
defenceless against impoverishment and loss of education. The international
community must increase assistance, and United Nations development agencies must
give full play to their role in giving children in armed conflict with fair opportunities
to rise above their difficulties and realize their potential, avoid being forced to join
armed groups to survive, and escape falling into vicious circles of violent conflict.
Unilateral coercive measures gravely violate children ’s rights to survival and
development. So-called humanitarian exemptions are useless, and all unilateral
coercive measures should be lifted immediately. Children threatened by terrorist
forces should receive equal protection, and the United Nations agencies concerned
should increase their efforts to bring about the repatriation of children of foreign
fighters in Syria and Iraq. In the context of the global fight against the pandemic,
special attention must be given children affected by conflict, so as to ensure that they
are not left behind in terms of vaccination and distance learning.
The protection of children is the responsibility of all countries and
Governments, and should be the highest priority in any situation. There is still a long
way to go in this regard. The abuse of Aboriginal children in Canadian boarding
schools, with the loss of more than 4,000 lives, is shocking and outrageous. We cannot
allow this dark page to simply remain in the history books. We urge the Canadian
Government to earnestly fulfil its responsibilities, let the world know the truth, and
give justice to the victims to avoid such a tragedy from happening again.

21-09006

31/152

S/2021/617

Annex XV
Statement by the Permanent Representative of France to the
United Nations, Nicolas de Rivière
[Original: French]
I would like to thank the Secretary General, Ms. Gamba and Ms. Fore, as well
as all our other guests, for their statements.
Since 2005, our efforts have resulted in the freeing of m ore than 150,000
children, thanks to the commitment of the Security Council, successive Special
Representatives of the Secretary-General, the United Nations Children’s Fund
(UNICEF) and civil society. This is one of the great, but little -known, successes of
the Security Council over the past 15 years.
We must do more to implement the protection framework created by resolution
1612 (2005). This ambitious and innovative resolution, put forward at the time by
France and Benin, has since provided a structure for our collective action.
However, grave violations against children continue at alarming levels, fuelled
by the escalation of conflict. We must make the best use of the tools in place. Those
involved in the monitoring and reporting mechanism on grave violations of children ’s
rights in situations of armed conflict need political and financial support to operate in
safety.
The restrictions brought by the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic have
limited our ability to monitor and respond to serious violations against children. I
would like to express my gratitude to all child-protection and civil-society actors who
have continued to ensure the smooth functioning of the mechanism, despite the
current circumstances.
The socio-economic consequences of the pandemic and school closures are
putting children at greater risk: inequalities are increasing in all regions of the world.
Acts of domestic violence, rape and other forms of sexual violence, as wel l as
dropping out of school, have increased.
School closures increase recruitment by armed groups, and child labour. In these
instances, as in others, girls also have specific vulnerabilities. I am thinking in
particular of the risk of early and forced marriage.
For its part, France will continue to play an active role and promote the universal
endorsement of the Paris Principles and Commitments.
In the field, it supports projects that ensure access to education in emergency
situations, including the “Education Cannot Wait” fund. Through the Global
Partnership for Education, France is funding an $11 million project in the Niger to
mitigate the impact of the pandemic on the education system.
Because girls are particularly affected, as I said, France suppo rts the creation of
protective environments in schools. This is one of the objectives of the “Priorité à
l’Égalité” (Priority to Equality) initiative in the Sahel countries, for which France is
providing 10 million euros of funding. Our action also include s a component devoted
to care, in the face of the unacceptable increase in sexual mutilation and violence.
This is the direction of several projects we support in Iraq, and of our contribution to
the Mukwege-Murad Fund for survivors of sexual violence.
The Security Council must remain mobilized, not only through its working
group but also in all its action. France’s commitment is guaranteed.

32/152

21-09006

S/2021/617

Annex XVI
Statement by the Permanent Representative of Kenya to the
United Nations, Martin Kimani
I also thank the Secretary-General António Guterres, Henrietta Fore, Forest
Whitaker, and Laban Onisimus for their informative briefings.
This year marks the twenty-fifth anniversary of the establishment of the Office
of the Special Representative of the Secretary-General for Children and Armed
Conflict.
Kenya welcomes this opportunity to reflect on further efforts needed to protect
children globally affected by armed conflict.
As recorded in the Secretary-General’s latest report, in 2020, the United Nations
verified close to 30,000 grave violations against children translating to about 100
violations committed every day.
We call on all parties in situations of armed conflict to adhere to their obligations
under international law regarding the safety of children.
There are immediate measures that need to be taken by the Security Council to
protect children in armed conflict. Among them are strengthening child protection
tools in United Nations peace missions by embedding them in mandates and following
up to ensure accountability.
For today, however, I want to focus most on protecting children from terrorism.
Kenya is especially concerned by the continued radicalization and recruitment
of children and youth by terrorist groups.
Beyond the direct recruitment efforts, large populations that of course include
children, are also being subjected to persistent narratives of hatred and discrimination
intended to recruit their passive and active support for the aims of Al Qaeda and ISIS
groups.
This is certainly the case in Somalia today where Al Shabaab, a declared and
acknowledged Al Qaeda affiliate, has a clear strategy for targeting children. In
addition to seeking children for their ranks, Al Shabaab has also peri odically attacked
educational institutions and murdering students.
It is for these reasons that Kenya regards robust and consistent counter terrorism
as key to the protection of children. The Security Council can do more on this front.
First in sanctioning terrorist groups and their supporters and financial infrastructure
more effectively.
There is an overstated tension that has been projected in the Council between
humanitarian aid delivery and counter terrorism. Specifically, the argument has been
made that Security Council counter terrorism resolutions frustrate or co mpromise
humanitarian work.
We believe that it needs to be more keenly appreciated is the humanitarian
disasters, and their impact on children, that result in counter terrorism measures that
lack robust international cooperation.
The Security Council can show its seriousness in protecting children by
deploying tough sanctions against terrorist groups that recruit or target children.
As many terrorism campaigns become protracted, new generations are growing
up with parents who are fighters or in areas where they are exposed to prolonged

21-09006

33/152

S/2021/617

radicalization. Left unchanged, it promises these groups recruits for successive
generations. We must try and break this deadly chain.
We recommend a renewed focus on delivering innovative disarmament,
demobilization and re-integration programmes. Kenya has been calling for
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration plus programmes that take into
consideration the reintegration of former terrorist fighters and minors who have been
radicalized or recruited.
We call for the Secretary-General to form an initiative that deploys training and
capacity-building for disarmament, demobilization and reintegration plus, and for the
Security Council to provide resources in missions for its implementation.
As Mr. Onisimus stated, “schools should be safe for children”. I reiterate
Kenya’s commitment to the Safe Schools Declaration.
We can do more to protect schools. Student safety and security should be key
Government deliverables. Kenya is pioneering the use of tools to allow our citizens
to protect their children, students, schoolmates and friends from radicalisation
conducive to terrorism. This is being done as part of an overall student safety and
security framework, and is being rolled out to schools with the support of a t rained
disengagement corps deployed nationwide.
Kenya looks forward to supporting further efforts made by the Security Council
to protect children in situations of conflict.

34/152

21-09006

S/2021/617

Annex XVII
Statement by the Permanent Mission of Mexico to the
United Nations
[Original: Spanish]
We welcome the organization of this debate. We also welcome the presentations
by the Secretary-General; the Executive Director of the United Nations Children ’s
Fund (UNICEF); and Mr. Whitaker and Mr. Onisimus. As we have heard, civil society
plays a key role in caring for children in conflict and post-conflict situations.
Only a month ago, the Security Council condemned the attack on a school in
Kabul in which more than fifty people, including several girls, were killed. The pres s
covered the story of Amina and Masooma, two young girls who were attending the
school; one died, and the other was debating whether to resume her studies after
experiencing such a tragedy. Today, a tragedy of that magnitude barely registers in
our collective consciousness.
Such stories underlie each of the cases included in the report of the Secretary General. We ask that in each of the situations reviewed by this Council, which
continue to dismay us, efforts be made to alleviate and resolve the plight of children
and adolescents, who are the most vulnerable victims of armed conflict.
The Safe Schools Declaration, recently signed by Mexico and to which we invite
those States that have not yet done so to accede, is an effort aimed at protecting
educational establishments.
The terrible case of Amina and Masooma in Kabul is just one example of how
conflict situations curtail the right to education. As we have heard in several
presentations this morning, attacks on schools and their use for military purpo ses also
expose children to other risks, such as recruitment by armed groups.
Child recruitment is one of the worst violations of international humanitarian
law and international human rights law. As a result, that crime cannot go unpunished.
Delivering justice is one of the ways in which children can get their lives back on
track. In this context, the work of the International Criminal Court and its growing
body of case law, which not only serves to combat impunity but also contributes to
preventing such crimes from being committed in the future, are critical. Mexico
reiterates its support for the International Criminal Court and calls for strengthening
synergies with the mandate of the Security Council and the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General. We also stress that, when it comes to detention, children,
including those associated with armed groups, must be treated as victims. We reiterate
that they should not be held in prisons, and international standards of juvenile justice
must be applied.
The pandemic has exacerbated children’s vulnerability, and among its most
damaging consequences is the effect it has had on their mental health and
psychosocial well-being. The impact in terms of sexual violence is particularly
severe. Child survivors must therefore be given greater access to comprehensive
health services tailored to their individual needs, including sexual and reproductive
health services and mental health and psychosocial support, which are essential for
healing psychological trauma and rebuilding social structures.
It is necessary to improve the understanding of the gender dimension of grave
violations, including through disaggregated data, and to ensure that services and
assistance programmes are designed through that lens. It is also imperative to address
the correlation between the proliferation and trafficking of small arms and light
weapons and gender-based violence, which can lead to sexual violence in both
21-09006

35/152

S/2021/617

conflict and post-conflict situations. As a concrete measure to protect children, States
should suspend all arms sales and exports to any party listed in the annex to the report
of the Secretary-General.
We agree with the Secretary-General on the importance of mainstreaming child
protection in the Council’s agenda. The role of child protection advisers must be
strengthened in the mandates of peacekeeping operations, as echoed by several
colleagues and special political missions.
Finally, in the context of the twenty-fifth anniversary of the mandate of the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General for Children and Armed Conflict, we
express our appreciation to all United Nations officials who work daily on behalf of
children, fighting to ensure that tragedies such as that of Amina and Masooma in
Kabul and those of so many others do not continue to occur and, even more
importantly, are not forgotten.

36/152

21-09006

S/2021/617

Annex XVIII
Statement by the Deputy Permanent Representative of the Russian
Federation to the United Nations, G.V. Kuzmin
[Original: Russian]
We are grateful to Estonia for hosting today’s meeting and are pleased to
welcome its President as our Chair. We would like to thank United Nations Secretary General António Guterres, Executive Director of the United Nations Children ’s Fund
(UNICEF) Henrietta Fore and the other speakers for their substantive presentations.
We note the efforts of the Special Representative of the Secretary -General for
Children and Armed Conflict, Virginia Gamba.
The Russian Federation regards the issue of child protection as a priority. We
have carefully studied the report of the Secretary-General, which overall provides a
sufficient overview of the situation. We are forced to note that children, who are
among the most vulnerable sections of the population, continue to suffer from the
effects of hostile actions, despite the national and international measures put in place.
We strongly condemn violations of international humanitarian law, especially
those committed against children by parties to armed conflict. The parties responsible
for these crimes should, after proper investigation, be held criminally responsible. We
consider unacceptable both the deliberate targeting of children and other categories
of protected persons, and the indiscriminate or excessive use of force.
The coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic has worsened the already
serious plight of children in areas of armed conflict. Social and economic life has
been the primary victim. Meanwhile, some countries continue to exert pressure and
actively apply unilateral coercive measures that include preventing the supply of
coronavirus vaccines, and equipment for diagnosis and treatment.
We note the work of the Security Council Working Group on Children and
Armed Conflict. We believe that the approach to addressing child pro tection issues
within that unique mechanism should be comprehensive, as envisaged in Security
Council resolution 1612 (2005) and subsequent resolutions of the Council. This
presupposes devoting equal attention to all six categories of grave violations against
children, both in the operation of the monitoring and reporting mechanism on grave
violations of children’s rights in situations of armed conflict and in the work of the
associated thematic working group of the Council. It should be remembered that the
primary responsibility for the protection of children in conflict lies with States, and
the Security Council Working Group should first and foremost address the most acute
and widespread situations of armed conflict on the agenda of the Council.
We are extremely concerned about the situation of children in Syria located in
territories not under the control of Damascus – in the Idlib de-escalation zone and in
the north-east of the country.
Idlib is controlled by Hayat Tahrir al-Sham, which is recognized by the Council
as a terrorist organization. The local population is essentially being used as a human
shield by the terrorists. Children are particular victims of the whims of the local
authorities. The enclave has recorded an increase in child and early marriages.
Schoolchildren are banned from leaving the enclave to travel to government
territories to take their exams.
The situation in the Hawl and Rawj camps for internally displaced persons in
the north-east of the country is no less disastrous. Temporary accommodation
facilities are overcrowded and extremist ideology and religious radicalism are
actively inculcated there. We reiterate our call on countries to comply with their
21-09006

37/152

S/2021/617

obligations under international law and to take steps to repatriate children of their
nationals from areas of armed conflict. We stand ready to share our experience, having
repatriated 318 of our children from Syria and Iraq since 2018, and being actively
engaged in their rehabilitation.
Moreover, the situation in Syria has been substantially further complicated by
the illegal unilateral sanctions imposed by the West. Syria is experiencing shortages
of essential foodstuffs, food, clean drinking water, milk formula, medicine and
textbooks. Paying lip service to concern over the plight of children, Western donors
refuse to finance not only projects to rebuild the country, but also infrastructure
projects for rapid rehabilitation.
The situation in Afghanistan is also a cause for concern. The Security Council
has already held detailed discussions on the deteriorating situation in that country, on
Tuesday, 22 June. Unfortunately, the situation there has changed very little over the
past 20 years or more in terms of the protection of civilians and children. Sad statistics
show that children have been regularly hit by airstrikes, including airstrikes by
foreign forces.
Afghanistan continues to be shaken by bloody terrorist attacks, the most recent
of which were perpetrated by Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL). Children
are among the victims of these heinous attacks. One recent example of such atrocities
is the May attack on a girls’ school. We condemn these crimes and call for them to be
investigated and for the perpetrators to be punished.
Child protection in Africa is notoriously difficult. Particularly in countries on
the agenda of the Security Council, such as the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
Libya, Mali, Somalia, South Sudan, the Sudan and the Central African Rep ublic.
Violence not only affects girls, but also boys, who are much more likely to be
recruited by armed groups. For example, significantly more crimes are committed
against boys and young men in Somalia. The activities of the Boko Haram group,
based in the Lake Chad basin area, have long crossed borders.
Ukraine is a source of particular pain for us. For more than seven years it has
been in a state of political chaos, civil war, legal nihilism and rampant ultra nationalism. For the eighth year, the Kiev regime, which came to power in a coup
d’état, has been trying to massacre the people of eastern Ukraine. With the help of the
regular army and punitive volunteer battalions under Nazi symbols. Using heavy
weaponry. Schools, hospitals, children’s playgrounds and key infrastructure continue
to come under target fire from the Ukrainian military.
More than a hundred children have been killed by the Ukrainian military during
the armed conflict. In the Donetsk People’s Republic, 93 children are recorded as
having died. Two hundred and sixty-three children have been left injured and 43 have
been left disabled. In the Luhansk People’s Republic, 34 children are recorded as
having died.
These are the terrible numbers attached to the tragedy in the Donbass. I could
read you the names of the children who died.
That is why residents of this region continue to carry flowers to the “Alley of
Angels”, a monument to the children who died at the hands of the Ukrainian military
who took up arms against their people.

38/152

21-09006

S/2021/617

Annex XIX
Statement by the delegation of Tunisia
[Original: Arabic]
At the outset, I should like to congratulate your country, Estonia, on its
successful presidency of the Security Council this month and to thank you for
devoting this high-level meeting to a discussion of the issue of children and armed
conflict. This is a critical issue, and we share your view that it deserves to be one of
the principal concerns of the Security Council, not only when discussing the
Secretary-General’s annual report but also when addressing the various conflicts on
the Council agenda and when renewing the mandates of the various United Nations
missions.
I must not fail to thank the Secretary-General for his annual report and valuable
briefing. I also commend the important work done by the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General for Children in Armed Conflict and her team and all the parties
engaged in monitoring and verifying the violations to which children are subjected in
armed conflicts and in seeking to provide them with better protection.
I am pleased to welcome the Executive Director of the United Nations
Children’s Fund (UNICEF) and to commend the Fund’s effective participation in
efforts to free children from all forms of exploitation and ensure their reintegration. I
further thank the representatives of civil society for their important contributions.
Armed conflict represents one of the most serious challenges to international
peace and security and one of the principal causes of human tragedy in all its forms.
However, it is the violations, atrocities and horrific crimes to which children are
subjected during armed conflict that constitute the gravest and most terrible
repercussions of conflict. Children represent the weakest and most vulnerable group
in society and are the most likely to be affected by the aftermath of these violations.
The effects on children and their communities continue to be felt ev en after conflict
has ended and settlement reached.
Given that conflict resolution and prevention are of paramount importance,
protecting children from the grave violations to which they are exposed during
conflict represents an absolute priority and collective responsibility that falls within
the framework of the efforts of the international community to preserve international
peace and security and ensure the triumph of international humanitarian law and the
rights of the child. It also falls directly within the Security Council’s commitment to
its core responsibilities.
The establishment 16 years ago of the monitoring and reporting mechanism on
children and armed conflict, alongside the creation of the working group on this issue,
represented a milestone in the Security Council’s treatment of this issue, enabling it
to determine more accurately and objectively the nature and scale of the violations,
including recruitment, killing, maiming, abduction and sexual abuse. It has also
enabled the United Nations to engage with the parties to conflict in several regions
and formulate action plans to halt grave violations against children, prevent violations
from occurring and free thousands of children from the cycle of exploitation and
suffering. Despite the progress achieved in implementing this mandate, the situation
of children in many conflict zones is, regrettably, still a matter of deep concern, as
highlighted by the growing number of grave violations verified by the United Nations
in recent years, including 26,425 in 2020 according to the latest report of the
Secretary-General (A/75/873-S/2021/437).
Moreover, there has been an alarming 70 percent rise in cases of sexual abuse
of children. This is a shocking indicator, particularly in view of the sustained
21-09006

39/152

S/2021/617

underreporting of cases due to fear of stigmatisation or reprisal, as well as inadequate
or non-existent accountability and the lack of sexual and reproductive health services
and psychological counselling for sexually abused girls.
Another key indicator requiring action on the part of the international
community and Security Council is the sustained high level of recruitment and use of
children as soldiers in conflict zones by non-State actors, including armed groups,
terrorist organizations and criminal networks (8,521 cases have been monitored).
The sustained increase in these violations at such an alarming rate serves to
prolong and deepen the impact of conflict, fragment communities and hinder the path
of subsequent peacebuilding, stabilisation and recovery. It also highlights the
indifference of the parties concerned to international humanitarian law and
international human rights law and underscores once again the need for stronger and
more effective mechanisms of accountability.
Tunisia, as a party to the Optional Protocol to the Convention on the Rights of
the Child on the involvement of children in armed conflict (2000), calls for all
obligations under the Convention to be met and for all measures to be taken to prevent
the recruitment of children. Tunisia further stresses the importance of implementing
all relevant international instruments, noting that such instruments will only be as
effective as our collective will to apply them.
In this regard, we support the Secretary-General’s call for strong national
accountability measures to be adopted for grave violations and for cooperation with
mechanisms of international accountability, such as the International Criminal Court,
to be strengthened.
Likewise, Tunisia welcomes all initiatives designed to provide sustainable
recovery and re-integration programmes for children, along the lines called for in
resolution 2427 (2018) and the Paris Principles and Guidelines on Children
Associated with Armed Forces or Armed Groups (2007), to which Tunisia acceded
upon adoption.
We believe that the Secretary-General’s report understates the actual number of
atrocities, given that a significant proportion could not be monitored or verified due
to COVID-19 restrictions.
The pandemic has had unprecedented repercussions for everyone without
exception. However, it has disproportionally affected certain vulnerable groups,
notably children in armed conflict, putting them at increased risk of grave violations,
including recruitment and sexual abuse, while diminishing their chances of enjoying
protection, welfare, education and health services. Accordingly, we reaffirm the need
to implement resolutions 2532 (2020) and 2565 (2021) and renew our demand for a
comprehensive and immediate end to hostilities worldwide, in response to the
Secretary-General’s appeal.
In conclusion, we reaffirm that commitment to a ceasefire, ending wars and
engaging constructively in political settlement and peacebuilding remains in the end
the most effective way to protect children from the grave repercussions of conflicts
which they did not start and to enable them to enjoy their childhood in a safer and
gentler world. They are, after all, our true wealth and hope for the future.

40/152

21-09006

S/2021/617

Annex XX
Statement by the Permanent Representative of Afghanistan to the
United Nations, Adela Raz
I would like to begin by extending our appreciation to Estonia for organizing
this open debate on children and armed conflict. I further thank Secretary -General
Antonio Guterres, Henrietta Fore, Executive Director of UNICEF, Forest Whitaker,
Advocate for Children Affected by War with the Office of the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General for Children and Armed Conflict and UNESCO Goodwill
Ambassador for Peace and Reconciliation, and Laban Onisimus, Education Specialist
at Plan International Nigeria, for their comprehensive briefings.
In the Arria-formula meeting we held on the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic
on violations against children in situations of armed conflict last May, I highlighted
the Afghan Government’s efforts to ensure the safety of our children against the
backdrop of an escalating conflict and a concerning humanitarian outlook exacerbated
by the effects of the pandemic. Since then, attacks targeting civilian centres, such as
the horrific attack on the school in Dasht-E-Barchi, have intensified. The recent report
of the Secretary-General on the situation in Afghanistan, has verified 552 child
casualties, including 52 girls and 99 boys killed, and 401 children maimed. It is a
situation that accentuates the critically urgent nature of this meeting.
The Afghan Government remains committed to the protection of children
affected by armed conflict. The joint action plan between the Government of
Afghanistan and the Office of the Special Representative of the Secretary-General for
Children and Armed Conflict is a clear testimony to our commitment and it has
achieved remarkable results.
As proof of the progress achieved, we are happy to note that the Afghanistan
National Police has been delisted from the annual report annexes.
The delisting is the result of concerted efforts over a long period of time. The
Government has strengthened and implemented policies regarding the upgraded Penal
Code of 2017 and the Law on Protection of Child Rights, adopted through a
presidential decree in 2019. Child protection units established in the Afghanistan
National Police across all provinces and child protection policies adopted by the
Ministry of Interior and other relevant security structures have helped ensure that
there have been no new recorded cases of child recruitment.
However, despite these updates we understand that a lot remains to be done and
align with the Secretary-General over his serious concerns on the number of children
maimed and killed. The Afghan Government is collaborating and wor king with the
United Nations to ensure that children are prioritized for protection during military
operations. To ensure success, we recently launched the policy for the protection of
children in armed conflict and security sectors together with United Na tions partners.
We are fully committed to turn this policy into practice.
We are further engaged in an ongoing dialogue with the United Nations office
in Kabul to reinforce national legislations and further mainstream child protection
efforts throughout the different sections of our national security architecture and in
our efforts for peace and reconciliation. On this, we underscore “The practical
guidance for mediators to protect children in situations of armed conflict ” as an
invaluable tool which could provide important inputs in this regard.
Though we continue to make progress on our commitment to mitigate civilian
casualties, including children, it is imperative to acknowledge that we face significant
challenges and are impeded in our efforts by armed groups, particularly the Taliban.
21-09006

41/152

S/2021/617

These groups continue to use heinous practices, including recruiting children as
fighters and using civilians and their vital infrastructure as cover, that put children in
harm’s way. The last few months have revealed to all of us the extent of the inhumane
acts that non-State armed groups brazenly commit. They target children, girl ’s going
to school, minorities, maternity wards, and humanitarian workers.
We once again call on the Taliban to join us in respecting and e nforcing a
ceasefire, for the sake of Afghanistan, the country we share, and its children.
Rather than respect the national call for a ceasefire, the Taliban has so far
continued to exploit the global pandemic with impunity, directing violence at our
most vulnerable communities. I call on our international partners to support us in
holding them accountable through diplomatic pressure and the effective
implementation and potential expansion of sanctions, as needed.
I reiterate that as long as the Taliban and other terrorist and non-State armed
groups are not committed to prioritizing the safety of children, we will not be
successful in our efforts to protect all children from violence.
The COVID-19 pandemic has exacerbated existing challenges. It has
complicated our efforts to deliver on child protection activities and, thereby, increased
the risk of grave violations against conflict-affected young populations. It is,
therefore, crucial to ensure that children remain at the centre of our COVID -19
response and recovery programmes.
To successfully overcome these challenges and meet our objectives, we want to
reiterate the need for strong, clearly defined child protection mandates for the United
Nations in Afghanistan. The United Nations is our key partner in our efforts to
advance the protection of children. It is therefore critical that we fund dedicated
personnel, and allocate appropriate budgets to country task forces on monitoring and
reporting, the United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanist an (UNAMA) and
UNICEF.
I want to especially highlight the crucial but under-resourced reintegration,
service and assistance programmes which must be timely, gender and age responsive
and inclusive. We call on donors to redouble their valuable support to child protection
through sustainable and adequate financial and technical support.
More than 50 per cent of our population is under the age of 15 and our
humanitarian response plan paints a dire picture of the situation faced by many
Afghans. The number of people in need has increased from 9.4 million to 18.4 million
this year. But we must think beyond statistics. Afghanistan’s children represent the
aspiration of our people for peace and prosperity and their rights are non -negotiable.
Once again, let me emphasize Afghanistan’s appreciation for the tireless work
and efforts of UNAMA and the Office of the Special Representative of the Secretary General for Children and Armed Conflict to protect the rights of the children of
Afghanistan. We remain a dedicated partner and in close cooperation and consultation
in Kabul and New York to ensure that we are sustaining and improving upon our
progress.

42/152

21-09006

S/2021/617

Annex XXI
Statement by the Permanent Representative of Algeria to the
United Nations, Sofiane Mimouni
At the outset, my delegation would like to congratulate Estonia for its leadership
as the President of the Security Council for the Month of June 2021 and for organizing
this very important annual open debate on children and armed conflict.
I avail myself of this opportunity to extend my sincere thanks to António
Guterres, Secretary-General, Virginia Gamba, Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for Children and Armed Conflict, Henrietta Fore, Executive
Director of UNICEF, and all the speakers for their informative briefings.
As we mark the twenty-fifth anniversary of the creation of the Children and
Armed Conflicts Agenda, including the mandate of the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for Children and Armed Conflict by the General Assembly and the
tenth anniversary of Security Council resolution 1998 (2011) that gave the United
Nations a mandate to identify and list those parties to armed conflict who attack
schools or protected persons in relation to schools, it is deeply shocking to witness a
constant increase in violations against children, as is underlined by the report of the
Secretary-General (A/75/873-S/2021/437).
While we speak today, thousands of children are trapped in armed conflicts all
over the world with an increasing number of children, especially girls, victims living
in the Sahel region. The surge in the numbers of killings, maiming of children, and
recruitment of children, rape and other forms of sexual violence and abductions as
well as attacks against hospitals is concerning. Moreover, the COVID -19 pandemic
had a devastating impact across the world with a disproportionate impact on children
in armed conflicts.
Against this backdrop, the Security Council’s discussions should not end up
with a mere renewal of the general commitment to protecting children and armed
conflicts. Our meeting should focus on the most practical and appropriate measures
to make sure that this commitment are fulfilled and that the place of children is in
school and not in armed conflicts.
Let me say at this juncture that, regardless of the situation, any child who is in
an armed conflict is by definition a victim. Children must be protected and we should
ensure that they do not become victims, soothe them when required and reconstruct
their future when necessary.
In this regard, we believe that bold measures should be taken by the international
community bearing in mind all the mechanisms, procedures and authority held by the
Security Council, the Secretary-General and the Office of the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General for Children and Armed Conflict and making clear the
interaction that exists between all areas of intervention, from reintegration of children
formerly associated with armed groups in society to the inclusion of the protection
and well-being of children into all peace processes and peace agreements.
Despite increasing international efforts to prevent all forms of violation against
children in armed conflicts, we note that this did not stop children from being the
primary victims of conflicts in the recent years. Children with low levels of education
are often the easiest targets of armed groups. Therefore, strengthening educational
systems in areas of armed conflict should be one of our utmost priorities.
Girls in particular are under the constant threat of sexual violence and other
forms of abuse in conflict situations. They are often deprived of education rights,
raped and forced into marriage. We should, therefore, continue to give specific
21-09006

43/152

S/2021/617

attention to the protection of girls as they are at greater risk of sexual viole nce, sexual
exploitation and abuses.
Long-standing peace will never be achieved unless we give children the means,
skills and education to rebuild a society and institutions torn apart by armed conflict.
That is why, prevention strategies are required and should start with tackling the root
causes of such conflicts and forced displacement. It should also start with
strengthening the human right mandate of United Nations peacekeeping Missions in
conflict affected areas, allowing them to report on human righ ts violation, especially
violation of children’s rights. Indeed, peacekeeping missions have an important role
to play in the protection of children in situations of armed conflict.
It is therefore essential that peacekeeping missions receive the necessary
training and requisite resources to effectively perform that critical task.
In the context of peacekeeping processes, we strongly believe that specific
provisions on the protection of children in armed conflict should be included in all
peace negotiations and/or peace agreements. Indeed, for example, the agreements on
peace and reconciliation in Mali, signed in Algiers, contains specific provisions
related to the protection of children from armed conflict and the engagement of
communities to support the return and maintenance of children, especially girls, in
schools. Such provisions should inspire all ongoing peace processes.
Moreover, the coordination and cooperation between the United Nations and the
regional organizations, especially the African Union, is also an important element of
the prevention strategy, to ensure a regional ownership in addressing the root causes
of those conflicts and to strengthen the protection of children in armed conflicts.
I would like to take the opportunity of our discussions today to underline the
strong commitment of Algeria to the protection of children. It is in this spirit that
Algeria has acceded to numerous international and regional legal instruments relating
to the rights of the child and the protection of children in armed conflicts, especially
the Optional Protocol to the Convention on the Rights of the Child on the involvement
of children in armed conflict, ratified in 2009.
Furthermore, in March 2021, Algeria has endorsed the Safe Schools
Declaration, as an additional step in our commitment to protect schools and ensure
the education of children in situation of armed conflicts. Our commitment has been
crystallized on the ground through the granting of free access to public schools to
Malian and Syrian children with the support of the Algerian Government.
Moreover, at the initiative of Algeria during its presidency of the Peace and
Security Council in May 2021, the Council has examined the situation of children in
armed conflict on the African continent and called the parties involved in armed
conflicts to unquestionably adhere to the AU and United Nations calls for a global
and continental ceasefire, in order to guarantee the protection of children and ensure
their well-being.
Finally, I would like to express Algeria’s confidence in Special Representative
Mrs Virginia Gamba and her mandate, which we demonstrated recently by joining the
Members States platform to elaborate a study on the twenty -fifth anniversary on the
evolution of the children and armed conflict mandate. Algeria believes it is essential
that the mandate of the Office of the Special Representative be strengthened by
providing the political recognition to the work being carried out by this Office and
ensuring the appropriate financial and human resources it requires.
Let me conclude by reiterating my country’s support to United Nations efforts to
ensure the protection of children in armed conflict and to advocate for the promotion
and the well-being of all children and civilians in all conflict affected areas.
44/152

21-09006

S/2021/617

Annex XXII
Statement by Permanent Representative of Andorra to the
United Nations, Elisenda Vives Balmaña
At the outset, let me commend the Permanent Mission of Estonia to the United
Nations for organizing this open debate of the Security Council on children and armed
conflict.
Andorra aligns itself with the statement delivered by Canada on behalf of the
Group of Friends of Children and Armed Conflict and wishes to make some remarks
in its national capacity.
I would like to thank the Secretary-General and the Office of the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Children and Armed Conflict for their
tireless efforts in favor of the most vulnerable. We appreciate the briefers, the
Executive Director of UNICEF, the Goodwill Ambassador for Peace and
Reconciliation and the representative of the civil society for their comprehensive
presentations today and sharing their insights for a better understanding of the
situation on the field and the conditions needed to address and reverse the situation
of thousands of children and their communities.
We are appalled by the alarming figures contained in the report of the Secretary General of 2020 and we would like to join our voice in denouncing the grave
violations against children. The year 2020 was marked by the COVID-19 pandemic
and the measures put in place to stop the spread of the virus. A difficult context for
the workers on the ground in monitoring and supporting the victims of armed
conflicts. In this regard, I would like to acknowledge their dedication and
commitment in fulfilling their work in very difficult circumstances.
We would also like to reiterate our full support to the Secretary -General’s call
to a global ceasefire and we call to all parties in conflict to fully implement resolutions
2532 (2020) and 2565 (2021) on the implementation of ceasefires and facilitating
equitable and affordable access to COVID-19 vaccines.
Andorra is deeply concerned by the trends presented in the report and condemns
all incidents of the six grave violations presented in the report of the Secretary General. We are particularly disturbed by the increased attacks against schoo ls,
hospitals and other civil infrastructure. Since the COVID -19 pandemic posed a threat
in the access of education for millions of girls and boys, the attacks against education
and medical facilities are determined to prevent children from enjoying their
fundamental human rights. This is unacceptable. They are an attack against their
future and wellbeing. We call for full accountability through national and
international justice mechanism, such as the International Criminal Court.
Andorra endorsed the Safe Schools Declaration, and we invite those who have
not yet done so, to do so and fully implement it. Andorra also calls to integrate the
Safe Schools Declaration in the Human Rights monitoring mechanisms, such as the
Universal Periodic Review.
Furthermore, Andorra endorsed the Paris and Vancouver Principles and is part
of the Optional Protocol to the Convention on the Rights of the Child on the
involvement of children and armed conflict and call Member States that have not yet
done so, to consider ratify this instrument in order to advance to its universalization.
Andorra wishes to express its deep appreciation for the work of the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General in a year when we mark the twenty-fifth
anniversary of her mandate. We recognize its essential work in involving parties in
conflict in engaging constructively to prevent violence against children. In this
21-09006

45/152

S/2021/617

regard, we welcome the action plans signed this year and the commitments made by
parties to the conflicts with the support of the Office of the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General.
We would also like to commend the work of the Office in supporting actions
and policies for the reintegration of victims of armed conflict to their own life, to
their communities, helping them against stigma, and recovering education to fulfil
their future. We commend the initiatives and actions already undertaken to promote
their education and support their mental health after so many abuses.
Andorra shares the concern for better funding the efforts and building capacity
for the workers in care of the reintegration of children affected by armed conflict.
Andorra is a regular donor of the Office of the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General and UNICEF and will keep its commitment in providing resources
to support the most vulnerable. In this regard, we wish to recognize the importance
of collecting disaggregated data and to integrate the gender perspective in the
response and support of the victims and in all its aspects.
To conclude, let me reiterate Andorra’s full support to the mandate and work of
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General. We must join our efforts to
protect the most vulnerable in conflict, for their present and future.

46/152

21-09006

S/2021/617

Annex XXIII
Statement by the Permanent Representative of Argentina to the
United Nations, María del Carmen Squeff
[Original: Spanish]
Argentina thanks the Government of Estonia for organizing this open debate on
such an important topic as the comprehensive protection of children in armed conflict.
I would also like to express our appreciation to the Secretary -General for preparing
his latest report on children and armed conflict (A/75/873-S/2021/437) and to the
Executive Director of the United Nations Children’s Fund (UNICEF), Henrietta Fore,
for her briefing.
Argentina shares the Secretary-General’s serious concern that in 2020 the
situation of children in armed conflict was marked by a sustained high number of
grave violations. The largest number of violations related to the recruitment and use
of children, murder and mutilation. There was an alarming increase in verified cases
of abduction and sexual violence against children, by 90 and 70 per cent respectively.
Abduction is often combined with the recruitment and use of children and sexual
violence. There were also a high number of incidents of denial of humanitarian access
and an increase in attacks on schools.
Deeply concerned about the adverse impact of the coronavirus disease
(COVID-19) pandemic on children affected by armed conflict, we join the call of the
Security Council in its resolution 2565 (2021) for an immediate and comprehensive
cessation of hostilities to facilitate the unimpeded distribution and delivery of
COVID-19 vaccines in areas of armed conflict.
Argentina firmly supports the Organization’s efforts to prevent and halt grave
violations of children’s rights in contexts of armed conflict. In that regard, our country
was one of the first States to ratify, in 2002, the Optional Protocol to the Convention
on the Rights of the Child on the involvement of children in armed conflict and
supported the adoption of Security Council resolutions 1261 (1999), 1612 (2005),
2143 (2014), 2225 (2015) and 2427 (2018). Argentina therefore stresses the relevance
of resolution 1612 (2005) and the creation of the monitoring and reporting mechanism
as a fundamental tool for the protection of children.
We appreciate the important work undertaken in the framework of the Act to
Protect Children Affected by Armed Conflict campaign and the Global Coalition for
Reintegration of Child Soldiers initiative as key tools for strengthening collaboration
between the United Nations, civil society and the international community in support
of actions designed to end and prevent grave violations committed against children in
armed conflict and to achieve a comprehensive and sustainable reintegration that is
oriented towards the needs of children and takes a humanitarian, peace and
development approach.
It is necessary to recognize the increased exposure of girls to sexual violence in
conflict situations and to bear in mind that all responses to this scourge must focus on
the needs of survivors and ensure access to essential health services and to justice.
Argentina strongly condemns attacks on schools and hospitals. Education is
critical to the development and full enjoyment of human rights, and access to safe
education supports the protection of children from the dangers of armed conflict,
helping them to reach their potential and contributing to building more resilient and
peaceful communities.
In that regard, Argentina reiterates its firm support for the Safe Schools
Declaration, adopted in May 2015 and promoted by Argentina and Norway, which has
21-09006

47/152

S/2021/617

been endorsed by 109 States. The Declaration commits States to implementing the
Guidelines for Protecting Schools and Universities from Military Use during Armed
Conflict, thereby ensuring the right to education and the protection of children and
young people in conflict situations. We recall that the Secretary -General has called
on all countries to endorse the Declaration and note that the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General for Children and Armed Conflict has indicated that the
endorsement of the Declaration has contributed decisively to the adoption of concrete
measures to prevent attacks on education.
Parties to armed conflict must immediately cease unlawful attacks on schools
and incorporate the “Guidelines for Protecting Schools and Universities from Military
Use during Armed Conflict” into military doctrine, operational frameworks, codes of
conduct and training.
We reiterate the urgent need to agree on and implement measures to increase the
international community’s pressure on State and non-State actors that commit
violations against children, in order to demobilize, separate, rehabilitate and
reintegrate children associated with such groups, in collaboration with their
respective communities, within the framework of absolute respect for international
humanitarian law, international human rights law and refugee law.
In order to ensure the full protection of children, a human rights-based approach
to protection is essential and should guide the mandates of peacekeeping operations
and special political missions, the peacebuilding actions of the Security Council, as
well as efforts aimed at combating terrorism and violent extremism. In this regard, it
is essential to develop, maintain and strengthen capacities in the field of peacekeeping
operations in the areas of prevention, protection, assistance, advice, documentation
and verification of violations of children’s rights. Likewise, it is of crucial importance
to strengthen the role of child protection advisers, who carry out a fundamental task
in the implementation of Security Council mandates on child protection.
In conclusion, we reiterate our concern at the scale and severity of the grave
violations committed against children. We call on all parties to the conflict to comply
with their obligations under international humanitarian law, international human
rights law and international refugee law and to put an immediate end to serious
violations.

48/152

21-09006

S/2021/617

Annex XXIV
Statement by the Permanent Representative of Armenia to the
United Nations, Mher Margaryan
I would like to thank the Estonian presidency for convening the Security
Council open debate on the theme of children and armed conflict. The presence of the
President of the Republic of Estonia Kersti Kaljulaid at the meeting attests the
importance, which Estonia attaches to the topic of protection of children in the
situation of armed conflicts. We thank Secretary-General António Guterres, the
Executive Director of UNICEF, Henrietta Fore, and other speakers their
comprehensive presentations highlighting the challenges related to the protection of
children in armed conflict.
The twenty-fifth anniversary of the creation of the children and armed conflict
agenda, including the mandate of the Special Representative of the Secretary -General
for Children and Armed Conflict creates a momentum to take stock of the progress
made in the protection of children and identify gaps and challenges in this regard.
The crisis caused by the COVID-19 pandemic has exacerbated the suffering of
children affected by conflicts and humanitarian emergencies, multiplying the
protection risks and life-saving needs. We are strongly concerned by the high number
of grave violations, as reflected in the recent report of the Secretary -General on
children and armed conflict, including recruitment and use, killing and maiming and
denial of humanitarian access. It underscores the imperative of amplifying the efforts
of the international community to identify and respond to the violations of the
international humanitarian law and international human rights law.
Despite the wide endorsement of the Secretary-General’s appeal for an
immediate global ceasefire, the last year was marked by escalation of violence and
hostilities in number of regions, accompanied with attacks on schools and hospitals,
which aggravated existing vulnerabilities of children, trapped in conflict, hampered
their access to education, health and social services.
The war unleashed by Azerbaijan against Nagorno-Karabakh in September
2020, amidst the global pandemic caused immense suffering, destruction,
displacement of thousands of people and inflicted a major humanitarian crisis. Among
the 90,000 displaced people from Nagorno-Karabakh, 88 per cent were women and
children. Deliberate air bombardments, artillery and missile strikes heavily damaged
a number of medical facilities, including the maternity ward of Stepanakert’s
Maternal and Child Health Center. Targeted attacks on educational institutions led to
the destruction of 18 schools and 6 kindergartens in Artsakh, depriving 28,000
children of their right to education. The violations of humanitarian law by Azerbaijan
have been widely documented by various international humanitarian and human
rights organizations.
In the aftermath of the aggression, hundreds of cluster bomblets and
sub-munitions and other explosive remnants of war spread across civilian settlements
and agricultural lands continue to cause serious security risk to the lives of civilians,
in particular children with a long-lasting adverse effect on the humanitarian and
socio-economic situation in Nagorno-Karabakh.
Denial of safe and unhindered humanitarian access of the United Nations
agencies to the conflict zone by Azerbaijan undermines comprehensive assessment of
the humanitarian, protection and early recovery needs and human rights situation of
the population of Nagorno-Karabakh and ensuring of protection of child’s rights and
enabling access to inclusive and quality education, healthcare and social services.

21-09006

49/152

S/2021/617

A source of particular concern is involving of children in state -sponsored
propaganda of hatred on ethnic and religious grounds. Educational curricula in
kindergartens and schools and school textbooks in Azerbaijan are aimed at
indoctrinating of children with armenophobia and inciting violence and intolerance.
Opening of the “military trophy park”, propagating vilifying images of ethnic
Armenians and exposing it to children is yet another manifestation of systemic policy
aimed at dehumanizing Armenians.
Armenia reiterates its commitment to the goals, objectives and principles
enshrined in the Safe School declaration, the Paris Principles and the Vancouver
Principles, which are crucial instruments to promote and protect the rights and the
dignity of all children, in particular those residing in conflict areas and prevent grave
violations. We fully support the mandate of the Special Representative, Virginia
Gamba, in streamlining the agenda of Children and Armed Conflicts in activities of
the United Nations agencies and promoting cooperation with regional organizations,
civil society and other stakeholders aimed at ensuring effective protection on the
ground.

50/152

21-09006

S/2021/617

Annex XXV
Statement by the Permanent Mission of Austria
Austria would like to thank Estonia for convening this open debate. Austria fully
aligns itself with the statements of the European Union as well as the Group of Friends
of children and armed conflict, and shares the following lines in its national capacity:
We thank the Secretary-General for the report. We commend the work of the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General for Children and Armed Conflict,
Virginia Gamba, and we pay tribute to the members of the country task forces of the
monitoring and reporting mechanism who collect information, often risking their
lives. We strongly condemn all forms of intimidation, violence and attacks against
child protection advisers, monitoring teams and all other involved stakeholders. The
data generated through the monitoring and reporting mechanism has fostered
accountability and has helped the United Nations to engage with parties to conflict in
elaborating action plans. We need the monitoring and reporting mechanism to remain
the objective basis of information for the United Nations children a nd armed conflict
mandate. At the twenty-fifth anniversary of the creation of the children and armed
conflict Mandate and in the midst of a global pandemic, which has hit children
disproportionately affected by armed conflict , Austria underlines its suppo rt to the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General and all stakeholders involved in
protecting children and preventing them from violence in situation of armed conflict.
The 26,425 grave violations documented in the report and committed by all
parties to conflict, both armed groups as well as government forces are appalling. The
reported attacks against schools, hospitals and protected personnel are also deeply
concerning as well as the denial of humanitarian assistance.
The breaches of international humanitarian law and international human rights
law and refugee law in all verified country situations need to be investigated. We call
for enhanced accountability, including by introducing laws to criminalize grave
violations against children. Austria would like to take this opportunity to reiterate its
full and unwavering support for the International Criminal Court and highlight its
importance for the rule of law, accountability and the fight against impunity for the
most serious crimes of concern to the international community.
Austria is convinced, that parties to conflict can prevent crimes against children
and protect children by abiding by their international law obligations as well as the
comprehensive set of existing principles and commitment s aimed at protecting boys
and girls affected by the scourge of war. We welcome the adoption of several new
action plans by parties to conflict as well as measures to enforce criminal justice to
protect children in armed conflict. We encourage all Member S tates, which have not
yet done so to adhere to the Optional Protocol to the Convention on the Rights of the
Child on the involvement of children in armed conflict and to endorse the Vancouver
Principles, the Paris Principles and Commitments, and the Safe S chools Declaration.
The 12,643 children released from armed groups and armed forces in 2020 are
a sign of hope and we applaud the efforts of the -Office of the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General and country task-forces with parties to conflict in
Afghanistan, the Central African Republic, Nigeria, the Philippines, South Sudan and
the Syrian Arab Republic to free these children.
The COVID-19 pandemic has exposed children to an increased vulnerability
and it has also put the protection and monitoring systems under pressure. This global
health crisis should be a reminder that we need a robust child protection system, in
particular through a strong mandate for and sustainable funding of child protection
advisers and country task forces in United Nations Peacekeeping operations and
21-09006

51/152

S/2021/617

special political missions. Austria will continue to advocate in the General Assembly
for a sufficient level of financing to the United Nations child protection advisers to
support the monitoring and reporting mechanism and the children and armed conflict
mandate. On a national level, child protection is part of pre -deployment training of
all Austrian peacekeepers.
We thank Estonia for focusing the open debate on a gender perspective in child
protection. We welcome the recommendations of the report of the Secretary-General
on that issue, which underlines that a gender-sensitive protection scheme is necessary
to address the particular situation of girls affected by armed conflict in a sustainable
way. We also welcome the efforts of the Special Representative of the Secretary General on Sexual Violence in Conflict, Pramila Patten. Austria is actively engaged
through the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD)
Development Assistance Committee’s International Network for Conflict and
Fragility to foster a systematic gender-sensitive approach to all humanitarian and
conflict prevention measures, with a particular focus to deliver the appropriate
assistance in situations of conflict-related sexual violence.
The high number of killed and maimed children due to the use of explosive
weapons in populated areas remains a grave concern for Austria – recent conflicts
have brought the humanitarian harm associated with the use of explosive weapons in
populated areas to light once more. Children are affected not only from the direct
impact of explosive weapons but also from the longer-term impacts on physical and
mental health as well as from the destruction of infrastructure essential to children ’s
development. One example of this is Water and Sanitation infrastructure where the
impact of the use of explosive weapons in populated areas has been highlighted by
UNICEF in its recent report “Water under fire”. We welcome the progress achieved
within the process of the elaboration of a political declaration on this subject in which
we remain fully and constructively engage. We look forward to its successful
conclusion with a strong declaration.
In the past years, Austrian Development Cooperation has supported projects
seeking to reduce the threat of violence against children. Austrian Development
Cooperationhas carried out a project in Sudan, where parties to the Darfur conflict
receive training on the rights of the child. This project also supports the Child
Protection Unit of the former African Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in
Darfur in facilitating dialogue between the conflict parties.
Reintegration and education programmes are paramount to create sustainable
peace for each individual child and for the communities affected by conflict.

52/152

21-09006

S/2021/617

Annex XXVI
Statement by the Permanent Representative of the Kingdom of
Bahrain to the United Nations, Jamal Fares Alrowaiei
[Original: Arabic]
At the outset, I should like to welcome President Kersti Kaljulaid of the
Republic of Estonia as chair and to thank the delegation of Estonia for convening this
important session on children and armed conflict in view of the continuing
vulnerability of children to grave violations caused by the escalation in armed conflict
and clashes and the serious humanitarian crises left in their wake, which have been
aggravated by the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic.
I should also like to thank His Excellency António Guterres, Secretary-General
of the United Nations, and Her Excellency Henrietta Fore, Executive Director of the
United Nations Children’s Fund (UNICEF), as well as all the speakers for their
valuable briefings.
The year 2021 marks the twenty-fifth anniversary of the creation of the mandate
of the Special Representative of the Secretary-General for Children and Armed
Conflict by the General Assembly, pursuant to its resolution 51/77, reflecting the
international community’s awareness of the plight of children in situations of armed
conflict. Efforts aimed at strengthening protection for children affected by armed
conflict and promoting international cooperation to put an end to the grave violations
committed against them have acquired greater importance today than at any time
previously in view of the rise in conflict and violence around the world, including
atrocities committed by militias and terrorist organizations in blatant disregard of
international humanitarian law and international human rights law. The report of the
Secretary-General to the Security Council on children and armed conflict ( A/75/873S/2021/437) draws attention to the grave violations committed against children in
situations of armed conflict. Furthermore, the impact of the COVID -19 pandemic has
aggravated the existing vulnerability of such children by hindering access to
education and health and social services, causing cutbacks in child protection
activities and reducing the number of safe spaces. Moreover, the social and economic
effects of the pandemic have left children affected by armed conflict vulnerable to
grave violations, including recruitment, exploitation, abduction and sexual violence.
In this regard, the Kingdom of Bahrain supports the heartfelt appeal of the Secretary General of the United Nations for an immediate global ceasefire.
The Kingdom of Bahrain believes in the importance of basing the protection of
children in armed conflict on compliance with international law. As such,
international instruments have a major role to play in preventing and ending the grave
violations committed against children. Anxious to do all it can to protect children, the
Kingdom of Bahrain has acceded to the Convention on the Rights of the Child (1992)
and the two optional protocols to the Convention, on the involvement of children in
armed conflict and on the sale of children, child prostitution and child pornography
(2004).
In his latest report, the Secretary-General welcomes the continuing cooperation
between the Saudi-led Coalition to Support Legitimacy in Yemen and Virginia
Gamba, Special Representative of the Secretary-General for Children and Armed
Conflict, within the framework of monitoring implementation of the memorandum of
understanding signed with the United Nations to strengthen the protection of children
affected by armed conflict in Yemen and its associated action plan.
In conclusion, the Kingdom of Bahrain underlines the need for the international
community to continue to make progress in protecting children in armed conflict by
21-09006

53/152

S/2021/617

strengthening action frameworks designed to ensure effective implementation of
international resolutions and international law, confidence-building measures, and the
resumption of political negotiations, in order to achieve peace and stability in conflict
zones and ensure that all children enjoy the right to life, health and education without
fear of killing, recruitment, abduction or other forms of violation of rights.

54/152

21-09006

S/2021/617

Annex XXVII
Statement by the Permanent Representative of Belgium to the
United Nations, Philippe Kridelka
I thank the briefers for their insightful remarks. Belgium aligns itself with the
statements of the European Union and the Group of Friends of Children and Armed
Conflict.
We congratulate Norway for the excellent work it has done during the first six
months of its mandate. The Working Group on Children and Armed Conflict is in able
hands.
Belgium welcomes the annual report and expresses its deepest concern at the
high amount of grave violations verified by the United Nations. In particular we are
concerned at the dramatic increases in abduction and sexual violence.
I wish to make three points on behalf of Belgium. They concern (1) the
mainstreaming of the children and armed conflict agenda across the work of the
United Nations system, (2) the importance of dedicated child protection capacity in
United Nations missions and (3) the central role of accountability i n preventing
violations against children affected by armed conflict.
First, the importance of mainstreaming the children and armed conflict agenda.
We expect the Security Council to pay due attention to child protection in its
mandating and sanctioning decisions and we expect the Fifth Committee to follow
through by providing the necessary resources. The conclusions of the children and
armed conflict Working Group need systematic follow up both in New York and in
the field. We call for the wide dissemination and use of the Practical Guidance for
Mediators to Protect Children in Situations of Armed Conflict.
We further call upon all parties to armed conflict to fully comply with their
obligations under international humanitarian law, human rights law and r efugee law.
We also encourage Member States to ratify the Optional Protocol to the Convention
on the Rights of the Child and endorse and implement the Paris Principles, the Safe
Schools Declaration and the Vancouver Principles with a view to strengthening the
protection of children.
Secondly, Belgium emphasizes the importance of dedicated child protection
capacity in United Nations missions. There is no substitute for the specialized
expertise of child protection advisers. They are the eyes and ears of th e children and
armed conflict mandate on the ground. We call for sufficient resources in this regard,
both in United Nations field operations and at the United Nations secretariat, and we
encourage strengthened regional partnerships on children and armed c onflict, for
example with the European Union and the African Union.
My third point concerns accountability. Belgium supports the Secretary General’s call to strengthen national accountability measures for violations against
children and for strengthened cooperation with international accountability
mechanisms such as the International Criminal Court. States have an obligation to
end impunity for grave violations against children. To further strengthen the synergies
between the International Criminal Court and the children and armed conflict mandate
Belgium organized a meeting for the members of the Security Council in which
Special Representative of the Secretary-General Gamba and the International
Criminal Court Prosecutor briefed last November.
Another powerful instrument for accountability is the listing of parties to
conflict by the Secretary-General which should be credible, objective and evidence -

21-09006

55/152

S/2021/617

based. The work of the monitoring and reporting mechanism, which continued during
the COVID-19-pandemic, has been exemplary.
On our side, child protection will continue to be a horizontal priority for
Belgium. We are proud to support the Office of the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for children and armed conflict to fulfil its essential ma ndate. We
also support the UNICEF children and armed conflict monitoring and reporting
activities, on top of our core funding to UNICEF which amounts to EUR 15 million
per year. This will assist the documentation and verification of grave violations. And
finally we are mobilizing our diplomatic network in conflict affected areas to raise
awareness and improve the follow up of children and armed conflict priorities by
local partners.
I conclude by expressing my deepest gratitude to Special Representative of the
Secretary-General Gamba, and to all child protection actors, be it within the United
Nations system, national authorities or civil society, for their dedication to protecting
children. This year marks the twenty-fifth anniversary of the children and armed
conflict mandate, and while the challenges remain formidable, I believe we have
jointly played an important role in improving child protection in conflict areas.

56/152

21-09006

S/2021/617

Annex XXVIII
Statement by the Permanent Mission of Brazil to the
United Nations
At the outset, Brazil would like to congratulate Estonia for organizing this high
level open debate on such an important matter. We would also like to express our
appreciation to the briefers for their insightful presentations and to the Secretary General for his annual report on the matter.
The COVID-19 pandemic aggravated the already vulnerable situation of
children in conflict situations. It created new challenges to family tracing a nd
reunification, as well as activities for the reintegration of children separated from
armed forces and groups. Another worrying factor is the increased risk of infection in
prison settings, which is particularly alarming when coupled with the fact that, only
in 2020, more than 3,000 children were detained for actual or alleged association with
armed groups or for national security reasons. These facts only reinforce the need to
treat children primarily as victims and to prioritize non-judicial and non-custodial
measures as alternatives to their detention.
Another area that has been negatively affected by COVID -19 is monitoring and
reporting. Severe movement restrictions created an additional layer of complexity to
verify and prevent violations, due to the lack of in-person contacts in the field. While
remote communication was a necessary work adjustment, it will hardly replace the
human connection needed to monitor and verify more sensitive violations against
children, such as sexual violence or recruitment and use as child soldier. Potential
underreporting might in turn lead to additional challenges to design policies aimed at
preventing and redressing violations. It also hampers our ability to find solutions that
take into account different vulnerabilities of children in conflict settings.
As the report of the Secretary-General rightfully points out, grave violations
affect boys and girls differently. While most forced recruitment happens against boys,
98 per cent of sexual violence is perpetrated against girls. Understanding the different
impacts of grave violations on boys and girls is key not only to provide adequate
support for victims, but also to implement effective prevention strategies. Brazil
encourages continued information collection and analy sis, including taking into
account victims’ gender and age, in designing policies for the protection of children
in armed conflicts.
Protecting children from the scourge of war is not just a legal requirement or a
humanitarian call, but a moral imperative. It is alarming to see that 2020 marked a
sustained high number of grave violations against children in conflict situations. With
more than 25,000 grave violations verified and a number of crimes that probably went
unreported, it is clear that more needs to be done to spare children from the terrible
consequences of war. I would like to address three areas that deserve our continued
attention.
First, Brazil coincides with the Secretary-General’s evaluation, as contained in
his report, that it is crucial to provide support for national capacities on child
protection. As we all know, States have the primary responsibility to protect their own
population. In conflict settings, the capacity of Member States to effectively protect
children might be severely impaired, thus requiring additional assistance in building
capacity to prevent, monitor and respond to grave violations.
Second, respect for international humanitarian law continues to be one of the
most important aspects in ensuring protection of children in armed conflicts.
Respecting and ensuring respect for international humanitarian law is an obligation

21-09006

57/152

S/2021/617

that precedes the outbreak of a war. It involves proper training on humanitarian law
and dissemination of its rules and principles, even in peace times.
Third, accountability is also of utmost importance in prevention of grave
violations against children, which more often than not constitute international crimes.
By ensuring that perpetrators do not go unpunished, the international community can
provide a sense of justice to the victims and also contribute to non-recurrence. In this
regard, Brazil coincides with the call in the report of the Secretary -General for
Member States to adopt national accountability measures and to cooperate with
relevant international accountability mechanisms.
In conclusion, while children do not initiate wars, they are among the ones that
suffer their consequences the most. Hence, the most effective way to protect children
from the inevitable suffering caused by war is to prevent it in the first place, and to
swiftly seek the cessation of ongoing hostilities. Investments in diplomacy, peaceful
settlement of disputes and economic and social development are always the best
choice, as they also provide children with a telling example of how to resolve disputes
through dialogue, not violence or coercion. The international community may count
on Brazil, including during its mandate as an elected member of the Council in 2022 –
2023, to advance the children and armed conflict agenda in the Security Council and
to promote peace, which remains the most powerful means to reduce violations
against children.

58/152

21-09006

S/2021/617

Annex XXIX
Statement by the Permanent Mission of Bulgaria to the
United Nations
Bulgaria aligns itself with the statement made on behalf of the European Union.
I would like to start by commending Estonia for initiating this open debate
during its presidency of the United Nations Security Council.
Bulgaria took part in the Arria-formula meeting on “The impact of the
COVID-19 pandemic on violations against children in situations of armed conflict ”
in May 2021, and welcomes such consistent efforts to draw the Council ’s attention to
the agenda on children and armed conflict.
As UNICEF is commemorating its seventy-fifth anniversary and we are marking
25 years since the establishment of the mandate of the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for Children and Armed Conflict, Bulgaria would like to reiterate
its support to the abovementioned. The children and armed conflict agenda has greatly
benefited from the tools under mandate of the Special Representative of the Secretary General, like the annual reports, which contain an annex with listings of parties that
have committed grave violations, but also the action plans and the Security Council
Working Group on children and armed conflict.
According to this year’s (2021) report on children and armed conflict, there is a
deeply concerning number of grave violations, affecting a staggering total of 19,379
children. We are appalled by the increase in verified cases of rape and other forms of
sexual violence, whereby 98 percent of all reported cases affect girls. Moreover, the
significant rise in the number of child abductions is shocking and this worrisome
context is underpinned by the fact that many violations remain underreported,
especially the ones related to sexual violence.
In May 2021 the Office of the Special Representative presented a detailed study
on the effects of the COVID-19 pandemic on the violations against children in
situations of armed conflict. The dire consequences of the COVID -19 pandemic on
children’s well-being and their rights, including their access to education and health,
are particularly concerning for those in vulnerable situations.
While we were witnessing the closures of schools and other education facilities,
school attacks still persist. Inclusive education is atop of Bulgaria’s human rights
agenda and we have been working and promoting the “Inclusive education of children
with disabilities” as one of our main priorities, including through our official
development assistance. However, school closures also have a negative impact on
violence against children, including child, early and forced marriage, as well as child
labour. This is alarming, bearing 2021 is the International Year for the Elimination of
Child Labour. Therefore, as we are deeply concerned that education is still
inaccessible to many children, due to reasons ranging from the digital divide to the
lack of security, and we call upon States to endorse the Safe Schools Declaration.
Bulgaria supports the call by the Secretary-General to allow and facilitate safe,
timely and unimpeded humanitarian access, as well as access to services by children,
in order to provide assistance to children, and to ensure the safety and security of
humanitarian personnel and assets. We also welcome the call to immediately end all
grave violations against children, while safeguarding human rights.
As recommended in the 2021 report, Bulgaria’s commitment to counter the
involvement of children in armed conflicts and to protect those affected is o bjectified
by the ratification of the Worst Forms of Child Labour Convention (ILO Convention
No. 182) and the ratification Optional Protocol to the Convention on the Rights of the
21-09006

59/152

S/2021/617

Child on the involvement of children in armed conflict. Moreover, Bulgaria h as
subscribed the Vancouver Principles on Peacekeeping and the Prevention of the
Recruitment and Use of Child Soldiers. We also support the recommendation of the
Committee on the Rights of the Child to introduce a ban on sales on end -use weapons
in countries where there are reports about the involvement of children in conflicts.
Bulgaria encourages all Member States to strengthen child protection, while
fostering the implementation of the children and armed conflict agenda. The Agenda
2030 identifies children as critical agents of change and we need to ensure the
protection of their human rights.

60/152

21-09006

S/2021/617

Annex XXX
Statement by the Permanent Mission of Canada to the
United Nations
[Original: French]
Due to the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic, the past year has been
one like no other, with significant setbacks around the world to the hard -won progress
in defending the rights of children affected by conflict.
In the Democratic Republic of Congo, Myanmar, and South Sudan, for example,
children are still being recruited and used by armed forces and armed groups. In
Afghanistan, Israel and the Occupied Palestinian Territories, and Syria, children
continue to be killed and maimed. And, while not covered in the report of the
Secretary-General, the credible reports of widespread sexual violence against
children, particularly girls, in Tigray, Ethiopia, are deeply disturbing.
Moreover, contrary to international law, attacks against schools and hospitals
have occurred or are ongoing in Cameroon, Nigeria, Syria, and elsewhere. We
condemn in the strongest terms the deliberate strikes against a medical facility in
Atarib, northern Aleppo, Syria, in March 2021, and the June 2021 attack on Shifa ’
Hospital in Afrin that killed and injured several children.
Such trends are not only concerning; in our eyes they are unacceptable. Canada
condemns all grave violations committed against children and we will continue
working with partners to help prevent and end such violations, including by holding
perpetrators accountable.
Canada strongly supports the impartiality and independence of the monitoring
and reporting mechanism on grave violations of children’s rights in situations of
armed conflict, which is one of the most critical tools in promoting truth and
accountability for grave violations against children.
The monitoring and reporting mechanism’s work, and the children and armed
conflict agenda, are strengthened by the application of clear, consistent, and evidence based criteria in the listing and de-listing of parties responsible for grave violations
against children.
Canada will continue to advocate for these principles to be upheld to the highest
standard, including in its capacity as chair of the Group of Friends of Children and
Armed Conflict in New York.
In addition to working on the issue at the United Nations, Canada co -chairs
Groups of Friends in Colombia, Philippines, South Sudan, and Sudan; a testament to
its global commitment and engagement in support of the children and armed conflict
agenda.
The Group of Friends in South Sudan, co-chaired by Canada and South Africa,
advocates for and supports South Sudan in implementing its Comprehensive Action
Plan to end and prevent all grave violations against children, and encourages South
Sudan to endorse key instruments, like the Vancouver Principles.
In Colombia, as co-chairs the Group of Friends, Canada and Sweden conducted
virtual visits to assess the situation facing children in areas of the country where
recruitment is on the rise due to COVID-19.
We remain committed to help build stronger links and synergies between these
groups to support the children and armed conflict agenda around the world.
Since their launch in 2017, the Vancouver Principles on Peacekeeping and the
Prevention of the Recruitment and Use of Child Soldiers have been endorsed by an
ever-growing number of United Nations Member States.
21-09006

61/152

S/2021/617

So far, 102 countries have formally committed to working to end the recruitment
and use of child soldiers in places where United Nations peacekeepin g missions
operate. This commitment takes many forms, from providing adequate training to
their own peacekeepers, to ensuring that peacekeeping missions are adequately
resourced to address recruitment and use of children.
Canada recognizes and congratulates those countries that have endorsed the
Principles since the last Security Council open debate on children in armed conflict
in 2020, namely, Qatar, Benin, the Democratic Republic of Congo, the Comoros,
Ghana, and Togo. We hope that even more United Nations Member States will join
us in reinforcing the prevention of the recruitment and use of child soldiers through
peacekeeping.
We also look forward to advancing the concrete implementation of the
Vancouver Principles in all aspects of United Nations peac ekeeping. At the national
level, the Canadian Armed Forces Dallaire Centre of Excellence for Peace and
Security is facilitating implementation of the Vancouver Principles. Key to this is the
development of doctrine that outlines the range of tasks the mili tary can perform in
preventing the recruitment and use of children as soldiers. These tasks, informed by
research and consultation with civil society actors, will influence policy, processes
and training of Canadian military peacekeepers, making them bette r prepared to
prevent recruitment. We look forward to sharing this with other partners.
It is imperative that we work together to better align peacekeeping mandates
with resources, including dedicated child protection capacity and expertise.
Encouragingly, the latest report of the Special Committee on Peacekeeping
Operations calls for the swift deployment of senior child protection advisers and
teams to United Nations peacekeeping operations. As members of the United Nations
General Assembly’s Fifth Committee, currently studying peacekeeping budgets, we
have an opportunity to ensure that child protection remains a priority, particularly for
missions that have specific child protection mandates.
Canada reiterates its strong support for these specialized protection actors, who
contribute to early warning and comprehensive, integrated, and gender-sensitive responses.
Canada will continue to use its voice and provide resources to ensure that
children are adequately protected in situations of armed conflict.
For instance, in Cameroon, Canada’s funding to Plan International helps address
urgent humanitarian needs of up to 20,380 internally-displaced persons and other
conflict-affected people, of which approximately 9,500 are boys and girls. This
includes the establishment of community-based safe spaces and structures, the
delivery of comprehensive age- and gender-responsive and inclusive case
management support services to vulnerable children, including survivors of sexual
and gender-based violence, and the delivery of family tracing and reunification
support to unaccompanied and separated children.
In South Sudan, Canada is supporting a project led by the Dallaire Institute to
build the capacity of security sector actors to prioritize the issue of child soldie rs,
prevent the recruitment of children, and prevent sexual violence perpetrated against
child associated with armed groups. Since inception, the project has reached 5,031
members of South Sudan’s unified forces. The project also involves working closely
with South Sudanese civil society and women-led organizations to prevent at-risk
boys and girls from being recruited as child soldiers.
We look forward to continuing to work with our partners around the world to
help put an end to grave violations against children affected by conflict, no matter
where they occur.

62/152

21-09006

S/2021/617

Annex XXXI
Statement by the Group of Friends of Children and
Armed Conflict
[Original: French]
This statement is submitted by the Group of Friends of Children and Armed
Conflict (CAAC), an informal, cross-regional network of 47 Member States and the
European Union. 1 We welcome today’s open debate convened by Estonia and thank
the briefers for their statements.
We express our deep appreciation for the work of the Special Represe ntative of
the Secretary-General as we mark the twenty-fifth anniversary of the mandate, and
look forward to continued constructive engagement at this important moment of
reflection.
We extend our sincere thanks to all child protection actors, in particu lar from
the United Nations and civil society, who often work at great risk to themselves to
protect children and support their resilience and recovery during periods of conflict
and violence. We thank Watchlist on Children and Armed Conflict in particular, and
congratulate the organization on its twentieth anniversary.
The Group of Friends welcomes the Secretary-General’s annual report, while
expressing serious concern with the scale and scope of the 26,425 grave violations
which affected 19,379 children, particularly amidst the coronavirus disease
(COVID-19) pandemic.
We remain deeply concerned about the multi-faceted impacts of COVID-19 on
children affected by armed conflict, including those forced to flee or living in
detention, as well as on the capacity of the United Nations and other actors to meet
the unique and urgent needs of children.
The protection of children must be central in the ongoing response to the
pandemic, including through the continuity of child-centred services that include
mental-health and psychosocial support, comprehensive reintegration programmes
that are gender- and age-sensitive, and inclusive of children with disabilities, and
rapid, safe, and unimpeded humanitarian access to all children in need.
We reiterate our call for the Security Council and parties to armed conflict to
fully implement resolutions 2532 (2020) and 2565 (2021) on ceasefires and
facilitating equitable and affordable access to COVID-19 vaccines in armed conflict
situations, post-conflict situations, and complex humanitarian emergencies.
The trends presented in the report are disturbing and must be reversed. We are
alarmed by the persistently high levels of denial of humanitarian assistance, killing
and maiming, and recruitment and use of children by parties to armed conflict. The
dramatic increase in sexual violence is also deeply concerning. This grave violation
disproportionately affects girls, while also impacting boys, and is already prone to
severe under-reporting.
Furthermore, we are troubled by the dramatic increase in abductions, which can
lead to other grave violations. We are also dismayed by widespread attacks against
__________________
1

21-09006

Andorra, Australia, Austria, Belgium, Benin, Canada, Chile, Costa Rica, Côte d ’Ivoire, Croatia,
Czechia, Denmark, Ecuador, Estonia, Finland, Germany, Ghana, Guatemala, Hungary, Ireland,
Italy, Japan, Jordan, Liechtenstein, Luxembourg, Mali, Malta, Mexico, Namibia, Netherlands,
New Zealand, Niger, Norway, Peru, Poland, Portugal, Qatar, Republic of Korea, San Marino,
Slovakia, Slovenia, South Africa, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, the United Republic of Tanzania,
Uruguay, European Union.
63/152

S/2021/617

schools and hospitals, particularly amidst the pandemic. Such attacks may not only
kill or maim children and endanger their safety. They also destroy or disrupt education
and essential health services at a time when these are needed most.
The Group of Friends strongly condemns all incidents of the six grave violations
presented in the report of the Secretary-General. We call for full accountability
through national and international justice mechanisms, such as the International
Criminal Court. True justice also involves reparations and access to gender- and agesensitive comprehensive specialized services, which includes but is not limited to
medical, mental and psycho-social and health services, including sexual and
reproductive health-care services, and legal and livelihood support to survivors of
grave violations, whose trauma may endure for years.
Furthermore, we call upon all parties to armed conflict fully comply with their
obligations under international humanitarian law, human rights law, and refugee law,
and to prevent and end grave violations.
To this end, we strongly encourage all parties to armed conflict to sign, develop
and implement action plans and other concrete, time-bound, and effective protection
measures for children in armed conflict, such as road maps, command orders, and
other commitments. We welcome the signing and implementation of such measures
during 2020, and call for further progress during 2021.
Additionally, we note that a growing number of Member States have acceded to
or endorsed key instruments aimed at strengthening the protection of children in
armed conflict. We encourage all Member States to strengthen the protection of
children, including by considering acceding to the Optional Protocol to the
Convention on the Rights of the Child, and by considering endorsing and
implementing practical protection tools, notably the Paris Principles and
Commitments, the Safe Schools Declaration, and the Vancouver Principles.
There is no substitute for the specialized expertise of dedicated child protection
capacities. The Group of Friends stresses the importance of providing adequate
resourcing for child protection personnel and activities, including and in particular
within United Nations peace operations, United Nations Country Task Forc es on
Monitoring and Reporting, the United Nations Children’s Fund (UNICEF), and the
United Nations Secretariat.
United Nations peace operations play an important role in protecting children
in armed conflict. We strongly encourage the Security Council and Member States to
support the full implementation of strong child protection mandates, including
through the speedy deployment of senior child protection advisers and teams, and by
prioritizing the protection of children in peacekeeping transitions.
We fully support mainstreaming the children and armed conflict agenda in the
work of the Security Council, including in mandate renewals, peace processes, and
sanctions regimes. We thank Norway for its efforts as Chair of the Working Group of
the Security Council on Children and Armed Conflict, and welcome the engagement
of the Working Group to deliver on its ambitious mandate. We encourage more regular
reporting from the Secretary-General to the Security Council, and call for the full
implementation of conclusions reached by the Working Group, as well as systematic
follow-up in this regard, which we commit to support.
As we mark the twenty-fifth anniversary of the mandate of the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, we express our full support for the range of
tools at our disposal to enhance the protection for children in armed conflict. We look
forward to strengthening these tools.

64/152

21-09006

S/2021/617

In this regard, we reiterate the importance that we attach to the independence,
impartiality, and credibility of the monitoring and reporting mechanism on grave
violations of children’s rights in situations of armed conflict, as established by
resolution 1612 (2005).
The information presented in the report of the Secretary-General, as collected
and verified through the monitoring and reporting mechanism, should be accurately
reflected in the annexes of the report. We further recall the importance of the criteria
and procedures for listing and de-listing parties to armed conflict deemed responsible
for committing grave violations outlined in report A/64/742-S/2010/181.
Finally, we once again call upon the Secretary-General to ensure that annual
reports on this important issue are released to Member States early.

21-09006

65/152

S/2021/617

Annex XXXII
Statement by the Permanent Mission of Chile to the
United Nations
[Original: Spanish]
Chile presents its compliments to the Permanent Representative of Estonia to
the United Nations, Sven Jürgenson, and aligns itself with the statement made by
Canada on behalf of the Group of Friends of Children and Armed Conflict.
Chile welcomes the annual report of the Secretary-General on children and
armed conflict, which highlights the critical situation of children in that context in a
year in which they have been affected by the closure of schools and continue to be at
high risk of being recruited by armed actors. The figures are alarming, with a total of
26,426 grave violations committed against children in armed conflict, approximately
1,400 more than was reported the year before.
We must bear in mind that children are the vital foundation for building a
prosperous future for the world, which is why protecting them and safeguarding their
rights is a moral imperative for the international community. This is especially
relevant given the complex situation caused by the coronavirus d isease (COVID-19)
pandemic, which has led to a radicalization of conflicts and has caused an
unprecedented global crisis in education, a field in which schools have suffered
continuous attacks or been used for military purposes.
Against that backdrop, Chile, as a signatory to the Safe Schools Declaration,
reiterates the importance of protecting schools from attack so as to ensure that
children become agents of change in the future, when the world will benefit from their
contribution to their communities towards sustained peace.
In that context, we call on all parties to conflict to respect international law,
including international humanitarian law, and to refrain from targeting infrastructure
that is essential to the survival of civilians in conflict situ ations, in particular
children’s facilities, hospitals and schools, as well as humanitarian and medical
personnel. We also recognize the importance of the Optional Protocol to the
Convention on the Rights of the Child, as well as practical protection instr uments, in
particular the Paris Principles and Commitments, the Safe Schools Declaration and
the Vancouver Principles.
Chile also recognizes the specific consequences of conflict on young and
adolescent girls. With the suspension of community -based child protection and
essential services, reduced mobility and the economic crisis triggered by the
pandemic, 98 per cent of child victims of rape and other forms of sexual violence
were girls. Chile strongly condemns the use of sexual violence as a weapon of war.
In this regard, we highlight the importance of implementing a gender-sensitive
approach to child protection mandates to prevent and address the occurrence of one
or more of the six violations – killing and maiming, recruitment or use of children as
soldiers, attacks against schools and hospitals, sexual violence, abduction and denial
of humanitarian assistance – using a trauma-informed, child-centred and survivorcentred approach.
The effects of conflict are often felt the hardest by children, who may lose their
families and friends and often suffer serious physical and psychological harm as a
result of egregious violations of their fundamental human rights.
In this context, we recognize that children, in particular those associated with
armed forces or groups and former child soldiers, should be treated as victims – not
actors – of conflict. It is therefore necessary to support them in their reintegration into
66/152

21-09006

S/2021/617

society so that they can be empowered to heal and move on from their painful past
experience, and in so doing prevent them from becoming part of the cycles of violence
that fuel conflict.
We also encourage the Security Council and Member States to support the
implementation of child protection mandates to ensure adequate priority is given to
the protection of children in peacekeeping operations.
In this regard, we reiterate that the monitoring and reporting mechanism on
grave violations of children’s rights in situations of armed conflict is vital not only to
understand the situation of children on the ground who have been victims of one or
more of the six grave violations, but also to ensure accountability of perpetrators.
Chile appreciates that, despite the constraints caused by the pandemic, the United
Nations teams in the affected countries have been able to continue their monitoring
and reporting work.
We reiterate the importance of maintaining the independence, impartiality and
credibility of the monitoring and reporting mechanism established by Security
Council resolution 1612 (2005). The information presented in the report of the
Secretary-General, collected and verified through the mechanism, should be
accurately reflected in the annexes of the report.
Most importantly, we owe it to these brave children to keep seeking solutions.
We must continue to strengthen an integrated and synergistic response that contributes
to building resilient societies that support children from the outset of conflict to the
stage of repairing cycles of violence, which we hope will enable these children to
shift from being victims to contributors and drivers of change.

21-09006

67/152

S/2021/617

Annex XXXIII
Statement by the Permanent Representative of Colombia to the
United Nations, Guillermo Fernández de Soto
[Original: Spanish]
We welcome the convening of this open debate by Estonia as President of the
Security Council for the month of June 2021.
The Colombian State believes that comprehensive care for children and
adolescents is a fundamental pillar of its “peace with legality” policy.
Children and adolescents will continue to be a priority for the national
Government, as established in the national development plan for 2018 –2022.
Colombia seeks to expand comprehensive care from early childhood to adolesc ence,
improving the targeting of policies and focusing efforts on the family as the most
immediate environmental setting for children’s development and well-being.
The coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic has had a strong impact on the
various dynamics and realities in the territories affected by the conflict. Strategies
launched by the national Government are therefore intended to safeguard the rights
of children and adolescents before, during and after the pandemic.
The security forces play a key role in protecting and guaranteeing the rights of
children, especially in contexts of armed violence, in which State bodies are
responsible for establishing the initial link or contact with a child who has been
rescued on the ground.
Strengthening security forces’ training and knowledge in the field of human
rights and international humanitarian law, particularly with regard to violence and its
effects on the integral development of children, contributes to the creation of peaceful
and safe environments that provide protection and reparation for those who suffer
from such violence.
In this context, the national Government launched a national plan to train more
than 250,000 members of the security forces. The plan, developed in the framework
of the “Pact: Colombia with Youth” initiative, under which more than 202 working
groups have been formed, has more than 5,500 young participants in 25 departments
of the country.
It is important to recognize the multiple effects of violence in order to achieve
gender equality, which is why progressive, comprehensive and differential actions
must be taken to address the reality of women, girls and adolescents in our country.
Guaranteeing access to justice for women and girls who have suffered some
form of violence in the context of the conflict is a pressing obligation. Priority must
be given to investigating the facts and initiating judicial proceedings, adopting
measures to guarantee the privacy, confidentiality and security of victims and
establishing comprehensive reparation mechanisms, in particular when the victim is
a child or adolescent.
Pursuant to resolution 1612 (2005), Colombia is making progress in improving
effective mechanisms to prevent recruitment, including through the Intersectoral
Commission for the Prevention of the Recruitment and Use of Children and
Adolescents by Illegal Armed Groups and Organized Criminal Groups, which has
helped to identify risk factors and coordinate State action.
The twenty-fourth ordinary session of the Intersectoral Commission, during
which the institutions that make up that body will report on the progress made in the
implementation of the “Join for me” strategy, is being held on 28 June 2021.
68/152

21-09006

S/2021/617

According to complaints filed with the Attorney General’s Office, between
26 September 2016 and 31 December 2020, reports were received on 1426 victims of
forced recruitment, 339 of whom were child and adolescent victims of unlawful
recruitment and 1087 were victims of use for the commission of a crime.
According to figures provided by the Colombian Family Welfare Institute,
between the signing of the Peace Agreement with Fuerzas Armadas Revolucionarias
de Colombia-Ejército del Pueblo (FARC-EP) in 2016 and 31 December 2020, the
main recruiters of children in the country in the recent past have been the residual
organized armed groups of FARC-EP, responsible for 40 per cent of cases (182 cases);
Ejército de Liberación Nacional (ELN), responsible for 35 per cent of cases (160
cases); organized criminal groups, responsible for 21 per cent of cases (99 cases); and
other organized armed groups, such as the Pelusos, with 3 per cent of cases (13 cases).
The responsibility for 1 per cent of cases (6 cases) has yet to be establi shed.
Unfortunately, despite the Government’s efforts, all organized armed groups
continue to recruit and use children in violation of international human rights law and
international humanitarian law.
I would like to conclude by reaffirming, once again, the commitment of
Colombia to building an increasingly prosperous and secure future for children and
adolescents.

21-09006

69/152

S/2021/617

Annex XXXIV
Statement by the Deputy Permanent Representative of Costa Rica
to the United Nations, Maritza Chan
Costa Rica aligns itself with the statement delivered by Canada on behalf of the
Group of Friends of Children in Armed Conflict. There is no act of war that does not
in some way harm children. Costa Rica looks forward to a frank and results -oriented
discussion of why we continue to allow this to happen, and how some of our most
vulnerable constituents can be better protected.
On this note, Costa Rica would like to raise the following points:
First, Costa Rica stresses that robust and effective arms control mechanisms are
critical to preventing conflict – and, synergistically, also key to protecting children.
According to the 2021 report of the Secretary-General on promotion and protection
of the right of children: children and armed conflict, we recognize that causes of child
casualties include crossfire from small arms and light weapons, landmines and other
unexploded ordnance and ground engagement between conflict parties. Indeed, many
conflicts that kill and injure children are only possible if illicit arms remain in
circulation, in the wrong hands, or misused by non-State and State actors alike. Armed
conflict is increasingly protracted and complex, exacerbated by climate change related risks, malevolent uses of technology, and transnational organized crime. But
despite these variables, small arms and light weapons remain a constant scourge
across virtually all societies. It is thus imperative that robust and effectively –
particularly for standards of trade and transfer – be a focal point of our discussion.
Second, Costa Rica draws attention to the troubling use of explosive devices in
densely populated urban areas. Rapid urbanization raises the possibility that armed
conflict is increasingly engaged in city centers: Explosives built for remote
battlefields are now bombarding children in packed apartments. Such violence
comprises serious violations of international humanitarian and human rights law and
represents a collective failure to mitigate harm especially to children. Costa Rica
wishes to make it clear: It is neither a principled nor pragmatic strategy for conflict
parties to use explosive weapons in areas where children are likely to be victimized.
And we know that the harm from explosive weapons in densely populated areas
does not end after detonation: Damage to civilian infrastructure and community
resources reverberates for years. The health and even lives of children are directly
imperilled when water, sanitation, and other essential infrastructure services are
disrupted. Such additive impacts must be avoided at all costs – as per human rights
and humanitarian law – and should be factored into all proportionality and necessity
tests before conflict parties resort to violent means.
Schools also continue to be targeted by explosive devices, eroding their sanctity
as safe spaces and putting children and their families at risk. In Myanmar, for
example, the Secretary-General report verified the military use of 30 schools by the
Tatmadaw. Eleven schools were attacked outright. An attack on a school is not just
about damage to a facility; it is an attack on children ’s rights as well as on their
communities, social networks, health, and well-being.
Lastly, Costa Rica emphasizes how conflict also puts children at heightened risk
of recruitment, abduction, and trafficking. When their schools, social support
networks, and safe spaces are disrupted, when essential infrastructure is damaged or
destroyed, children become particularly vulnerable to nefarious actors. Indeed, the
most prevalent grave violation listed in the report of the Secretary -General was the
recruitment and use of children in armed conflict, referencing a jaw -dropping 8,521
children. The report also outlines how abduction and sexual violence can often
70/152

21-09006

S/2021/617

become the consequences of child recruitment. The report of the Secretary -General
makes clear that offenses against children intertwine, adding even greater impetus to
stop putting children in harm’s way.
No child leaves conflict zones unscarred: physically, emotionally, socially,
mentally. Their protection is thus an ethical, moral, and legal imperative. Moving
forward, Costa Rica maintains that United Nations peacekeeping missions should
feature child-specific protection training, and that the child protection budget must be
boosted in the Fifth Committee. It is also essential that the reports of the Secretary General reflect the most impartial, accurate, and courageous assessments; to do
otherwise can have deadly consequences for children. Costa Rica looks forward to a
results-oriented and frank discussion of how our most vulnerable citizens can stay
safe, especially in conflict settings.

21-09006

71/152

S/2021/617

Annex XXXV
Statement by the Permanent Representative of the Dominican
Republic to the United Nations, José Alfonso Conde
I thank the Secretary-General, Antonio Guterres, Henrietta Fore, Forest
Whitaker and Laban Onisimus for sharing their important perspectives.
The Dominican Republic fully supports the recommendations presented by the
Secretary-General in his report.
Moreover, we recognize the essential work of the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for Children and Armed Conflict and of UNICEF, including
through their engagement with parties to conflict resulting in the a doption of measures
to better protect children from hostilities, such as the release of 12,643 children from
armed groups and armed forces on 2020.
As we continue to make efforts to remain positive, the reality is that, despite
advancement achieved, the picture that the reports draws year after year on the
situation of children in armed conflict, remains terrifying. Violence and conflict
continue to have a devastating and disproportionate impact on children.
Children that require our utmost attention and unwavering commitment.
This year’s report registers an alarming 23,946 grave violations and has shown
a massive spike in the number of children abducted, by 90 per cent, and sexually
abused in conflict, by 70 per cent.
We are deeply concerned by the increase of these violations, many pe rpetrated
by parties that have signed action plans with the United Nations.
According to the report of the Secretary-General, Afghanistan, the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, Somalia, the Syrian Arab Republic and Yemen are the most
dangerous places for children at this moment.
Afghanistan remains the deadliest conflict for children.
In the Democratic Republic of the Congo, with its rising insecurities, children
are more vulnerable to abuse, human trafficking and recruitment.
The COVID-19 pandemic has aggravated children’s existing vulnerabilities,
including by hindering their access to education, health and social services.
In addition to the mass school closures, attacks on schools have increased,
impacting children’s future.
The Dominican Republic condemns these violations and urges parties to
conflicts to comply with their obligations under international law, including
humanitarian law and human rights law and to adhere to the Secretary -General’s
appeal for a global ceasefire.
Despite the heavy impact the pandemic has imposed on the monitoring and
reporting mechanism operations pertaining grave violations against children in armed
conflict, it continues to provide us with a better understanding of the situation on the
ground as a basis to guide effective action towards protecting children.
Once again, we emphasize our strong support for the impartiality and
independence of the monitoring and reporting mechanism on children and armed
conflict and for the need to apply clear, consistent and e vidence-based criteria in the
listing and delisting of parties responsible for grave violations against children in the
annual reports of the Secretary-General on children and armed conflict.

72/152

21-09006

S/2021/617

In that same line, we must continue to support United Nations child protection
advisers, and make sure such positions are fully funded and given the appropriate
seniority.
Protecting children requires a collective response.
The briefers’ observations and recommendations are meant to leave this debate
translated into concrete action by the Security Council.
Being the main goal to break the cycle of violence, it becomes crucial that all
the pillars of child protection are taken into account in the context of all relevant
activities of the United Nations, Governments and stakeholders, carried out during
conflict prevention, as well as in conflict and post-conflict situations, including
through the strengthening of child protection mechanisms, and by adopting measures
and assuming greater commitments, mainly with reintegration and rehabilitation
programmes, and with action plans to protect children.
During its tenure in the Security Council, the Dominican Republic kept the
protection of children in armed conflict high in our priorities and we will continue to
do so, including through the different endorsements made by our country, such as the
Safe Schools Declaration, the Paris Principles and the Vancouver Principles, as well
as through the ratification of the Optional Protocol to the Convention on the Rights
of the Child on the involvement of children in armed conflict.
As we commemorate the twenty-fifth anniversary of the creation of the children
and armed conflict agenda, including the mandate of the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General for Children and Armed Conflict, we want to reiterate the
strong support of the Dominican Republic to the agenda and mandate.
As the report clearly signals us, it is a “Stolen childhood and a future to repair”.
Therefore, let us not lose sight of the fact that accounta bility for all violations
and abuses against children is at the heart of the children and armed conflict agenda.

21-09006

73/152

S/2021/617

Annex XXXVI
Statement by the Permanent Representative of Ecuador to the
United Nations, Cristian Espinosa
[Original: Spanish]
I would like to thank Henrietta Fore, the Executive Director of the United
Nations Children’s Fund (UNICEF), Forest Whitaker of the Office of the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Children and Armed Conflict and Laban
Onisimus of Plan International for their presentations. I also welcome the presentation
by the Secretary-General, António Guterres, describing the vulnerable situation of
children in armed conflict.
That situation is even more clearly exposed in the report of the Secretary General of 6 May 2021 (A/75/873-S/2021/437), presented pursuant to Security
Council resolution 2427 (2018), which covers the period of 2020 and thus reflects the
significant impact of the pandemic.
Having joined the Group of Friends on Children and Armed Conflict one year
ago, Ecuador aligns itself with the statement by Canada on behalf of that Group. We
urge the international community to prioritize efforts to promote and protect the rights
of children in all contexts.
We strongly support the implementation of each of the 13 Security Council
resolutions on this matter, especially given our concern that the coronavirus disease
(COVID-19) pandemic continues to exacerbate the situation in conflict areas. The
24,000 grave violations reported in the 21 situations covered by the mandate reflect
the precarious situation we are facing.
I reiterate the call made by Ecuador in Security Council document S/2021/415
for a halt to attacks on schools and to any form of military use of schools.
Ecuador remains engaged in significant regional efforts against child trafficking
and recruitment, which continues to be a global challenge that requires a coordinated
response from our Organization.
The best way to commemorate the first anniversary of the Declaration signed
by 172 countries in support of the call made by the Secretary-General on 22 June
2020 for a global ceasefire, and the subsequent adoption of Security Council
resolution 2532 (2020), is by setting up a mechanism to follow up on their
implementation, as well as on the implementation of resolution 2565 (2021).
Such a mechanism would support efforts to alleviate the suffering of more than
400 million children living in conflict zones.
I would also like to reiterate that the study of the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for Children and Armed Conflict on the impact of COVID -19 on
violations against children in armed conflict is a valuable tool for better understanding
the challenges on the ground and for strengthening the means of protection, including
through digital monitoring measures for prevention and to avoid impunity, as I stated
at the Arria formula meeting of the Security Council held on 7 May 2021, also
organized by Estonia, in which I recalled that the pandemic had left 500 million
children without access to a digital education as a result of connectivity gaps.
On this twenty-fifth anniversary of the submission of the first report on the
impact of armed conflict on children, we must redouble our efforts as an Organization
in peacebuilding and in managing humanitarian access to conflict zones for the
protection of children.

74/152

21-09006

S/2021/617

Annex XXXVII
Statement by the Permanent Mission of Egypt to the
United Nations
At the outset, we would like to thank Estonia for organizing this important high level open debate regarding children and armed conflicts. We would also extend our
thanks to the distinguished briefers for their interesting presentations delivered at the
beginning of the session.
Egypt believes in the importance of raising awareness regarding the Human
rights issues and its linkage with the realization of peace and security, particularly
issues related to the protection and promotion of the rights of the child.
Egypt strongly support all efforts to strengthen the protection of children and to
end the violations committed during conflicts, especially crimes committed by
terrorist organizations. Armed conflicts deprive children of their right to life, physical
integrity and mental health and deprive them of their social, cultural and educational
rights.
These strong negative impacts of armed conflicts on children were aggravated
because of the impacts of the COVID-19 pandemic. This requires more international
cooperation and stronger measures to urgently respond to those exacerbated impacts.
In this regard, Egypt expressed on the highest level to the United Nations its
willingness to cooperate, to the utmost possible extent, in order to ensure the delivery
of much needed humanitarian assistance.
Since 2002, Egypt ratified the Optional Protocol to the Convention on the Rights
of the Child on the involvement of children in armed conflict. The P rotocol’s
provisions are a part of our national legislation.
Furthermore, respect of international humanitarian law, including the protection
of children in armed conflicts, is part of the curriculum provided by the Egyptian
Ministry of Defence to its personnel, especially for those personnel participating in
peacekeeping operations. The content of this curriculum is prepared in collaboration
with the International Committee of the Red Cross and the National Council for
Motherhood and Childhood to ensure the protection of the rights of the child.
Egypt will continue its efforts nationally and internationally to assure the
protection of the rights of the child, especially for those trapped in difficult situations.

21-09006

75/152

S/2021/617

Annex XXXVIII
Statement by the Permanent Mission of El Salvador to the
United Nations
[Original: Spanish]
El Salvador thanks the Estonian presidency for organizing this open debate on
children and armed conflict, and takes note of the latest report of the SecretaryGeneral (A/75/873-S/2021/437) on the subject.
My country takes this opportunity to reiterate its commitment to the
maintenance of international peace and security, as well as its full willingness to
address the harrowing consequences of armed conflict and to help reduce the
widespread suffering that it inflicts on the civilian population. It also reaffirms its
firm commitment to complying with the Convention on the Rights of the Child, with
a view to ensuring that the best interests of the child remain the priority regardless of
the context in which children find themselves.
More than a year after the start of the coronavirus disease (COVID -19)
pandemic, it is important to measure the full impact it has had on children. Beyond
its devastating health impacts, the crisis, which has brought to light existing
inequalities, has clearly had profound social, economic and political consequences,
with a wide-ranging impact on the most vulnerable groups, in particular on children
affected by armed conflict.
The pandemic situation has weakened the capacity of States to ensure adequate
support for preventing and ending acts that contravene relevant international law, and
has had a negative impact on the provision of age- and gender-sensitive support
services, including psychological, social and health-care services. It has also had a
negative effect on education, the prevention of sexual abuse, including the treatment
of child victims of sexual violence in the context of armed conflict, and reintegration
programmes, while cases of forced recruitment have risen.
Restrictions on the free movement and circulation of people within and between
countries, which are among the measures adopted to prevent the spread of COVID-19,
have hampered monitoring efforts in various ways, including in terms of compliance
with applicable international commitments such as the relevant provisions of
international humanitarian law and international human rights law, in particular the
Convention on the Rights of the Child, and the implementation of prevention and
reintegration campaigns and activities.
States have also been forced to prioritize the adoption of relevant health
measures as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic, leading to a reduction in
international funding for direct care for children affected by armed conflict, creating
a gap between available resources and the need for health care and medical supplies
and materials, as well as health and humanitarian personnel on the groun d.
This prompts us to urge States not to take a step backwards but rather to maintain
our momentum in improving protection systems and timely and effective
humanitarian assistance, even as the world grapples with the consequences of and
recovery from the COVID-19 pandemic.
Despite the Secretary-General’s calls for a ceasefire in March 2020, we have
seen conflicts escalate in some regions of the world, which have resulted in attacks
on critical infrastructure, such as hospitals and schools, and associated personnel.
El Salvador strongly condemns such attacks, the improper use of civilian
facilities and the recruitment or use by armed forces or armed groups of children and
adolescents to take part in conflicts – acts that go against international humanitarian
76/152

21-09006

S/2021/617

law, the Convention on the Rights of the Child and various Security Council
resolutions.
El Salvador calls upon all parties to armed conflict to comply with their
obligations under international law, including international humanitarian law and
international human rights law, and stresses the importance of providing humanitarian
personnel with safe and unhindered access to the civilian population.
In that regard, as a contributor of troops and police to United Nations peace
operations and special political missions, El Salvador recognizes the fundamental role
of such personnel in the protection of children in conflict situations.
The vulnerability of girls to sexual and gender-based violence has grown as a
result of the pandemic and, among other aspects, of the challenges posed in
monitoring such violence; social stigma; a lack of comprehensive treatment to provide
girl victims with psychological and social care; and a lack of financial resources to
support investigations to ensure access to justice in order to redress such crimes in
the context of armed conflict. The Security Council and all States members of the
United Nations must continue to work on ensuring accountability and ending
impunity, guaranteeing procedural mechanisms related to investig ations, prosecuting
responsible actors and ensuring due reparation and reintegration of victims and
survivors. Armed conflict is no justification for not guaranteeing this fundamental
human right and freedom. In this regard, El Salvador considers that it i s essential, in
order to prevent the recurrence of war crimes, to facilitate access to justice for victims
and reparations for victims and survivors. Prosecutions for war crimes must include
investigating and ultimately convicting those criminally responsi ble, regardless of
who they are and where their crimes took place, all in accordance with applicable
international criminal law. My country calls on States to continue to cooperate with
international investigative and judicial mechanisms to reduce scenario s of impunity
in this regard.
A gender-sensitive approach is needed in all prevention, protection and
reparation activities related to children and armed conflict. Such an approach should
also be adopted when States and international and regional agencie s collect
information, present statistical data and formulate responses and policies.
El Salvador is focused on providing care for vulnerable groups, with special
attention given to victims and survivors of armed conflict, which is why it highlights
the importance of offering psychological support to address the immediate and long term effects on children living in situations of armed conflict, including the need for
continued prosecution of violations committed against them.
It would like to thank the United Nations Children’s Fund (UNICEF) for its
support at the national and international levels in promoting better results in the
protection of children in various contexts, particularly its work in different regions
for the protection of children in conflict situations. It is essential to strengthen
programmes to reintegrate children who have been released and removed from
military activity, so they can be properly integrated into society through viable
alternatives. In this way, we will reduce the chances that they will again become
vulnerable to abuse, social stigmatization and recurrent recruitment.
It reiterates the urgent need to continue to work on strengthening the
coordination and cooperation of the United Nations and regional organizations;
training members of armed forces and armed groups in international humanitarian
law and international human rights law; improving capacities to monitor, investigate,
prosecute and convict those guilty of having committed war crimes, crimes against
humanity, acts of genocide and other violations of international humanitarian law;

21-09006

77/152

S/2021/617

and providing opportunities for reparations and social reintegration for victims and
survivors of these scourges.
El Salvador reiterates its firm belief that the most effective way to protect
children is to prevent conflict by investing in development, promoting the peaceful
settlement of disputes, responding to the needs of post-conflict countries and regions
and building stability by promoting a culture of peace and respect for intern ational
law.
The protection of civilians must be a priority of the work of the Organization
and must override any geopolitical interest that is opposed to it. Genuine protection
requires a commitment on the part of all States members of the United Nations to
safeguarding the human dignity of all peoples without discrimination.

78/152

21-09006

S/2021/617

Annex XXXIX
Statement by the Deputy Head of the Delegation of the European
Union to the United Nations, Silvio Gonzato
I am pleased to submit this statement on behalf of the European Union and its
Member States.
The candidate countries the Republic of North Macedonia, * Montenegro,*
Serbia* and Albania,* the country of the stabilization and association process and
potential candidate Bosnia and Herzegovina, as well as Ukraine, the Republic of
Moldova, and Georgia, align themselves with this statement.
The European Union thanks the Estonian presidency of the Security Council for
organizing this debate and extends its gratitude to the briefers.
The European Union is concerned by the findings of the Secretary -General
report that verified 26,425 grave violations, which affected 19,379 children in 21
situations. The continued denial of humanitarian assistance as well as the multiple
cases of killing and maiming, the increase of recruitment and use of children by
parties to armed conflict as well as attacks against schools and hospitals are of great
concern, too. We are deeply disturbed by and condemn the shocking rise in cas es of
rape and other forms of sexual violence, a violation that predominantly affects girls
and which remains vastly underreported. We are also shocked by the sharp increase
in the number of child abductions. In light of these new and worrying trends,
combined with the multi-faceted impact of the COVID-19 pandemic, we must
redouble our joint efforts to protect children.
The European Union urges parties to armed conflicts, state and non -State alike,
to immediately end all violations against children and fully implement international
humanitarian, human rights and refugee law, including by providing for concrete and
effective protection.
The COVID-19 pandemic negatively affected public health systems capacities
already strained by armed conflicts, and led to closures of schools and other education
facilities. Meanwhile, widespread attacks against schools and hospitals continued and
even increased in certain areas. On certain occasions, restrictions were misused to
impede the timely and effective delivery of humanitarian assistance. We call upon all
Governments to allow and facilitate safe, rapid and unimpeded access for all frontline
medical and humanitarian workers to people in need.
School closures and the closure of other education facilities are of spec ial
concern as they have suspended the education of millions, impacting the right to
education. For many children, education remains out of reach due to insecurity, the
digital divide and a lack of remote learning opportunities in certain contexts. The
suspension of education increases the risk of drop-outs, and has led to forced labour
and recruitment by armed groups and forces. School closures also reinforce exposure
to all forms of violence, including child, early and forced marriage. They can lead to
increase the military use of education facilities, which hinders children from resuming
their studies. That is why integrating education into the humanitarian -developmentpeace nexus is important, as it can help to overcome these challenges.
The European Union calls upon Member States and non-State actors to improve
access to safe and quality education, in line with General Assembly resolution 74/275.
The European Union will continue to focus on supporting e ducation in situations of
armed conflict and to advocate for unhindered access to education with a particular
* The Republic of North Macedonia, Montenegro, Serbia and Albania continue to be part of the
stabilization and association process.
21-09006

79/152

S/2021/617

focus on girls. Tailor-made assistance will facilitate the release and reintegration of
children associated with armed forces and groups, includin g mental health and
psycho-social support. We underline that the specific needs of girls and children with
disabilities require special attention. Sexual and reproductive health -care services,
legal and livelihood support and services to survivors of grave violations must also
be ensured.
This year marks the twenty-fifth anniversary of the mandate of the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Children and Armed Conflict – a mandate
that the European Union strongly supports. We thank Special R epresentative of the
Secretary-General Gamba and her Office for their tireless efforts over the past year.
It is time to build on the gains made and address future challenges. Child protection
must be a central element of prevention, early warning, mediati on, and conflict
resolution efforts. United Nations peace operations must be mandated and financed
accordingly. We thank all child protection actors for their crucial and dedicated work.
We call on all Member States to accede to the Optional Protocol to th e Convention
on the Rights of the Child on the involvement of children in armed conflict. We
welcome other initiatives and instruments that build on the existing framework, such
as the Paris Principles and their commitments, the Vancouver Principles. The S afe
Schools Declaration is also a valuable tool to this end.
The protection and the promotion of the rights of the child are central to the
European Union’s human rights policy. The children and armed conflict agenda is
included in the 2020–2024 Action Plan on Human Rights and Democracy and the
2021 European Union Strategy for the Right of the Child. It is mainstreamed across
the work of the European Union, including our common security and defence policy
missions. The European Union will step up its efforts to ensure meaningful child
participation, build, and strengthen child-friendly justice and child protection
systems.
Against this background, the European Union calls on the members of the
Security Council to deal with children and armed conflict as a matter of priority and
with unprecedented dedication. This means concretely: (1) to ensure mainstreaming
of the children and armed conflict agenda across the work of the Council; (2) to invite
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General to continue her briefings to the
Council on relevant country situations; (3) to raise the children and armed conflict
agenda, especially child protection, during Security Council visits; and (4) to ensure
that child protection is preserved in peace missions, including in transitions, and well
budgeted, and it is addressed in relevant mandate discussions of all United Nations
missions.
The European Union recognizes the real value and impact of the United Nations
children and armed conflict mandate and its tools: the Working Group chaired by
Norway, the monitoring and reporting mechanism, the action plans, and the annual
report with its annex listing parties to conflicts that have committed grave violations.
It is of utmost importance to protect its integrity and impartiality, including the
application of the criteria and procedures for listing and de -listing parties. Every year,
European Union Member States review the European Union list of priority countries
on children and armed conflict, based on the description of the country situations in
the Secretary-General annual report. We encourage the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General to continue to secure agreements on new action plans and support
the implementation and monitoring of existing ones. The Europe an Union also places
high value on accountability, including through the International Criminal Court.
Children must be given full access to justice.
The European Union is strongly engaged in the conflict prevention agenda and
is dedicated to foster the implementation of the children and armed conflict agenda.
80/152

21-09006

S/2021/617

The COVID-19 pandemic shall not stop us in these efforts. It is important to further
operationalize the children and armed conflict agenda and ensure that the right of the
child is a priority in all our efforts in building back better.

21-09006

81/152

S/2021/617

Annex XL
Statement by the Permanent Mission of Fiji to the United Nations
First of all allow me to congratulate Estonia on its successful presidency of the
Security Council.
In 1990 the Convention of the Rights of the Child came into force. There are
now 196 state parties to the Convention. The United Nations Office of the Spe cial
Representative for children and armed conflict was established by Member States in
1996, recognizing the importance of the issue. Security Council resolution 1261
(1999), recognized that the situation of children in armed conflict affects international
peace and security, and directed the Secretary-General to report annually on the
situation. Since then, there have been 12 resolutions by the Security Council relating
to the protection of children in armed conflicts.
But each year, the reports of the Secretary-General and the Special
Representative continue to highlight the plight, and grave violations of children ’s
rights in situations of armed conflicts around the world. Their numbers are clearly
increasing. Something is so obviously not right. The numbers of children affected by
conflicts where the United Nations does not have a mandate is unclear. This is a
failing that needs to be set right.
While international regimes are in place to protect and reduce the impact of
armed conflicts on children, their implementation continues to be, sadly, a growing
challenge. The report of the Secretary-General highlights that there is a “sustained
high number of grave violations.” Addressing this is an urgent task before this United
Nations Security Council. The trends highlight a systemic record of children being
exploited, killed, abducted, denied humanitarian access, subjected to sexual violence;
all perpetrated by adults and many having the protection of Go vernments and
competent authorities. All of these are compounded by the COVID -19 crisis.
To give peace operations a better chance of success, Fiji wholeheartedly
supports the call by the Secretary-General on 23 March 2021, for an immediate global
ceasefire so the world could focus its effort to combatting the COVID -19 pandemic.
The COVID-19 pandemic has caused major disruptions to mediation of
conflicts, and peacebuilding efforts by international, regional, and local communities.
The pandemic has exacerbated existing vulnerabilities worsening the situations in
conflict areas. This has disproportionally affected women and children the most.
Unfortunately, the Secretary-General’s ceasefire call was not heeded.
International and local communities lost a major opportunity to reduce the suffering
of children, and to save more children’s lives. The worst of the pandemic still lies
ahead for most developing countries. There is time still.
Fiji would like to highlight the following:
The report of the Secretary-General of 2020 highlights that a third of violations
reported are carried out by Governments and international forces. This can and must
stop urgently.
Non-State actors in the conflict space continue to be the major violators of
international laws on the protection of children. The United Nations system and its
peace operations have a significant role to play in ensuring that non -State actors are
made aware of their obligations unambiguously. There can be no impunity.
The Security Council has within its authority the means to implement
preventative measures. These include imposing and maintaining ceasefires; ending
impunity by making violators accountable for their actions through sanctions,
82/152

21-09006

S/2021/617

embargoes, and tribunals. The Security Council needs to tak e a more proactive
approach to protection mandates for peacekeeping missions to address escalating
violations.
The United Nations and the International community have recognized that
development and peace are closely linked. The 2030 Agenda for Sustainab le
Development is aimed at addressing the root causes of conflicts in communities, and
leaving no one behind. The achievement of the Sustainable Development Goals will
need the support of the whole of the United Nations system.
The Peacebuilding Commission is playing a critical role in prevention and
peacebuilding. The PBC continues to act as a bridge between the United Nations
organs, key stakeholders, and those in the field. The Peacebuilding fund requires
predictable and sustainable funding to support the work of the PBC. Its ability to
finance broader interventions aimed at protecting and saving children in conflict
affected regions are substantial.
Peacekeepers are best positioned to respond to protecting children in armed
conflicts due to their presence in conflict areas, and resources. child protection
advisers in United Nations peacekeeping field missions provide the best advise to
field missions on child protection and coordination with the host Government and
other key stakeholders. These posts should be increased in peacekeeping missions
according to the situation. Peace operations must be adequately resourced, so that
they can continue to provide protection, coordination, and support to the children in
armed conflicts.
Fiji reiterates its commitment to the protection of children in armed conflicts.
Fiji is a signatory to the Safe Schools Declaration and the Vancouver Principles on
peacekeeping and the prevention of the recruitment and the use of child soldiers.
Fiji has continuously deployed peacekeepers for more than 40years, supporting
the United Nations in maintaining international peace and security, and protecting
children in armed conflicts. Fiji will continue to ensure that its peacekeepers bring
the highest possible standards for protection of children, across all peace operations
they are engaged in.

21-09006

83/152

S/2021/617

Annex XLI
Statement by the Permanent Mission of Georgia to the
United Nations
I would like to express gratitude to the Estonian presidency for convening
today’s high-level debate on this important issue and thank the distinguished speakers
for their comprehensive update.
Armed conflicts impede children’s effective enjoyment of their rights and strip
them off the possibility to be protected from violence and ab use. We remain alarmed
by the sustained high number of grave violations committed against children in armed
conflict last year. Increased attacks on schools endangered them and infringed on their
right to education. Moreover, children continue to be denied humanitarian access.
This year marks the twenty-fifth anniversary of the creation of the children and
armed conflict agenda and the mandate of the Special Representative of the Secretary General for Children and Armed Conflict by the General Assembly. Despite the
significant progress that has been made with regards to the protection of children in
armed conflicts during last decades, there is still more to be done in this end.
While we welcome the findings of the latest report of the Secretar y-General and
share its recommendations, we also express our serious concern over the continued
mass violations against children that took place during the reporting period.
From the Georgia’s perspective, effectively addressing grave violations against
children is possible only through unwavering commitment to our obligations under
international law and redoubling national and international efforts to achieve
accountability for perpetrators of grave violations. Hence, Georgia continues to
strengthen its adherence to the relevant international legal instruments. Our
commitment to the protection of children has been further solidified by endorsing
important multilateral initiatives, including the Safe Schools Declaration, the
Vancouver Principles on Peacekeeping and the Prevention of the Recruitment and Use
of Child Soldiers.
Unfortunately the COVID-19 pandemic – this unprecedented global threat –
particularly exacerbated the dire situation of children affected by armed conflicts. At
the same time, the pandemic has further accentuated the importance of protecting
hospitals and other civilian infrastructure.
As the conflict-affected children continue to suffer on a daily basis in different
parts of the world, there is an urgent need of timely and unimpeded humanitarian
access for providing assistance to them. Thus, we join the call of the Secretary -General
upon all parties to allow safe, timely and unimpeded humanitarian access (P 284).
In this context I would like to draw the Council’s attention to the dire
humanitarian and human rights situation in the Russia-occupied regions of Georgia –
Abkhazia and the Tskhinvali region/South Ossetia that has been aggravated amid the
COVID-19 pandemic. Among our major concerns remain, inter alia, the restrictions
of the freedom of movement, infringement of right to life and health and the
prohibition of education in native language for children as well as other forms of
discrimination they regularly face. These fundamental rights continue to be violated
by the Russian Federation – the power exercises effective control on the ground,
which has been clearly attested by the 21 January 2021 ruling of the European Court
of Human Rights.
Due to the Russia’s irresponsible and inhuman approach of closing the so-called
“crossing points” along the occupation line, population residing in the occupied

84/152

21-09006

S/2021/617

regions, including children, remain stripped of the access to urgent care and medical
evacuations that often leads to fatal cases.
The above-mentioned once again clearly demonstrates the urgent need of access
for the international and regional human rights monitoring mechanisms to both
regions of Georgia. Herewith, we call on the international community to urge Russia
to cease its provocative and destructive actions in the occupied reg ions of Georgia.
On its part, my country reiterates its readiness to contribute to the Secretary General’s endeavour to mobilize the international community’s political will and
commitment to prioritize the protection of children in conflict-affected areas, to
advance peace efforts and leave no child behind.

21-09006

85/152

S/2021/617

Annex XLII
Statement by the Permanent Mission of Germany to the
United Nations
Germany thanks the Estonian presidency for convening this important debate
on children and armed conflict at the highest level, which demonstrates the high
importance Estonia attaches to the children and armed conflict agenda.
Today we are discussing a long awaited report. This report documents the
shocking number of 26,425 grave violations committed against children in 2020. This
number is all the more worrisome as we know that there are many more unreported
violations hidden behind official numbers. And behind each single number is the fate
of an individual child. The Security Council cannot allow these horrendo us violations
to continue. It cannot allow that in certain regions of the world, a whole generation
of children grows up without knowing peace and without access to basic services and
education. The severity of the situation has been made abundantly clear by the briefers
here today.
The twenty-fifth anniversary of the children and armed conflict mandate is a
moment for reflection. We want to sincerely thank Special Representative of the
Secretary-General Gamba and all those involved in the monitoring and reporting
mechanism for their important work – especially the country task forces, who often
risk their lives collecting and verifying data, a crucial task that has been made even
more difficult due to the COVID-19 pandemic. At the same time we need to do
everything we can in order to finally end these grave violations against children.
Especially the reported attacks on education facilities and hospitals remain very
concerning. We therefore encourage all those who have not yet done so to endorse the
Safe Schools Declaration as well as the Paris Principles and the Vancouver Principles
and to ratify the Optional Protocol to the Convention on the Rights of the Child on
the involvement of children in armed conflict. Following-up on the Safe Schools
Declaration is also an integral part of the call for Action to strengthen respect for
international humanitarian law and principled humanitarian action, which has been
developed by France and Germany. We call on those who have not yet joined this Call
to do so.
Just like the Secretary-General and many of the briefers today, we are also
concerned about other violations, including sexual and gender-based violence in
conflict – some even conducted by state actors, as reported in Somalia and the
Democratic Republic of the Congo. Sexual and reproductiv e health services must be
provided to survivors, and perpetrators must be held accountable.
Killing and maiming as well as recruitment and use by armed group sadly
remain the most common violations. We are equally concerned over attacks on water
and sanitation services, and the subsequent impact on children – children are more
likely to die from diseases linked to unsafe water than adults. Germany has
particularly focused on the gender-related impact of poor or non-existent water,
sanitation and hygiene services for children in conflict areas. For instance, we
organized an event with UNICEF during Protection of Civilians Week in May that
focused on children, especially girls, as the most vulnerable victims when water,
sanitation, and hygiene facilities are attacked and water supply is cut off.
Against this background, Germany would like to use the opportunity of this
open debate to highlight four crucial points for our future action.
First, we need to further mainstream the children and armed conflict A genda in
the Security Council’s work. To this end, it is more important than ever that the
Working Group continues to closely monitor the situation of children in conflict areas
86/152

21-09006

S/2021/617

which are on the agenda of the Security Council. As Chair, Belgium did an exce llent
job over the past two years; now Norway continues to ably lead the way. We thank
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General and all others actors involved
increasing the frequency of country reports submitted to the Group and, as a result,
the significant reduction of the respective reporting periods. We also encourage the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General to brief other Security Council
Working Groups and Sanctions Committees. We welcome new interactive dialogues
with peace operations and UNICEF that also aim to integrate the Protection of
Civilians, the Women, Peace and Security, and the Youth, Peace and Security
Agendas. In this regard, Germany is organizing a high-level conference on the
integration of human rights components into peace operations on 6 July.
Second, we have to ensure adequate age and gender-responsive child protection
capacities and resourcing. The protection of children through humanitarian assistance
and development programmes requires sufficient financial resources. As the COVID19 pandemic implies additional challenges and needs, we are increasingly concerned
about the often insufficient and untimely delivery of humanitarian assistance.
Germany is determined to act. That is why we have committed 450 milli on euros for
COVID-19-related humanitarian funding in 2020. In 2021 we have already committed
an additional 115 Mio. EUR this far. Additionally, we are the second largest donor to
UNICEF with over 600 Mio. EUR in 2020.
It is the responsibility of Member States, especially Security Council Members,
to ensure that peace operations have a strong child protection mandate. It is the
responsibility of all members of the General Assembly to ensure that peace operations
are adequately resourced. The distinct role of child protection advisers must be
preserved and strengthened. Germany will continue to push for a sufficient level of
financing for child protection capacities. Child protection must also be part of
pre-deployment training for all peacekeepers.
In the long-term, more sustainable funding is also needed for gender-sensitive
reintegration programming for children affected by armed conflict. We call on all
Member States to adhere to the Convention on the Rights of the Child and its Optional
Protocol on the involvement of children in armed conflict.
We see the 12,643 children that have been reportedly released from armed
groups and armed forces in 2020 as a sign of hope and are encouraged by ongoing
efforts of the Office of Special Representative of the Secretary-General and country
task-forces with parties to conflict in Afghanistan, the Central African Republic,
Nigeria, the Philippines, South Sudan and the Syrian Arab Republic to free further
children.
It is crucial to ensure that children are not deprived of their freedom solely
because of their alleged or actual association with armed groups. Germany has been
supporting research by the international NGO Watchlist on children in detention and
handover protocols that call for the swift transfer of children from security forces to
civilian child protection actors for reintegration.
The third crucial aspect is accountability. Violators of international
humanitarian law and human rights law need to be held accountable. In Syria, the
Syrian regime and Russia have been bombing civilian infrastructure, including
schools and hospitals. In Somalia, we are yet to see any credible accountability for
the killing and maiming and sexual violence committed against children. Access to
humanitarian assistance is denied without consequences in Myanmar. With such
rampant impunity, there is little deterrent against committing any of the horrible
crimes against children detailed in the report. Germany reiterates its full confidence
and support for the work of the International Criminal Court and international
investigative mechanisms. The strengthening of national judicial systems is also crucial.
21-09006

87/152

S/2021/617

True justice further involves access to reparations and to gender- and agesensitive comprehensive specialized services, including medical, mental and
psycho-social health services, sexual and reproductive health services, and legal and
livelihood support to survivors of grave violations. Special attention must be payed
to children with disabilities.
Our fourth and final crucial point today concerns the Secretary-General annual
report and the listings. We thank all who contributed to the Secretary -General
substantial report. We believe it is timely that Cameroon and Burkina Faso have been
added to the report this year. The cross-border nature of criminal groups, especially
in the Sahel and Lake Chad area, provide for a worrying trend. The United Nations
monitoring and reporting mechanism, the annual report of the Secretary -General, and
its annex are essential for accountability and preventing further violations against
children. All perpetrators of grave violations against children must be held to the same
standard, regardless of whether they are state forces or non -State armed groups. In
Germany’s view, it is therefore imperative that the findings of the report consistently
reflect the listing in the Annexes. We note that the Coalition to Restore Legitimacy in
Yemen remains as “delisted” despite 194 documented violations of killing and
maiming children in 2020. We would like to ask the Secretary-General to clarify his
approach regarding the annex. We further wish to underline the importance of a more
timely release of the reports in order to allow for more in -depth review and
consultations with civil society.
In closing, Germany aligns itself with the statements submitted by the European
Union and the Group of Friends.
Promoting children’s rights is a key pillar of Germany’s human rights policy.
Germany will remain committed to advancing the children and armed conflict
Agenda in all its aspects.

88/152

21-09006

S/2021/617

Annex XLIII
Statement by the Permanent Mission of Greece to the
United Nations
Children and young people are among the most vulnerable members of society.
It is a common truth that children continue to be the invisible victims of human
rights violations and abuses across the world. That is to say, killed or maimed,
recruited or used as soldiers, sexually abused or violated, abducted, deprived of
education and health services due to military attacks against scho ols or hospitals, and
restrained from humanitarian access.
Added to that, the current global health crisis, due to the COVID -19 pandemic,
exacerbates already existing vulnerabilities. It has a cumulatively negative impact on
all dimensions of human security, especially for children.
Greece entirely agrees with Secretary-General Guterres, saying that “the
pandemic also poses a significant threat to the maintenance of international peace and
security”, thus calling for ceasefires as a means to facilitate r esponse to COVID-19.
This cruel and devastating reality illustrates the urgent need to accelerate
coordinated international action to achieve peace and sustainable human development
for all. Especially for children, as future key actors in building peacef ul, inclusive
and resilient societies founded on the rule of law, justice and strong institutions.
Greece, prioritizing the protection of children affected by armed conflict and
the safeguarding of their rights, ratified the Optional Protocol on the invol vement of
children in armed conflict, which is essential for their adequate protection.
Greece has also endorsed the Paris Principles and Guidelines, the Safe Schools
Declaration and the Vancouver Principles.
Additionally, Greece has started implementation of its recently endorsed
national action plan on the Rights of the Child, while being in the process of
developing a national action plan on Women, Peace and Security, which highlights
the protection of girls from conflict-related violations and abuses.
In this vein, Greece remains committed to joining forces with all international
stakeholders in a global effort to adequately promote and protect the rights and
welfare of conflict-affected children and contribute to building a peaceful, inclusive
and gender-equal world.

21-09006

89/152

S/2021/617

Annex XLIV
Statement by the Permanent Mission of Guatemala to the
United Nations
• Allow me to congratulate the republic of Estonia for organizing this high level
open debate. Our acknowledgment is also extended to the Secretary -General of
the United Nations, the Executive Director of UNICEF, as well as, Forest
Whitaker and Laban Onisimus, for their valuable briefings.
• The findings of the annual report of the Secretary-General considers issues
related to the implementation of this agenda while taking into account the mid and long-term impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on the protection of children
in armed conflict. It is undeniable that the pandemic severely affected the ability
of the United Nations to monitor and verify grave violations against children
and curtailed its efforts to engage with parties to armed conflict to end and
prevent such violations.
• Despite the available data, it is not yet possible to draw definitive conclusions
about the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on violations against children. The
verification of reported cases will take time before the full magnitude of
violations against children becomes evident.
• Having statistical data is important because it is a way to realistically tailor
response capacity on the potential effects of the COVID -19 pandemic on
violations against children, including the right to education and the vulnerability
faced by girls.
• Due to school closures and loss of family income, there has been an increase in
the vulnerability of children to recruitment and abuse. Girls have become more
vulnerable to sexual and gender-based violence has increased because of
reduced mobility and increased isolation.
• The right of children to protection from violence is enshrined in the convention
on the rights of the child and yet still one billion children experienced some
form of emotional, physical or sexual violence, only in the past year. We
encourage States that have not yet done so, to consider ratifying the optional
protocol on the involvement of children in armed conflict.
• Children are disproportionately affected by hostilities, both dire ctly as victims
and through their association with armed forces and armed groups. States should
develop better comprehensive prevention policies to reduce demand for and
access to weapons to decrease environmental factors that also contribute to
violence against children, especially during armed conflicts.
• Guatemala stresses its commitment for ensuring and protecting the rights of
every child. An example of this, is our endorsement of the safe schools
declaration that calls for strong political support for the protection of every child
comprehensively.
• Facilitating adequate funding for child protection capacities in united nations
missions is of paramount importance. We call on the security council to continue
to incorporate the key role played by child protection provisions and capacity
in all relevant mandates of peacekeeping operations and special political
missions.
• Greater efforts are needed to provide assistance to parties in armed conflict in
order to fulfil the measures put in place to improve the protection of children
with a view of developing action plans. The united nations plays a relevant role
90/152

21-09006

S/2021/617

for the facilitation and engagement with non-State actors to prevent grave
violations.
• We encourage to follow up on this debate focusing on the actions and solutions
involved in addressing this matter now that we are in the post-pandemic phase,
in order to contribute to Member States still struggling with the effects of the
virus.
• I conclude by underlining that the defence of children is a moral and political
imperative. We must continue to act collectively in order to work towards the
fulfilment of our responsibility to protect the most precious good of our
societies: the children.

21-09006

91/152

S/2021/617

Annex XLV
Statement by the Chargé d’affaires of Indonesia to the
United Nations, Mohammad Kurniadi Koba
I would like to thank the President for her leadership in today ’s open debate.
I also thank the Secretary-General and other briefers for their updates on this
issue.
Every child deserves to live in a safe environment, which warrants policies that
protect them from harm. This reasoning is the basis for Indonesia ’s policy on child
protection and sets the tone for our stance in condemning six grave violations against
children in armed conflict.
The high number of grave violations in 2020 is unsettling, notably the record
high number of casualties as a result of recruitment and use of children, killing and
maiming, as well as the denial of humanitarian access.
It is, moreover, an unfortunate fact that the COVID-19 pandemic aggravated
existing vulnerabilities of children, including by hampering their access to heal thcare, education and safe spaces. The socioeconomic impact of this pandemic also
augmented violations against children.
On that note, allow me to elaborate three pertinent points.
First, no more children should be affected by armed conflict.
Children have rights to be protected from violence wherever they live. In this
respect, we believe that the best approach until now is to find tailor-made and contextbased solutions that end and prevent violations against children.
The most recent resolution 2427 (2018) with previous resolutions provide a
comprehensive basis on this matter.
We also need to consistently maintain our support towards the enhanced
engagement by all parties to conflict on child protection. As clearly reported, this
engagement resulted in the release of more than 12,000 children from armed groups.
Second, the children and armed conflict agenda is even more critical during this
COVID-19 pandemic. Unfortunately, the pandemic is not over yet.
We need to ensure that our efforts towards this pandemic take the rights and
needs of children into account. This covers their access to healthcare, quality
education and delivery of timely COVID-19 response.
Through our peacekeepers on the ground, Indonesia maintains its concrete
contribution on child protection. Our peacekeepers continue to engage communities
within Civil-Military Coordination (CIMIC) activities, including by supporting
children to understand how to address the pandemic in various conflict situations.
Intricately linked and having a direct bearing on child protection, we remain our
support to the Secretary-General’s call for a global ceasefire during the COVID-19
pandemic.
Third, invest more in the efforts to reintegrate children associated by armed
groups.
As member of the Friends of Reintegration, Indonesia believes that the
protection of children’s rights must start from the family or caregivers. Providing
children with a safe and nurturing environment in the family is the best way to break
the cycle of their involvement in armed conflict.
92/152

21-09006

S/2021/617

Mental health and psychosocial support that involve local community are
essential towards their effective reintegration into the society.
We commend UNICEF, Office of the Special Representative of the Secretary General for Children and Armed Conflict, relevant non -governmental organizations
and personnel on the ground for their significant contribution to facilitate the
transition of former child soldiers to normal life.
The best interests of children must be given primary consideration in all actions,
with no exception. It is even more urgent for those children who are in conflict affected areas and under the disruption of COVID-19 pandemic.
Let’s put our words into action for the best interests of our children. Children
are neither soldiers nor victims. They are our future.

21-09006

93/152

S/2021/617

Annex XLVI
Statement by the Permanent Representative of the Islamic
Republic of Iran to the United Nations, Majid Takht Ravanchi
In the Name of God, the Compassionate, the Merciful.
Protection of children, particularly girls, in armed conflicts is a fundamental
moral and humanitarian principle and every effort must be made to ensure that it is
fully respected by all parties in all conflicts.
Nevertheless, it is highly alarming that according to annual report of the
Secretary-General on children and armed conflict, “In 2020, the situation of children
in armed conflict was marked by a sustained high number of grave vi olations.”
Unfortunately, many of such violations have occurred in our neighbourhood from
Afghanistan to Yemen to Palestine.
The most recent example of such violations in Afghanistan is a cowardly
terrorist attack that took place, on 8 May 2021, in front of the Sayed Al-Shuhada
school in the community of Shi’ites of the Hazara minority in Kabul, killing 85 and
injuring 147 others, mostly schoolgirls.
This and other deadly terrorist acts in Afghanistan, mostly committed by Daesh,
targeting certain religious and ethnic minorities as well as women and girls,
underscore the continued need for combating terrorism as well as brining the
perpetrators of these reprehensible acts to justice.
In Yemen, in 2020 the United Nations verified the killing and mai ming of 194
by the so-called Coalition to Support Legitimacy in Yemen, as stated by the Secretary General in his annual report. Nonetheless, on 22 June 2021, Yemeni children marched
across the country stating that in more than six years, as a result of the attacks by that
Coalition, over 3,500 Yemeni children were martyred, more than 4,000 were injured,
thousands were orphaned, and millions were displaced from their homes. They also
expressed their strong dissatisfaction with the United Nations for not prop erly
reflecting in its reports of such grave violations of the rights of Yemeni children.
Yet, the most systematic and gross violation of the rights of child in the Middle
East continues to be committed by the Israeli regime. According to the annual repo rt
of the Secretary-General, in 2020, the United Nations verified 1,031 cases of grave
violations against 340 Palestinian children, including killing 11, maiming 324 and
detaining 361, as well as 30 attacks on schools and hospitals by Israeli forces.
Only in its 11-day brutal and all-out war on Gaza in May 2021, Israeli forces
killed 253 Palestinians, including 66 children. This includes 13 members of an
extended family who have been killed and buried in the rubble of their own home –
many of whom were children, one as young as six months. Israeli forces also
destroyed 30 health facilities and around 50 schools.
These barbaric acts are clear manifestations of genocide, war crimes and crimes
against humanity, materially breach fundamental norms and princip les of
international law, and entail international responsibility of the Israeli regime, whose
officials must therefore be brought to justice for committing such heinous crimes.
Protection of children in armed conflicts primarily requires putting an end to the
current conflicts and preventing their re-emergence and the eruption of new conflicts
as well as ensuring the full and effective implementation of international
humanitarian law by the conflicting parties.
The mechanism to list the parties violating the rights of children in armed
conflicts must also be used effectively and without discrimination and selectivity. It
94/152

21-09006

S/2021/617

is a source of grave concern that the Israeli forces have never been blacklisted as
violators of children’s rights in relevant reports of the Secretary-General and also the
name of the so-called Coalition to Support Legitimacy in Yemen has been deleted
from the top of that list.
We share the views of several Council members as well as significant number
of other Member States that have expressed concern in recent years on discrepancies
between the violations described in the reports of the Secretary -General and the
listing of the parties in their annexes, as well as the premature de-listing of parties,
calling for a consistent application of the criteria for listing and de -listing parties, and
stressing the importance of upholding the impartiality and integrity of such
mechanism.
Moreover, one of the missing elements of the report of the Secretary-General on
children and armed conflict seems to be the absence of assessment about the adverse
impacts of unilateral sanctions on the protection of children in conflict situations,
where sanctions most often deteriorate the economy, exacerbate the living conditions
and ultimately render the children vulnerable to recruitment by terrorist groups, force
them to leave their family and home and join displaced communities, and deprive
them of proper education, health services and the like. This important factor deserves
serious attention by the Secretary-General in his future reports.
Finally, protection of children in armed conflicts is the protection of our future
societies. This is a noble humanitarian duty and we must take it seriously and do
whatever in our power to protect them from the scourge of wars and conflicts.

21-09006

95/152

S/2021/617

Annex XLVII
Statement by the Permanent Mission of Italy to the United Nations
Italy aligns itself with the statement submitted by the European Union – as well
as with the statement presented by Canada on behalf of the Group of Friends of
Children And Armed Conflict – and would like to add the following remarks in its
national capacity.
We would like to thank Estonia for organizing this open debate, immediately
after the release of the annual report of the Secretary-General, and to express our
appreciation for the work of the Special Representative of the Secretary -General for
Children and Armed Conflict in that regard.
The COVID-19 pandemic has profoundly affected the promotion and protection
of children’s fundamental rights, aggravating their existing vulnerabilities, hindering
or preventing access to education, health and social services, and limiting safe spaces
for the protection of minors, including the monitoring activities carried out within the
mandate of the Special Representative of the Secretary-General.
Violations of children’s rights in armed conflict have dramatically risen, as this
year’s report shows, while school closures have had, and continue to have, a
detrimental effect on millions of children worldwide, exposing children to violations
that often have a long-lasting impact on their physical and psychological
development, and undermine their ability to actively shape their future.
Within this wider framework, girl children affected by armed conflicts are
particularly at risk of experiencing harsh and brutal forms of violence, also as a result
of school drop-outs which often increase the risk of child, early and forced marriage,
adolescent pregnancies, sexual exploitation and abuse, and recruitment into armed
groups. Applying a gender lens when approaching the situation of children in armed
conflicts is therefore necessary.
Italy welcomes the many initiatives taken to fight violenc e against women and
girls in armed conflicts, including Security Council initiatives, as well as the inclusion
of these crimes in the Statute of the International Criminal Court among war crimes
and crimes against humanity.
During the last session of the Commission on the Status of Women, we hosted
a high-level side-event on the accountability for violence against girl children in
armed conflicts, together with the Office of the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, Save the Children, and a cross-regional group of Countries.
In line with Italy’s strong support to Security Council resolution 1325 (2000) on
Women, Peace and Security, we dedicate specific attention to children, particularly
girls, within the implementation of the fourth Italian national action plan on Women,
Peace and Security, adopted in December 2020. References to girl children are
mainstreamed throughout the Plan, along with a number of measures specifically
dedicated to girls and girl children, to be implemented by different national
administrations.
Moreover, Italy considers continued access to education, also during armed
conflict, as an essential component of women’s empowerment and their full
participation in all spheres of society, in line with the spirit of article 29 of the United
Nations Convention on the Rights of the Child.
We believe that much more needs to be done, both to prevent violence against
girl children and to ensure accountability for occurred vio lations. In this regard, the
international criminal justice system, starting from the International Criminal Court,
96/152

21-09006

S/2021/617

can play a pivotal role. Access to justice should be ensured to all girls victims of
violence, as it constitutes a key tool to tackle impunity, to prevent other violations,
and to help the victims overcome the damages caused by violence.
We encourage all States affected by armed conflict to take, develop and
implement the necessary measures to ensure that the recruitment of children by
government forces and non-State armed groups, as well as acts of violence against
girls, are criminalized, and the perpetrators are brought to justice, in accordance with
the relevant international provisions.
We strongly support mainstreaming the children and armed conflict in the work
of the Security Council, including in mandate renewals: it is essential that the United
Nations peace operations include child protection officers. Italy is engaged in
providing its military personnel with the necessary skills to effectively protect
children and encourages all TCC to do so.
We reiterate the importance of the independence, impartiality, and credibility of
the monitoring and reporting mechanism, the findings of which should always be
accurately reflected in the annexes of the report, and that of the criteria and procedures
for listing and de-listing parties to armed conflict deemed responsible for grave
violations.
Italy will continue to engage in the protection of children ’s rights and in the
implementation of the children and armed conflict Agenda, while fully supporting the
mandate of the Special Representative of the Secretary-General.

21-09006

97/152

S/2021/617

Annex XLVIII
Statement by the Permanent Representative of Japan to the
United Nations, Ishikane Kimihiro
I would like to begin by thanking Estonia for convening this important meeting.
I thank the also Secretary-General and his Special Representative for the report on
children and armed conflict.
This year marks the twenty-fifth anniversary of the mandate of the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Children and Armed Conflict. Japan
highly values the efforts and achievements made to date in protecting children
affected by armed conflict, particularly by the United Nations peacekeeping
operations and special political missions as well as UNICEF and other agencies on
the ground. It is regrettable, however, that children in armed conflict continue to
experience grave and large scale violations of their most basic rights. In conflict
affected areas, girls are facing particular risks of abduction and sexual violence. Japan
urges all parties to armed conflict to fully comply with their obligations under
international human rights law and humanitarian law and implement all Security
Council resolutions on children and armed conflict.
The COVID-19 pandemic has only exacerbated children’s vulnerability to
violence and abuses in conflict settings. Child protection responses must not be
ceased or hampered. Safe, timely and unimpeded humanitarian access to children in
need is a matter of high priority, as recognized in Resolutions 2532 and 2565. The
Council must use its influence to the fullest extent to implement an immediate global
ceasefire and facilitate the implementation of the relevant Security Co uncil
resolutions, including resolution 2286 (2016) on healthcare in armed conflict.
Japan is committed to protecting children affected by conflict. In February,
Japan committed a $6.6 million contribution to the United Nations agencies,
including UNICEF, to urgently protect the people affected by the situation in Tigray
region, Ethiopia. Through this assistance, 624,000 children and 267,000 pregnant and
lactating women will receive nutritional support. This assistance will also enable
essential healthcare facilities to be repaired and 50,000 internally displaced persons
and children to receive medical support including mental healthcare. In addition, in
December, Japan decided to extend $3.3 million assistance for refugees in Sudan who
had entered from the Tigray region.
Japan is also committed to safeguarding children’s right to education and echoes
the urgent need to protect schools from attacks and to ensure access to safe and quality
education. No child should be left behind. In February, Japan contributed about
$4 million to UNICEF to provide quality learning for 135,000 children in Yemen,
where their access to education continues to be jeopardized due to prolonged conflict.
This contribution will also support 3,000 teachers in delivering quality education.
Japan also decided in February to contribute $9 million to support the United Nations
Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East in building or
rehabilitating 6 elementary and middle schools in Gaza to provide more classrooms
and better education facilities, including mental healthcare, to match increasing
student enrolment.
Child protection is critical under conflict situations. At the same time, from a
human security perspective, Japan deems it equally important to empower children by
providing every child equal opportunity to fully develop their human potential. To serve
longer-term peacebuilding objectives, we should spare no effort to improve learning
environments and ensure access to safe and quality education. Japan will continue to
work closely with other Member States, the United Nations system, international
humanitarian organizations and civil society organizations in this endeavour.
98/152

21-09006

S/2021/617

Annex XLIX
Statement by the Permanent Representative of Kazakhstan to the
United Nations, Magzhan Ilyassov
At the outset, Kazakhstan expresses deep concern over the number of
unconscionable acts of violence against children in armed conflict, further aggravated
by the pandemic COVID-19, and its concomitant upheavals, turmoil, disruption and
economic downturns. Child protection, is thus an absolute critical priority for the
international community and must be mainstreamed in the work of the United Nations
system and its six organs, peacekeeping and political missions, as well as state
national institutions and organizations with enhanced capacity on this issue at all
levels.
Thus, Kazakhstan presents the following recommendations for consideration to
strengthen measures to safeguard children:
It is vital that all Member States ratify and strictly implement the O ptional
Protocol to the Convention on the Rights of the Child and other relevant treaties.
Governments must endorse the international tools related to the protection of children
in armed conflicts, such as the Principles and Guidelines on Children Associat ed with
Armed Forces or Armed Groups, the Safe Schools Declaration, the Vancouver
Principles on Peacekeeping and the Prevention of the Recruitment and Use of Child
Soldiers. The attacks on schools, as well as hospitals, and their use for military
purposes must be prevented through immediate and resolute action by building a
sustained system that protects all children.
We join the call made by UNICEF, and the Alliance for Child Protection in
Humanitarian Action and other agencies, to release children detain ed in relation to
armed conflict. These also include children living with parents in detention due to
their extreme vulnerabilities, especially the risks on their fragile lives from the spread
of COVID-19, other viruses and infections in substandard settings.
It is equally important to have an effective system of strict law enforcement and
judicial procedures, with high punishment for violence inflicted on children and ban
on all impunity.
We need to set up mechanisms of early warning, monitoring and use of digital
and communication technology for greater vigilance, monitoring and control of such
crimes. These have to be followed with exchanges of experts and training of personnel
and institutions for child protection.
It also means we must prioritize preventive measures and increase support for
reintegration and rehabilitation programmes for children affected by armed conflicts,
with guarantees for long term predictable funding by national and international
donors.
It is essential to work with international and regional organizations, civil society
in implementing the above measures.
We take note of the report of the Secretary-General on children and armed
conflict in the Syrian Arab Republic (S/2021/398).
In this context allow me to inform the Council about the steps taken by my
country over the past two years to bring back from Syria and Iraq 725 of our citizens
(37 men, 188 women), including over 500 children, 33 of which are orphans, who
were lured into ISIL under false pretense and then entrapped in prolonged armed
conflict. Our experience can provide best practices and lessons learned for other
countries also engaged in similar repatriation operations.
21-09006

99/152

S/2021/617

It has been a complex and delicate endeavour over many stages. Each group of
returnees are placed in specialized, protected adaptation facilities where they were
given special medical, psychological examination. Psychologists, teachers, medical
and social workers work with them for a month, identifying the most acute problems
of each person.
Upon completion of the adaptation period, women with children travel to the
regions of their origin, usually to the families of relatives.
We are well aware of importance of developing an integrated approach to this
problem that will take years and thus implementing the rehabilitation, reintegration
and resocialization (3R’s) program for victims of terrorism in Kazakhstan.
Further rehabilitation is carried out by local government bodies with the
participation of local non-governmental organizations, as well as assistance of our
international partners. Currently, a total of 17 Rehabilitation Centres have been
opened throughout the country to help returnees, and they are run by local non governmental organizations supported by the Government.
It is important to emphasize that we consider returned women and children as
victims of terrorism. At the same time, we strive to implement the most balanced
approach that allows us to avoid both victimization and glorification of this category
of people.
Special attention was given to the rights of a child. Mothers and their children
are not separated at any stage of the program.
The returned orphans in most cases are adopted by their closest relatives –
grandmothers, aunts, but there are those who find a new family, while brothers and
sisters are not separated. There are cases when one family immediately took three
returned orphans.
To avoid stigmatization all children born in war zones are documented with bir th
certificates indicating home cities of their parents as their birth places. This is
important for the adaptation of children in the society, in the schools they attend.
Kazakhstan is ready to share its experience of reintegration as well as to learn
from others. With the escalating conflicts and tensions around the world, it is vital to
ensure that children grow up in a world free from fear, violence and hopelessness. It
is, therefore, our moral responsibility to save precious young promising lives, wh o
can be transformed into worthy citizens and beacons of light for others.
It is with great honour that the Government of the Republic of Kazakhstan has
accepted the invitation to serve on the Working Platform of Member States to review
the draft of the study of the mandate of the children and armed conflict on its twenty fifth anniversary. Alim Shaumenov, Director of Akniet Adaptation Centre, has been
appointed as the designated focal point for Kazakhstan.
I am grateful for this opportunity to share my country’s experience and let me
reiterate Kazakhstan’s commitment to contribute to our collective endeavours to
achieve a safer world.
We believe that Kazakhstan’s experience of repatriation, rehabilitation and
resocialization may become a role model for rest of the world community. Our stance
is clear – no citizen is left behind, justice and fair play for one and all.

100/152

21-09006

S/2021/617

Annex L
Statement by the Permanent Representative of Lebanon to the
United Nations, Amal Mudallali
Allow me first to congratulate the President of the Republic of Estonia, Kersti
Kaljulaid, on chairing this timely open debate and to congratulate Estonia on
assuming the presidency of the Security Council for the month of June.
We thank the President for organizing this important high-level open debate on
children and armed conflict and we thank the speakers for their thorough briefing, as
well as for their leadership in their respective field.
This open debate is very timely; it comes only a month after the bombing of the
occupied Palestinian territories where at least 67 Palestinian children under 18 years
old were killed in Gaza.
As Secretary-General António Guterres describes perfectly in one sentence: “If
there is a hell on earth, it is the lives of children in Gaza”.
As we celebrate this year the twenty-fifth anniversary of the creation of the
children and armed conflict agenda, including the mandate of the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Children and Armed Conflict, the New
York Times on its front page of 26 May 2021 reminded the world that those 67 victims
that were killed in Gaza: “They were just children”.
One of those children, a 12-year-old Palestinian girl called Nadine Abdullatif,
reminded us too, while weeping and pointing at the rubble asking: “What am I
supposed to do? Fix it? I’m only 10. I can’t even deal with this anymore. I just want
to be a doctor or anything to help my people. But I can’t. I’m just a kid”.
When we talk about children who died, we think about children who did not,
children who woke up without their parents, without a father, without a mother,
without a sibling, without a classmate, without a friend; children who woke up with
one of their body parts missing, children who cannot sleep at night from the trauma
of the bombing and the loss.
Unfortunately, the year 2020 has been particularly somber for children. As the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General for Children and Armed Conflict,
Virginia Gamba, stated, “The wars of adults have taken away the childhood of
millions of boys and girls again in 2020.”
As we read the annual report of the Secretary-General on children and armed
conflict, published last week, we are struck by the number of violations against
children in 2020 verified by the United Nations: “26,425 grave violations”.
It is important to highlight that this striking number refers to violations being
verified by the United Nations, without representing the full scale of violations
against children.
As stated in the aforementioned report, attacks on schools increased, verified
cases of abduction and sexual violence against children increased alarmingly by 90
and 70 per cent, respectively. The Secretary-General noted that these grave violations
do not affect boys and girls the same way; whereas 85 per cent of children recruited
and used were boys, 98 per cent of sexual violence was perpetrated against girls.
These alarmingly high numbers reveal how violations against children soared, in
the context of conflicts and how, despite the repeated calls by the Secretary -General to
silence the guns, many conflicts have intensified, and others have erupted. COVID -19
pandemic added fuel to the fire by aggravating existing vulnerabilities for children,
21-09006

101/152

S/2021/617

hindering their access to education, health, and social services, and exposing them to
recruitment, abduction, and sexual violation.
Impunity is not an option anymore. Perpetrators cannot get away with killing,
maiming, raping, abducting, and recruiting children anymore. All perpetrators of all
violations against children must be brought to justice and held accountable without
any delay. We recall Security Council resolution 2427 (2018) and we stress on the
importance of accountability for all violations and abuses against children in armed
conflict.
We need to give our children a better future, a better world to live and prosper in.
We need to act now, and we need to build a post-pandemic world where our
children do not have to hide from the terrifying noises of sirens, from raids and
shelling, where they do not have to run from bombings, and where they do not have
to live in constant fear.
Our children deserve better. They deserve to dream.
Let us all help them to fulfil their dreams.

102/152

21-09006

S/2021/617

Annex LI
Statement by the Deputy Permanent Representative of
Liechtenstein to the United Nations, Georg Sparber
25 years ago, the General Assembly created the children and armed conflict
agenda – as a response to the many devastating effects of war on children. While the
children and armed conflict mandate has had a positive impact on the livelihoods of
many children since, the current situation sadly illustrates its continued urgent
relevance. The number of grave violations against children remained high in 2020,
and the COVID-19 pandemic has increased their vulnerabilities. We reiterate that the
protection of the mandate’s independence and integrity is crucial to its effectiveness
and credibility. This also includes the objective, consistent and transparent practice
of listing parties that have committed grave violations against children and those that
have and have not put in place measures during the reporting period to improve the
protection of children.
Liechtenstein remains deeply concerned about the high occurrence of sexual and
gender based violence against children. Such violence is often underreported owing
to fear of stigmatization and cultural taboos, in particular when perpetrated against
boys, as also documented by the All Survivors Project. A culture of silence continues
to impede accountability and justice, and contributes to further cycles of violence and
persistent harmful gender stereotypes. In times of quarantines, lockdowns and other
restrictions on movement caused by the COVID-19 pandemic, it is particularly
important to ensure access to reporting mechanisms and to safe, timely, quality, age appropriate, survivor-centred medical care and mental health and psychosocial
support services for all survivors. We reiterate our strong support for the efforts of
the Secretary-General’s Special Representative to shed light on victims and survivors
of conflict-related sexual violence, including men and boys, in line with Security
Council resolution 2467 (2019).
We furthermore continue to be alarmed about the attacks against schools and
other education institutions. Such attacks violate the right to education and often
constitute war crimes or crimes against humanity. Depriving children of access to
education and thus violating the right to education also has a devastating impact on
sustainable development. The COVID-19 pandemic has further exacerbated
inequalities and limited access to education. The Safe School s Declaration remains
an important tool and its effective implementation is key.
The international justice system has played a key role in ending impunity for
grave violations against children. The Rome Statute of the International Criminal
Court has been exemplary in its child-sensitive approach. It requires the Chief
Prosecutor to appoint advisers with legal expertise on violence against children and
the International Criminal Court to take measures to protect the safety, physical and
psychological well-being, dignity and privacy of victims and witnesses, and to have
regard to age in this respect.
Engaged in the prosecution of crimes committed against children from its
inception, the International Criminal Court has been vital in determining how to
handle cases involving child soldiers, including complex cases with children involved
both as perpetrator and victim. The case of Dominic Ongwen is a prime example:
Found guilty for a total of 61 crimes comprising crimes against humanity and war
crimes, he himself was kidnapped and forced into military service at a young age. The
International Criminal Court’s conviction of Bosco Ntaganda for the forced
enlistment of boys and girls in armed groups, and the perpetration of sexual violence
against them, is an important step forward in ensuring justice for children in conflict.
It is also a milestone decision in recognizing sexual and gender based violence against
21-09006

103/152

S/2021/617

both male and female child soldiers equally. The Trust Fund for Victims of the
International Criminal Court has provided important assistance to children and it is
in the process of designing measures providing collective reparations with
individualized components for the victims and survivors of the Ntaganda case.
Liechtenstein has been a donor and supporter of the Trust Fund for many years.
The situation in Syria continues to be of grave concern to us. The conflict has
entered its eleventh year, with grave impacts on children. Millions have suffered
death, injury, displacement, destruction, poverty, hun ger and insecurity. An estimated
11.1 million people are in need of humanitarian assistance, of which 4.8 million are
children. We call on the Security Council to ensure safe, unhindered and sustained
humanitarian access to all Syrians in need. We furtherm ore support the SecretaryGeneral’s Special Representative in her call to parties to the conflict to remove all
impediments to humanitarian access to children and to enable unimpeded access to
education. And we welcome her continued engagement and cooperation with special
mechanisms, including the General Assembly accountability mechanism (IIIM).

104/152

21-09006

S/2021/617

Annex LII
Statement by the Permanent Representative of Lithuania to the
United Nations, Rytis Paulauskas
Lithuania aligns itself with the statement submitted by the European Union and
would like to additionally submit a statement on its national capacity.
Lithuania would like to sincerely thank the Estonian presidency of the Security
Council for organizing this very important debate. We also really appreciate the
briefers for their presentations.
As Nelson Mandela rightly said, there can be no keener revelation of a society’s
soul than the way in which it treats its children. In this context, the recent annual
report of the Secretary-General on children and armed conflict reveals a very grim
reality. The numbers are staggering: 26,425 grave violations affecting 19,379 children
were recorded over the reporting period. It makes 42 pages filled with numbers and
figures. Although properly structured and disaggregated, these numbers do not reflect
the scope of real suffering. Behind each and every number, each an d every figure,
there are personal stories of real children, real families, real communities. The stories
of real loss and real trauma. In the 21st century that has seen the real breakthrough in
many fields – from utilization of new frontier technology solutions, including use of
AI, to new space programmes – it is tragically sad and heart-breaking to read stories
of children who will never be able to fully enjoy their childhood.
As the current President of the UNICEF’s Executive Board, I had an opportunity
to get the broader insight into many problems that children still face in the modern
world. The impacts of armed conflict and violence are particularly devastating for
children, with interruptions to education and health services and heightened risk of
conflict-related sexual violence. Children continue to suffer daily, and the numbers
of children killed in conflict are appalling.
Children, who survived, will live with the terrible remnants of the conflict. The
gravity of the violations is so much heavier and so longer-lasting than might appear
from the sheer numbers: the impact of the conflict may adversely affect the life
trajectory of children far more than adults and may leave enduring impacts in
posttraumatic stress disorder. Severe losses and disru ptions during the conflict lead
to long-term psychological consequences, high rates of depression and anxiety.
During the reporting period, the scale and severity of grave violations against
children remained very concerning, including increased number ch ild abductions,
recruitment and use of children by parties to armed conflict. In particular, Lithuania
is appalled with the fact that during the verified cases of abduction and sexual
violence against children increased alarmingly by 90 and 70 per cent, re spectively.
This is utterly disturbing, especially having in mind that sexual violence cases are
usually greatly underreported and that they disproportionately affect girls.
Lithuania urges all parties of armed conflicts, state and non -State alike, to end
all violations against children and fully implement international humanitarian, human
rights and refugee law. As set in the report, the levels of denial of humanitarian access
to children continued to be high, therefore Lithuania urges all parties of arm ed
conflicts to provide safe, timely and unimpeded humanitarian access. All parties that
fail to comply with these obligations that bear on the protection of children in conflict
must be held accountable.
The period of reporting was as difficult as never before – the COVID-19
pandemic has had a negative impact on every aspect of our lives and children in
conflicts despite already being one of the most vulnerable groups, had to additionally
21-09006

105/152

S/2021/617

face pandemic-related consequences, such as school closures, increased number of all
forms of gender-based violence, including child, early and forced marriage.
The pandemic has, however, provided forward-looking solutions aimed at
equipping all children with digital learning opportunities. We believe that the
alternative and distance learning programmes that have been put in place while
schools have been closed during COVID-19, should be made available to children in
armed conflict, especially girls and children with disabilities, and should continue to
be available even when the pandemic ends.
It is also of utmost importance to ensure that all of those children (and their
families) that were subjected to grave violations, especially survivors of rape and
sexual violence, would receive the needed assistance and help, inc luding
psychological support, medical and legal assistance, food and shelter. In this context,
we need to ensure that proper long-term and comprehensive programmes for
rehabilitation and reintegration of children affected by armed conflict would be put
in place.
Lithuania would like to reiterate our strong support to the mandate of the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Children and Armed Conflict. As this
year we mark the twenty-fifth anniversary of this mandate, we would like to thank
Virginia Gamba and her whole team for their uncontested work in the field. Lithuania
would also like to extend our appreciation to UNICEF and the Executive Director H.
Fore for the tireless efforts of protecting the children.
This report should be a wake-up call. A reminder that behind each and every
number in the report, there is a real boy or girl asking not to be left behind and not to
be forgotten. Very often children are not able to protect themselves. The responsibility
of protecting their peace, their dreams and their tomorrow lies on our shoulders. Let
us not fail them.

106/152

21-09006

S/2021/617

Annex LIII
Statement by the Permanent Mission of Luxembourg to the
United Nations
[Original: French]
Luxembourg thanks the Estonian presidency of the Security Council for
organizing this open debate on children and armed conflict, as well as all the briefers
who enriched the debate with their experience and expertise.
Luxembourg aligns itself with the statement of the European Union and with the
statement submitted on behalf of the Group of Friends of Children and Armed
Conflict.
When the mandate of the Special Representative for Children and Armed
Conflict was created 25 years ago, our common goal was to end violations against
children in conflict situations. We have made remarkable progress in many areas,
including the establishment of the monitoring and reporting mechanism on grave
violations of children’s rights in situations of armed conflict, which has enabled us to
record the most serious violations. Without that mechanism, we would not be able to
understand the extent of the phenomenon, nor would we be able to take action to put
an end to it. Moreover, the action plans that Governments are implem enting with the
United Nations have made it possible to demobilize thousands of children. They
remain an essential tool to guide governments’ efforts to comply with international
humanitarian law.
However, the latest annual report of the Secretary-General gives a disturbing
assessment of the situation. Approximately 24,000 serious violations have been
recorded for 2020, and we know from experience that the actual figures are most
likely higher. The coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic has hampered
monitoring and reporting of violations, and has increased the vulnerability of
children. The socio-economic impact of the pandemic on children is likely to be felt
in the long term and may reverse the gains made. In some countries, the closure of
schools due to the health situation has increased the number of instances of
occupation of schools for military purposes.
But the pandemic, as serious as it is, is only an aggravating factor. The real
causes of violations against children are conflict and the inabilit y or unwillingness of
parties to conflict to take appropriate measures to protect children. This is why it is
necessary to reiterate the primary responsibility of States to protect their population
against abuse, to shed light on the violations committed, and to bring the guilty to
justice.
International courts can on occasion play an important subsidiary role, as was
the case recently with the conviction of Dominic Ongwen by the International
Criminal Court.
The Security Council, through its Working Group on Children and Armed
Conflict, must continue to assume its responsibility, notably by including child
protection provisions in all relevant resolutions. All countries can nevertheless
contribute to advancing the Children and Armed Conflict agenda throug h child
protection initiatives. Those initiatives include the Safe Schools Declaration, drawn
up by the Global Coalition to Protect Education from Attack, which Luxembourg
particularly welcomes. Since its launch in 2015 by Norway and Argentina, the
initiative has seen growing success.
In support of the fourth International Conference on Safe Schools to be held in
October 2021 in Abuja, Nigeria, Luxembourg, in partnership with Norway, will
21-09006

107/152

S/2021/617

organise regional consultations on 2 July to identify common priorities and challenges
in the Europe/Central Asia region.
You can count on Luxembourg to continue to support the mandate of the Special
Representative, as well as the agenda on children and armed conflict.

108/152

21-09006

S/2021/617

Annex LIV
Statement by the Permanent Mission of Malta to the
United Nations
I begin by thanking Estonia for organizing today’s important debate on children
and armed conflict and the briefers for sharing their valuable insights.
Malta aligns itself with the statements by the European Union and the Group of
Friends of Children and Armed Conflict, and would like to highlight a few points in
its national capacity.
Malta expresses its deep appreciation for the work of Special Representative of
the Secretary-General Virginia Gamba as we mark the twenty-fifth anniversary of the
mandate. This milestone is a time to reflect on our achievements and all that still
needs to be done to address the plight of children affected by armed conflict. Violence
and hostilities continue to have a devasting impact on children, and the COVID-19
pandemic has further exacerbated their vulnerability.
Important work is being carried out by civil society and humanitarian actors.
We thank them for their efforts and dedication to protect children, often at great
personal risk.
Malta is concerned with the findings of the report. The number of grave
violations presented in it are staggering. Even more worrying is that fact that such
numbers may be underreported, given that the COVID-19 pandemic has also impeded
information gathering and verification.
The countless reports detailing the recruitment and use of child soldiers; killing
and maiming, as well as abductions, of children; the high number of rape and other
forms of sexual violence perpetrated against children; repeated att acks against schools
and hospitals; and the continued denial of humanitarian assistance present a very
worrying picture where children face both immediate dangers and long -term risks.
Children’s right to education must be protected, at all times. This is also
particularly important for girls as they are often the last ones to resume their education
after schools’ closure.
The protection of children must be central in our policy and decision -making
processes. This goal is attainable, but we must act with u rgency. United Nations
peacekeeping operations have a key role to play in protecting children in armed
conflict, as well as others within the United Nations system, including UNICEF.
State and non-State parties must immediately cease all violations agains t
children by ensuring their behaviour is in full compliance with international
humanitarian law and human rights law. This approach will facilitate concrete and
effective protection for children, all more important amid the COVID -19 pandemic.
As a signatory to the Paris Principles and Commitments, Vancouver Principles, and
the Safe Schools Declaration, which provide a strong framework for us to build on,
Malta remains committed to playing its part in ensuring that children are afforded the
protection they deserve.
We strongly encourage the Council and Member States to support the full
implementation of strong child protection mandates, including through the speedy
deployment of senior child protection advisers and teams, and by prioritizing the
protection of children in peacekeeping transitions.
Should Malta be entrusted to serve on the Security Council in 2023 –2024,
children and armed conflict will be a matter of priority during its tenure. We firmly
believe that this issue should be mainstreamed across the work of the Security Council.
21-09006

109/152

S/2021/617

Annex LV
Statement by the Permanent Representative of Myanmar to the
United Nations, Kyaw Moe Tun
At the outset, I would like to thank the presidency of Estonia for convening
today’s Security Council high-level open debate on children and armed conflict. I also
appreciate all the briefers for their insightful and valuable contributions to the
meeting.
The United Nations has played a pivotal role in advocating for children and
working towards a world in which our children can live and grow away from conflict,
suffering and despair. Children are the future leaders. This year marks the twenty fifth anniversary of the creation of the children and armed conflict agenda, including
the mandate of the Special Representative of the Secretary-General for Children and
Armed Conflict.
In 2020, the COVID-19 pandemic brought about one of the worst tragedies in
humanity. Besides the loss of millions of lives, the pandemic exacerbated children ’s
vulnerability to serious violations. Subsequently, its long-term negative impact will
greatly continue to disturb our efforts to prevent grave violations against children in
conflict situations.
Myanmar expresses its deep concern about a sustained number of 23,946 grave
violations that affected 19,379 children in armed conflict in 21 situations worldwide
as unveiled in the report of the Secretary-General (S/2021/437) covering the period
of 2020. We are particularly alarmed by the trends of increased attacks on schools,
continued denial of humanitarian access and the underreporting of sexual violence,
of which 98 per cent was perpetrated against girls.
The protection of children needs to be ensured first and foremost by a legal
framework that guarantees their rights and wellbeing. Conflict parties’ compliance
with international law, including international humanitarian law and international
human rights law is essential. Efforts to monitor and verify grave violations against
children must be strengthened at all levels especially at the national level. All
perpetrators must be held accountable.
Despite the constitutional constraint with regard to the armed conflicts, the
elected civilian Government, with its strong commitment, led by Presiden t U Win
Myint and State Counsellor Daw Aung San Suu Kyi implemented a number of
significant initiatives to enhance child protection capacity, inter alia, the enactment
of a new Child Rights Law, the ratification of the Optional Protocol to the Convention
on the Rights of the Child on the involvement of children in armed conflict and the
ILO Minimum Age Convention, 1973, and the establishment of an inter-ministerial
committee for the prevention of the six grave violations during armed conflict. The
Government fully cooperated with the United Nations entities including the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Children and Armed Conflict. Taking this
opportunity, we wish to commend the Special Representative for her relentless efforts
and hard work, and thank her for the continued support towards the people of
Myanmar.
However, in 2020, 1,012 Myanmar children including 88 girls experienced
1,039 grave violations. I wish to express our profound sadness and sympathy for all
affected children. As verified by the Secretary-General in his report, more than 80 per
cent of these grave violations were perpetrated with impunity by the military known
as the Tatmadaw.

110/152

21-09006

S/2021/617

Last year, we cautiously welcomed the delisting of Myanmar military from the
violation of recruitment and use of children, one of the six grave violations against
children, hoping that such a positive gesture might lead to the improvement of their
behaviours. However, the military’s recruitment and use of children in 2020 increased
to 726 from 17 in 2019. They continued to commit grave violations of killing and
maiming children and rape and other forms of sexual violence against children as
reported by the Secretary-General.
Given the widely known brutality and inhumane acts of the military and its total
disregard for human life, the military has been relisted under Section B of annex I of
this annual report of the Secretary-General for the recruitment and use of children.
The military continues to be listed in Section A as in previous years.
A safe and bright future for children can only be realized by a peaceful
environment which can only be enabled by the rule of law, justice and respect for
human rights. Since the illegal military coup on 1 February 2021, the military has
destroyed our nascent democratic transition, and has ruined the rule of law. Justice
has been out of reach. Violence and atrocity crimes have been committed by the
military security forces on daily basis. The impact of the atrocities on the people in
particular children by the military is deeply disturbing and heartbreaking. Nearly 900
people were ruthlessly murdered by the military. According to UNICEF, as of 21 June,
at least 60 children have been killed since February, while countless others have been
seriously injured. The military forces tortured and threatened healthcare professionals
and teachers for their opposition to the military coup. We unequivocally condemn all
kinds of attacks on schools and hospitals as a grave violation against children. The
security forces continue to occupy many schools and hospitals throughout the country,
making it impossible in enabling a safe environment for learning and health care.
In light of the rapidly deteriorating situation in my country, Myanmar, after the
illegal military coup, I wish to appeal to the Security Council, the Security Council
Working Group on Children and Armed Conflict as well as to the Secretary -General
and his Special Representative as follows:
1.
Prevent further grave violations by the military forces of killin g and
maiming children and rape and other forms of sexual violence against children in
Myanmar.
2.
Ensure that the military forces stop indiscriminate and excessive use of
force and comply with the obligations under international law, including internatio nal
humanitarian and human rights law.
3.
End impunity and hold the perpetrators of grave violations against children
accountable.
4.
Ensure that the country task force on monitoring and reporting receives
sufficient support and strengthens its monitoring, reporting, prevention and response
efforts regarding all violations and abuses against children in Myanmar.
5.
Demand the military for unhindered humanitarian access to civilians
including children displaced by armed clashes.
6.
Call upon the United Nations and donors to work with the National Unity
Government of Myanmar, civil society organizations and other stakeholders to
provide short- and long-term humanitarian support to children especially in conflict
affected areas and camps for internally displaced persons.
7.
Demand that the military forces stop using schools and hospitals for
military purposes so that a safe and secure environment for children ’ education and
health can be ensured.

21-09006

111/152

S/2021/617

8.
Demand the immediate end of military coup and the restoration of
democracy in Myanmar.
In conclusion, children in Myanmar have suffered enough from prolonged
conflicts. History tells us that the brutal military dictatorship only exacerbates the
people’s sufferings in various ways. The fundamental solution to building a peaceful
future for our children is the emergence of a federal democratic union where human
rights are fully respected, justice and the rule of law upheld, the military be
professional through the establishment of a federal army. With th is goal in mind, the
National Unity Government together with the people of Myanmar will do everything
we can to eradicate the military dictatorship and build a peaceful, democratic and
federal union.

112/152

21-09006

S/2021/617

Annex LVI
Statement by the Permanent Representative of Nepal to the
United Nations, Amrit Bahadur Rai
I begin by extending my sincere appreciation to Kersti Kaljulaid, President of
the Republic of Estonia, for organizing this high-level open debate on the important
issue of children and armed conflict.
I thank the President, the Secretary-General and the distinguished briefers for
their remarks and valuable insights.
Nepal believes that protection of children is a crucial aspect of conflict
resolution, peacebuilding and sustaining peace.
As a party to the Convention on Rights of the Child and its Optional Protocols,
Nepal has enacted necessary legal instruments and established a legal and
administrative framework for the promotion and protection of the rights of children.
Nepal remains committed to all the normative framework of the Security Council
relating to the rights and protection of children in armed conflict including resolution
1612 (2005).
Nepal commends the role of the United Nations for setting rightful attention to
the issues of children and armed conflict for several years. Numerous normative
frameworks have been devised under the auspices of the United Nations for the
compliance of obligation to parties of conflict on prote ction of children. The United
Nations has supported many countries in demobilization, rehabilitation and
reintegration of thousands of conflict-affected children; and responded to violations
and abuses against children.
Despite our collective efforts, children have not ceased to suffer. Reports of
Secretary-General, year after year, indicated that the high numbers of children are
suffering from grave violations by parties in conflicts. Children continue to be
recruited, abducted, raped, killed or maimed in conflict -affected areas. Schools and
hospitals are being targeted, attacked or used for military purposes. Violations against
children have been used as tactics of war.
Children are the most vulnerable section of the society during the conflict. The
COVID-19 pandemic has exacerbated the situation of thousands of already vulnerable
children in conflict-ridden areas. Due to pandemic induced economic fragilities and
closure of schools, children are at high risk to be abused, recruited and used by armed
groups, suffer sexual exploitation and other forms of violence.
National Governments have the primary responsibility for protection and
promotion of the rights of children. They must implement national policies ensuring
inalienable rights of children with adequate measures for their education, health,
safety, well-being and opportunities to develop their inherent qualities. Every nation
must fulfil their obligations relating to rights and protection of children and take
remedies thereof, if their rights are violated. State should be responsible in bringing
perpetrators to justice in the case of the violation of rights.
Comprehensive and collaborative approach is required to address the issues of
conflict-affected children. National Governments, internationa l community, civil
societies and all other relevant actors should work together during conflict as well as
post conflict recovery and reconstruction planning, programmes and strategies.
Consideration of the views of children in post conflict rehabilitation and reintegration
process is must for the sustained solution. At the same time, overall development
policies with investment in education, health system, State and social support

21-09006

113/152

S/2021/617

mechanism to children are essential for sustained promotion and protection o f rights
of children.
Nepal’s own experience of successful transition from conflict to peace includes
reintegration of conflict-affected children, among others. The Government of Nepal
had included child protection provisions from the early stages of pea ce process
emphasizing on the best interest of children and their families. Successful
implementation of time-bound and tailor-made action plans for rehabilitation and
reintegration of children was a key element of peace process. Nepal was delisted from
the report of the Secretary-General as we completed this process in a transparent
manner.
As one of the largest troops and police contributing countries, Nepal provides
its peacekeepers with adequate pre-deployment training on child protection issues in
all its aspects including prevention and response to violation against children.
To conclude, I wish to emphasize on the necessity of our collective efforts for
the protection of child rights while strengthening accountability framework as well
as investigative and prosecutorial capacities of national Governments in case of
violations during and post conflict setting.

114/152

21-09006

S/2021/617

Annex LVII
Statement by the Permanent Mission of Pakistan to the
United Nations
We thank the Permanent Mission of Estonia for holding this year’s annual debate
of the Security Council on children and armed conflict.
We also thank the Secretary-General, Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral for Children and Armed Conflict and other briefers for their insightful
statements.
Millions of children are caught up in conflicts in which they are not merely
bystanders, but deliberate targets. While some fall victim to a general onslaught
against civilians; others die as part of a calculated genocide. Still other children suffer
the effects of sexual violence or the multiple deprivations of armed conflict that
expose them to hunger or disease.
The facts revealed in the Secretary-General’s latest report (S/2021/437) are
quite sombre.
The overall number of grave violations remained alarmingly high at 26,425.
These violations include the continued killing and maiming of children, the
recruitment and use of child soldiers, sexual violence and abduction, attacks against
schools and hospitals, and denial of humanitarian access.
The report further revealed that the ongoing COVID-19 pandemic has
exacerbated difficulties in the protection of children affected by armed conflicts, with
humanitarian agencies finding it hard to conduct their work safely.
Whatever the causes of modern-day brutality towards children, the time has
come to call a halt. These acts must end, and perpetrators must be held to account.
Despite some progress in recent years, the scale and intensity of today ’s
conflicts is stretching our capacity to protect children.
In conflict zones and occupied territories, we are witnessing a deeply troubling
breakdown in humanity and diminishing respect for human life and dignity.
Nowhere is this grim reality starker than in today’s Indian Occupied Jammu and
Kashmir (IIOJK).
In this regard, I wish to draw the Council’s attention to the latest report of the
Secretary-General which has expressed deep concerns on the “grave violations”
against children in occupied Jammu and Kashmir by the Indian security forces.
The report also raises alarm on the continued illegal detention of (Kashmiri)
children, torture in detention and detention without charge or due process.
In view of these serious concerns, the Secretary-General has rightly urged the
Indian Government to “immediately end” such practices and take “preventive
measures” to protect children, including by “ending the use of pellets against
children” in IIOJK.
We are not surprised by the findings of the report of the Secretary -General.
Despite the persistent concerns raised by multiple Special Rapporteurs and
Mandate Holders of the Human Rights Council and the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for Children and Armed Conflict, the human rights and
humanitarian situations continues to deteriorate for the innocent children of IIOJK
since 5 August 2019.

21-09006

115/152

S/2021/617

During the year 2020, we continued to witness some of the worst atrocities and
state terrorism taking place in IIOJK:
• More than 300 innocent Kashmiris, including women and children, were killed
in “fake encounters” and staged “cordon-and-search” operations.
• 750 Kashmiris were critically injured, while 2,770 innocent Kashmiris were
arbitrarily detained, and 922 houses destroyed as part of collective punishment
inflicted on the Kashmiri communities.
In a particularly horrifying incident, a gut-wrenching picture of a three-year-old
Kashmiri boy sitting on the body of his grandfather (Muhammad Bashir) killed by the
Indian forces went viral on the internet, drawing ire from social media and civil
society. The three-year-old boy was shown sitting on top of his motionless grandfather
as he cried.
Such inhuman actions are not only in violation of the Security Council
resolutions on children and armed conflict but are also in breach of the “best interests
of the child” principle under the Convention on the Rights of the Child, to which India
is a state party.
The worsening situation and increased attacks against children in IIOJK, as
reported in the latest report of the Secretary-General, calls for Security Council’s
intervention by holding India accountable for its grave breaches of international
humanitarian law and war crimes in IIOJK.
Pakistan fully supports the mandate of the Special Representative, which is
adequate to deal with situations of armed conflict. We want to strengthen the political
consensus around it but the mandate does not need accretion.
We firmly believe that the legal parameters of the mandate establ ished by the
Security Council resolutions must be respected. Our singular focus should continue
to remain on situation of “armed conflicts”. We hope that this principle would be kept
in mind while preparing future reports.

116/152

21-09006

S/2021/617

Annex LVIII
Statement by the Permanent Mission of Panama to the
United Nations
[Original: Spanish]
This year, against the background of the twenty-fifth anniversary of the creation
of the agenda for children and armed conflict, the Government of the Republic of
Panama, led by President Laurentino Cortizo Cohen, reiterates its commitment to
promoting and protecting the human rights of children and adolescents, as well as to
adopting new actions aimed at strengthening those rights.
In September 2019, Panama submitted its first report for consideration by the
Committee on the Rights of the Child, in accordance with the Optional Protocol to
the Convention on the Rights of the Child on the involvement of children in armed
conflict, ratified by Panama through Act No. 48 of 2000.
It is important to note that there is no civil war or international armed conflict
in Panama, that article 310 of our Constitution provides that “the Republic of Panama
shall have no army” and that, in accordance with the scope of the Protocol, the
government bodies responsible for implementation of the Protocol include the
Ministry of Security, with its various agencies, and the Ministry of Social
Development, as the lead agency for policy on children and adolescents; the National
Secretariat for Children, Adolescents and the Family, as the specialized autonomous
body responsible for the coordination of public policies for children and adolescents;
the National Office of Refugee Affairs, as the body responsible for requests for refuge
and care of refugees; the Public Prosecutor’s Office, as the body responsible for
prosecuting offences; and the Ombudsman’s Office, as the country’s independent
human rights institution responsible for ensuring the protection of fundamental rights
and guarantees.
As a mechanism for the protection of rights, the organic laws of the security
forces of the Republic of Panama stipulate the age of legal majority as a requirement
for entry.
As a country committed to respecting human rights in matters of armed conflict,
Panama has adhered to or ratified the following instruments:
– The Arms Trade Treaty, in February 2014;
– The Convention on Cluster Munitions, in November 2010;
– The Protocol against the Illicit Manufacturing of and Trafficking in Firearms,
Their Parts and Components and Ammunition, supplementing the United
Nations Convention against Transnational Organized Crime, in August 2004;
– The Rome Statute of the International Criminal Court, in March 2002.
– The endorsement of the Safe Schools Declaration, in 2015;
– The adoption of Act No. 57 of 27 May 2011, which regulates the possession,
carrying, import and export of and trade in firearms, ammunition and related
materials, as well as other related activities.
Since the adoption of the first resolution on children and armed conflict by the
Security Council in 1999, Panama has ratified 16 Hague Conventions, related to the
conduct of hostilities or means and methods of warfare, and nine Geneva Conventions
pertaining to the general issue of ensuring full respect for the victims of armed
conflict.

21-09006

117/152

S/2021/617

We have also incorporated into our laws the use and protection of the Red Cross
emblem in accordance with the Protocol Additional to the Geneva Conventions of
12 August 1949, and relating to the Protection of Victims of International Armed
Conflicts, and by Act No. 50 of 2010 we ratified the Protocol on Explosive Remnants
of War to the Convention on Prohibitions or Restrictions on the Use of Certain
Conventional Weapons Which May Be Deemed to Be Excessively Injurious or to
Have Indiscriminate Effects of 1980, and incorporated into our national laws the
Protocol Additional to the Geneva Conventions of 12 August 1949, and relat ing to the
Adoption of an Additional Distinctive Emblem, better known as the Red Crystal.
Our Criminal Code establishes measures to prevent and punish crimes against
collective security and crimes against humanity, which constitute a mechanism to
facilitate the State’s compliance with its international obligations under international
humanitarian law to identify and punish the activities of armed groups.
Panama guarantees access to international humanitarian protection for minors,
and our laws do not allow minors to carry weapons or serve as part of the security
forces.
Panama signed Decree No. 5 of 16 January 2018, which includes a chapter on
the protection and care of children and adolescents seeking recognition of refugee
status in Panama, thus ensuring the best interests of the child.
It is a guide, based on international standards, that is aimed at improving the
refugee status procedure by strengthening inter-agency coordination of actions and
responses for the protection of children and adolescents seeking refugee status,
between the National Secretariat for Children, Adolescents and the Family and the
Office for the Care of Refugees, attached to the Ministry of the Interior. It is important
to point out that, since there is no armed conflict in our country, we are able to be a
host country for migrant children and adolescents coming from countries that are
experiencing such conflict.
We have therefore decided to continue working in this joint intersectoral and
inter-agency effort with the local government, the international community and nongovernmental organizations to define strategies and programmes aimed at protecting
and guaranteeing the rights of persons in need of international protection, including
children and adolescents.
We understand the importance of the issue and reiterate our commitment, as a
country of peace, dialogue and without armed conflict, to continue strengthening joint
actions to ensure the comprehensive protection of Panamanian children, as well as
children arriving in our territory who are escaping situations of conflict that limit and
restrict the full exercise of their rights.
We are committed to continue working on the observations received in our first
and most recent report submitted.

118/152

21-09006

S/2021/617

Annex LIX
Statement by the Permanent Representative of the Philippines to
the United Nations, Enrique A. Manalo
We appreciate the presidency of Estonia in organizing this open debate as we
mark the twenty-fifth anniversary of the creation of the children and armed conflict
agenda this year. We also thank briefers for their informative presentations.
Children have the right to be children. Armed conflict deprives them of this
right. In armed conflict, children are endangered by direct attacks, damage to essential
infrastructure including schools, and recruitment into armed organizations. Disrupted
access to education and health services have long-term consequences on the physical
and mental well-being of children and hampers the development of entire
communities.
The Philippines has experienced these challenges firsthand, notably during the
siege of Marawi by ISIS elements in 2017 and in incidents with armed rebel groups
since then. These devastating events have only strengthened our resolve and
commitment to protect children. The Convention on the Rights of the Child Optional
Protocol on the involvement of children in armed conflict and various Security
Council resolutions informed Republic Act 11188. Signed into law in 2019, the
Children in Situations of Armed Conflict Law declares children as “zones of peace”
and provides special protection against grave violations.
Furthermore, this act recognizes that child protection must be gender sensitive.
Girls affected by armed conflict are more vulnerable to sexual viole nce and are often
the first to drop out of school. To this end, the Children in Situations of Armed
Conflict Law affirms girls’ rights to education and access to reproductive health
services. Girls’ access to education is both a preventative measure and an essential
component of post-conflict rehabilitation and reintegration.
National laws and commitments must be paired with robust dissemination,
implementation, and monitoring. COVID-19 has strained government resources and
posed new logistical challenges. Despite this, the Philippine Government, together
with civil society, continues to strengthen protection mechanisms for children
affected by armed conflict by raising awareness for the Children in Situations of
Armed Conflict Law. The Council for the Welfare of Children led an online caravan
to disseminate the salient features of the Children in Situations of Armed Conflict
Law to clusters in Luzon, Visayas, Mindanao, and the Bangsamoro Autonomous
Region in Muslim Mindanao in August 2020. The caravan engaged a total of 430
national and regional frontline service providers from the Government, private sector,
civil society organizations, and supported by child protection allies and child rights
advocates. A series of online consultations at the national and regional levels were
also conducted on the new handling protocol for children in situations of armed
conflict, towards equipping responders with step-by-step procedures on how to
efficiently respond to children in situations of armed conflict and grave chi ld rights
violations and concerns.
Similarly, the dissemination activities on the National Policy Framework on
Learners and Schools as Zones of Peace were conducted virtually. This framework
guides Department of Education (DepEd) offices at all levels, in cluding schools in
preparing for, responding to, and recovering from armed conflict incidents. While in
December 2020, DepEd, in partnership with UNICEF Philippines, also published a
report on building communities and schools as zones of peace which featur ed case
studies of schools and communities in armed conflict situations in different parts of
the country.
21-09006

119/152

S/2021/617

International cooperation can support national implementation and monitoring
efforts. Recently, the Armed Forces of the Philippines signed a Strateg ic Plan with
the United Nations resident coordinator and UNICEF representative to the
Philippines. This aligns the Armed Forces’ commitment to the protection of children
with international humanitarian and human rights laws by ensuring all personnel are
properly trained to respect children’s rights. Under the Strategic Plan, the United
Nations country task force on monitoring and reporting shall assist the Armed Forces
of the Philippines in revising its policy guidelines towards strengthened protection of
children in situations of armed conflict, and enhanced accountability for grave child
rights violations.
The Secretary-General’s country reports are also valuable. The reports are most
effective when there is active communication with national agencies du ring the
drafting process. Doing so allows national agencies to quickly address potential issues
or clarify information.
Protecting children requires a whole-of-Government approach that centers
children in conflict-prevention, during situations of armed conflict, and in peace
processes. The Philippines remains committed to mobilizing all relevant agencies to
achieve this. The COVID-19 pandemic has posed novel challenges in addressing the
decades-old problem of children and armed conflict. But if the intern ational
community learns from innovative solutions and redoubles its efforts, we can make
strides in protecting children and preventing conflict.

120/152

21-09006

S/2021/617

Annex LX
Statement by the Permanent Mission of Poland to the
United Nations
I thank the President and I thank all of today’s briefers for their insightful and
valuable presentations. Our particular thanks go to Special Representative Gamba.
Her commitment and dedication to the implementation of the children and armed
conflict agenda demonstrate the ideals that stood behind the creation of this crucial
mandate 25 years ago.
I also wish to express my sincere appreciation to the delegation of Estonia for a
successful presidency of the Security Council this month and for convening this
significant and timely discussion on children and armed conflict.
Poland aligns itself with the statements delivered by the European Union and by
the Group of Friends of Children and Armed Conflict. Both documents underscore
the pressing need to reverse unsettling trends in child rights violations that, in the last
year, had worsened even further due to the COVID-19 outbreak.
The figures for the number of children affected by armed conflict across the
globe are truly shocking and appalling. Abductions, military rec ruitment, sexual
violence or killing and maiming are just a few examples of the main forms of
exploitation to which they are subjected. The annual report of the Secretary -General
provides a devastating picture in this regard. In 2020, violations affected 1 9,379
children. This is outrageous – all the more so because, in reality, this number may be
much higher due to unreported cases and the lack of access to verified information.
That being said, Poland is greatly disturbed about the scale and scope of grav e
violations committed against children in conflict-affected areas. Our particular
concern is in the detrimental impact of COVID-19 increasing children’s vulnerability
to a wide range of child protection problems.
Confinement measures put in place in order to combat the pandemic often
involve school closures which only further exacerbate the already challenging
environment for schools to operate. Systematic deprivation of access to education
make children more susceptible to recruitment and use by armed gr oups. In light of
this, as a proud Member of the Steering Committee for the Global Coalition for
Reintegration as well as a member of the Group of Friends of Reintegration, we urge
to redouble efforts to develop reintegration programmes benefitting former child
soldiers and other war-affected youth and children associated with parties to the
conflict.
We are also troubled by the increase in violence levelled against critical
infrastructure. Two months ago, in this chamber, we adopted Security Council
resolution 2573 (2021) on the very issue. Unfortunately, the number of attacks on
hospitals and other medical facilities, schools, medical and humanitarian personnel,
as well as their equipment and supplies keeps growing. In this context, we welcome
and endorse initiatives that aim to reduce the impact of conflict on objects
indispensable to the survival of civilian population, including children, such as the
Safe Schools Declaration.
Children are among the most vulnerable members of society suffering
disproportionately in situations of conflict. From this perspective, it is even hard to
imagine that within this group there is also a number of those whose needs are even
greater. These are children with disabilities. Often abused, rejected, abandoned, and
too weak to cry for help. Let us spare no effort to create conditions that will enable
them to return to normal lives and livelihoods. In view of this, protecting and
21-09006

121/152

S/2021/617

reintegrating vulnerable and fragile groups of child refugees, internally displaced,
war traumatized, and children born of sexual violence have become top priorities of
the Polish development cooperation.
Given the torturous consequences of armed conflict, Poland recognizes the
importance to provide constant psychological support for children and youth. Here, I
would like to underline that Polish Aid is involved in the development activities aimed
at providing necessary support for children affected by the conflict in Ukraine.
Together with the Polish Humanitarian Action, we have been improving the quality
of social services through developing capacities of social and psychological support
personnel in the settlements along the contact line.
When there is no accountability and no effective prosecution and punishment
for perpetrators, there is abuse and injustice. In this respect, the monitoring and
reporting mechanism has shown value in exposing grave violations committed against
children. What we must do now is further support it altogether with strengthening
national and international judiciary institutions, as well as enhancing child protection
capacities scattered across the United Nations system, including in the delivery of
peacekeeping mandates. Only this way we can ensure that parties to ar med conflict
fully comply with their obligations under international law, international
humanitarian law, human rights law, and refugee law.
Last but not least, I would like to touch upon a very shameful fact that here we
are in the 21st century, and we still need to confront famine and food insecurity in so
many parts of the world. The most difficult situation in that regard is perhaps in the
conflict zones in Africa and Middle East. Tragically, as indicated by the Office for the
Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs, malnutrition underlies nearly half of all child
deaths under the age of five globally. Therefore, it is our responsibility to provide
basic humanitarian assistance, health and nutrition services to those in need as well
as use sanctions against those who restrict safe and unimpeded humanitarian access.
If we want to ensure stability and economic growth in the long run, as well as
prevent conflicts and build healthy societies based on respect, empathy, and solidarity,
we must invest in our best hope for the future. This hope is the safety of children.

122/152

21-09006

S/2021/617

Annex LXI
Statement by the Permanent Mission of Portugal to the
United Nations
Portugal thanks the Estonian presidency of the Security Council for promoting
this timely open debate, in the year we celebrate the twenty-fifth anniversary of the
creation of the children and armed conflict agenda and the mandate of the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, which we fully support.
Portugal aligns itself with the statement submitted by the European Union and
by the Group of Friends of Children and Armed Conflict and wishes to add the
following points in its national capacity.
We welcome the Secretary-General’s 2021 report on children and armed conflict
and we express our strong concern for the 26,425 grave violations against children
verified by the United Nations – an ever-increasing figure.
Portugal condemns all six grave violations against children in arm ed conflict
identified by the Security Council in resolution 1612 (2005). These represent serious
violations of the rights of the child, international humanitarian law and international
human rights law. Fighting impunity and ensuring accountability is essential in the
prevention of these crimes.
We highlight the primary responsibility of States to protect civilians in armed
conflict and to guarantee unimpeded humanitarian access to all children in nee d.
The Optional Protocol to the United Nations Convention on the Rights of the
Child on the involvement of children in armed conflict, which Portugal has ratified,
is a benchmark instrument. The Paris Principles on children associated with armed
forces or armed groups, the Safe Schools Declaration and the Vancouver Principles
on Peacekeeping and the Prevention of the Recruitment and Use of Child Soldiers,
all of which were endorsed by Portugal, are also fundamental documents.
We call on all States that have not done it yet to ratify the Optional Protocol and
to endorse these documents. Moreover, we urge State and non-State parties to armed
conflict to end all violations against children. We defend the guarantee of support and
reparation for survivors, including gender and aged-oriented services, physical and
psychological medical care, sexual and reproductive health care.
Attacks on schools have a particularly long-lasting effect, resulting in school
dropouts, risking the future of entire generations and disproportionally affecting girls.
The safeguarding of education opportunities, under SDG 4, is therefore crucial and
contributes to preventing recruitment, as well as child, early and forced marriages.
It is fundamental to incorporate a gender perspective whilst discussing children
and armed conflict, in accordance with Security Council resolution 1325 (2000) on
women, peace and security.
We are deeply concerned by the impacts of COVID-19 in health and education
systems, in further deteriorating children’s situation of vulnerability, as well as in
preventing monitoring.
It is essential that the Working Group on Children and Armed Conflict and the
monitoring and reporting mechanism remain operational. The collection and reporting
of data in a transparent and accurate way needs to remain a key concern for the
independence, credibility and efficiency of this Mechanism.

21-09006

123/152

S/2021/617

It is essential to work on the reintegration of children and the rehabilitation of
their families and communities as part of the roadmap to address this problem and to
advance the mainstreaming of children’s rights.
The protection of children can be a first step to resolve or mitigate conflicts. As
such, child protection must be integrated in all peace processes and cease-fire
agreements.
Finally, Portugal recognizes and supports the work of UNICEF and other United
Nations bodies, as well as the mainstreaming of the children and armed conflict
agenda in peace operations. We therefore call for States’ cooperation with these
entities, as well as with civil society organizations, to protect the rights of children in
armed conflict.

124/152

21-09006

S/2021/617

Annex LXII
Statement by the Permanent Representative of Qatar to the
United Nations, Alya Ahmed Saif Al-Thani
The State of Qatar has long recognized that protection children in armed conflict
is a key component of conflict prevention, peacebuilding and sustaining peace. As
Nelson Mandela said “Our children are our greatest treasure. They are our future.
Those who abuse them tear at the fabric of our society and weaken our nation. ”
(22 November 1997)
Therefore, we note with extreme concern the findings of the report of the
Secretary-General (A/75/873-S/2021/437), submitted pursuant to Security Council
resolution 2427 (2018), that in 2020 violence and hostilities, disregard for
international humanitarian law and international human rights law, have continued to
have a devastating impact on the situation of children in armed conflict and that the
number of grave violations verified remained high. We are appalled by attacks on
schools and hospitals, and the military use thereof, have continued throughout 2020 ,
exacerbating the plight of children.
We are also deeply troubled by the report’s findings that the COVID-19
pandemic has further exacerbated the vulnerability of boys and girls to grave
violations, including by hampering their access to education, health and soci al
services, limiting child protection activities and shrinking safe places.
In the same vein, the report of the Office of the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for Children and Armed Conflict titled “Impact of the COVID-19
pandemic on violations against children in situations of armed conflict”, of 3 May
2021, suggests that the pandemic and measures implemented by States to mitigate its
effects have likely increased children’s vulnerability to recruitment and use, notably
because of school closures and loss of family income. In addition, girls are likely to
have become more vulnerable to sexual and gender-based violence because of
reduced mobility and increased isolation.
In this regard, we would like to commend the work done by the Office of the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General for Children and Armed Conflict and
United Nations country task forces on monitoring and reporting on grave violations
against children in these challenging times of COVID-19.
Places of learning should never be a place of war: the report of the SecretaryGeneral points out, 127 million children were out of school in conflict situations
because of insecurity, attacks on schools or related personnel or the military use of
schools.
Over a year ago, on 28 May 2020, the General Assembly unanimously adopted
resolution 74/275, presented by the State of Qatar, designating 9 September as the
International Day to Protect Education from Attack. The day serves a s an important
reminder of safeguarding schools as safe spaces for children and the need to prioritize
all children’s access to education, especially those in vulnerable situations.
The challenge at hand is to make sure the protection of education is ref lected
and embodied by action on the ground through effective mechanisms that will end
impunity for the perpetrators of such attacks, so that the millions of children deprived
of education in conflict settings can aspire to a better future. Accountability is key to
deterring future attacks.
Therefore, much more must be done. Among some of the deterrent measures is
the strengthening of documentation of attacks on education, including the collection
of data disaggregated by gender. Attacks on schools and/or hospitals are one of the
21-09006

125/152

S/2021/617

six grave violations subject to the monitoring and reporting mechanism, pursuant to
Security Council resolution 1612 (2005) and Security Council through resolution
1998 (2011), requests the Secretary-General to include in his annual “list of shame”
those parties to conflict that commit attacks on schools. The recent Secretary -General
report points out “prioritization of data analysis is crucial for early identification and
response to prevent the impact of armed conflict on children, through enhanced
information collection and analysis, support for national capacities and inclusion of
child protection concerns in mediation.”
The State of Qatar has long understood the vital role that reliable data play in
monitoring and responding to attacks on education across the globe. Education Above
All Foundation (EAA) is at the forefront of efforts to improve access to data o n
education in emergencies. This data helps to highlight and understand how attacks
against education during times of conflict and insecurity deprive children of their
right to education. EAA is also supporting the development of humanitarian
technology to record data on attacks on schools, teachers and students, and education related violations of law in order to hold perpetrators of attacks to account. This global
data service on attacks on education is a hub for the collection, sorting, analysis,
storage and distribution of information about attacks on education for policy -makers,
the United Nations, non-governmental organizations and other stakeholders.
These efforts depict the State of Qatar ’s belief that by working together we can
ensure that children everywhere can grow up safe, healthy and educated so they can
help to build a secure and sustainable future for themselves, their families and their
societies.
To conclude, we extend an invitation to join the efforts of the State of Qatar,
UNICEF, UNESCO, the Office of the Special Representative of the Secretary-General
for Children and Armed Conflict, and of the international community to celebrate
9 September as the second International Day to Protect Education from Attack. The
aim of the high-level virtual event is to commemorate and promote this important
International Day and a call to stop attacks on education, much needed towards global
peace, and to promote accountability.

126/152

21-09006

S/2021/617

Annex LXIII
Statement by the Permanent Representative of the Republic of
Korea to the United Nations, Cho Hyun
At the outset, my delegation commends the President for convening today ’s
open debate on children and armed conflict, and offers its deep appreciation to the
briefers for their statements. Today’s open debate is particularly timely as this year
marks the twenty-fifth anniversary of the children and armed conflict agenda. Let me
take this opportunity to reiterate my support for the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, Virginia Gamba, and her Office.
My delegation is deeply concerned by the sustained high number of violations
against children. According to the Secretary-General’s recent annual report on
children and armed conflict, 19,379 children in 21 situations were affected by
violations; including recruitment, killing, and denial of humanitarian access.
Furthermore, the COVID-19 pandemic has aggravated vulnerabilities of children,
while posing additional challenges to child protection capacity and the monitoring
and reporting of violations.
Against this disturbing backdrop, and while aligning myself with the statement
by Canada on behalf of the Group of Friends of Children and Armed Conflict, I would
like to highlight the following five points that are of particular importance to m y
delegation.
First, let me reiterate the importance of full implementation of Security Council
resolutions 2532 and 2565. In particular, full, safe, and unhindered humanitarian
access to children in armed conflicts must be ensured to adequately respond to the
pandemic. It is particularly concerning to find from the annual report that there were
4,156 incidents of denial of humanitarian access for children in 2020 when the need
for humanitarian assistance surged. We echo the call of the Secretary -General for safe
and unimpeded humanitarian access in many fragile parts of the world.
Second, gender perspectives must be incorporated into child protection. As the
annual report of the Secretary-General rightly pointed out, violations affect boys and
girls differently. 85 per cent of children recruited and used were boys, while 98 per
cent of sexual violence was perpetrated against girls. Girls are also usually the first
to drop out of school and most will never return. As such, it is vital to take a gender sensitive approach in child protection and reintegration.
Third, we must strengthen our efforts to ensure access to quality education for
children in conflict affected settings. Attacks on schools increased in 2020, infringing
on children’s rights to education. It is also worrisome that the long-term
socio-economic impacts of pandemic may aggravate the situation, further depriving
so many children around the world of their access to education.
We must be reminded that education is a key to break the cycle of violence,
build resilience, and achieve sustainable peace and development. As a member of the
Steering Committee of the Global Coalition for Reintegration of Child Soldiers, the
Republic of Korea has consistently called for the need to ensure inclusive, equal
access to education for all children affected by conflicts, and we will continue our
active efforts to this end.
Fourth, the Republic of Korea strongly supports the role of United Nations for
child protection, including through United Nations peac ekeeping operations and
UNICEF. We support United Nations peacekeeping operations and special political
missions in facilitating a protective environment for children affected by armed
conflicts. We emphasize the importance of their child protection mandat es as well as
21-09006

127/152

S/2021/617

the vital role carried out by senior child protection advisers in peacekeeping missions,
and believe that they should be adequately resourced. We look forward to furthering
our discussion on protection of civilians, including children, at the upcoming
Peacekeeping Ministerial to be held in Seoul in December of this year.
Moreover, In order to facilitate the re-integration of children and provide them
necessary care, the Republic of Korea has been making contributions to UNICEF,
including through providing one million dollars for the “Saving lives and
strengthening the protection of Afghan girls and boys affected by armed conflict ”
project. With the Secretary-General’s recent annual report noting Afghanistan as one
of the places where the highest numbers of grave violations were verified, we believe
our project has been providing pragmatic support for improving its situation.
Last, but not least, we must ensure accountability of all violations against
children and find ways to strengthen compliance with international humanitarian law.
The Republic of Korea fully supports the implementation of the Convention on the
Rights of the Child and its Optional Protocol on the involvement of children in armed
conflict. We also believe it is essential to support and strengthen our tools to document
and address violations, including the United Nations monitoring and reporting
mechanism, the Security Council Working Group, and the annual report of the
Secretary-General.
Violations against children are threats not only to our present, but, more
importantly, to our future. If we do not stop and prevent them now, it will get more
and more difficult to cut the vicious cycle of violence. The Republic of Korea
reaffirms its driving commitment to working with the United Nations, as well as all
Member States, with a view towards better protecting children from the scourge of
armed conflicts, as well as from the ongoing pandemic.

128/152

21-09006

S/2021/617

Annex LXIV
Statement by the Permanent Representative of San Marino to the
United Nations, Damiano Beleffi
The Republic of San Marino aligns itself with the statement submitted by
Canada on behalf of the Group of Friends of Children and Armed Conflict.
I would like to thank the President, for convening this important meeting and
the Secretary-General for his annual report, as well as the briefers for their
presentations.
The COVID-19 pandemic has aggravated precarious situations all over the
world and has created new challenges for the most vulnerable groups, including
children and especially children affected by armed conflicts.
This year has been particularly difficult also for child protection actors,
especially the ones in the field. We remain worried for the difficulties created by the
pandemic for the monitoring system and for the complications in the implementation
of child protection activities. San Marino commends the dedication of the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Children and Armed Conflict and of her
Office and appreciates the engagement of all the child protection personnel and
partners involved. San Marino welcomes the new action plans and commitments
which have resulted in a high number of children who have been released.
San Marino is particularly worried by the high number of grave violations
reported also this year in the report of the Secretary-General. The killing and maiming
of children and their recruitment has reached also this year an alarming level, while
abductions and sexual violence have reached an unprecedented level. Thi s new
element is of particular concern.
It is clear that the pandemic has created new space and opportunities for
violators and this situation needs to be immediately addressed.
Furthermore, rape and sexual violence are generally underreported and the
consequences of such violations have negative long-term impact on the life of boys
and girls.
The closure of schools due to COVID-19 measures and the loss of income of
many families during the pandemic have greatly endangered children. Students have
remained out of school, more isolated and more vulnerable to recruitment, abduction
and even sexual violence. Girls have been particularly affected since they are often
the first ones who drop out of school and the last ones to return. It is therefore
important that assistance programmes include the gender dimension.
San Marino firmly condemns attacks on schools, as well as their use for military
purposes.
We reiterate our support for the Safe Schools Declaration, an instrument that
promotes the protection of students, teachers and schools. We believe that educational
facilities that were occupied during the pandemic should return to their primary
function, they should be a safe place for children, where students can continue their
education and where their hopes for a better future can be nurtured.
San Marino is also particularly worried for the despicable attacks on hospitals
and for the threats that medical personnel continue to face, even during an
unprecedented health emergency.

21-09006

129/152

S/2021/617

We call on all parties to respect medical facilities, as well as to grant access to
humanitarian aid, which is particularly needed in this challenging time. The delivery
of humanitarian assistance should always be guaranteed.
San Marino calls for a full compliance with international humanitarian law and
human rights law and reiterates the importance of accountability for all grave
violations against children. Impunity is totally unacceptable and victims should
receive justice and reparation.
We call on all member States to ratify the Optional Protocol to the Convention
on the Rights of the Child on the involvement of children in armed conflict, which
constitutes a fundamental instrument for the prevention of the recruitment of child
soldiers. We also encourage all parties to support other important tools, such as the
Paris Principles and Commitments and the Vancouver Principles.
San Marino has also joined the campaign Act to Protect Children, an important
campaign to help all children in having a normal life.
Furthermore, San Marino believes that rehabilitation and reintegration of
children should always be the focus of all our activities. The best interest of the child
should always guide our actions and it should be the focus of reintegration
programmes and of future peacebuilding efforts.
We also reiterate the importance of treating children affected by arm conflict as
victims, including the ones associated with groups designated as terrorist.
Finally, as reiterated by the Secretary-General, mediation and conflict
prevention are fundamental to stop these violations.
San Marino reiterates its full support for the Secretary-General’s call for a global
ceasefire, which is vital during this emergency. San Marino also expresses its support
for Security Council resolutions 2532 (2020) and 2565 (2021). During this pandemic,
cessation of hostilities is a necessity. Equally important is to guarantee equitable and
affordable access to COVID-19 vaccines in armed conflict and post-conflict
situations, and in humanitarian emergencies.
This year marks the twenty-fifth anniversary of the creation of the children and
armed conflict agenda and San Marino continues to firm ly believe and to support this
mandate, including the integrity of the listing mechanism.
The figures of violations reported in the report of the Secretary -General are not
only numbers, but actual children who are suffering the most horrific violations.
These children need our engagement and our support. San Marino believes that
working together, we can build the foundations for a better future for every child
living through conflict and crisis.
Together we can win this pandemic, building a strong response to it and creating
comprehensive recovery programmes that prioritize children ’s rights and their
protection.

130/152

21-09006

S/2021/617

Annex LXV
Statement by the Permanent Representative of the Kingdom of
Saudi Arabia to the United Nations, Abdullah Y. Al-Mouallimi
[Original: Arabic]
The issue of the protection of children in armed conflict is of vital importance
to the concept of peacebuilding and the creation of generations able to build a more
stable and prosperous future for countries affected by conflict. The i nternational
community must handle children caught up in armed conflict with the utmost care,
enabling a new reality to be created for them that will break the cycle of violence,
address the negative effects of conflict and act upon any signs that an envir onment
conducive to extremism and violence is being created.
The Kingdom of Saudi Arabia believes that protection of children in armed
conflict around the world is a joint responsibility of the entire international
community, requiring a collective and coordinated response to deal with the
repercussions and address the causes. My country has acceded to numerous
international frameworks in support of this goal.
The Kingdom of Saudi Arabia welcomes the report of the Secretary -General on
children and armed conflict, which highlights the commitment of the Coalition to
Support Legitimacy in Yemen to protecting children and the effectiveness of the
significant and sustained measures it has taken to promote the protection of children
in the current conflict in accordance with international terms of reference. The report
also reflects the potential of the Coalition to provide a model for other international
coalitions for protecting children in armed conflict.
Notwithstanding our reservations about the number of incidents attributed to the
Coalition, we note that the conclusions of the Secretary -General’s report give the lie
to tendentious claims advanced by certain bodies in an attempt to distort the true
image of the Coalition for political purposes that have nothing to do with the
protection of children but instead use lies to create a hypothetical reality to divert
attention from the genuinely constructive role of the Coalition in Yemen.
In this context, we affirm once more our support for the mandate of the U nited
Nations Special Representative for Children and Armed Conflict, Virginia Gamba,
and her positive role in protecting children at international level. We look forward to
continuing the proactive cooperation between her and the Coalition with a view to
developing the mechanisms for the protection of children in the armed conflict in
Yemen.
The report of the Secretary-General on children and armed conflict (A/75/873S/2021/437) confirms once again the destructive role of the Iranian-backed Houthi
militia, providing yet more evidence of their unwillingness to end the conflict in
Yemen and of the atrocities committed by them against children. Their rejection of
peace initiatives and escalation of the conflict against civilians, most recently in
Marib, clearly illustrates the violent ideology of this militia and demonstrate its lust
for power and lack of concern that their coup against legitimacy and the Yemeni
people has drained the country of resources and plunged its people into chaos, hunger
and disease. It also demonstrates the negative role played by Iran in the region,
imposing its expansionist policy without concern for the destruction visited upon the
children of the countries in which it has intervened.
My country calls upon the Security Council and international community to take
the necessary measures to compel the Houthi militia to adopt the path of peace and
support the efforts of the United Nations to reach a political solution on the basis of
the three terms of reference – the Gulf Cooperation Council Initiative, the outputs of
the Comprehensive National Dialogue Conference and the relevant resolutions of the
Security Council, particularly resolution 2216 (2015) – and spare the Yemeni people,
especially children, further suffering.
21-09006

131/152

S/2021/617

Annex LXVI
Statement by the Permanent Representative of Slovakia to the
United Nations, Michal Mlynár
Slovakia aligns itself with the statements of the Europea n Union and of the
Group of Friends of Children and Armed Conflict.
We commend Estonia for convening this open debate on children and armed
conflict and we thank the briefers for their insightful presentations. We also appreciate
the role of the Secretary-General, and his Special Representative in child protection
and promotion of their human rights, and for the strong and concrete engagement by
all United Nations partners in advocating for practical measures to protect children.
We welcome the report of the Secretary-General and voice our strong concern
about the scale and severity of grave violations against children reflected in it. We
may commemorate the twenty-fifth anniversary of the children and armed conflict
mandate, but children still remain the most vulnerable group in situations of armed
conflict, and therefore we need to look ahead, on how to better implement the children
and armed conflict mandate.
Unfortunately, grave violations remain at a similar concerning level as last year
and it is clear that urgent and effective measures to protect children in all situations
of armed conflicts are needed. We firmly condemn the ongoing recruitment and use,
killing and maiming of children as well as the denial of humanitarian access to them,
as the three most prevalent grave violations verified in 2020. We express particular
concern over dramatic increases in abduction and sexual violence, and the long -term
negative impact these have on children. We also condemn wide -spread attacks on
schools and hospitals, and strongly call on all parties to armed conflict to immediately
cease those attacks. Strengthened monitoring and reporting of attacks on education as
well as accountability and redress for it is crucial.
The COVID-19 has further exacerbated children’s vulnerability to grave
violations and complicated the implementation of child protection activities. We
underscore the importance of prioritizing children ’s rights and needs in global
COVID-19 response and recovery programmes. In this regard we welcome the study
on the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on violations against children in situations
of armed conflict, launched last May. With the long-term effects of the pandemic, the
call for improved access to safe, quality education, including for girls, du ring armed
conflict is even more acute.
We continue to reiterate our unwavering call for all parties to armed conflict to
fully respect international humanitarian law and human rights law, and to end
violations against children. Accountability for all the se crimes must be ensured, and
perpetrators bring to justice and punished. We simply cannot accept the prevalent
impunity for grave violations against children. We call for criminalization of grave
violations in domestic laws and for the adoption of effect ive national accountability
measures as well as for Member States to cooperate with international, regional and
national accountability mechanisms.
Having ratified Optional Protocol to the Convention on the Rights of the Child
on the involvement of children in armed conflict, endorsed the Paris Principles, the
Safe Schools Declaration as well as the Vancouver Principles, Slovakia calls on others
who have not yet done so to follow this action.

132/152

21-09006

S/2021/617

Annex LXVII
Statement by the Permanent Mission of Slovenia to the
United Nations
At the outset we wish to thank the Estonian presidency for organizing this open
debate as well as the Secretary-General for his annual report and the Executive
Director of UNICEF, Henrietta Fore, Forest Whitaker and Laban Onisimus for their
comprehensive briefings.
Slovenia aligns itself with the statements by the European Union and on behalf
of Group of Friends of Children and Armed Conflict, and wishes to add some remarks
in its national capacity.
As we mark the 25 years since the establishment of the children and armed
conflict mandate we wish to express our deepest gratitude to the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General and the United Nations personnel on the
ground for their invaluable work in documenting and monitoring violations of
children’s rights in conflict.
It is deeply saddening that yet again the report before us documents the
persistent high numbers and trends of grave violations against children. After
acknowledging some progress in 2019 it is particularly disconcerting that the
recruitment and use, killing and maiming and denial of humanitarian access
represented the most prevalent grave violations in the year 2020.
In the situation of armed conflict children remain among the most vulnerable
and COVID-19 pandemic has further aggravated these vulnerabilities. It has among
others enhanced the barriers impeding their access to education and health. Lack of
safe spaces for children has further exposed them to grave violations which is
evidenced in the rising trends documented by this year ’s report.
We are appalled about the dramatic increase in sexual violence. These heinous
acts continue to be the most underreported grave violation against children. While
they are perpetrated against girls and boys, girls remain disproportionately affected.
A gender sensitive approach and response is essential.
As impunity for grave violations against children persist much more must be
done to ensure that all perpetrators of violations are held accountable. Ensuring
accountability is key to preventing the reoccurrence of such violations and for victims
and survivors to receive justice. In this respect we wish to emphasize also the
importance of the monitoring and reporting mechanism as established by Security
Council resolution 1612 (2005) and its independence, impartiality, and credibility.
We remain deeply concerned about the continued attacks against schools and
the alarming rate of denial of humanitarian access to children. Protecting schools
against attacks and military use is essential to ensure children’s access and their right
to education. Moreover, in conflict situations schools are and must remain a safe
haven for children. We therefore call on States who have not yet done so, to consider
ratifying the Optional Protocol and joining the Paris Principles and Paris
Commitments, the Safe Schools Declaration and the Vancouver Principles.
Slovenia remains a strong advocate for child protection and our national efforts
aim also at alleviating the pain of children affected by armed conflict and assisting
victims of conflict. In this respect we have been supporting several projects to assist
children affected by conflicts in Ukraine, Palestine and Syria and we have provided
humanitarian aid to UNICEF for Yemeni children. Over 500 children from active or
post-conflict areas have received psychological and physical assistance and
rehabilitation in Slovenia. Through the “Our rights” project and teaching materials
21-09006

133/152

S/2021/617

Slovenia has enabled human rights education for more than 200 ,000 children around
the world which help foster tolerance and understanding of diversity in societies.
While ending grave violations against children sometimes seems an elusive task
we are nevertheless able to acknowledge also certain promising developme nts that
reflect the tireless efforts by the Special Representative and her Office. These include
the release of more than 12,000 children as well as several action plans that are
currently being implemented. In this respect we encourage all parties to the conflict
to develop, sign and implement such action plans and to engage with the United
Nations representatives in this respect.
Ending violations against children must be at the centre of our efforts to build
back a better and more peaceful future as the future we are building belongs to the
children.

134/152

21-09006

S/2021/617

Annex LXVIII
Statement by the Permanent Mission of Somalia to the
United Nations
At outset, I would like to express my appreciation to the delegation of Estonia
for preparing the open debate on the situation of children and armed conflict to share
our views. We are pleased that the President is chairing this meeting, since it is of
paramount importance for the Council to take stock of developments and strengthen
its efforts to assist and protect children in armed conflict. We also wish to thank the
Secretary-General and all other briefers for their valuable contributions.
It is my privilege to speak today on behalf of Somalia on the issue of children
and armed conflict. The report of the Secretary-General comes at a time when the
world faces unprecedented challenges due to the COVID-19 Pandemic. We share
views with the Special Representative of the Secretary-General for Children and
Armed Conflict and the United Nations that the rights and needs of c hildren should be
a central aspect in all efforts for peace, including mediation and conflict prevention.
We remain concerned over the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on conflictaffected children, which has further exacerbated children’s vulnerability to grave
violations and complicated the implementation of child protection activities.
Therefore, it is crucial to prioritize children rights and needs in global COVID -19
response and recovery programmes.
The Somali Government is committed to the protection of children in our
country. We continue to work hard to improve the legal framework for the protection
and promotion of child rights, as stipulated in national and international frameworks.
Moreover, key legislation, such as the National Child Rights Bill, are developed to
better protect children in Somalia from grave violations. These provide the basis for
further institutional building and government capacity development, given the
requisite framework to protect children’s rights, including upgrading legislation and policy.
On 3 May 2019, The Federal Government has completed the biometric
registration for all Somali National Army and Somali Police Force officers. Moreover,
in addition to the biometric registration, proper screening of existing security forces
and new recruits ensures the presence of no children. We are more proactively
investigating and prosecuting cases of grave violations against children while raising
awareness and capacity-building activities for security forces.
I underline the need for increased compliance with child protection mandates,
laws and measures for United Nations peacekeeping missions while strengthening
their accountability for all grave violations against children in armed conflict. Equally
important, the need for a strong partnership between the United Nations and regional
organizations, specifically with the African Union, to coordinate and enhance child
protection activities in Africa.
We encourage donors to redouble their contributions to child p rotection, in
particular through adequate and sustainable financial support and technical
assistance, including to reintegration programmes. There are actual girls and boys in
the world who urgently require protection and timely, inclusive reintegration se rvices
and assistance programmes, which are currently under-resourced.
To conclude, we are committed to assuming our primary responsibility in the
protection of the children within our borders. From that perspective, we recognize
and work on durably strengthening our institutional capacities in terms of legislative,
judicial and executive branches. The Somali Government will scale up all its efforts
to protect the most vulnerable – the youngest among us – and with them our future.
Council members may rest assured that Somalia will continue furthering that
endeavour.
21-09006

135/152

S/2021/617

Annex LXIX
Statement by the Permanent Representative of South Africa to the
United Nations, Mathu Joyini
At the outset, I wish to thank Estonia for convening the open debate on children
and armed conflict. This debate is timely as the year 2021 marks the twenty -fifth
Anniversary of the creation of the children and armed conflict agenda and the mandate
of the Special Representative of the Secretary-General for Children and Armed
Conflict by the General Assembly.
I also wish to thank the briefers for their insightful briefings and for highlighting
the pressing need to protect all children especially those living amidst hostilities and
armed conflict.
It is concerning that after 25 years of the creation of the children and armed
conflict agenda, we still witness alarmingly high and grave violations against boys
and girls in armed conflict. We are now faced with the COVID-19 pandemic, which
seem to have increased children’s vulnerability to abduction, recruitment and sexual
violence. This is evident in the annual report of the Secretary-General on children and
armed conflict, which states that 26,425 verified grave violations were conducted
against children in 2020. This is deeply concerning considering that we find ourselves
in the midst of a global health emergency.
It is in this context that South Africa continues to advocate for the accelerated
and equitable distribution and access to vaccines, diagnostics and therapeutics.
Preliminary medical studies suggest that the recent variants of the Corona virus spread
more easily among unvaccinated persons, including children, putting them at risk of
contracting the virus as well. Considering that we are in uncharted waters, we must
ensure that each and every individual gets vaccinated, this includes children in armed
conflict area situations.
Children have for far too long carried the brunt of war. They represent a n
alarming percentage of the casualties of war; as refugees and internally displaced
children, unaccompanied minors, trafficking or sexual slaves. Their basic rights to
education and health are undermined and threatened as schools and hospitals are
closed or cease to function for extended periods as a result of violent attacks in many
conflict areas. These senseless and violent attacks against children are unacceptable
and goes against the grain of international humanitarian law. We thus urge that the
perpetrators be held accountable for grave violations against children in armed
conflict.
While progress in protecting children in armed conflict is slow, we do note that
some progress is being made. In this regard, we welcome the progress in dialogues
with warring parties in Afghanistan, the Central African Republic, Nigeria, the
Philippines, South Sudan and Syria. We further welcome the new commitments and
other engagements that were reached in 2020, to better protect children, including
two new action plans signed in Myanmar and South Sudan.
South Africa is encouraged to learn that armed groups and forces freed more
than 1,643 children from their ranks following the United Nations engagement, and
many more boys and girls were spared from recruitment due to age screening
processes in situations where the United Nations has action plans with Governments
to stop child recruitment and use.
On 16 June 2021, the African Union commemorated one of the most important
AU Charter aimed at advancing children’s rights: the African Charter on the Rights
and Welfare of the Child, which was adopted 30 years ago, under the theme: “30 years
136/152

21-09006

S/2021/617

after the adoption of the Charter: accelerate implementation of Agenda 2040 for an
Africa fit for children”. The Day of the Child is a demonstration of the African
Union’s commitment to safeguarding the rights and welfare of the child. It is also an
important day to reflect on progress made in implementing the provisions of the
Charter and addressing the numerous remaining challenges face d by boys and girls
affected by armed conflict.
The collaboration between the African Union Commission’s Department for
Political Affairs, Peace and Security and the Office of the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General for Children and Armed Conflict with the support of UNICEF
and its collective effort to protect children from the scourge of violence and war is
commended.
With more children suffering horrific abuses in conflict areas across the globe,
we desperately need to reinvigorate and double our efforts to raise awareness about
the grave violations in order to provide children with the protection they deserve. In
this regard, I wish to highlight the following.
Firstly, the international community must take care of the special short-term and
long-term needs of children involved in armed conflicts, both while conflicts are
occurring and after they are finished. States must undertake all the necessary actions
to preserve the fundamental value of the children, as the most precious resources for
the future of humankind. To break the cycle of violations affecting children, we must
take a systematic and coherent approach, from prevention to accountability and
reintegration;
Secondly, we call upon Member States to continue to support existing and
develop new implementation action plans to protect children in armed conflict and
encourage States to adopt and implement protocols for the handover of children to
civilian protection actors; Thirdly, we encourage all peacekeeping operations to
undertake all the appropriate and necessary actions to reduce the impact of armed
conflicts on the life of children by integrating into the military training the protection
and rights of children; and
Lastly, parties to conflict, whether governmental forces or non -State armed
groups, must keep schools and hospitals safe and not use them for military purposes.
The protection and safety of schools is of particular importance as it forms part of the
backbone of any peacebuilding effort, enabling future development growth and
sustainable peace.
I wish to conclude by highlighting that children are the most vulnerable at times
of armed conflict as they are incapable of taking necessary measures to maintain their
wellbeing and are thus entirely dependent on others to meet their survival needs.
Therefore, children are not only affected by direct targeting leading to their death or
injury but are also gravely affected by any harm to their guardians, homes, schools
and hospitals as it puts enjoyment of their basic needs i n jeopardy. The international
community must take urgent and effective action to put an end to violations of the
rules of international law, particularly those relevant to children’s rights, and to ensure
justice to child victims of grave violations by holding perpetrators accountable. It is
our collective responsibility to put an end to these crimes and create the conditions
for this generation to enjoy a childhood and youth in dignity and a future in prosperity.

21-09006

137/152

S/2021/617

Annex LXX
Statement by the Permanent Representative of Spain to the
United Nations, Agustín Santos Maraver
[Original: Spanish]
On the occasion of the high-level meeting of the Security Council, Spain aligns
itself with the statement made by the European Union and wishes to underline its
support for the integrity of the mandate of the Office of the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General for Children and Armed Conflict as the main advocate of the
United Nations for the protection and well-being of children in conflict zones as a
problem that affects international peace and security.
Spain defends and supports the monitoring and reporting mechanism on children
and armed conflict and trusts that it will be adequately reflected in the annual report
of the Secretary-General and its annexes. The Government of Spain also welcomes
the gender policy implemented by the Office of the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for Children and Armed Conflict and the disaggregation of data by
age and gender. This decision will result in more accurate, timely, objective and
reliable information.
We commend the Special Representative of the Secretary-General for Children
and Armed Conflict, Virginia Gamba, for including Burkina Faso, Cameroon and the
Lake Chad region in her annual report and also for her statements on the difficult
situation in Cabo Delgado and Tigray. We support her boldness in bringing to light
the grave violations against children that occur beyond the 21 situations listed in the
2020 report.
Spain supports and urges States to defend the global child protection agenda.
The Security Council has created a strong framework and provided the Office of the
Special Representative with tools to respond to violations against children. For this
reason, the Government of Spain considers it necessary to hold a mid-term briefing
of the Security Council, prior to the next annual open debate, in order to defend the
protection of children, consult the work of the monitoring and reporting mechanism
and assess the items approved by the Council, as well as possible requests for
adequate funding, especially for United Nations peacekeeping and political missions.
Spain is gravely concerned by the high number of cases in which humanitarian
access has been denied (4,156 incidents). We call on the parties to respect the prompt,
safe and uninterrupted access of humanitarian actors, including child protection
actors.
The high number of attacks on hospitals is also a matter of concern for our
country. These aggressions must be condemned and curtailed w ithout delay. Schools
must also be safe places. The 927 attacks on schools and hospitals in 2020 are too
many. We recall the need to respect and implement Security Council resolution 2286
(2016) and call on States that have not yet done so to endorse the Safe Schools
Declaration. The Fourth Safe Schools Conference, to be held in Nigeria, offers an
opportunity to endorse the declaration and to advocate for safe education in conflict.
Spain is pleased to be able to provide technical support to Nigeria in the organization
of this Conference, the successor to the Third Safe Schools Conference, held in Palma
de Mallorca in 2019.
We also condemn the 90 per cent exponential increase in rape and other forms
of sexual violence against minors in 2020. We must be vigilant and reduce this
percentage in 2021. The international community’s priority in this regard must be to
focus on protecting the victims and condemning the perpetrators. As States governed

138/152

21-09006

S/2021/617

by the rule of law, we have a responsibility to provide protection for victims through
national courts and, where appropriate, through the International Criminal Court.
In 2021, Spain will remain committed to the monitoring and reporting
mechanism, supporting its funding, as well as to reintegration mechanisms and
programmes, an important avenue for redressing the rights of victims violated by
recruitment and use, among other grave violations.

21-09006

139/152

S/2021/617

Annex LXXI
Statement by the Chargé d’affaires a.i. and Deputy Permanent
Representative of Switzerland to the United Nations, Adrian Hauri
[Original: French]
Switzerland thanks Estonia for organizing this debate, and thanks the speakers
for their contributions.
“The number of grave violations against children [has] remained unacceptably
high”, the Special Representative of the Secretary-General for Children and Armed
Conflict warned the Human Rights Council in March 2021, and that alarming
observation is reaffirmed in the annual report that has just been published. Respect
for children’s rights continues to erode, and Switzerland is deeply concerned by the
continuation of armed conflicts in the world and their devastating impact on children.
We would like to stress three considerations to improve the protection of children:
First, children in armed conflicts must primarily and above all be considered
victims and treated accordingly. Children, especially those associated with an armed
group or whose parents are affiliated with such a group, including groups designated
as terrorist groups, are still children and therefore entitled to special protection. This
is why child protection capacities on the ground, prevention of recruitment, and
rehabilitation and reintegration, need to be strengthened. We call on the Security
Council to include strong language on respect for children ’s rights and international
humanitarian law in its resolutions in order to ensure that peace operations are staffed
with the necessary specialized personnel. This is particularly important in the context
of mission transitions.
Second, the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic and the measures taken
to stop the spread of the virus have increased children’s – particularly girls’ –
vulnerability to violence and psychosocial distress. Despite these extraordinary
circumstances, protection staff have been there on the ground to continue to protect
many thousands of children around the world. Member States must ensure that all
responses to the pandemic comply with international la w, that all measures to combat
the virus are lawful, necessary and proportionate and that children in armed conflicts
are given the assistance and protection they need. Moreover, the Secretary-General’s
call for a global ceasefire during the pandemic is the most immediately-required
measure to minimize the risk to children. We call on the Security Council to support
the swift implementation of resolutions 2532 (2020) and 2565 (2021) in all situations
on its agenda.
Third, we must strengthen the instruments available to prevent and stop
violations against children. The monitoring and reporting mechanism on grave
violations of children’s rights in situations of armed conflict, as well as the SecretaryGeneral’s annual report, including its annex, are crucial in this regard. Switzerland,
for its part, is engaged in advocacy efforts as co-chair of the Group of Friends in
Yemen and Syria, and also supports the reporting mechanism’s work in Syria, in
collaboration with the United Nations Children’s Fund (UNICEF). We reiterate our
call on the Secretary-General to continue to provide, on the basis of the reporting
mechanism’s data, a comprehensive, impartial and accurate list of parties committing
grave violations of children’s rights.
This year marks the twenty-fifth anniversary of the mandate of the Special
Representative for Children and Armed Conflict. Her work remains essential. The
United Nations, including the Security Council, has all the necessary tools to mark
this anniversary with strengthened commitment. As a Security Council candidate,
Switzerland will continue to work for the protection of children – because by
protecting children, we are empowering them to contribute to a more peaceful world.

140/152

21-09006

S/2021/617

Annex LXXII
Statement by the Permanent Mission of Thailand to the
United Nations
Thailand welcomes the annual report by the Secretary-General. We further note
with appreciation the continued hard work and dedication by the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Children and Armed Conflict on this
important issue.
Thailand joins the international community in expressing concern for the plight
of children in armed conflict, whose vulnerabilities are more evident during the
COVID-19 pandemic. Hence, we call on all parties to heed the Secretary -General’s
appeal for an immediate global ceasefire, and to prioritize protection and
humanitarian access to children and other vulnerable groups.
Thailand also strongly condemns all violence and crimes against children in
armed conflict. We will continue to support the effective implementation of relevant
Security Council resolutions on this issue.
In this regard, Thailand wishes to highlight the following points:
First, we must continue to forge an even stronger partnership on child
protection.
Thailand appreciates the Special Representative of the Secretary -General’s
continued engagement with States and supports increased efforts in this regard. We
encourage the identification of areas of cooperation where the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General and United Nations agencies can play a constructive role in
strengthening Member States’ child protection capacities.
In addition, greater multi-stakeholder and inclusive partnership can contribute
to the efforts in addressing emerging challenges to child protection. Examples of
collaboration between Member States, United Nations agencies and the civil society
can include community outreach and education to prevent children from online
recruitment tactics and incorporating child protection in pandemic response and
recovery measures.
Second, we must continue to mainstream child protection in the peace agenda.
Peacekeepers do not serve as the frontline to peacekeeping missions, but can
also play a vital role as early peacebuilders who help build environments conducive
for better livelihoods of the children and vulnerable groups in conflict and transition
areas.
Thailand underscores the importance of capacity-building for peacekeepers to
enable them to fulfil their child protection mandate. We also stress the need for
adequate funding and resources as well as clear and realistic mission mandates. This
is to ensure effective peacekeeping and smooth transition to peacebuilding and postconflict development.
Third, we must continue to address the root causes of armed conflict
To transform conflicts and ensure sustaining peace, we must tackle their root
causes. Major common elements include poverty, discrimination, social injustice, and
economic and social exclusion of persons and communities. It is important that in this
endeavour we seek to advance security, development, and human rights at all stages
of the peace continuum.
For our part, Thailand highly prioritizes sustainable development as a key to
root out conflict. We are developing a sustainable development training course for
21-09006

141/152

S/2021/617

our peacekeeping personnel based on our applied experience with local communities
in conflict and transition areas. We found that our homegrown approach to sustainable
development, the Sufficiency Economy Philosophy, can indeed provide the local
population with livelihood skills to tackle some of the challenges that led them into
conflict.
Finally, the international community must continue to work towards a world
where children are no longer drawn into armed conflict. Thailand remains fully
committed to doing our part and looks forward to working with others to amplify our
efforts.

142/152

21-09006

S/2021/617

Annex LXXIII
Statement by the Permanent Representative of Turkey to the
United Nations, Feridun H. Sinirlioğlu
At the outset, I would like to express our appreciation to the Estonian presidency
for convening today’s Security Council open debate on children and armed conflict.
I thank the Secretary-General for his report and his address today to the Security
Council. I would also like to thank the briefers, UNICEF Executive Director Henrietta
Fore, Forest Whitaker and Laban Onisimus of Plan International for t heir
contributions.
We commend the efforts of the United Nations in taking the children and armed
conflict agenda forward.
This year marks the twenty-fifth anniversary of the establishment of the children
and armed conflict agenda, including the mandate of the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General on the children and armed conflict by the General Assembly.
This anniversary provides an opportunity to take stock of our achievements and
to discuss further efforts to keep children from harm ’s way as the severe effects of
conflicts on children continue to constitute a significant challenge.
The annual report of the Secretary-General highlights the dire situation of
children in armed conflict. We sadly see that similar to previous years, the highes t
numbers of violations are the recruitment and use of children and the killing and
maiming. We are equally disturbed by the sharp increase in the cases of abduction
and sexual violence against children.
As underlined in the report, the COVID-19 pandemic has aggravated existing
vulnerabilities of children, including by hampering their access to education, health
and social services, limiting child protection activities and shrinking safe spaces.
The pandemic has also reduced the capacity of national, regional and
international actors to engage in prevention, and protection work, and to provide
psychosocial support for children affected by sexual violence. The effects are
manifold and children are expected to feel the various repercussions of the pandemic
through years to come.
We need to step up our efforts to ensure that the United Nations country task
forces on Monitoring and Reporting on Grave Violations against Children have
adequate resources to fulfil their mandate, which has become even more chal lenging
in the context of the pandemic.
We also concur with the Secretary-General’s call to ensure that child protection
provisions and capacity are included in all relevant mandates of United Nations
peacekeeping operations and special political mission s.
In addition, we see the repatriation and reintegration of children as important
aspects of this agenda. Turkey fully subscribes to the Secretary -General’s appeal to
the countries concerned to take steps for the voluntary repatriation of children,
including those with alleged links to DAESH.
The report of the Secretary-General reveals once again that the plight of children
continues unabated in many parts of the world.
As for Syria, the destructive war that Assad has waged against his own people
had a staggering impact on children. The war has left the lives and the future of a
generation of Syrian children hanging by a thread. Almost 12,000 children were killed
or injured throughout the conflict.
21-09006

143/152

S/2021/617

The crimes of the regime are not the only menaces Syrian children face. Well documented crimes of the terrorist organization PKK and its Syrian branch PYD/YPG
in relation to the recruitment of young girls and boys over the years continue to be a
source of grave concern.
PYD/YPG, hiding behind the name of “Syrian Democratic Forces” (SDF),
employs the same tactics as other terrorist organizations operating in Syria, such as
DAESH, Al-Qaeda, Al-Nusrah and other affiliated groups. As such, they deserve no
less condemnation.
As recently as March of this year, the Assad regime attacked the Atarib hospit al.
A few weeks ago, Al Shifa Hospital in Afrin was targeted by PKK/YPG terrorists. We
strongly condemn these attacks and reiterate our expectation from the Security
Council to ensure that these grave violations of international humanitarian law are
investigated and the perpetrators are held accountable.
While we fully support the efforts of the United Nations to document
PKK/PYD/YPG’s and other terrorist groups’ crimes, we must stress the need to
demonstrate a unified front against terrorism in all its fo rms and manifestations and
refrain from any act, including signing commitments that would be exploited by
terrorists in their search for recognition and legitimacy.
On the other hand, latest incidents in Manbij bear testimony to the local
population’s resistance to PKK/YPG’s oppression and persecution. At least eight
people were killed and scores injured as a result of live rounds fired by PKK/YPG to
disperse locals protesting against its forced recruitment policies. We expect the next
report of the Secretary-General to include these developments, along with an adequate
assessment of PKK/YPG’s recruitment strategy of children in the area.
In addition, as revealed by the Secretary-General on different occasions,
PKK/YPG, in its attempt to fuel its separatist ideology and gain legitimacy in Syria,
use tactics to impose arbitrary school curricula, arrest teachers and block
humanitarian aid.
I would like to put on record Turkey’s stance with regards to the unfortunate
references in the report to Turkey’s counter-terrorism operations in Syria and in Iraq
which emanate from its legitimate right of self-defence in accordance with
international law. All activities carried out by the Turkish Armed Forces during those
operations are conducted exclusively towards terrorist targets, with utmost attention
and care to avoid any harm to civilians or civilian infrastructure.
Meeting the fundamental humanitarian needs of children in conflicts and
emergencies, including the provision of health and education services must be one of
our main priorities. Turkey, on its part, takes all necessary measures to alleviate the
suffering of children fleeing armed conflict in its region and beyond.
For the Syrian children who are under temporary protection in Turkey, we have
succeeded to constantly increase the school enrolment rate. I would also like to note
that health services are provided free of charge for all Syrians including children in
Turkey. This has been particularly crucial during the unprecedented challenges posed
by the pandemic on the health systems worldwide.
As for the children living in northwest Syria where schools and hospitals have
been indiscriminately targeted, Turkey does its utmost to rehabilitate many public
buildings, which were once used by the said terrorist groups. In this vein, Turkish
Government has repaired and made 426 schools operational in Ras al-Ayn and Tal
Abyad area, which provide education for approximately 45,000 students.

144/152

21-09006

S/2021/617

Furthermore, Turkey plays a vital role in northwest Syria as the only corridor
for the delivery of cross-border humanitarian aid of the United Nations where more
than 4 million people live, 80 percent of whom are women and children.
These people struggle to survive with aid arriving through Bab al Hawa crossing
point. The continuation of the United Nations cross-border assistance mechanism,
which provides uninterrupted and unhindered humanitarian access is crucial for
children living in this region. We urge all Council members to provide these innocent
children with long-term support and certainty. Renewing the cross-border resolution
for another 12 months, including re-opening of additional crossing points would be
an important step in that direction.
My Government fully shares and supports the agenda of the United Natio ns in
addressing the situation of children in armed conflict.
We will continue to work closely with the Special Representative’s Office.
In concluding, I would like to underline Turkey’s unwavering support to all
international and regional efforts related to the protection of children.

21-09006

145/152

S/2021/617

Annex LXXIV
Statement by the Permanent Mission of Ukraine to the
United Nations
I would like to express my appreciation to the Estonian presidency for holding
this important debate to discuss current state and challenges of the protection of
children in armed conflict.
I would also like to thank the Secretary-General of the United Nations, António
Guterres, for presenting his report on the issue which testifies that children remain
one of the most vulnerable groups in the situations of armed conflict. We are deeply
concerned over the alarming scale and grave violations committed against children,
as documented in the mentioned report, in particular in Afghanistan, the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, Somalia, Syria, the Sahel and Lake Chad basin regions.
As we mark this year the twenty-fifth anniversary of the children and armed
conflict agenda, this topic remains one of the priorities of the Council and receives
broad attention from the international community while children continue to bear the
brunt of armed conflicts.
The ongoing conflicts, damage and destruction of civilian infrastructure
including schools and hospitals, the use of explosive weapons in populated areas
remain of particular concern. The COVID-19 pandemic has only exacerbated existing
problems of the civilian’s insecurity, especially children during the armed conflict.
Violence, threats and attacks against medical care in violations of international
humanitarian law persist. In the context of the COVID-19 pandemic, the already weak
healthcare systems in armed conflict have been overwhelmed, and healthcare service
has been undermined at a time it is most needed in order to provide assistance to
children.
Ukraine has always been consistent in its policy on ensuring the protection of
children in situation of armed conflict. We were among the first States to ratify the
Optional Protocol to the Convention on the Rights of the Child, as well as to endorse
the Paris Commitments and Principles.
The report reflects the general situation of thousands of children in conflicts.
Unfortunately, many cases remain outside the scope of attention of the report, as there
is not a single word in the document regarding the Russian -Ukrainian armed conflict.
It is quite baffling given that many of the United Nations bodies, agencies and
funds, like the Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs, UNICEF and
others, report extensively on the dire situation of children who suffer from the conf lict
that has been ongoing for the last seven years.
Ukraine is among the most severely affected places in the world in terms of
casualties because of landmines and other explosive remnants of war. This is one of
the main causes of conflict-related child casualties, leaving many children with
lifelong disabilities.
Attacks on schools and regular interruptions of educational process negatively
affected education and general development of hundreds of thousands of children
living near the contact line which regularly face shelling, landmines and explosive
remnants of war. Militarization of education in the occupied territories, amounting to
brainwashing and indoctrination, is also a cause of specific concern.
In this regard, I would like to repeat my call to include the reference to the
situation of Ukrainian children, living in the temporarily occupied territories of
Ukraine, in future relevant United Nations thematic reports.
146/152

21-09006

S/2021/617

We share the call of the Secretary-General to adopt and implement legislation
criminalizing violations of the rules of international law pertaining to the protection
of children in armed conflict. It is high time to pursue accountability and to strengthen
collective responsibility to prevent, stop and ensure non-repetition of attacks against
civilians in conflict situations. This should remain a priority.
As a result of violation by one of the permanent members of the Security
Council of norms and principles of international law, including international
humanitarian law, now it is more than seven years since the Russian-Ukrainian
international armed conflict continues to take lives of civilians in my country. The
conflict and the temporarily occupied territories of the Autonomous Republic of
Crimea and the city of Sevastopol, certain areas of Donetsk and Luhansk regions,
turned the subject of protection of civilians to a very practical and daily issue for my
country.
Many children in the occupied territories of Donetsk and Luhansk regions, as
pointed out by the Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE)
Special Monitoring Mission to Ukraine in its 2020 thematic report “Impact of conflict
on educational facilities and children’s access to education in Eastern Ukraine”, “have
spent a significant portion of their childhoods under the constant threat of violence
and insecurity due to the conflict ... Schoolchildren and teachers along the contact
line have been at constant risk from shelling or small -arms fire, as well as from the
mines and UXO that litter the area. They are at risk of death, injury, or of having their
schools rendered inoperable due to damage”.
Attacks on education in situations of conflict do not confine to physical safety
or school premises only. Children’s mindsets are also among the main targets for the
aggressor in Russian-Ukrainian armed conflict.
Anti-Ukrainian propaganda and hate speech have gained a foothold in the school
programmes, written by the Russian occupation administration.
According to the Ukrainian Ombudsperson, in 2020 all schools in th e occupied
territories of Donetsk and Luhansk regions had to introduce Russian education
standards. The Russian occupation administration attempts to expand its creeping
annexation attempts on schoolchildren, subjecting them to brainwashing practices.
Militarization of children in occupied territories of Donbas and Crimea, in
particular their enrolment in militarized movements aims at preparing them to wage
a war. According to available information, they train in using weapons, shooting and
installing landmines.
As a result, numerous sources, including the OSCE Special Monitoring Mission
to Ukraine, reported that minors took part in active hostilities as part of the Russian
occupation forces. This practice is a violation of the laws and customs of war and
qualifies as a war crime.
Propaganda among children aimed at ensuring a voluntary enrolment of the
occupied territories residents in the army is prohibited by article 51 (1) of the Fourth
Geneva Convention. In Crimea, such propaganda constitutes not only an international
humanitarian law violation, but also a way of committing a war crime as compelling
to serve in the enemy’s armed forces. The occupation power has set up an entire
system of education and sports events for children ensuring a continuous pr opaganda
of military service in the Russian army among children.
We reiterate that according to article 4 of the Optional Protocol to the
Convention on the Rights of the Child on the involvement of children in armed
conflict, to which the Russian Federation and Ukraine are participants, States Parties

21-09006

147/152

S/2021/617

shall take all feasible measures to prevent recruitment or use in hostilities of persons
under the age of 18 years.
It is also inappropriate that over 200 of Crimean children, mostly Crimean
Tatars, have been partly left without parental care due to the imprisonment of their
fathers under fabricated and politically motivated grounds. These children are being
psychologically traumatized while observing brutal searches in their houses and
detention of their parents.
Ukraine pays special attention to the issues related to compliance with
international humanitarian law and human rights in armed conflicts as well as
preventing and responding to forced displacement, protecting women and children
affected by armed conflict, including conflict-related sexual violence.
By contrast, another party to a conflict – the Russian Federation – is ignoring
the General Assembly resolutions and the OHCHR recommendations, practicing a
“cherry-picking” approach to the obligations under international humanitarian law.
Last year Russia revoked the statement made in relation to the ratification of
Additional protocol I to the Geneva Conventions related to the protection of victims
of international armed conflicts. This statement recognized the competence of the
International Fact-finding Commission, which is a key mechanism in achieving
objectives, undertaken by the States parties to the Geneva Conventions of 1949 and
to Protocol I, to “respect” and “ensure respect” for the provisions of those treaties.
Time and again, we urge Russia to uphold all its obligations under applicable
international law as an occupying power, in particular to ensure proper and
unimpeded access of international human rights monitoring missions and human
rights non-governmental organizations to Crimea, pursuant to General Assembly
resolutions 71/205, 72/190, 73/263, 74/168 and 75/192; immediately release without
preconditions of Ukrainian citizens, who were unlawfully detained; end the practice
of forcible transfers and deportations of protected persons, including detainees, to
areas outside the occupied territory; refrain from compelling residents of Crimea to
serve in the armed forces of the Russian Federation.

148/152

21-09006

S/2021/617

Annex LXXV
Statement by the Permanent Mission of the United Arab Emirates
to the United Nations
The cost of conflict, as war too often demonstrates, is borne by the most
vulnerable members of society. Children pay with their lives for the devastating
economic and humanitarian consequences of war. Survivors of conflict, including
children, are left with the burden of rebuilding destroyed communities. The
unrelenting spread of COVID-19, particularly in conflict-affected areas, exacerbates
the effects of war. We come together today to express our outrage at violations of
international law against children; and to restate our commitment to the agenda first
endorsed here 25 years ago: every child deserves protection from the ravages of war,
so they may enjoy a life of safety, fulfilment, and happiness.
Accordingly, the United Arab Emirates would like to reaffirm its deep
commitment to the protection of children in conflict, in accordance with international
law and the Security Council framework on children and armed conflict. We take this
opportunity to commend the tireless efforts of the Special Represent ative of the
Secretary-General for Children and Armed Conflict, Virginia Gamba, and her Office,
to strengthen the protection of children in conflict situations around the world.
Further, as a member of the Coalition to Support Legitimacy in Yemen, the Unit ed
Arab Emirates reiterates its commitment to continue our strong engagement and
cooperation with the Special Representative, which, together with the protective and
precautionary measures the Coalition has taken, is recognized in the decision to
maintain the delisting of the Coalition for a second year.
The United Arab Emirates is deeply concerned by the findings in the latest report
of the Secretary-General on children and armed conflict. Even with the challenges to
verification and reporting of incidents caused by the COVID-19 pandemic, there
continues to be a sustained high number of grave violations against children, reaching
almost 24,000 verified violations committed in 2020 alone.
Against that backdrop, COVID-19 has increased children’s vulnerability and
posed considerable challenges to educational and healthcare systems. These
challenges underline the necessity of unimpeded, safe and timely humanitarian and
medical access. It is concerning that, even in the midst of a global pandemic, the
number of verified incidents of denial of humanitarian access has remained at roughly
2019 levels. The United Arab Emirates condemns the significant rise in the denial of
humanitarian access to children by the Houthis in Yemen, who, as noted by the
Secretary-General, remain the overwhelming perpetrator of all such verified
violations in Yemen. The United Arab Emirates has emphasized the provision of
medical care and lifesaving assistance in conflict situations globally, including
equipment and much-needed medicine, as well as serving as a logistical hub for the
delivery of humanitarian assistance around the world.
Considering the strain COVID-19 has placed on humanitarian assistance, there
is a need to prioritize mechanisms and institutions that protect children in conflict
areas. It is particularly critical that the United Nations system has the resources to
implement its mandate. In this regard, the United Arab Emirates contributed $37.5m
to UNICEF in 2021, and in total over $100 million in recent years, to supp ort its
crucial efforts in expanding access and protecting children in Yemen.
It is also important to recognize that conflict affects girls and boys differently.
In particular, the Secretary-General noted 85 per cent of children recruited and used
in combat in 2020 were boys, however 98 per cent of sexual violence was perpetrated
against girls. The prevention of conflict-related sexual violence against children
21-09006

149/152

S/2021/617

should be at the heart of this agenda. This can only be achieved by embedding gendersensitive efforts not only in our responses to conflict, but also in our efforts towards
conflict-prevention.
In order to mitigate the impact of armed conflict on children, the United Arab
Emirates would like to propose two recommendations:
First, we must develop and promote reintegration programming as a shared
responsibility to support children coming out of conflict and re -joining their
communities. Child soldiers suffer from serious and long-lasting physical and
psychological harm, which can impede their ability to recover and participate in their
community. Moreover, to be successful, reintegration typically requires medium to
long-term engagement that can address children’s and their families’ needs. In light
of the rising need, particularly given the constraints caused by the COVID-19
pandemic, our focus should be on providing support, in partnership with affected
States, to develop the capacity and viability of rehabilitation and reintegration
services for both boys and girls.
Second, we must ensure approaches to protect all children are implemented in a
gender-sensitive manner. The COVID-19 pandemic has seen an alarming rise in
sexual and gender-based violence, as well as severe limitations to access to education
and essential medical services. Girls and young women are disproportionately
affected by conflict, and their needs must be addressed adequately. This includes
tackling harmful social norms that lead to the stigmatization of survivors.
As 2021 marks the twenty-fifth anniversary of the creation of the children and
armed conflict agenda, the United Arab Emirates reaffirms its commitment to the
promotion of the rights of children in areas of armed conflict and the rehabilitation of
survivors – to ensure a bright future for all. This commitment will guide us as we
work with fellow Security Council Members during our 2022 –2023 term. We look
forward to collectively strengthen the progress made thus far and develop new ways
to further this agenda.

150/152

21-09006

S/2021/617

Annex LXXVI
Statement by the Permanent Representative of Yemen to the
United Nations, Abdullah Al-Saadi
Nelson Mandela once said “Our children are our greatest treasure. They are our
future. Those who abuse them tear at the fabric of our society and weaken our nation. ”
And yet, children continue to suffer from conflicts and are forced to live with its
consequences.
I cannot stress more the importance of the international community ’s collective
effort to prevent grave violations against children. Thus, I would like to t hank the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General for Children and Armed Conflict for
her commitment in this regard.
In Yemen, the Houthi militia continues to present a great threat to children. They
continue to kill, maim, abduct, sexually violate, and recruit children in their absurd
war against the Yemeni people. Since 2014, the Houthis have recruited 12 ,054
children to fight, of which 308 are below 11 years old, and 6 ,729 are actively fighting
in the Houthi frontlines.
In their efforts to mobilize fighters, the Houthis use schools, mosques and
summer camps where they brainwash children, train them in a hurry to send them to
die in the frontlines, including in the recent offensive against Marib city.
The Houthis grave violations against children are not limited to only areas under
their control. Besides using schools for military activities, they target schools in the
Government-controlled areas, attack camps for internally displaced persons, and kill
children in their random attacks against civilian facilities, most notably the recent
attack against a gas station in Marib, where children were killed, including one that
was burned beyond recognition. In addition, the Houthi snipers continue to inhumanly
take the lives of children in Taiz. The international community must act immediately
to stop these Houthis heinous crimes against children and the Yemeni people.
The Government of Yemen is sparing no effort to protect children and alleviate
their suffering. Although the war has created unstable conditions, the Government
continues its commitments under international law, including in regards to children.
The Government efforts to prevent child recruitment includes the following:
– In 2014, the Government and UNICEF signed an action plan to end and prevent
the recruitment and use of children in armed conflict.
– In 2017, the Government endorsed the Safe Schools Declaration to prevent the
use of schools in armed conflict.
– In 2018, the Government adopted a handover protocol on the release of children
caught fighting for the Houthis in the battlefield, and adopted with the UNICEF
a road map to end and prevent the recruitment and use of children in armed
conflict. Immediately, the vice president issued a directive to all armed forces
to adhere to the protocol and the road map.
– In 2020, a presidential and a military directives were issued to prevent the
recruitment of children into the armed forces; establish child protection units;
demobilize and hand over recruited children under the age of 18 to agreed
civilian bodies in the field of child protection to ensure their return to civilian
life; and prosecute all military or civilian personnel who participated or were
part of a fraudulent operation for recruiting children.
The Government of Yemen is also working with partners, including King
Salman Centre for Relief and Humanitarian Aid to establish specialized centres for
21-09006

151/152

S/2021/617

rehabilitation of children involved in military actions, who were recruited by the
Houthi militias. This includes training specialists in several governorates to enhance
awareness and mobilize the community to participate in preventing child recruitment.
The Government of Yemen has noted the recent report of the Secretary -General
on children and armed conflict. Although the report welcomed the steps taken by the
Government to protect children, it failed to translate this progress into a delisting. The
Government of Yemen is concerned that despite the vast difference between the
Government and the Houthi militia in terms of natur e, actions and cooperation with
the Office of the Special Representative of the Secretary -General and its country team
in Yemen, the report depends on unreliable sources and is distributing the guilt among
the parties in Yemen.
In addition, the Government notes that the representation of United Nations
agencies in Aden, Marib and Taiz, including of those in relation to children and armed
conflict remains insufficient to the level of cooperation and engagement shown by the
Government. In contrary, the Houthis continue their crimes in disregard to
international norms and conventions despite the high -level representation of the
United Nations in Sana’a. Thus, the Government invites, again, the United Nations
agencies to increase the level of their representation in Government-controlled areas,
where they enjoy free movement and reporting, and away from the Houthi influence
or restrictions. This should enhance the transparency of the reporting, allowing for
better accountability.
Finally, I would like to reaffirm the steadfast commitment of the Government
of Yemen to protecting children and preventing grave violations against them. In
particular, I would like to reiterate the government’s readiness to continue and
enhance the ongoing cooperation with the international community, including through
the work of Virginia Gamba and her team to protect children in Yemen and around
the world.

152/152

21-09006
