A /69/PV.69

United Nations

asdf

General Assembly

Official Records

Sixty-ninth session

69th plenary meeting

Thursday, 11 December 2014, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Kutesa . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  (Uganda)

In the absence of the President, Mr. Moura
(Portugal), Vice-President, took the Chair.
The meeting was called to order at 10.05 a.m.
Agenda item 124 (continued)
Global health and foreign policy
Note by the Secretary-General (A/69/405)
Draft resolutions (A/69/L.17, A/69/L.17/Add.1,
A/69/L.35 and A/69/L.35/Add.1)
The Acting President: I now give the floor to the
representative of India to introduce draft resolution
A/69/L.17.
Mr. Mukerji (India): On behalf of the Indian
delegation, I have the honour to introduce draft
resolution A/69/L.17, by which the General Assembly
would establish the International Day of Yoga, to be
commemorated at the United Nations on 21 June every
year.
Member States may recall that during the maiden
United Nations address on 27 September of Shri
Narendra Modi, The Honourable Prime Minister of
India, said from this rostrum,
“we need to change our lifestyles. Avoiding energy
use is the cleanest option and would give a new
direction to our economy. For us in India, respect
for nature is ... an integral part of spiritualism.”
“Today, I would like to underscore that yoga
is an invaluable gift from our ancient tradition.

Yoga embodies unity of mind and body, thought
and action ... a holistic approach [that] is valuable
to our health and our well-being. Yoga is not just
about exercise; it is a way to discover the sense of
oneness with yourself, the world and the nature. By
changing our lifestyle and creating consciousness,
it can also help us deal with climate change. Let
us work towards adopting an international yoga
day.”(A/69/PV.15, p. 18)
That is the vision that my delegation, along with
everyone here, proceeded to implement. It is a matter
of great satisfaction to all of us in the Assembly that
today, less than 90 days after the proposal was made
for an international yoga day, we have the honour to
introduce in the Assembly a very forward-looking,
simple yet substantive draft resolution calling for the
establishment of an international day of yoga. Arrived
at by consensus after just two rounds of informal
consultations with all Member States, the text of the
draft resolution conforms to the General Assembly’s
basic template for establishing international days. It
fully addresses the concern of some of our colleagues,
notably from the European Union, about ensuring
that this proposal does not entail any additional
budgetary implications for the United Nations system.
All activities held in connection with the Day will be
financed solely through voluntary contributions.
The draft resolution contains six preambular and
four operative paragraphs. The preambular paragraphs
draw from mostly agreed language and recognize that
yoga provides a holistic approach to health and wellbeing, while acknowledging that wider dissemination

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of speeches
delivered in other languages. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only.
They should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

14-68494 (E)

*1468494*

A/69/PV.69

of yoga’s benefits would be beneficial for the health of
the world’s population. The main operative paragraph
proclaims 21 June each year as the International Day of
Yoga, while inviting all of us – Member and observer
States, international and regional organizations,
including non-governmental organizations, civil
society and individuals – to join in and raise awareness
about its benefits.
When we started this journey, all we had was
the vision articulated by the Prime Minister of India,
which was warmly welcomed by a small yet committed
corpus of friends of this initiative. The very fact that
today in the General Assembly this draft resolution has
garnered a record number of 175 sponsors, including
the vast majority of Member States of all the regional
and subregional groups of the General Assembly and
all five permanent members of the Security Council,
is testimony to the enthusiastic cross-cultural and
universal appeal that yoga enjoys among Members of
the United Nations.
On behalf of my Government, I would like to place
on record our sincerest appreciation to each and every
Member State that has put its name behind this initiative
by the Prime Minister of India, and to assure them that
we will collectively work together in making the first
International Day of Yoga a grand success, next year
on 21 June.
I must also thank the President of the General
Assembly at its sixty-ninth session, His Excellency
Mr. Sam Kutesa, and the Secretary-General, His
Excellency Mr. Ban Ki-moon, who, despite their
absence, have sent special messages to members of
the General Assembly expressing their strong support
and recognition of this initiative taken by the Prime
Minister.
As we are about to adopt the draft resolution,
it is perhaps also appropriate to recall what the late
Shri B. K. S. Iyengar, one of the most famous modern
practitioners of yoga, said:
“Yoga, an ancient but perfect science, deals with
the evolution of humanity. This evolution includes
all aspects of one’s being, from bodily health to
self-realization. Yoga means union — the union of
body with consciousness and consciousness with
the soul. Yoga cultivates the ways of maintaining
a balanced attitude in day-to-day life and endows
skill in the performance of one’s actions.”

2/28

11/12/2014

When Shri Iyengar passed away on 20 August 2014
at the age of 96, the Prime Minister of India remarked:
“Generations will remember Shri B. K. S. Iyengar
as a fine guru, scholar and a stalwart who brought
yoga into the lives of many across the world.”
In the Sanskrit language, the meaning of the word
yoga is to join or to yoke. We hope that the impact of
this draft resolution will yoke our efforts in the area
of global health with our aspirations for a meaningful
post-2015 development agenda. I therefore recommend
this draft resolution for adoption by consensus and
thank all members.
The Acting President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Norway to introduce draft resolution
A/69/L.35.
Mr. Bekken (Norway): On behalf of Brazil, France,
Indonesia, Senegal, South Africa and Thailand, it is
an honour for Norway to introduce this year’s global
health and foreign policy draft resolution (A/69/L.35).
Our seven countries have been collaborating on
global health since 2007. Every year since then, the
group has introduced a draft resolution to the General
Assembly, each time focusing on a different topic. The
topic of this year’s draft resolution is ensuring the safety
of medical and health personnel, including in conflict
situations and other situations of emergency, such as
the current Ebola outbreak.
Sadly, this topic has become very relevant in the
last few months. In the current Ebola outbreak in West
Africa, health workers are disproportionately affected.
Over 350 have been confirmed dead and many more
have been otherwise affected, largely due to the lack
of proper and adequate safety equipment. With the
continuing spread of the Ebola virus disease, health
workers will continue to be at risk. There have even
been some instances in which health-care workers have
been attacked by the local population.
Furthermore, in situations of conflict, there have
been also been numerous — and increasing — instances
of attacks on health-care workers, medical transports,
hospitals and other health-care facilities.
This draft resolution strongly condemns all attacks
on medical and health personnel. We recognize and
deplore the long-term consequences of such attacks
on both the population and health-care systems of the
countries concerned.

14-68494

11/12/2014

The draft resolution furthermore makes a strong
linkage between the safety of health workers and
development. The draft resolution recognizes that
attacks on medical and health personnel weaken
the ability of health systems to deliver essential and
life-saving medicines and care, ultimately jeopardizing
the realization of the right to the enjoyment of the
highest attainable standard of health and creating
barriers to universal access to health services. The
draft resolution therefore calls for all Member States
and all stakeholders to respect the integrity of medical
and health personnel in carrying out their duties.
The draft resolution also urges Member States,
relevant international organizations and non-State
actors to develop effective preventive measures to
enhance and promote the safety and protection of
medical and health personnel, including by promoting
respect for their code of ethics.
Furthermore, the draft resolution calls for clear
and universally recognized definitions and norms for
the identification and marking of medical and health
personnel, their transports and installations and
emphasizes the need to develop appropriate measures
to, first, educate medical and health personnel, State
employees and the general population; secondly,
promote the protection of medical and health personnel
and their transport and installations; and, thirdly,
address violence against medical and health personnel,
including through national legal frameworks. We also
call on both Member States and the World Health
Organization to develop systematic collection of data
on attacks on health workers, health facilities and
vehicles.
This draft resolution recognizes the important
work being done by health workers all over the world
every day. I want to particularly draw attention to the
health workers in West Africa: the burial teams in
Sierra Leone, the nurses in Guinea and the doctors
in Liberia. They are the heroes in the fight against
Ebola, as they, often at great personal risk, are at the
front lines of efforts to stop the outbreak. It is therefore
fitting that just yesterday, Time Magazine announced
that these health workers — the Ebola fighters, as it
called them — were named Time’s “Person of the Year”.
We too salute and honour the hard and important work
done by health-care workers, especially those working
in conflict or emergency situations.
Finally, the group wishes to say a special word
of gratitude to the World Health Organization and

A/69/PV.69

the International Committee of the Red Cross, which
assisted with the negotiations from the beginning in
Geneva to the end here in New York. We also thank
all delegations involved, who engaged constructively
throughout the process and showed the necessary
flexibility to allow us to reach the comprehensive draft
resolution agreed upon by consensus that we have
before us today.
As we pass on the leadership of the group to
Senegal, which will guide us through the negotiations
on next year’s draft resolution, I wish its delegation the
best of luck. The group of seven is pleased with today’s
outcome and hopes to be able to continue to contribute
in a meaningful way to the ongoing debate on the global
health and foreign policy agenda.
Mr. Kyaw Tin (Myanmar): I have the honour to
deliver a general statement on behalf of the 10 member
States of the Association of Southeast Asian Nations
(ASEAN) — Brunei Darussalam, Cambodia, Indonesia,
the Lao People’s Democratic Republic, Malaysia, the
Philippines, Singapore, Thailand, Viet Nam and my
own country, Mynanmar — before the adoption of
draft resolution A/69/L.35, entitled “Global health and
foreign policy”.
At the outset, let me commend the delegation
of Norway for facilitating the draft resolution under
this agenda item on behalf of the foreign policy and
global health group. The adoption of this year’s draft
resolution will be all the more timely and relevant, as
it comes at a time when the international community
faces global health issues on two fronts.
The first one is the current Ebola virus pandemic,
which has not only claimed the lives of thousands of
ordinary people but also poses a threat to the lives
of medical personnel and health workers who have
dedicated their lives to the effort to contain and resolve
this outbreak. Apart from those affected by this deadly
pandemic, lives of thousands of medical personnel and
health workers in humanitarian situations across the
globe are also at risk as we speak today.
Medical personnel and health workers play a
significant role in the efforts to achieve the highest
attainable standard of health for everyone. To be able
to perform their tasks and duties, they need safe and
conducive working conditions and environments. In that
regard, we need to continue to strengthen frameworks
to address all major health and safety hazards that
might be encountered by medical personnel and health

14-684943/28

A/69/PV.69

workers in hospitals and other health-care facilities or
in emergency settings. One of the frameworks that has
been developed within the Association of Southeast
Asian Nations is the ASEAN guidelines for the
disinfection and sterilization of instruments in healthcare facilities.
On the second front, we are currently embarking
on a path towards adopting a new development agenda
later next year. Thus this year’s draft resolution is yet
another reminder to all of us that international political
commitment is crucial if we are to ensure quality health
care with professional and dedicated medical personnel
and health workers, as well as to realize our ambition
of achieving not only the health goals, but also the new
agenda in its entirety.
Health is a precondition for, and an outcome of, all
three dimensions of sustainable development — social,
economic and environmental — as reaffirmed by the
United Nations Conference on Sustainable Development.
Ensuring good health for the population is therefore
among the foremost prerequisites for the achievement
of an inclusive and sustainable post-2015 development
agenda during the next 15 years. In the proposed goal 3 of
the Open Working Group on Sustainable Development
Goals, it is also clearly set out that ensuring healthy
lives and promoting well-being for all at all ages should
be given priority and should therefore form the main
basis of the new post-2015 development agenda to be
adopted at the summit in September 2015.
However, many challenges lie ahead. The ongoing
Ebola pandemic has raised alarm across the globe, with
nearly 16,000 cases of Ebola virus disease in eight
countries spanning three continents and causing nearly
5,700 deaths to date. The widespread and intense rate of
transmission has posed great challenges and threats to
the health systems — both to surveillance and response
efforts — of the three affected West African countries.
Moreover, Ebola’s devastation has also adversely
impacted the socioeconomic progress of the three
countries in region, reversing the development gains
achieved during the last few years. Progress towards
ending of this unprecedented outbreak, as well as the
full-fledged recovery of the affected countries, requires
our coordinated efforts and a global response. ASEAN
therefore welcomes the adoption of resolution 69/1, on
the establishment of the United Nations Mission for
Ebola Emergency Response, proposed by the SecretaryGeneral, which is a manifestation of the commendable
role of the United Nations. ASEAN member States are

4/28

11/12/2014

fully supportive of this concerted effort and stand side
by side with our friends in the affected countries.
Ensuring healthy lives and promoting well-being
for all at all ages requires a paradigm shift towards
a transformative change, with renewed political
commitment in the health area across the board at
the national, regional and global levels. Allow me to
elaborate on the three main areas of work in the health
sector being undertaken at the regional level in SouthEast Asia.
First, since 2010, based on the ASEAN
Socio-Cultural Community Blueprint 2009-2015,
ASEAN member countries have been implementing the
ASEAN Strategic Framework on Health Development
2010-2015. Specific regional activities under the
Strategic Framework include enhancing food security
and safety, access to health care and improving
healthy lifestyles, improving the capability to control
communicable diseases and building disaster-resilient
nations and safer communities.
Secondly, ASEAN member States are working
towards the ASEAN post-2015 health development
agenda with a vision to create a healthy, caring
and sustainable ASEAN community. The health
development agenda comprises four main clusters that
aim to maximize people’s health potential through
a healthy lifestyle, universal access to quality health
care and financial risk protection, safe food and a
healthy diet, and a healthy living environment with
sustainable and inclusive development in which health
is incorporated across the board.
Lastly, ASEAN is currently finalizing two
memorandums of understandings to be signed with
the World Health Organization and the United Nations
Population Fund to further enhance collaboration
between ASEAN and the United Nations system in
health-related areas.
In pursuing the ASEAN Socio-Cultural Community,
ASEAN remains fully committed to strengthening
and enhancing cooperation and collaboration, not only
within our region but also with our dialogue partners
and the international community, to achieve our
common health objectives.
The advent of the post-2015 development agenda and
the imminent realization of the ASEAN Community at
the end of 2015, as well as the emergence of the ASEAN
Community’s post-2015 vision at the same time,
might seem to be just coincidental. But such parallel
14-68494

11/12/2014

developments attest to our commitment to serve the
interests of our peoples and of the world at large.
Mr. Fawundu (Sierra Leone): On behalf of the
delegations of Mali, Guinea, Liberia and my own
country, Sierra Leone, I would like to express my
profound appreciation to the President for convening
this meeting. We would also like to thank Norway for
introducing the draft resolution on global health and
foreign policy (A/69/L.35). While supporting it, we
strongly endorse the importance of health-care workers’
safety, which the draft resolution underscores. Our
delegations strongly affirm the sixteenth preambular
paragraph, which expresses
“deep concern about the current outbreak of the
Ebola virus disease, which demonstrates the
urgency of having strong health systems capable of
implementing the International Health Regulations,
pandemic preparedness and universal health
coverage that promotes universal access to health
services, which would assist in the prevention
and detection of possible outbreaks, as well as of
having motivated, well-trained and appropriately
equipped health workers, and emphasizing the need
for Member States and other relevant institutions to
extend urgently all possible means of support to the
affected countries to end the Ebola outbreak, while
noting the importance of evidence-based responses
to prevent fear, stigma and discrimination”.
The unprecedented outbreak of the Ebola disease
has created devastating social and humanitarian crises,
with severe negative economic effects in every part
of the fabric of our societies, reversing the gradual
but impressive economic growth we have worked
strenuously but steadily to achieve in recent years. As
the disease continues to wreak untold havoc on the
health-care system, including health-care workers,
we would like to express our deep concern about the
misgivings that have been created within the entire
health-care system following the deaths of the doctors
and nurses who have taken the lead in the fight. As
I speak, Sierra Leone has lost more than 10 medical
doctors in the fight against Ebola.
We are also gravely concerned about the devastating
consequences relating to weakening efforts to control
the epidemic and end the collapse of the basic health-care
infrastructure needed to treat more common diseases in
the region, such as malaria and cholera. While we are
sincerely grateful to all our development partners and the
United Nations family for their valuable contributions

A/69/PV.69

to efforts to stop the transmission chain with a view
to eradicating the disease both in the subregion and
globally, we are particularly grateful for the SecretaryGeneral’s initiative in speedily establishing the United
Nations Mission for Ebola Emergency Response.
We are confident that the international community
will not limit its efforts to helping to contain the disease
but will also support post-Ebola recovery strategies in
the affected countries. Our budget support partners
have provided strong indications that they will scale up
support in the post-Ebola period, especially in 2015. On
that note, we find comfort in the current assessment
visit by President Jim Yong Kim of the World Bank
to the countries most affected and the message of
the commitments he announced in support of postEbola recovery programmes. We also look forward
to the visit of the Secretary-General to those regions,
which will take place very soon. And we are urging
the non-traditional partners that have stood with us in
the fight against Ebola to continue to support our postEbola economic recovery.
The fear, stigma and discrimination attached to the
disease cannot be over-emphasized. On that note, we
particularly welcome, in line with the draft resolution,
the importance of evidence-based responses in
alleviating such occurrences, which continue to have an
impact on people not only from the affected countries
but in West Africa as a whole. We are also in firm
agreement with paragraph 8 of the draft resolution,
which
“[s]trongly condemns all attacks on medical
and health personnel, their means of transport and
equipment, as well as hospitals and other medical
facilities, and deplores the long-term consequences
of such attacks for the population and health-care
systems of the countries concerned”.
In that vein, we welcome efforts to develop and
establish recommended safety and health standards, and
to conduct the research and experimental programmes
required to develop benchmarks for new and improved
safety in the health sectors of the countries concerned.
Mr. Roet (Israel): Israel is proud to support and
sponsor today’s global health and foreign policy
initiative, as well as the International Day of Yoga. As
the international community prepares to lay out the
development agenda beyond 2015, we are witnessing
an emerging consensus on the major paradigm shifts
that will be necessary to secure a brighter future for

14-684945/28

A/69/PV.69

the next generation. There is no doubt that in today’s
increasingly integrated world, forming a new global
partnership will be one of the most transformative
shifts we can make. That partnership, rooted in a
shared common vision and collective action, has one
simple idea at its core — that our fates, as people and as
nations, are connected. What happens in one part of the
world can affect us all. Global cooperation is no longer
a moral obligation to provide assistance to the people
who need it; it is a proven investment in the long-term
prosperity of all people and of the planet.
Nowhere is the need for effective global
partnerships more evident than in the field of global
health. In one generation, development goals that once
seemed unachievable are now within our reach. At the
same time, we are confronting global health challenges
that threaten to set us back decades. In recent months,
we have seen the Ebola epidemic transform from a
disease outbreak to a humanitarian emergency to a fullfledged development crisis that threatens to destabilize
an already fragile region. The Ebola epidemic has had
significant political, social, economic, humanitarian
and security implications. The complexity of the crisis
has driven enormous efforts on the part of a growing
number of civil society organizations, along with other
partners, which have been operating on the front lines,
often in extremely difficult environments.
Israel was quick to join the effort to contain and
mitigate the outbreak in West Africa. Our immediate
response included shipping basic medical equipment
and drugs to Sierra Leone and protective gear to the
African Union headquarters, as well as dispatching
doctors to neighbouring Cameroon and Côte d’Ivoire
to help strengthen local capacity for emergency
preparedness. Israel also recently shipped field clinics,
known as Hospitals of Hope. Each mobile clinic
includes 20 beds, protective gear, treatment carts and
all the medical equipment required to treat patients.
Israel will train local health personnel and instruct them
on how to operate the clinics. Our non-governmental
organizations will work simultaneously to locate and
recruit additional local medical staff for the clinics.
Israel understands that protection is just as
important as prevention. Despite its high mortality
rate, Ebola can be stopped with proper precautions.
The challenge lies in disseminating that information
in local languages to the people who are at high risk.
In the face of the Ebola outbreak in West Africa,
mobile applications are helping workers in the field to

6/28

11/12/2014

streamline Ebola research and receive reliable updates
from health ministries, even when they are on the front
lines in remote areas. Mobile applications can also help
disseminate information about Ebola in local languages.
The Israeli app About Ebola has been downloaded more
than 10,000 times in West Africa alone and is available
in local languages such as Jola, Krio, Liberian English
and Wolof.
Major health crises, including the Ebola outbreak,
often have a disproportionate impact on vulnerable
groups such as pregnant women, children and elderly
people. On 18 September, 36-year-old Comfort Fayiah
went into labour in Monrovia. Her family had to
struggle to find a health centre where she could deliver.
They went to four different clinics but were refused
entry each time. They were only a few metres from
the last clinic they were forced out of when Comfort
collapsed on the side of the road, in the pouring rain,
and delivered twin girls.
Tragically, Comfort’s story is not an isolated case.
There are mounting reports of women being refused
care in the wake of a complete breakdown of health
systems. Ebola is threatening to wipe out gains in safe
motherhood, and we therefore must ensure that global
efforts meet the sexual and reproductive health needs
of women and mothers in countries affected by this
crisis. In that regard, Israel strongly supports the target
of ensuring universal access to sexual and reproductive
health-care services set out in the Open Working Group
proposal.
Multistakeholder partnerships play a fundamental
role in achieving collectively agreed global health
priorities. Israel strongly believes that the new global
partnership should include the broadest possible range
of actors, including national Governments, local
authorities, international institutions, business, civil
society organizations, foundations, philanthropists,
scientists and academics. Finally, we cannot forget the
crucial contribution of individuals.
As we look beyond 2015, we must never lose sight
of the aspirations of the first words of the founding
Charter of the United Nations, “We the people”. If we
work together, there is no limit to what can be achieved.
Ms. Lee (Singapore): Singapore welcomes the
report by the Director-General of the World Health
Organization transmitted by a note by the SecretaryGeneral on “Global health and foreign policy” (see
A/69/405), which outlines the vision and identifies the

14-68494

11/12/2014

guiding principles for partnerships for global health.
We thank the global health and foreign policy group
for its good work on the draft resolution on ensuring
the safety of medical and health personnel (A/69/L.35).
The theme of this year’s draft resolution serves as
a timely reminder of the rising violence and deliberate
attacks against health-care workers in areas of conflict.
All States have the responsibility to ensure their safety
in accordance with their obligations under applicable
international humanitarian law. Singapore strongly
condemns all threats and acts of violence against
health-care workers. We urge all States to take stronger
action to ensure that any such acts committed on their
territory are fully investigated. We must bring the
perpetrators of such acts to justice and end impunity.
Our health-care systems and workers are facing
pressing challenges that are being exacerbated by
the risk of the spread of infectious diseases, which is
multiplied in today’s interconnected world. Put simply,
no countries are immune from the threat of outbreaks.
Besides taking precious lives and straining our healthcare systems, such outbreaks can have a detrimental
impact on economic and social stability. The Ebola
virus outbreak, which has resulted in more than 6,000
deaths in the West Africa region, has brought these
challenges into sharp relief. We extend our sympathies
to the people who are struggling with the outbreak, and
we stand in solidarity with the countries that are most
adversely affected.
Singapore has had its own experience dealing with
disease outbreaks. In 2003, the severe acute respiratory
syndrome (SARS) struck our region. In Singapore, 238
people fell ill and 33 succumbed, including five healthcare workers, in a period spanning barely four months.
SARS not only resulted in the loss of precious lives but
also dealt a blow to our economy and society. It tested
the resolve of Singaporeans to overcome together our
first major crisis as an independent nation. Fortunately,
we got our act together quickly. Singaporeans from all
walks of life rallied around efforts to rid Singapore of
SARS. They understood the need to work together to
tackle the crisis and restore their lives to normalcy. Many
heroes emerged from the crisis, none more so than our
selfless health-care workers battling at the front line.
They cared for their patients despite the considerable
risk to themselves and to their families. We remember
and salute all who remained steadfast in their posts in
the fight against SARS despite the dangers.

A/69/PV.69

Singapore would also like to reiterate our
concern over the ongoing Ebola virus outbreak in
West Africa. We wish to reaffirm our commitment to
working with the World Health Organization (WHO)
and the international community in combating this
unprecedented public health challenge. Singapore has
not stood still. We have contributed an aid package
consisting of medicines, medical supplies and personal
protective equipment to the affected regions, and
$150,000 in cash to WHO.
The best way to stem the Ebola outbreak is to stop
it at the source. The progress made is a testament to
the tireless efforts and personal sacrifices of front-line
health-care workers who put themselves at risk. On a
broader scale, health-care facilities around the world
employ over 59 million workers, who are exposed to a
complex variety of health and safety hazards every day.
While they respond daily with skills, professionalism,
courage and dedication, they are certainly not immune
to injury, illness or bullets. They deserve our gratitude
and to be treated with dignity, respect and, above all, our
protection. We therefore reiterate our stance that any
act of violence against people whose sole purpose is to
save lives cannot be excused and should be prosecuted
in a manner befitting the heinous nature of the crime.
We hope that the draft resolution will be an important
step forward towards that goal.
Mrs. Robl (United States of America): The United
States is pleased to co-sponsor both draft resolutions
before the Assembly today under agenda item 124:
the draft resolution for an international day of yoga
(A/69/L.17) and the annual draft resolution on global
health and foreign policy (A/69/L.35). We appreciate
the flexibility and dedication displayed by the main
sponsors and all negotiating partners during the
informal consultations. In particular, we thank the
representative of Norway for introducing this year’s
global health and foreign policy text on behalf of the
cross-regional core group.
This year’s focus on the safety and security of health
workers is particularly timely and relevant in the light
of the recent tragic outbreak of the Ebola virus in West
Africa. The devastating impact on the region’s health
workers, both national and international, has served to
emphasize the dangers faced by medical professionals
in the field. We have all been immeasurably inspired by
their service. In that regard, I am pleased to note that
Time Magazine has named them their “People of the
Year” for 2014.

14-684947/28

A/69/PV.69

The outbreak has decimated the health profession
in a region already challenged with limited health
infrastructure. We must give all possible support to the
courageous individuals on the front lines of this crisis
and do more to ensure the safety of health workers as
they respond to the public health challenges of their
patients.
The international community needs to reinforce
the obligation of parties to armed conflicts to respect
and protect medical personnel exclusively engaged in
medical duties. We also need to respect the personal
safety of medical workers who go to an area to provide
vaccinations and other health services to the local
population. And we must take necessary steps to
provide supplies and train health workers in the ways
of avoiding infections.
Not all threats to the safety of health workers come
from their proximity to disease. In recent years we
have seen violations by parties to armed conflicts of
the obligation to respect and protect medical personnel
exclusively engaged in medical duties. The origins of
this rule date back 150 years to the Geneva Conference
of 1863.
Threats to the safety of health workers are
increasingly apparent in parts of Syria, where, according
to the World Health Organization, nearly 70 per cent of
hospitals and health-care centres have been damaged or
closed. Forces loyal to the Al-Assad regime have been
making it next to impossible for doctors and nurses
to do their jobs, dropping barrel bombs on medical
facilities as if they were military encampments,
stealing medicine out of humanitarian convoys and
even dragging patients from sickbeds. More than 460
civilian health professionals have been killed across
Syria, and of the 5,000 doctors who worked in Aleppo
before the war, only 36 are said to remain.
I would like to highlight the Global Health Security
Agenda, which has brought together a strong coalition
of countries dedicated to strengthening the global
capacity to prevent, detect and respond to infectious
diseases. We look forward to continuing to work
with our international counterparts to reinforce the
rights of health workers, be it through the activities
and resolutions of the General Assembly, the Security
Council or other relevant United Nations bodies, and by
our actions on the ground.
One small but important clarification: we are
joining the consensus and sponsoring draft resolution

8/28

11/12/2014

A/69/L.35 today with the express understanding that
its reaffirmation of human rights instruments are
applicable to the extent countries have affirmed those
instruments in the first place, and that it does not imply
that States must implement obligations under human
rights instruments to which they are not a party. To the
extent that it is implied in the draft resolution, the United
States does not recognize the creation of any new right
that we have not previously recognized, the expansion
of the content or coverage of existing rights, or any
other change in the current state of treaty or customary
international law, including international humanitarian
law. Countries have a wide array of policies and actions
that may be appropriate for the progressive realization
of the right to the enjoyment of the highest attainable
standard of physical and mental health, and neither this
draft resolution nor others should try to prescribe or
define how individual countries pursue such progressive
realization.
Mr. Zagrekov (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): The Russian Federation welcomes and
supports the efforts of the United Nations, and
especially of the World Health Organization (WHO),
to bolster multilateral cooperation and assistance
and strengthening national health-care capacities.
Considering health care one of the priorities of the future
global socioeconomic agenda is a major achievement.
A nation’s health can be seen as its backbone; it is
necessary for the sustainable development of States.
Health-care systems are becoming a sphere of longterm State investment in human potential.
One of the most pressing areas in our joint work in
health care this year is joining together to implement
General Assembly and Security Council decisions on
combating Ebola and mitigating its negative impact on
the economy, security and stability of affected countries.
We support the central role of the United Nations in
that work. We make an active contribution to practical
activities in the epidemic zone, consistently stepping
up technical and financial support to affected countries
through multilateral and bilateral mechanisms.
Our country, through WHO, continues to assist
affected countries in the implementation of international
medical or sanitary rules that improve the readiness of
national health-care systems for effective and timely
response to outbreaks of dangerous infections like
Ebola. In intergovernmental work being done by the
World Food Programme, UNICEF and WHO, there
are proposals for financing humanitarian projects in

14-68494

11/12/2014

countries affected by Ebola. We are considering the
prospect of providing assistance through the World
Bank and the Ebola Response Multi-Partner Trust
Fund.
We welcome draft resolution A/69/L.35, entitled
“Global health and foreign policy“. The draft resolution
feeds into efforts by Member States and the United
Nations system to develop health care and reflects the
recognition of the need to duly consider the issue of
health care in the emerging new global development
agenda.
One of the priorities of socioeconomic cooperation
in the post-2015 period should be combating
non-communicable diseases (NCDs), which are one
of the main causes of mortality in populations in
developed countries and, together with infectious
diseases, impose a serious burden on the health-care
systems of developing States. Russia’s contribution to
combating NCDs in low- and middle-income countries
took the form of the allocation of more than $3 million to
funding a joint global project with WHO on establishing
healthy lifestyles and preventing NCDs, with financial
and technical support from WHO and Russian experts,
for the period 2012-2014. Those countries will develop
national plans of action on NCDs.
The possibility is also being considered of extending
the projects for a new two-year period. Countries
will receive technical and financial support in the
implementation of national plans of action on NCDs,
as well as strengthening of their national monitoring
systems for those diseases. Our upcoming plans include
opening a WHO office in Moscow on NCDs. The
Government has allocated $22 million to that end.
In 2016, our country will host the second global
conference on NCDs. I would like to take today’s
opportunity to invite all interested parties to participate.
An important element of Russian support of WHO
activities is also the initiative geared towards enhancing
the role of the Russian language in international
health care. The results of two years of joint work are
impressive. We intend to continue that project with a
view to increasing the level and enhancing the quality
of outreach in the field of health care in the Russian
language.
The development of health care is a Russian
priority. Efforts of the State in this area are receiving
growing financial support. We believe such funding to
be one of the most important areas of State investment

A/69/PV.69

policy that should guarantee improved health for the
population, tackle demographic problems and support
sustainable development.
We would like to welcome the draft resolution from
our Indian colleagues on declaring the International
Day of Yoga (A/69/L.17), which was introduced earlier
today under this same agenda item. We think that the
initiative is very useful in terms of popularizing yoga as
an element of a healthy lifestyle, given the scientifically
proven positive results that the practice of yoga can
have on human health.
In conclusion, I would like to stress that an
effective response to global challenges in the field of
health care is possible only on the basis of partnership
and cooperation among all stakeholders. Russia intends
to fully assist in the strengthening of multilateral
cooperation in the area of health and to provide support
for the relevant efforts being carried out by the United
Nations.
Mr. Rakhmetullin (Kazakhstan): I thank the
President for calling attention to health care as an
important policy issue on the international agenda and
demanding that States give particular attention to it in
their foreign policy.
Because of their virulence and frequency, as well as
their potential wide reach, the Ebola virus, HIV/AIDS
and other major diseases have been added to our list
of unprecedented challenges. Given their transnational
character, combating them is an integral aspect of
foreign policy. These new health challenges go beyond
regional cooperation, and meeting them has proved to
be effective and timely only through collaboration with
outside partners.
Progress in global health depends primarily on
international partnerships, including public-private
partnerships, to bridge the existing gaps in realizing
every person’s right to internationally accepted
standards of physical and mental health care. That
calls for coordination by each Member State with its
neighbours and other countries of a region and a review
of the institutional environment, including forums for
interaction, and the various instruments and means
that could be used. At the same time, the international
community will have to seek ways to enhance the
quantity and quality of health information available to
decision-makers by thoroughly analysing the influence
and impact of foreign policy on global health. Therefore,
developing the capacity and training of health officials,

14-684949/28

A/69/PV.69

as well as the orientation of diplomats, in global health,
foreign policy and development cooperation will have
far-reaching positive effects.
Contemporary outbreaks of diseases require
sustainable international responses to shared health
risks, which do not know borders. Therefore, achieving
positive global health outcomes contributes to providing
human, national and international security, as well as
increased prosperity for States, among other related
goals.
Achieving the Millennium Development Goals
(MDGs) required coherent global and national health
programmes as well as international cooperation. That
will become an even greater imperative in the post2015 phase, not only for the health-related sustainable
development goals but also for overall security and
progress. It will be necessary to focus on reducing the
mortality rate of infants and pregnant women, which
still falls far short of the targets set in the MDGs,
and on fostering women’s health and gender equality,
providing safe water and sanitation and environmental
sustainability, as outlined in the Secretary-General’s
Global Strategy for Women’s and Children’s Health
and in the Health for All Strategy. This strategy will
have to be implemented by a wide range of partners in
a multisectoral, harmonious and integrated manner by
developing countries, donors and regional international
organizations.
Kazakhstan has achieved a number of MDGs and
is now working on the Millennium Development Goals
Plus. The new strategy of the President of Kazakhstan,
entitled “The road to the future”, has set new standards
that will be reached through a multisectoral approach
to health care, in combination with efforts in the areas
of social protection, education, agriculture, scientific
development and technology and infrastructure
development, given their interrelated nature.
Kazakhstan is also collaborating with other
countries of the region on health issues. It is working
most closely with the World Health Organization
(WHO), the United Nations Development Programme,
UNICEF, UN-Women and the United Nations Population
Fund, all of which plan to use the Kazakhstan-proposed
United Nations hub to be located in Almaty to reduce
poverty and enhance standards of health care. The
overarching goal of the United Nations system, through
its multi-country outreach out of Almaty, is also to
reduce risks and build health resilience for the countries
of Central Asia through the sharing of best practices and
10/28

11/12/2014

technical collaboration, thereby promoting capacitybuilding.
At the global level, Kazakhstan has made a
contribution of $50,000 to the Ebola Response
Multi-Partner Trust Fund and is planning to make
another in the amount of $300,000 through the African
Union. It will also continue to step up its efforts
to promote global health through knowledge- and
technology-sharing and all forms of cooperation.
Knowing full well that all sustainable development
gains could be reversed by challenges to health systems,
Kazakhstan is committed to all international initiatives
in the areas of health, the fight against poverty and the
pursuit of peace and human security.
Ms. Al-Temimi (Qatar) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, we would like to express our appreciation for
the report of the Director-General of the World Health
Organization (WHO) on partnerships for global health
(see A/69/405), including the links between health and
environmental, economic and social determinants.
It provides important recommendations aimed at
improving the management of health care at the global
level. We would like here to pay tribute to the role of
WHO.
We all know that health for all must be a development
objective for all States, with a view to shaping better
individual lifestyles that would be reflected in national
development. There is agreement on the importance of
health as a comprehensive and significant public policy
issue. It is a prerequisite for sustainable development in
all of its dimensions. We therefore agree that there is a
need to accord due attention to health-related issues in
the post-2015 development agenda, including the issue
of comprehensive health coverage.
Qatar’s foreign policy is committed to global
health objectives. The humanitarian support provided
by Qatar has included the establishment in several
regions of hospitals and other projects. It also includes
support for sports as a means of achieving development
and enhancing the health of the members of society.
In addition to hosting major sporting events, the State
supports a number of sports initiatives and hosts
the Doha GOALS Forum, which works to develop
initiatives aimed at achieving global progress through
sports in response to the General Assembly resolutions
on the issue, the latest of which is resolution 68/98.
Qatar’s development efforts include actions to
enhance and improve the quality of health systems
14-68494

11/12/2014

in order to achieve sound and more equitable,
comprehensive and effective health systems for its
population. In addition, Qatar’s national health strategy
for 2011-2016 was elaborated in accordance with
Qatar’s national vision 2013, on the basis of which the
State works to develop an integrated health-care system
that is managed in keeping with the most stringent
international criteria. Mandatory health care will also
be provided to all of the population by the end of 2015.
In general, the Government of the State of Qatar
is taking significant actions to protect the people and
their health, with an increased national interest in
epidemics. Long-term strategies must be developed
in relation to topical threats. As with all issues
affecting the international community, this will require
cooperation at the international level, and the exchange
of information and best practices is of great importance.
In the context of realizing the importance of such
cooperation, we appreciate the initiatives and efforts
aimed at enabling all people to enjoy the highest level of
physical and mental health. In that regard, we commend
the Foreign Policy and Global Health Initiative.
The State of Qatar is also a sponsor of the draft
resolution to be adopted today proclaiming 21 June
as the International Day of Yoga (A/69/L.17), given
the benefits of yoga for health. It also stresses the
importance of disseminating information more widely
about the benefits of yoga so that all peoples of the
world can enjoy its benefits and improve their lifestyles
so as to enjoy better health.
Mr. Bhattarai (Nepal): I have the honour to speak
on behalf of the Government of Nepal in support
of the draft resolution before the Assembly on the
International Day of Yoga (A/69/L.17), under the item
“Global health and foreign policy”.
My delegation wishes to place on record its most
sincere appreciation to the leadership of India for their
important initiative and coordination, which led to the
submission of this draft resolution, of which Nepal is
honoured to be a sponsor. Indeed, yoga should have
found its way into this Hall a long time ago, given the
widely accepted importance of the practice of yoga
as a natural way of life to good health, physical and
mental as well as spiritual. It is never too late, however,
and Nepal wholeheartedly welcomes the adoption of
this resolution by the Assembly later today, with the
unprecedented strength of its sponsorship.

A/69/PV.69

The sacred mountains and Himalayas in Nepal
have been a sanctuary for all seekers of peace and
benevolence as well as great practitioners of yoga and
various forms of meditation, from South and Central
Asia and beyond, since ancient times. Nepal is also
home to Lumbini, the birthplace of Siddartha Gautama,
the Shakyamuni Buddha, himself a great practitioner
of meditation.
Nepal would like to underline some important
aspects of our way forward with respect to the
International Day of Yoga in the coming years.
First, yoga is about practicing, so the observance
of the International Day of Yoga would enrich our
understanding of various aspects of yoga, with a focus
on practice.
Secondly, genuine ways need to identified in the
longer run to distinguish distorted and commercialized
versions of yoga from the yoga we embrace here as a
connector of the self and the environment at large and
as a great energizer of global health, especially in the
prevention and control of non-communicable diseases,
at minimum to no cost to the practitioner.
Thirdly, yoga should be at the core of networking all
our populations for this good cause. Encouraging such
bona fide networking should be part of all our foreign
policy in support of a holistic approach to health and
well-being.
Last but not least, while the cost of all activities
that may arise from the implementation of this draft
resolution will be met from voluntary contributions, it is
important to start earmarking part of our development
budget in the health sector towards unleashing the full
potential of yoga, so as to help realize global health as a
long-term health objective through the exchange of best
practices over time.
In conclusion, I would like to encourage one and
all in the Hall today, and throughout the United Nations
system, to start allowing the invaluable practice of yoga
to permeate their own lives and help create an affordable,
eco-friendly and sustainable health system in the world
of the future. We believe that will profoundly benefit
the global health and foreign policy initiative, which
Nepal fully supports.
Mr. Toriello (Sao Tome and Principe): Among
the many important issues and the draft resolutions
that we have before us today, which Sao Tome and

14-6849411/28

A/69/PV.69

Principe supports fully, we would like to focus on the
declaration of the International Day of Yoga as a means
of promoting health and evolution, if I may use that
word. It is not only a matter of health; it is a matter of
having clarity of vision through the mental approach
that yoga can provide. In fact, it is not only the body
that we must cure and improve, but mainly the mental
system through which human beings make rules and
laws.
I believe that yoga is a very important medium in
providing clarity of vision. And if there is clarity of
vision, there is clarity of action. When we have clarity
of vision and action, that can help us to prevent the
incongruities and contradictions that, normally, every
institution experiences. In fact, there are contradictions
that can sometimes generate a lot of confusion in the
making of rules and promoting laws. Therefore, it is
very important that the International Day of Yoga be
fully supported, that it becomes part of our daily lives
and helps us to have clearer vision and action in life.
Mr. Kohona (Sri Lanka): Sri Lanka is pleased to
support the two draft resolutions before the Assembly:
on the International Day of Yoga (A/69/L.17) and on
global health and foreign policy (A/69/L.35).
We will continue to work with the United Nations
in providing assistance to deal with the Ebola outbreak
in West Africa. With our established experience in
cost-effective public health services, we hope to make a
useful contribution in that respect.
We congratulate India, in particular Ambassador
Asoke Mukerji, on the initiative for the United Nations
to declare 21 June the International Day of Yoga, a most
appropriate concept for the United Nations. The word
“yoga” originates from Sanskrit and means to join or to
unite. Yoga has a holistic effect and brings body, mind,
consciousness and soul into balance. As we struggle
with the challenges of modern life, yoga can infuse life
with a serene balance.
As a country that shares a millenniums-old
cultural, social and religious bond with India, Sri
Lanka welcomes this initiative. The declaration of
the International Day of Yoga will contribute to
raising awareness on gaining greater understanding of
ourselves, our strengths, the purpose of our existence
and our relationships. Unfortunately, yoga has become
a fad — a craze — in the industrialized, developed
West. I hope that the intrinsic beauty and strength of
yoga will not be diluted by sheer commercialization.

12/28

11/12/2014

In that spirit, Sri Lanka unites with other supporters
of these draft resolutions.
The Acting President: We have heard the last
speaker in the debate on agenda item 124.
We shall now consider draft resolutions A/69/L.17
and A/69/L.35.
The Assembly will first take a decision on draft
resolution A/69/L.17, entitled “International Day of
Yoga”.
I give the floor to the representative of the
Secretariat.
Mr. Botnaru (Department for General Assembly
and Conference Management): I should like to announce
that since the submission of the draft resolution, in
addition to those delegations listed in the document, the
following countries have also become sponsors of draft
resolution A/69/L.17: Albania, Andorra, Antigua and
Barbuda, Bahrain, Belgium, Bosnia and Herzegovina,
Botswana, Brazil, Cambodia, the Comoros, the Congo,
Costa Rica, the Czech Republic, the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, Hungary, Italy, Jordan,
Kuwait, Latvia, Lesotho, Liberia, Lithuania, Mali,
Malta, the Federated States of Micronesia, Nauru, the
Niger, Panama, Paraguay, the Philippines, Poland, the
Republic of Moldova, Romania, San Marino, Seychelles,
Slovakia, Slovenia, Somalia, South Sudan, the former
Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Togo, Trinidad and
Tobago, Tunisia, Ukraine, the United Republic of
Tanzania, Uzbekistan, Yemen and Zimbabwe.
The Acting President: May I take it that the
Assembly decides to adopt draft resolution A/69/L.17?
Draft resolution A/69/L.17 was adopted (resolution
69/131).
The Acting President: The Assembly will now
take a decision on draft resolution A/69/L.35, entitled
“Global health and foreign policy”.
I give the floor to the representative of the
Secretariat.
Mr. Botnaru (Department for General Assembly
and Conference Management): I should like to announce
that since the submission of draft resolution A/69/L.35,
in addition to those delegations listed in the document,
the following countries have become sponsors: Andorra,
Austria, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Bulgaria, Canada,
Croatia, Cyprus, the Czech Republic, Denmark,
Estonia, Finland, Georgia, Germany, Greece, Hungary,
14-68494

11/12/2014

India, Ireland, Israel, Italy, Latvia, Liechtenstein,
Lithuania, Luxembourg, Mexico, Mongolia, Myanmar,
the Netherlands, New Zealand, Peru, Portugal, the
Republic of Korea, Romania, San Marino, Serbia,
Slovakia, Slovenia, South Africa, Spain, Suriname,
Sweden, Turkey, the United Kingdom of Great Britain
and Northern Ireland and Viet Nam.
The Acting President: May I take it that the
Assembly decides to adopt draft resolution A/69/L.35?
Draft resolution A/69/L.35 was adopted (resolution
69/132).
The Acting President: I shall now read a statement
on behalf of Mr. Sam Kutesa, President of the General
Assembly at its sixty-ninth session.
“Today’s adoption of a resolution on the
International Day of Yoga (resolution 69/131) with
overwhelming support, as shown by the more than
170 Member States that sponsored it, demonstrates
how both the tangible and the unseen benefits of
yoga appeal to people around the world.
“I congratulate the Honourable Shri Narendra
Modi, Prime Minister of India, for this initiative
whereby the international community will observe
the International Day of Yoga on 21 June each year.
“For centuries, people from all walks of
life have practiced yoga, recognizing its unique
embodiment of unity between mind and body. Yoga
brings thought and action together in harmony
while demonstrating a holistic approach to health
and well-being.
“I commend the Indian delegation for its work
on this initiative and look forward to celebrating
the first International Day of Yoga next June.”

A/69/PV.69

victims among health workers in my country, Syria,
given that it is that country that organized the Daesh
terrorist organization, having had the CIA train its
fighters in secret camps in Jordan, who were then sent
to Syria to kill Syrians, according to American and
other Western reports.
Since the beginning of the crisis, more than 2,000
medical facilities have been damaged, more than
40 of them to the point where they cannot function.
Thousands of health workers, especially volunteers
in the Syrian Arab Red Crescent, have fallen victim
to terrorist attacks perpetrated by armed terrorist
groups. Those groups, created by the United States of
America – first in Pakistan and Afghanistan under the
name of Al-Qaida and then in Jordan under the name
of a moderate opposition – were sent to my country
to carry out their terrorist acts against Syrians, as
acknowledged by American secretaries of State. If
the representative of the United States of America is
truly concerned about the health situation in Syria, the
latter recommends that that country lift the illegitimate
economic sanctions imposed on my country, which
prevent the import of the necessary medical equipment,
including wheelchairs, and medications to treat Syrian
victims of terrorism.
We look to the day when one State will train a
terrorist group and then send it to the United States
of America to fight its Government and people, after
labelling it the moderate opposition. Then we will see
how this criminal American system reacts.
The Acting President: The General Assembly has
thus concluded this stage of its consideration of agenda
item 124.

I now call on the representative of Syria, who
wishes to speak in exercise of the right of reply.
May I remind members that statements in exercise
of the right of reply are limited to 10 minutes for the
first intervention and should be made by delegations
from their seats.
Ms. Alsaleh (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in
Arabic): I wish to thank you, Mr. President, for giving
me the floor to exercise the right of reply to the statement
made by the representative of the United States.
It is truly ironic to hear the representative of the
United States express concern over the number of

14-6849413/28

A/69/PV.69

Agenda item 69
Strengthening of the coordination of humanitarian
and disaster relief assistance of the United Nations,
including special economic assistance
Report of the Secretary-General (A/69/406)
Draft resolutions (A/69/L.33 and A/69/L.37)
(a) Strengthening of the coordination of emergency
humanitarian assistance of the United Nations
Reports of the Secretary-General (A/69/96 and
A/69/303)
Draft resolution (A/69/L.40)
(b) Assistance to the Palestinian people
Report of the Secretary-General (A/69/84)
(c) Special economic assistance to individual
countries or regions
The Acting President: I now give the floor to
the representative of Italy, who will introduce draft
resolution A/69/L.33.
Mr. Lambertini (Italy): I have the honour to present,
on behalf of the European Union and its member States,
draft resolution A/69/L.33, on the safety and security
of humanitarian personnel and protection of United
Nations personnel.
In 2013, the number of deliberate attacks
against humanitarians — be they United Nations
system personnel or personnel of non-governmental
organizations or the International Committee of the
Red Cross, whether international or national — was
the highest ever recorded. There were at least 251 such
attacks, resulting in 155 dead, 171 injured and 134
abducted. It is profoundly shocking that people should
be targeted while trying to save other people’s lives.
Deliberate attacks such as those — against
humanitarians, medical personnel and United Nations
personnel — are a crime under international humanitarian
law. The perpetrators of such attacks must be punished.
We are pleased that this year’s draft resolution
acknowledges the full scale of the problem and includes
strengthened language condemning such attacks and
speaking out against impunity.
The draft resolution also concerns the protection
of United Nations personnel more generally. Some
28 United Nations system personnel lost their lives

14/28

11/12/2014

in significant security incidents in 2013. The number
is even higher when considering all categories of
personnel or personnel of partner organizations.
In addition to condemning such attacks, the draft
resolution also provides important guidance by the
General Assembly to the Secretary General, and more
specifically to the United Nations security management
system and the Secretariat’s Department of Safety and
Security, which is now headed by Under-SecretaryGeneral Peter Drennan.
Among other elements, the draft resolution
commends the paradigm shift of the United Nations
over recent years from “when to leave’ to “how to
stay”. In fact, the United Nations is today staying
and delivering its most critical programmes in much
more dangerous environments than some years ago.
The draft resolution further strengthens a key pillar
of this approach, which is a consistent assessment of
acceptable risk by the system through the application
of the programme criticality framework. That is an
important tool of the United Nations system that allows
for the determination of acceptable risk.
The draft resolution furthermore acknowledges that
close cooperation with host Governments, which have
the primary responsibility for the safety and security
of humanitarians and United Nations and associated
personnel, as well as increased acceptance by all
parties and the local population, are integral parts of
risk-management strategies.
Last but not least, through the draft resolution we
commend and encourage the continued improvement
and professionalization of the United Nations approach
to risk management. The European Union and its
member States firmly believe that it is our duty to
acknowledge the commitment of humanitarians and of
United Nations and associated personnel, to support
their work and to do everything in our power to further
enhance their safety and security. The draft resolution
we are proposing for adoption today demonstrates
that this concern is shared by all delegations, with
the strong text of this year’s draft resolution having
been unanimously agreed in the course of informal
consultations.
I wish to warmly thank the many delegations that
took part in the consultations for their constructive
engagement, and also the many delegations that are
sponsoring the draft resolution with us, several of
which are doing so for the first time this year. We

14-68494

11/12/2014

look forward to the adoption of this important draft
resolution by consensus once again.
The Acting President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Argentina to introduce draft resolution
A/69/L.37.
Mr. Estreme (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish): It is
an honour for the delegation of Argentina to introduce
to the General Assembly the draft resolution on the
White Helmets initiative (A/69/L.37).
This year marks 20 years since the adoption of
resolution 49/139, which endorsed the White Helmets
initiative proposed by Argentina as a tool for providing
care, rehabilitation and technical cooperation in
overcoming humanitarian crises. I take the floor on this
occasion to express our appreciation for the work that
has been done within the United Nations framework in
the past 20 years, which made it possible to provide
humanitarian assistance far and wide throughout the
world. Over those years, we have built a Southern
initiative — an initiative from a Latin American
country — introduced in the Latin American and
Caribbean region but with clear global aspirations as
well.
The White Helmets initiative was born when the
debate was focused on the coordination of humanitarian
assistance. Throughout the years, we have been part
of the discussion on the comprehensive management
of risk and on the involvement of the community
and trained volunteers, among other topics that have
enriched and democratized the debate. As we move
towards the future, we wish to continue that close
collaboration with the Office for the Coordination of
Humanitarian Affairs. We want to expand the debate on
vulnerabilities and disaster risk reduction and, together
with the United Nations Volunteers programme, work
towards the universalization of the role of volunteerism
in risk management.
I would also like to highlight my country’s
profound interest in continuing to actively contribute,
as we have done in initiatives of the Central Emergency
Response Fund, the United Nations International
Strategy for Disaster Reduction and in the tasks
associated with projects of the Office of the United
Nations High Commissioner for Refugees, the World
Health Organization and the Pan American Health
Organization, as well as with joint and coordinated
activities with the Red Cross and the International
Organization for Migration.

A/69/PV.69

I also point out that my country’s commitment to
volunteerism will be maintained. Our commitment is
shown not only in the annual celebration in Argentina
of International Volunteer Day, which we held this
past 5 December, but also in the work of dissemination
and training that allow us to have a database with over
5,000 volunteers ready to join support teams.
As the draft resolution under consideration by the
General Assembly states, the White Helmets initiative
comes from a developing country. That should be
appreciated on two levels: for the effort it takes a country
like Argentina, or any other developing country, to set
up an initiative of this nature, and for the possibility
of replicating it in other developing countries. In
addition, as the draft resolution suggests, in a time
when disasters are of increasing magnitude, when an
international crisis is added to the mix, which would
undoubtedly have an impact on the United Nations
and its humanitarian assistance capacity, the efforts
of developing countries in the field of humanitarian
assistance deserve special support because they involve
technical, professional and volunteer resources, not to
mention financial resources and supplies, that are highly
valued and needed for people facing the humanitarian
crises.
Because of the foregoing, my country has decided
to introduce this draft resolution, entitled “Twentieth
anniversary of the participation of volunteers, ‘White
Helmets’, in the activities of the United Nations in
the field of humanitarian relief, rehabilitation and
technical cooperation for development“, with a view
to commemorating the twentieth anniversary of an
initiative that makes us so proud, for everything done
so far and its potential for future development.
We hope that Member States will support the
White Helmets initiative. We hope as well that the
contribution States have made in the 20 years of the life
of the initiative, including the contribution to the United
Nations system as a whole, will also be acknowledged.
Those are the main elements of the draft resolution.
In a global landscape where humanitarian
emergencies are increasingly broad, complex and
long-lasting, I cannot stress enough the valuable role
played by humanitarian assistance and cooperation
in promptly and efficiently responding to disaster
situations. It is also essential to note that only through
economic growth and the achievement of sustainable
development will countries be able to achieve the

14-6849415/28

A/69/PV.69

capacities of resilience and recovery in situations where
they face the most challenging risks. In that regard,
I would be remiss if I did not conclude by expressing
Argentina’s deep appreciation and gratitude for the
invaluable work and selfless commitment of all the
humanitarian personnel who labour daily on the ground
in some of the most remote places in the world, where
humanitarian assistance is so vital.
Lastly, I would like to urge all Member States of
the United Nations to continue to work together on the
enormously important task of providing humanitarian
assistance in natural disaster situations.
The Acting President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Sweden to introduce draft resolution
A/69/L.40.
Mr. Thöresson (Sweden): It is my great pleasure to
introduce this year’s draft resolution on strengthening
of the coordination of emergency humanitarian
assistance of the United Nations (A/69/L.40). Through
its adoption of this resolution every year, the General
Assembly reaffirms the distinctive and leading role
of the United Nations in coordinating efforts and
responding to the growing humanitarian needs around
the world. Its adoption by consensus sends an important
signal of shared ownership and responsibility for its
agenda, as well as of affirmation of the legitimacy of
United Nations humanitarian assistance.
A number of new elements have been introduced
or reinforced in this year’s draft resolution, making
it even more reflective of today’s reality. One such
element concerns protection. The Assembly recognizes
the significance of addressing the various protection
needs of affected populations, particularly the most
vulnerable. Another issue is an acknowledgement of the
Health Care in Danger project, led by the International
Committee of the Red Cross, which addresses the
unacceptable, increasing violence against medical
personnel and their facilities. Another welcomes the
new Humanitarian Programme Cycle and calls for
strengthened language on the importance of robust
needs assessments and analyses so as to better tailor
the humanitarian response. Moreover, this year’s
draft resolution contains new or stronger language
on other issues — such as public policies, durable
solutions for internally displaced persons, safety and
security, education, risk management and resilience,
and transition funding — as well as on the importance
of geographical diversity and gender equality among

16/28

11/12/2014

humanitarian staff. For the first time ever, there is
also a reference to sexual and reproductive health, a
recognition of the importance — in the humanitarian
field as well as elsewhere — of redoubling our joint
efforts to tackle that crucial challenge.
A remarkably large number of delegations
participated in this year’s negotiations, which is
again a sign of the broad interest in and ownership
of United Nations humanitarian work. I would like to
thank delegations for their active, collaborative and
constructive engagement on the draft resolution. We
look forward to its formal adoption by consensus.
The Acting President: I now give the floor to the
observer of the European Union.
Mr. Mayr-Harting (European Union): I have the
honour to speak on behalf of the European Union and
its member States. The candidate countries Turkey, the
former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Montenegro,
Serbia and Albania; the country of the Stabilization
and Association Process and potential candidate Bosnia
and Herzegovina; the European Free Trade Association
country Liechtenstein, member of the European
Economic Area; as well as Ukraine, the Republic of
Moldova, Armenia and Georgia, align themselves with
this statement.
The European Union and its 28 member States
remain deeply committed to saving lives and reducing
human suffering throughout the world through
principled and needs-based humanitarian action, in line
with the European Consensus on Humanitarian Aid. We
remain collectively the world’s largest humanitarian
donor, and the solidarity of our citizens with those in
need has withstood the continued economic hardship in
much of Europe.
Humanitarian needs worldwide continue to grow
dramatically faster than the system’s response capacity
and available funding. The initial amount requested
under the 2015 appeal is a staggering $16.4 billion.
For the first time since the Second World War, more
than 50 million people are displaced. And every time
we think that it cannot get worse, we stand corrected
by a new crisis that adds itself to the long list of new
and protracted crises, pushing the current system to its
limits.
We need to try to respond as best we can to that
terrible reality. In addition to seeking ways of making
additional humanitarian funding available, including

14-68494

11/12/2014

from new donors and the private sector, we must
continue efforts to improve the functioning of the
current humanitarian system to effectively deliver
assistance and use scarce resources efficiently, and at
the same time we must accept that we have to rethink
the system and adapt it to the changing world.
We commend the improvements already made in
the functioning of the current humanitarian system,
in particular the tireless work to that end by outgoing
Emergency Relief Coordinator Valerie Amos, whose
achievements in humanitarian coordination and
advocacy we would like to acknowledge. Humanitarian
reform must go on, including through the continued
implementation of the Inter-Agency Standing
Committee’s Transformative Agenda, in its key aspects
of strong humanitarian leadership, strengthened
coordination and clear accountability for a collective
response, including to affected populations.
In the field, we need strong humanitarian country
teams led by experienced resident humanitarian
coordinators. We need collaborative action among
implementing agencies, efficient coordination and
coordinated needs assessments and responses.
Humanitarian decision-making should be based
on reliable data, situational evidence and response
analysis. Last but not least, all humanitarian actors must
feel accountable, and be so, to the overall humanitarian
country response, beyond simply delivering on their
own individual programmes and mandates.
We also believe that the system — indeed, our
whole humanitarian paradigm — should be gradually
adapted to the changing world. That is why the
reflection launched in the run-up to the 2016 World
Humanitarian Summit is so significant. That is not to
say that the core principles of humanity, impartiality,
neutrality and independence should be questioned. On
the contrary, our reflection should lead us to better
apply those key principles in practice. But we should
also learn to do more with less, through innovative
approaches and new partnerships, making humanitarian
action more effective and the system more inclusive
and accountable. That should include working with a
broader group of actors; listening more attentively to
affected populations and local partners when designing
or readjusting programmes; basing an increasing
proportion of our funding on risk rather than needs,
including through the use of new risk-management
tools; and using new and innovative technologies and
delivery methods to their full potential. We intend

A/69/PV.69

to actively contribute to preparations for the World
Humanitarian Summit, including the European
consultation in Budapest in February.
In the run-up to the World Humanitarian Summit,
we believe it will be essential to ensure adequate
humanitarian contributions to the 2015 processes,
including work on sustainable development goals,
climate change and a post-Hyogo framework for
disaster risk reduction, to be agreed on in Sendai in
March. Humanitarian and development actors, not
least national Governments, must make it a core task
to strengthen disaster resilience through disaster risk
reduction, including preparedness. That is far more
cost-effective than emergency response, and it is what
will enable us to save more lives tomorrow. And while
Typhoon Hagupit, which hit the Philippines some days
ago, unfortunately demonstrates that such phenomena
may be becoming the new norm in many regions, it also
demonstrates that preparedness helps save both lives
and money. In regions prone to natural disasters as well
as in situations of chronic vulnerability, such as in the
Sahel, preventive action and resilience-building must
become the norm.
Unfortunately, natural disasters are not the only
challenge we face. It is difficult at this point in time
not to mention the Ebola virus outbreak, the spread of
which is threatening the very fabric of society in the
most-affected countries. Our coordinated efforts in
addressing this scourge must continue unabated.
But conflicts are clearly the greatest overall
challenge facing the humanitarian community today.
The four Level 3 crises — in the Central African
Republic, Iraq, South Sudan and Syria — will eat up
over two thirds of next year’s appeal. However, needs
will also remain considerable, and often unmet, in
Afghanistan, the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
Myanmar, Palestine, Somalia, the Sudan, Ukraine,
Yemen and other countries.
There can be no humanitarian solution to any of
those conflicts. But while political solutions are being
worked on, it is crucial to allow humanitarians to do
their work fully, including accessing all the populations
in need regardless of which side of the front line they
are on.
The European Union calls on all parties to grant
rapid and unimpeded access for humanitarian aid to
all the affected populations. It recalls that the arbitrary
denial of humanitarian access constitutes a violation of

14-6849417/28

A/69/PV.69

international humanitarian law, for which an improved
system of accountability should be developed.
The centrality of protection in many of today’s
humanitarian crises and complex emergencies has to
be operationalized from the start, and the protection of
the most vulnerable, including refugees and internally
displaced persons, must be ensured. The specific needs
of women, girls, boys and men, and of the disabled,
must be adequately addressed.
Finally, all parties to a conflict must ensure
respect for and protection of humanitarian and healthcare personnel. The fact that the number of deliberate
attacks against humanitarians in 2013 was the highest
ever recorded — with at least 155 killed, 171 injured
and 134 abducted in such attacks — is profoundly
shocking. Translating this shared indignation into
action is what we are hoping to achieve, including
through the annual draft resolution on the safety and
security of humanitarian and United Nations personnel,
which the European Union facilitates.
The challenges facing the humanitarian community
are enormous. As the General Assembly, we need to
contribute to their task through the draft resolutions
we shall unanimously adopt today, by strengthening
the agreed framework for humanitarian action in the
successor resolution to 46/182, and by recalling the
need to ensure the safety and security of humanitarians
and United Nations personnel. These and other
humanitarian resolutions are and should remain
genuinely consensual, as a testimony to our common
humanity.
Mr. Tin (Myanmar): I have the honour to speak
on behalf of the 10 member States of the Association
of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN), namely, Brunei
Darussalam, Cambodia, Indonesia, the Lao People’s
Democratic Republic, Malaysia, the Philippines,
Singapore, Thailand, Viet Nam and my own country,
Myanmar.
We would like to thank the Secretary-General for
the comprehensive reports on the Central Emergency
Response Fund (A/69/96), international cooperation
on humanitarian assistance in the field of natural
disasters, from relief to development (A/69/303) and on
the strengthening of the coordination of humanitarian
and disaster relief assistance of the United Nations
(A/69/406).
ASEAN would also like to express its deepest
sympathies to the Government and the people of the

18/28

11/12/2014

Philippines for the loss of life and property caused by
Typhoon Hagupit. ASEAN expresses its solidarity with
the Philippines and wishes the Government and the
people all the best in their recovery efforts.
The unfortunate outbreak of the Ebola virus
showcases the relevance of United Nations humanitarian
work. In that regard, ASEAN welcomes resolution
69/1, adopted on 19 September 2014. We reiterate our
support for the United Nations agencies, including the
World Health Organization, in their effors to contain
and prevent this serious public health threat.
ASEAN established dialogue-partner relations
with the United Nations in 2006, with humanitarian
assistance being one of the areas of our cooperation.
We have set up the ASEAN Coordinating Centre for
Humanitarian Assistance on disaster management,
which acts as our main coordinating body on disaster
management and emergency response work. We also
have in place a joint task force to coordinate work on
humanitarian assistance among various ASEAN bodies.
The work of the Tripartite Core Group, comprising
ASEAN, the United Nations and the Government of
Myanmar, was one of the success stories in coordinating
and facilitating humanitarian assistance after Myanmar
was hit by Cyclone Nargis, in 2008.
At the second ASEAN Ministerial Meeting on
Disaster Management, convened in Bandar Seri
Begawan on 16 October 2014, ASEAN adopted the
strategy entitled “One ASEAN, One Response 2020
and beyond: ASEAN Responding to Disasters as One”.
The strategy, which will be launched in 2015, will
ensure that ASEAN responds effectively and efficiently
to regional disasters.
ASEAN remains fully committed in our
partnership with the United Nations, whereby our
cooperation is carried out through the 2011-2015
ASEAN-United Nations Strategic Plan on Disaster
Management. Currently, we are in the second phase of
implementation, which focuses on enhancing capacity
and technical support to the ASEAN Coordinating
Centre in areas such as sharing best practices and
experiences on disaster preparedness and earlywarning systems, as well as on post-disaster response
and recovery management.
Beyond ASEAN, we also work very closely with
our dialogue partners in the Asia-Pacific region
through several processes we have in place, including
the ASEAN Defence Ministers-Plus Humanitarian

14-68494

11/12/2014

Assistance and Disaster Relief and Military Medicine
Exercise and the ASEAN Regional Forum Disaster
Relief Exercise, which bring together the largest
civilian-military personnel and assets in the region.
As part of ASEAN’s continued strategic assistance
to support the efforts of the Government of the
Philippines to recover from Typhoon Haiyan/Yolanda,
a high-level conference on assistance for the recovery
of Yolanda-affected areas was convened in August for
ASEAN to share best practices and experiences on
recovery work following large-scale disasters.
With regard to the Malaysia Airlines Flight
MH-370 incident, ASEAN member States extended
assistance to Malaysia and participated in the extensive
search and rescue and humanitarian assistance and
disaster relief operations in the South China Sea and
the Indian Ocean. That operation reflects genuine
maritime cooperation, as countries agreed to set aside
their overlapping jurisdictional claims in the searched
waters for the good cause of humanitarian assistance.
The United Nations humanitarian system continues
to face challenges, in particular in meeting increasing
humanitarian needs with overstretched capacities
and resources. ASEAN believes in the importance of
the first World Humanitarian Summit, to be held in
Turkey in 2016, as a platform for States, stakeholders
and humanitarian actors to identify solutions aimed at
addressing challenges and further strengthening our
commitment and our efforts to ensure the effective,
efficient and accountable delivery of humanitarian
assistance.
We believe strongly in involving our people, who
are our greatest asset, in that effort. In line with our
ASEAN Community objective, we have put in place
an ASEAN young volunteers programme and young
professionals’ volunteer corps, designed to create a
spirit of cooperation and togetherness among our young
professionals through grass-roots community work in
their areas of expertise.
Besides cooperating regionally through ASEAN,
individual ASEAN member States have also sought
to promote and strengthen humanitarian assistance
through bilateral efforts and initiatives.
Last but not least, ASEAN continues to ensure
that our national and regional efforts will continue to
complement and contribute positively to the work of
the United Nations, especially that of the Office for the

A/69/PV.69

Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs. We stand ready
to share the lessons learned and experience gained
by ASEAN in order to improve our preparedness and
responses to future humanitarian needs. ASEAN will
continue to do its best to strengthen and improve its
coordination work and become better prepared to assist
with any future humanitarian and disaster relief needs.
Mr. Bishnoi (India): It is my honour to deliver
a joint statement on behalf of India and Sweden
on strengthening the coordination of humanitarian
and disaster relief assistance of the United Nations,
including special economic assistance.
Through the General Assembly’s annual adoption
of a resolution on strengthening the coordination of
humanitarian assistance, we welcome the role of the
United Nations in coordinating and responding to the
world’s growing humanitarian needs. On behalf of
Sweden, which facilitated the negotiations on today’s
draft resolution, and on our own behalf, I would like to
thank Member States for their cooperation in achieving
consensus on this important issue.
We would like to emphasize that our joint statement
is a reflection of our common endeavour to strengthen
the coordination of emergency humanitarian assistance.
The several ongoing humanitarian crises in various
parts of world reflect the need for closer coordination
and cooperation among Member States on humanitarian
assistance.
India and Sweden would like to thank the
Secretary-General for the report presented under
this agenda item (A/69/406). It provides a substantial
overview of the issues and challenges the humanitarian
community faces. Those challenges are visible in the
unprecedented number of major crises being dealt
with at the moment. We believe there is a significant
need for broad and inclusive partnerships to meet such
challenges and strengthen the coordination of United
Nations humanitarian assistance. Our joint statement
today is one example of broadened partnerships, but
there are many others and further possibilities at the
global, national and regional levels.
One example that serves to highlight the centrality
of partnerships to humanitarian action is the effort
required to tackle the Ebola outbreak in West
Africa — a multifaceted crisis with a humanitarian
dimension that has demonstrated the importance of
increased international, regional, national and crosssectoral collaboration for delivering a coherent and

14-6849419/28

A/69/PV.69

effective response. India and Sweden have both stepped
up their contributions by providing specific financial
and human resources for the effort to end this crisis.
It is significant that our two countries are among the
top four financial contributors to the Ebola Response
Multi-Partner Trust Fund set up by the SecretaryGeneral. India and Sweden believe that the importance
of partnerships will be a key component in the leadup to the World Humanitarian Summit, to be held in
Istanbul in 2016. We welcome that initiative and look
forward to participating actively in the consultation
process, together with all other stakeholders.
India and Sweden reaffirm that humanitarian
principles and international humanitarian law provide
the basis for humanitarian assistance. The essence of
resolution 46/182 is the call for a collective effort on
the part of the international community in which the
United Nations has a central role. We are committed to
preserving respect for, and adherence to, the principles
of humanity, neutrality, impartiality and independence
outlined in the annex to resolution 46/182.
We would also like to strongly emphasize another
guiding principle: the sovereignty, territorial integrity
and national unity of States must be fully respected in
accordance with the Charter of the United Nations, and
humanitarian assistance should be provided with the
consent of the country concerned and, in principle, on
the basis of that country’s appeal. We would also like to
emphasize that the primary role in, and responsibility
for, providing protection and humanitarian assistance
lies with the State concerned.
It is the affected populations who should be the
main focus of all humanitarian action. We encourage
the international community and the United Nations
to continue to enhance their accountability to the
people affected, and work closely with them, in order
to ensure an inclusive process and promote a sense of
local ownership.
The United Nations and its international partners
should strive to make better use of their local
partners, whose role should be expanded from merely
implementing decisions to participating in strategic
planning. Only then can we make the best use of their
knowledge of the local context. We would also like
to highlight the need for continued efforts to place
protection at the centre of every humanitarian response.
That includes being mindful of the different protection
needs of women, men, girls and boys, not least when it
comes to sexual and gender-based violence.
20/28

11/12/2014

We would also like to note that the draft resolution
on the safety and security of humanitarian personnel
and protection of United Nations personnel (A/69/L.33),
which is expected to be adopted today by consensus,
commends the courage and commitment of those who
take part in peace operations, including peacekeeping
operations. It condemns intentional attacks on
peacekeeping mission personnel and reaffirms the
importance of prosecuting, penalizing and punishing
those responsible for such acts. India has contributed
more than 180,000 peacekeepers to United Nations
peacekeeping operations, and 156 of them have made
the supreme sacrifice while serving in those operations.
Another important issue is providing safe and
unhindered access to humanitarian personnel and
goods for people in need. We have noted that despite
examples of good practice and the clear obligations
imposed by international humanitarian law, such
access is frequently delayed, impeded or denied. That
is a problem and must be recognized as such.
India is part of the Dialogue on Humanitarian
Partnership, co-chaired by Sweden and Brazil, in
which 24 Member States meet informally to discuss
issues of humanitarian relevance. In the past year, the
group has discussed issues such as risk management,
early warning and other preventive measures. Lately
we have also discussed the importance of innovation
in the humanitarian field. We believe the Dialogue
is a good example of the type of broad and inclusive
partnerships that are needed to tackle the challenges to
the humanitarian community today.
Despite its own resource constraints, India
contributed $500,000 each to Saint Vincent and
the Grenadines and to Saint Lucia and $300,000 to
the Commonwealth of Dominica for disaster relief
assistance in the aftermath of the flash floods that
struck those islands on 24 December 2013. India also
contributed $500,000 in 2014 to the Central Emergency
Response Fund, bringing our total contribution to
$5 million.
Sweden remains one of the world’s largest
humanitarian donors. Mindful of supporting an effective
and well-functioning humanitarian system, Sweden not
only provides significant targeted contributions to most
of the world’s humanitarian crises, it is also one of the
largest donors of core funding to the United Nations
humanitarian agencies and funds. Sweden also remains
deeply engaged in matters related to humanitarian
policy and reform.
14-68494

11/12/2014

In-country delivery saves lives, and coordination
makes that delivery more effective. This is especially
true in a time of increased international solidarity, when
we find an increasing number of new and emerging
humanitarian actors. India and Sweden sincerely value
the coordinating capacities of the United Nations
system as mandated by the General Assembly, through
the Emergency Relief Coordinator and the Office for
the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs (OCHA),
and we encourage all actors to continue enhancing their
support for the Office. OCHA’s report “Saving Lives
Today and Tomorrow” gives us good food for thought
on how to increase our efforts on managing risks and
preventing crises from happening in the first place.
As supporters of the Central Emergency Response
Fund, our two countries welcome its continued
achievements in providing timely and predictable
responses to humanitarian emergencies.
In conclusion, we would like to draw attention to
the huge challenges we are now facing. In today’s world,
an increasing number of people around the globe are
in need of humanitarian assistance, often in complex
and/or protracted situations. We remain confident that
collectively we will be able to effectively contribute
to addressing these challenges through enhanced
cooperation and by fostering broad consensus among
Member States on the promotion of effective and
inclusive humanitarian action. We remain committed
to supporting the United Nations in becoming more
efficient in its actions.
Mr. Liu Jieyi (China) (spoke in Chinese): The
Chinese delegation thanks the Secretary-General for
the reports submitted under this agenda item.
In 2014, humanitarian crises caused by natural
disasters, armed conflicts and long-standing
vulnerability remained complicated and dire. They
resulted in increased humanitarian needs, significantly
impacting the economic and social development of
relevant countries and regions and posing greater
challenges to global humanitarian response capability
and relief resources. China appreciates the important and
active role played by the United Nations in coordinating
and mobilizing international humanitarian assistance
and the efforts by the affected countries and people.
We pay tribute to the United Nations and other relevant
humanitarian actors for their dedication. We believe that
the United Nations must treat both the symptoms and
the root causes of the problem so that we can respond to
humanitarian needs in a more coordinated and effective

A/69/PV.69

manner and address the underlying issues of the crises.
China would like to stress the following points.
First, international humanitarian relief efforts
must be conducted in accordance with the Charter of
the United Nations and the basic principles governing
humanitarian assistance established in resolution 46/182.
They must respect the sovereignty, independence and
territorial integrity of the recipient countries, abide by
international law and the law of the host country, avoid
the politicization of humanitarian issues and insist on
the non-militarization of humanitarian assistance.
Secondly, the unique and central role played by the
United Nations in leading and coordinating international
humanitarian efforts must be further strengthened.
China appreciates the work carried out by the Office for
the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs (OCHA) in
such fields as resource mobilization, the launching of
appeals and coordination. We attach importance to the
active role played by the Central Emergency Response
Fund in supporting the efforts to address urgent and
long-standing humanitarian crises. China hopes that
the United Nations humanitarian system will further
improve its mechanisms, enhance coordination, step
up partnership-building and increase the effectiveness
of its humanitarian work by identifying the needs and
priority areas of recipient countries and people and
promoting the synergy of relief efforts at national,
regional and international levels.
China believes that the 2016 world humanitarian
summit proposed by the Secretary-General will
provide all countries with an important opportunity
to share knowledge and best practices and strengthen
coordination in the field of international humanitarian
assistance. We hope that OCHA will give timely
briefings to Member States about the results in the
different stages of its preparation and its future work
plan and maintain further contact with Member
States on the process and outcome of the summit so
as to ensure the transparency and inclusiveness of the
summit and its preparatory process.
Thirdly, the peace and development efforts of
developing countries should be vigorously supported
to address the root causes of humanitarian crises.
The underlying causes of the many conflict-induced
humanitarian crises of recent years are the acute
economic and social problems faced by developing
countries as a result of protracted poverty and
underdevelopment. The international community
should provide more resources, effectively implement

14-6849421/28

A/69/PV.69

its commitment to helping developing countries with
their economic growth and sustainable development,
address the root causes of the economic and social
problems confronted by developing countries and help
disaster-affected countries to achieve a genuine and
smooth transition from emergency relief to long-term
development.
Fourthly, greater effort should be made to
strengthen the capacity and resilience-building of
developing countries. Information technologies such
as mobile phones, the Internet and early warning
software for disasters have greatly enhanced the means
of preventing and responding to disasters. The United
Nations should increase its input in building the capacity
and resilience of developing countries and helping them
resolve their bottlenecks in capital and technology so as
to effectively enhance their risk management capacity
and overall resilience.
As a developing country prone to natural disasters,
China fully understands the misery that disasters can
inflict on local populations. Therefore, the Chinese
Government, while increasingly enhancing its own
disaster prevention and response capacity, attaches
great importance to international cooperation in the
field of humanitarian affairs, actively participates in
multilateral and bilateral humanitarian assistance,
engages in various forms of cooperation for capacitybuilding and conducts earnest exchanges of experiences
and technology with developing countries.
In the aftermath of the Ebola outbreak in West
Africa in March, the Chinese Government was among
the first to provide in-kind and cash assistance to the
affected countries. To date, China has provided four
rounds of emergency assistance totalling ¥750 million,
including a donation of $6 million to the United
Nations Ebola Response Multi-Partner Trust Fund. As
we speak, more than 400 Chinese medical personnel
are providing medical services to local populations in
pandemic-stricken regions.
In its fourth round of assistance, China has already
taken the broad needs of the post-Ebola period into
consideration by focusing part of its assistance on
helping the affected countries to strengthen their public
health safety systems and capacity-building. We have
built and donated a 100-bed treatment centre in Liberia
that includes a 480 Chinese medical staff responsible
for running and managing it. The centre has already
started taking in suspected cases. China has also given

22/28

11/12/2014

Sierra Leone a mobile laboratory that began operating
in late September, while construction recently began
there on a permanent biosafety level 3 laboratory
funded by China.
In the coming months, Chinese medical personnel
and public health experts will undertake 1,000
individual tours of duty in pandemic-stricken regions to
train personnel, perform laboratory testing and observe
and treat patients. China will also start to implement
its long-term China-Africa public health cooperation
plan by conducting 12 sessions of training courses on
public health and pandemic prevention and control for
the three affected countries, the African Union and the
Economic Community of West African States, as well
as for the China-Africa Joint Research Centre.
China will continue to join others in the international
community in further supporting the affected West
African countries in their response to Ebola and, in
the light of the ongoing international humanitarian
situation, will continue to make its own contribution to
the international humanitarian cause.
The Acting President: I now give the floor to the
observer of the observer State of Palestine.
Mr. Mansour (Palestine) (spoke in Arabic):
Having considered the report of the Secretary-General
on assistance to the Palestinian people between May
2013 and April 2014 (A/69/84), I would like to express
my thanks and appreciation to the Secretary-General
and his team for their work on the report, which covers
every aspect of the economic and social life of the
Palestinian people. I am also grateful to all the United
Nations programmes and agencies that continue to
assist the Palestinian people. The report addresses a
significant year in the life of the Palestinian people
under occupation, as well as the various and expansive
types of assistance provided them by the United
Nations.
Since the period covered by the report, there have
been many major negative developments in the daily
lives of Palestinians that will have an impact on future
generations, most notably the savage Israeli war and
aggression against the Gaza Strip. For more than 67
years, the United Nations with all its agencies and
programmes has addressed the consequences of the
Palestinian Nakba, the exodus of Palestinians from
their land, and the loss of their livelihoods and the
sources of their economy. However, we have yet to
address the root causes of the problem despite the strict

14-68494

11/12/2014

mechanisms established by the Organization to oblige
Israel, the occupying Power, to implement the relevant
United Nations resolutions. As long as Israel continues
to act as a State above international law and the United
Nations cannot enforce and apply its resolutions, we
will continue for generations to address the effects of
the problem rather than its origins.
According to economic theory, there are four
requirements for production: land, labour, capital and
organization. The same theory posits that all four
elements must be properly managed in order to foster
economic development. In our case, the Palestinian
economy suffers from a lack of structure as a result
of our limited capacity to control and manage those
elements, owing to the Israeli occupation. As the
Assembly is aware, Israel, the occupying Power, has
partitioned the Palestinian territory occupied since 1967
into three parts — East Jerusalem, the West Bank and
the Gaza Strip — thereby preventing any geographic
connection between them.
As a result, each of these three sections has its
own economic activity and characteristics. For obvious
reasons, occupied East Jerusalem has religious tourism.
Gaza has its agriculture and fishing and the West
Bank includes both religious tourism and agricultural
production. Because the three sections have been
forcibly cut off from one another, there is no trade in
services, products and expertise among them. There is
thus a huge disparity of prices among the three regions,
even though Israel, the occupying Power, recently
disseminated rumours that trade exists among them. I
reiterate that the value of imports exchanged between
the three regions is less than $10,000 — less than a
single truckload. In 2014, the International Labour
Organization stated that in 2000 exports from Gaza to
the West Bank exceeded 15,000 truckloads per year.
Gaza has been destroyed and besieged. Israel is
preventing raw materials from reaching industries.
International reports continue to highlight that Israel
destroyed hundreds of commercial and industrial
facilities during the three wars against Gaza. Israel
continues to prevent construction material from
entering Gaza. In Jerusalem, Bethlehem and other
Palestinian centres of religious tourism, Israel has a
monopoly on foreign tourism services. Despite the fact
that those centres lie in occupied Palestinian areas, the
Palestinians enjoy only a tiny share of that revenue.
The port, airport and other points of entry are our
tools for developing our economy for the future. The

A/69/PV.69

airport in Gaza was completely destroyed in December
2001 by Israeli military action that was condemned by
the International Civil Aviation Organization. The port
of Gaza remains a Palestinian dream that has never
been realized. The entry points on the Gaza and West
Bank borders are under Israeli control.
The illegal settlements in Area C cover around
60 per cent of the West Bank. Palestinians have no right
to exploit their own resources or develop their economy,
while our ability to use those resources is greatly
diminished thereby. In that regard, I should point out
specifically that we cannot get to or exploit the natural
gas fields in Gaza or the West Bank, where, according to
the Hebrew daily Haaretz, there are gas and oil reserves
daily. Israel sent an official message to the Palestinian
Government asking it to stop requesting to be able to
exploit those areas, when Israel had already sunk wells
in them near the village of Rantis named Meged 5 and
Meged 6, where there are estimated reserves of more
than 40,000 or 50,000 barrels. According to the most
recent report of the United Nations Conference on
Trade and Development,
“The Israeli occupation of Area C” - in the West
Bank - “deprives the economy of the occupied
Palestinian territory of much of its natural resource
base and costs at the very least one third of its gross
domestic product every year” (TD/B/61/3, p. 1).
The situation regarding Palestine’s water is hardly
better than that of oil. According to the first military
order promulgated by Israel after 1967, Palestinian
water was State property and could not be dispensed.
Israel, the occupying Power, created fishing zones
in an effort to stop water flowing into Gaza. We all
understand the extent of Gaza’s water problems, since
water is a fundamental part of Palestine’s agricultural
economy, and a lack of water is definitely an obstacle
to development in that important economic sector.
In its 2013 report, the World Bank estimated that the
effect of the Israeli occupation of Area C on economic
sectors such as agriculture, mining, construction,
tourism, communications and others was huge. It was
thought that when restrictions were lifted they would
result in a growth increase of 41 per cent in revenue and
construction, but in fact revenue fell 60 per cent.
As for the organization and management of the
economy, since the peace accords Palestinians have
been developing their State institutions and, according
to the World Bank and other international institutions,

14-6849423/28

A/69/PV.69

have succeeded to a large extent. However, we have not
been able to develop our economy sufficiently.
Our economy is still crippled by structural
deficiencies, owing, of course, to the Israeli occupation.
For example, we cannot always control our economy at
the macro level in areas such as monetary and financial
policy in order to steer it towards equilibrium. Regarding
monetary policy and currency control, on top of control
of exchange rates, which have had an effect on State
services, we have not had our own currency. We have
not had the Palestinian pound since the Nakba, and
since 1967 all we have had is Israel’s currency, which
means that we cannot control our economy.
Israel has imposed its monetary policy on us. When
it comes to budgetary policy controlling Government
expenditure and taxes designed to redistribute revenue
and create economic growth, we do not have proper
control over any of that. That is because our ability
to control taxes, goods and services is very limited,
although, according to economic agreements such as
the Paris Protocol, they were supposed to be developed
along with the Palestinian State. But that has never
happened.
What Government expenditure there is is devoted
solely to job opportunities, not to our various living
requirements. We have therefore suffered, along
with every reversal of our economy and the global
economy, problems that are the result of the numerous
punitive economic measures imposed by Israel since
the General Assembly’s recognition of Palestine as an
observer State, so that our growth curve has fallen from
5.6 per cent to 1 per cent since 2012. We would like to
cite Oxfam’s shocking 2013 report, which testifies that
individual Palestinian incomes fell from $2,000 in 1993
to $1,093 in 2013, while average individual incomes in
Israel greatly increased, from $13,800 to $32,000 in
the same period. Thus average income in Israel is now
195 times higher than the Palestinian equivalent. The
situation in Gaza is even more tragic.
Palestine, which is a young society, has many
promising young people in the job market who, if they
can find good opportunities, could make progress
within the Palestinian economy in areas they are
attracted to, such as promoting investment in Area C,
religious tourism, fishing and construction.
Regarding the fourth factor, capital, it has been
estimated that our foreign capital is more than
$60 billion and that if we had political possibilities,

24/28

11/12/2014

we could solve the Palestinian economic problem. But
the Israeli occupation hinders that. The Economic and
Social Commission for Western Asia is attempting to
do an economic survey of the more than 47 years of the
Israeli occupation of the West Bank and East Jerusalem.
The economic losses endured by the Palestinian people
during that period have been enormous, and if the
study is completed, the results will shock us all. We
will see what international organizations have to deal
with in providing services to the Palestinian people
and the true cost of the occupation. If we can bring an
end to the Israeli occupation and are able to exploit and
develop our own economic resources, we will have a
strong, independent economy, and at that point we will
no longer need all this international aid.
The Palestinian leadership, with the full support of
the Arab Group and peace-loving States that advocate
a two-State solution, made a decision to approach the
Security Council about adopting a courageous draft
resolution that would set a mandatory timetable for
ending the occupation and halting the construction of
settlements and the racist wall of separation and the
occupying Power’s numerous other unilateral measures
(S/2014/916). I would like to take the opportunity to
emphasize our solidarity with the entire international
community in supporting the adoption of this draft
resolution in order to establish the conditions for peace.
Ms. Lusananon (Thailand): At the outset,
Thailand aligns itself with the statement delivered by
the Permanent Representative of Myanmar on behalf of
the Association of Southeast Asian Nations.
Thailand would like to express its appreciation
to the Secretary-General for his relevant reports and
useful recommendations under this agenda item.
As the Secretary-General rightly states in his report
(A/69/303), humanitarian crises continue to be among
the biggest challenges of our time. Thailand prioritizes
humanitarian assistance in its core and foreign policies.
Thailand is committed to providing humanitarian
services and disaster relief at the national, regional
and international levels. Concurrently, we attach
great importance to the promotion of, respect for and
adherence to the humanitarian principles of humanity,
impartiality, neutrality and independence.
Our first-hand experience during the unprecedented
natural disaster of the tsunami in 2004 demonstrated
that a timely response to and effective relief for such
a large-scale disaster requires concerted efforts.

14-68494

11/12/2014

Strengthening the coordination of humanitarian
assistance on the ground is therefore crucial.
Close cooperation and consultation between host
Governments and the United Nations, as well as with
other humanitarian actors, is the key element for such
effectively coordinated efforts. We have therefore
continued our support for draft resolutions A/69/L.33,
A/69/L.37 and A/69/L.40 under this agenda item and
joined the consensus in favour of their adoption.
As mentioned in the Secretary-General’s report,
the scale of needs and the outlook for humanitarian
needs continue to grow. Therefore, even relatively
small contributions can play a significant role in
providing humanitarian assistance. Let me share with
the Assembly some of our small contributions in this
respect.
Thailand reaffirms its support for the Central
Emergency Response Fund and therefore has decided
to continue its contribution of $20,000 annually to the
Fund. In response to the spread of Ebola, Thailand has
so far contributed over $152,000 to the World Health
Organization to provide rice to help relieve the food
shortage crisis facing the people in Ebola-affected
areas. Such humanitarian assistance will continue from
both the Thai Government and private sectors to fight
this epidemic. Regarding the relief effort for Typhoon
Haiyan, also referred to as Typhoon Yolanda, Thailand
has contributed ready-to-use aid packages, 5,000 tons of
rice, financial donations up to $1.78 million and 131 tons
of relief supplies to the Government of the Philippines.
With regard to conflict crises, Thailand has contributed
a total of $240,000 to the United Nations Relief and
Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East
and the Palestine Red Crescent Society for providing
the much needed humanitarian services to the Palestine
refugees and the reconstruction of Gaza.
We strongly believe that adequate funding could
be made possible through enhanced partnerships and
strengthened financial mechanisms. We have tried
our best to do our part and would like to urge Member
States in a position to do so to make more voluntary
contributions for a more predictable and adequate
humanitarian funding to enable the United Nations
and the humanitarian community to fulfil their noble
mandates in providing assistance to those in need.
Thailand concurs with the Secretary-General’s
comment on the need to work towards the reduction
and management of the risk of disasters and crisis,
rather than simply responding to the impacts once they

A/69/PV.69

emerge. Our active role on the humanitarian front is
therefore not limited only to response but also includes
prevention.
In 2014, the Department of Disaster Prevention and
Mitigation in Thailand’s Ministry of Interior, in close
collaboration with the Ministry for Foreign Affairs and
the United Nations Office for Disaster Risk Reduction,
hosted the sixth Asian Ministerial Conference on
Disaster Risk Reduction in Bangkok, under the theme
“Promoting Investments for Resilient Nations and
Communities”. The outcome of the conference provides
key inputs for the post-2015 framework for disaster
risk reduction — the Hyogo Framework for Action
II — and the third World Conference on Disaster Risk
Reduction, to be held in March 2015 in Japan. Just
recently, in November, Thailand hosted the first-ever
Asian Disaster Risk Reduction Expo, with a focus on
preparedness for and response to both natural and manmade disasters. Thailand will continue to strengthen
its partnerships with the United Nations bodies, civil
society and the humanitarian community in order to
reinforce its global, regional and national capacity
for better prevention of and response to disasters and
emergencies and the effective provision of humanitarian
assistance.
In conclusion, Thailand commends the leading role
of the Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian
Affairs in humanitarian operational coordination in
crisis situations. My delegation also wishes to express
our sincere appreciation to the relevant United Nations
agencies, as well as other humanitarian actors, for
their tireless efforts and dedication towards building
more effective humanitarian responses and disaster
relief processes. Above all, Thailand pays tribute to
the dedication and courage of humanitarian personnel
who work tirelessly and risk their lives to provide the
necessary humanitarian assistance to those in desperate
need worldwide. We also pay respect to those who have
lost their lives in the line of duty.
Thailand reiterates its strong commitment to
working side by side with the international community to
promote and strengthen the humanitarian coordination
and disaster relief efforts for the betterment of people
in need.
Mr. Roet (Israel): Israel has the honour to sponsor
both the humanitarian omnibus draft resolution on
strengthening the coordination of humanitarian and
disaster-relief assistance, and the draft resolution on the

14-6849425/28

A/69/PV.69

11/12/2014

safety and security of humanitarian personnel and on
the protection of United Nations personnel (A/69/L.33).

Israel has taken this message to heart. It serves as the
core of our development activities.

We would like to begin by thanking the SecretaryGeneral for the reports before us today. The scale
of humanitarian needs is clearly increasing, as the
United Nations continues to face major challenges in
responding to humanitarian crises around the world.

Israel was quick to join the efforts in containing
and mitigating the Ebola outbreak in West Africa. Our
immediate response included the shipment of basic
medical equipment and drugs to Sierra Leone and of
protective gear to the African Union headquarters,
as well as the dispatching of doctors to neighbouring
Cameroon and Côte d’Ivoire to help strengthen the
local capacity in emergency preparedness. Israel will
soon announce further support for the donation to
Ebola causes.

Now more than ever it is vital that Member States,
United Nations organizations, non-governmental
organizations, the private sector and volunteers
coordinate, collaborate and unite around effective
humanitarian response. The 2016 world humanitarian
summit in Istanbul will provide us with an important
opportunity to strengthen partnerships and improve
collective humanitarian action for those most
desperately in need.
Israel is deeply concerned about the intensification
of a number of conflicts in Africa. The SecretaryGeneral’s report (A/69/96) notes that more than half of
the population in the Central African Republic are in
need of urgent humanitarian assistance. In South Sudan,
1 million people face acute food insecurity resulting
from intercommunal violence, as well as seasonal
flooding. And the number of internally displaced people
continues to grow in Mali, the Democratic Republic of
the Congo and Somalia.
In the Middle East, violent radical groups are
waging a brutal and aggressive war that threatens
to further destabilize an already volatile situation,
highlighting the enduring problem of failed States in our
region. In Syria, the humanitarian situation continues
to deteriorate rapidly. The situation is particularly
dreadful for the millions of people living in areas that
are besieged or generally hard to access, many of whom
have not been reached for assistance in over a year.
Evidence has shown that both Government and terrorist
groups have deliberately starved civilian populations
as a weapon of war. Over 220,000 people have been
killed, and millions have become refugees. Israel is
deeply horrified by the suffering that the Syrian people
have endured. Our hand remains extended to the Syrian
people.
One of the greatest imperatives of Jewish tradition
is tikkun olam — the obligation of every person to make
the world a better place. As our former President Shimon
Peres said: “The greatest thing in life is to serve other
people. We are always as great as the cause we serve”.

26/28

Our latest contribution is field clinics called
“hospitals of hope”. Each of these state-of-the-art mobile
clinics includes 20 beds, protective gear, treatment carts
and all the medical equipment required to treat patients.
Israeli experts will train the local health personnel and
instruct them on how to operate the clinics. Israeli
non-governmental organizations will work together
to locate and recruit additional local medical staff for
the clinics. The Ebola epidemic in West Africa shows
us how a disease outbreak can quickly morph into a
humanitarian crisis of disastrous proportions. This
underscores the need for early response and prevention,
which can be greatly enhanced by improving data
quality, including disaggregation, which helps us get a
real sense of the needs on the ground.
The Secretary-General’s report (A/69/303) recognizes
that innovation and technologies are crucial to
increasing the reach and impact of humanitarian work.
Innovative approaches are already being adopted by
Governments and people affected by crises, such as the
text-messaging post-disaster early warning system for
disease in the Philippines.
As we know all too well, the incidence of sexual
assault and gender-based violence is often amplified
during humanitarian crises. When social structures
are disrupted, women are even more vulnerable to acts
of violence. Israel believes it is crucial to prioritize
and enhance access to comprehensive sexual and
reproductive health services for survivors of sexual
violence. These health services are essential for women
survivors to be able to rebuild their lives in the wake
of humanitarian crises, which we all know can have a
ripple effect on their families and communities.
The greatest obstacle to humanitarian goodwill is
the politicization of relief efforts, and this is particularly
true in our region. The truth is, Israel deeply cares

14-68494

11/12/2014

about the well-being of its neighbours. As I sat in this
Hall listening to the Palestinian representative bringing
up a laundry list full of accusations, but without taking
any responsibility — zero accountability — I thought
about how the Palestinian delegation constantly
and relentlessly occupies this institution’s time and
resources on issues that should and can be discussed
and solved between Jerusalem and Ramallah. That is
where real peace can be made.
Israel remains committed to two States for two
people. We are ready to make a historic compromise
to realize the creation of a demilitarized Palestinian
State living side by side with the Jewish State of Israel.
This is a time to seize the moment and work towards
lasting solutions, not to spread lies and foster hate. It
is unfortunate that the Palestinian delegation choose
to ignore the real causes of Palestinian suffering and
instead focused on those cynical accusations against
my country.
Many in the international community, unfortunately,
are quick to denounce Israel’s actions but are blind to one
simple fact. Hamas, a recognized terror organization,
has stolen hundreds of millions of aid dollars intended
for development to build its military capabilities and
terror infrastructure. I urge representatives to go on
the fabulous United Nations webcast to see if they can
find the Palestinian representative ever speaking about
Hamas and about these millions of stolen dollars.
And yet, even under all those attacks, Israel has
consistently ensured that trucks carrying hundreds
of thousands of tons of goods enter Gaza, even as
rockets rained down on its cities. In addition, Israel
welcomed the tripartite agreement signed with the
Palestinian Authority and the United Nations regarding
the entry of construction materials into Gaza and the
rehabilitation of the Strip, an agreement that should
guarantee — if it is implemented as it should be by the
Palestinian Authority — proper oversight to ensure that
all funds and materials reach their intended destination.
It is time to stop pointing fingers and constantly
laying blame at Israel’s doorstep. It is time to stand up,
speak up and say “Let us put a stop to Hamas. Let us put
a stop to the militarization in Gaza. Let us put a stop to
utilizing the time of this Organization and making every
debate a mini Security Council meeting when peace
can be made in our area.” It is time for the Palestinian
leadership to take responsibility for its actions and
lack of governance. Making peace requires courage; it

A/69/PV.69

requires leaders who will build their people up instead
of tearing Israel down. Hate speech, incitement and
false propaganda might get applause in the Delegates’
Lounge, but they lead us nowhere.
Every tragedy offers a glimpse into the very best
of humankind. Israel is acutely aware of the risks that
humanitarian staff and medical personnel take each
day to reach those in need of assistance. Over the past
year, countless individuals courageously stepped up,
nations committed a wealth of resources and the family
of nations united to assist the victims of tragedies.
Allow me to conclude by paying respects to all
humanitarian workers who have paid the ultimate price
while trying to provide hope for those in dire situations.
Let us always be inspired by their compassion,
dedication and kindness.
Mr. Versegi (Australia): Australia supports the
adoption of this year’s draft resolution on strengthening
the coordination of United Nations humanitarian
assistance (A/69/L.40).
Effective and coordinated international assistance
is essential at a time when the humanitarian system is
confronted by unprecedented political, operational and
financial challenges. This includes four system-wide
Level 3 crises and the Ebola epidemic. Our thoughts
are with the Government and people of the Philippines
as they deal with yet another natural disaster.
The magnitude and complexity of crises have
changed the global humanitarian landscape. We can no
longer talk about a linear transition from response to
recovery. The proliferation of conflict and protracted
humanitarian crises are taking an incalculable toll on
civilians. More than 52 million people worldwide have
been forcibly displaced from their homes — the highest
number since the Second World War. At the same time,
humanitarian actors are working in increasingly hostile
environments, with more killed in 2013 than ever before.
Further, violent extremism, as witnessed most starkly
in Iraq over the last 12 months, has made humanitarian
action even more dangerous and complex.
Women and girls are being disproportionately
affected, facing a higher risk of sexual and genderbased violence. Sexual violence must not be accepted as
an inevitable consequence of crises. We must improve
prevention and response to sexual and gender-based
violence, including through trauma, health and sexual
and reproductive health-care services.

14-6849427/28

A/69/PV.69

Affected people must be at the centre of
humanitarian action. Effective humanitarian action
starts with accountability to affected people, and that
means engaging affected people in determining needs
and in the allocation and delivery of humanitarian
assistance. We should also recognize that women have
lead roles to play in peace and recovery efforts and as
human rights defenders, particularly in humanitarian
settings.
Donors are providing record levels of funding
for humanitarian relief, yet we are not keeping up
with spiralling needs. We cannot confront today’s
humanitarian challenges with a business-as-usual
approach. We must use innovation, such as building on
cash transfer technologies, to find new efficiencies in
humanitarian assistance. We must bring in new donors
and facilitate a greater role for the private sector. In all
these endeavours, we must ensure the consistency of
these approaches with humanitarian principles.

11/12/2014

Reducing disaster risk and building resilience to
disasters saves lives and must be an integral part of
our strategy. It is also integral to sustainable economic
development. We must continue to push for greater
support for economic activity even within protracted
crises. Australia has consistently advocated that the
post-2015 Hyogo framework for disaster risk reduction
reflect a new paradigm where disaster risk reduction is
seen as investment in a resilient future, rather than an
optional cost.
The World Humanitarian Summit is an opportunity
to galvanize global support to address the pressures on
the international humanitarian system. We encourage
all Member States to actively support all voices, large
and small, in coming together to find solutions to the
most pressing humanitarian challenges. We are pleased
to support regional consultations in the Pacific, in
partnership with New Zealand and the Office for the
Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs.

The political drivers fuelling today’s entrenched
crises are multifaceted and cannot be solved by
humanitarian actors. We need political solutions that
support conflict resolution and work to restore peace
and security. The international peace and security
architecture plays a major role in conflict resolution,
but in the absence of a broader political solution it
must engage to facilitate the delivery of humanitarian
assistance in conflicts and crises.

In closing, Australia would like to convey our very
deep gratitude to Valerie Amos for her professional and
steadfast leadership as Under-Secretary-General. Her
tireless efforts and deep commitment to improving the
lives of those who rely on the international humanitarian
assistance, have resulted in real and meaningful
change. She has always sought to draw our attention to
the impacts of crises on the lives of people. This is her
legacy, but also the challenge she leaves with us all.

Australia made that a priority during its term on the
Security Council to ensure better access and protection
for humanitarian actors, placing this at the centre of
Security Council debates. We will continue to call for
full compliance with international humanitarian law,
including unfettered access to civilians. The targeting
of humanitarian workers, including medical and healthcare personnel and the arbitrary denial of humanitarian
assistance, must cease immediately. Security Council
resolution 2175 (2014) was unambiguous in sending this
message.

Programme of work

28/28

The Acting President: I wish to announce that
the consideration of agenda item 15, “The role of the
United Nations in promoting a new global human
order”, previously scheduled for consideration today,
11 December, will now take place at a later date to be
announced.
The meeting rose at 1 p.m.

14-68494
