S/PRST/2015/24

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
8 December 2015
Original: English

Statement by the President of the Security Council
At the 7571st meeting of the Security Council, held on 8 December 2015, in
connection with the Council’s consideration of the item entitled “Peace and security
in Africa”, the President of the Security Council made the following statement on
behalf of the Council:
“The Security Council takes note of the report (S/2015/866) of the
Secretary-General on the progress toward the implementation of the United
Nations Integrated Strategy for the Sahel (UNISS) and welcomes the briefing
on 25 November 2015 by the Special Envoy of the Secretary-General (SESG)
for the Sahel, Ms. Hiroute Guebre Sellassie. The Security Council encourages
further progress by the United Nations system and its partners toward the
implementation of the UNISS, including through support to the Group of 5 for
the Sahel (G5 Sahel) in order to assist in addressing the security and political
challenges to the stability and development of the Sahel region. The Security
Council reaffirms its continued commitment to address all these challenges,
which are interrelated with humanitarian and development issues as well a s the
adverse effects of climate and ecological changes. The Security Council
reiterates the importance of national and regional ownership of the UNISS,
and commends the growing leadership role assumed by the countries of the
region. It welcomes in this regard, the establishment of the G5 Sahel, which
aims to enhance ownership of the initiatives focused on addressing the threats
to peace, security and development in the Sahel.
“The Security Council encourages the Office of the Special Envoy of the
Secretary-General for the Sahel (OSES) to continue to work closely with the
G5 Sahel countries as well as other countries of the region, regional and
international actors including the African Union (AU) and the Economic
Community of West African States (ECOWAS) to tackle the threats to peace,
security and development in the Sahel as well as their root causes. The
Security Council encourages greater cooperation among all stakeholders
including the AU and ECOWAS, calls on them to collaborate with the OSES,
and the Secretariat of the G5 Sahel as well as the G5 Sahel countries, and
reiterates its call for the rapid and effective implementation of the UNISS.
“The Security Council is gravely concerned that Libya remains a safe
haven for terrorist groups operating in the Sahel region, and expresses deep
concern at the threat posed by the widespread availability of unsecured arms
and ammunition and their proliferation, which undermines stability in Libya
and the Sahel region, including through transfer to terrorist and v iolent
15-21630 (E)

081215

*1521630*

S/PRST/2015/24

extremist groups. In this regard, the Security Council calls on the international
community to provide support to Libya and its neighbors in the Sahel,
including by providing them with the necessary security and capacity building
assistance in the struggle against Al-Qaida linked terrorist groups and
individuals. The Security Council calls on all Libyan stakeholders to endorse
and sign the Political Agreement and work swiftly towards the formation of a
Government of National Accord.
“The Security Council urges Member States of the Sahel, West Africa
and the Maghreb, to coordinate their efforts to prevent the serious threat posed
to international and regional security by terrorist groups crossing borders and
seeking safe havens in the Sahel region, to enhance cooperation and
coordination in order to develop holistic, inclusive and effective strategies to
combat in a comprehensive and integrated manner the activities of terrorist
groups, and to prevent the expansion of those groups as well as to limit the
proliferation of all arms and transnational organized crime. The Security
Council welcomes the efforts of the AU and ECOWAS as well as of Member
States of the Sahel to strengthen border security and regional cooperation,
including through the G5 Sahel and the Nouakchott process on the
enhancement of the security cooperation and the operationalization of the
African Peace and Security Architecture (APSA) in the Sahel and Sahara
region, the most inclusive security cooperation mechanism in the region. It
takes note of the establishment by the G5 Sahel countries of a framework to
strengthen regional security cooperation as well as to conduct cross -border
joint military operations, including with the support of the French Forces.
“The Security Council reaffirms that Member States must ensure that any
measures taken to counter terrorism comply with all their obligations under
international law, in particular international human rights law, international
refugee law, and international humanitarian law. The Sec urity Council recalls
that those responsible for abuses and violations of human rights and violations
of international humanitarian law must be held accountable and brought to
justice.
“The Security Council calls for funding for humanitarian programmes i n
the Sahel region which continue to be underfunded, hampering timely
responses to humanitarian needs. The Security Council expresses its concern
at the scale of the growing humanitarian crisis caused by the activities of the
Boko Haram terrorist group, which has displaced over 2.5 million people
including an estimated 1.4 million children and 200,000 refugees in
Cameroon, Chad and Niger. It commends the support provided to the refugees
by these Governments, including with the assistance of humanitarian act ors
and relevant United Nations entities, and calls on the international community
to provide its support.
“The Security Council commends the AU, ECOWAS and the Lake Chad
Basin Commission Member States’ as well as Benin’s courageous and active
contribution to peace and stability in the Sahel region and in particular, pays
tribute to the engagement of their soldiers in Mali and in the fight against
Boko Haram. The Security Council notes that the creation of the Multinational
Joint Task force (MNJTF) has led to steady progress in the fight against Boko
Haram. The Security Council reiterates its call upon the international

2/5

15-21630

S/PRST/2015/24

community and donors to support the MNJTF. The Security Council reiterates
its call on Member States to contribute generously to the Afric an Union Trust
Fund and requests the Secretary-General to continue to advocate strongly with
the international community and donors in support of this effort. It calls on the
African Union to establish its Trust Fund without further delay.
“The Security Council recalls the importance of coordinating the
effective implementation of Sahel initiatives and strategies, and commends in
this regard Mali for its chairmanship of the Ministerial Coordination Platform
over the last two years. It encourages Chad, as the new chair to intensify
efforts to improve coordination between partners, including through the
regular sharing of information and the strengthening of operational
cooperation between partners.
“The Security Council calls on the international community and donors
to fulfill all their pledges made towards boosting economic growth, eradicating
poverty and supporting governance reforms, through projects that would
support peace and security efforts in the Sahel region and calls on all relevant
entities of the United Nations system to focus on identifying and funding such
projects, as a matter of priority, in consultation with the OSES and the
Member States of the Sahel including the G5 Sahel Member States and
relevant regional organizations.
“The Security Council calls upon the Member States of the Sahel region,
with the support of the international community, to initiate programmes aimed
at creating opportunities that would engage the youth in productive activities
to reverse the tide of radicalization and recruitment into terrorist groups. It
also calls on the OSES to support as a matter of priority, efforts focused at
creating opportunities for youth and women. The Security Council expresses
strong support to the States in the region affected by the smug gling of
migrants and human trafficking, emphasizes the need to step up coordination
of efforts in order to strengthen an effective multidimensional response to
these common challenges, and stresses that addressing both smuggling of
migrants and human trafficking requires a coordinated, multidimensional
approach with States of origin, of transit, and of destination.
“The Security Council takes note of the organization of the Sahel
Women’s Forum in N’Djamena, Chad, on 22 and 23 July 2015 to strengthen
the role of women in the Sahel region and encourages the Member States of
the region to enhance the active participation of women in decision -making.
The Security Council also takes note of the organization in N’Djamena, Chad,
on 19 and 20 November 2015, of a G5 Sahel and partners Ministerial meeting
and an ordinary Summit of the G5 Sahel respectively.
“Recognizing the strong nexus between peace, security, good governance
and development, the Security Council encourages regional and international
financial organizations to provide a substantial financial assistance package to
countries of the region to boost economic growth and reduce poverty. The
Security Council welcomes plans by the United Nations to establish a
Multi-Partner Trust Fund for the Sahel (S-MPTF), in order to pool
contributions including from donor countries and the private sector, to sup port
the region’s efforts. The Security Council notes the active resource
mobilization efforts of the SESG to continue to engage with potential donor

15-21630

3/5

S/PRST/2015/24

countries and organizations to accelerate the implementation of selected
regional projects in consultation with the Member States of the Sahel region
including the G5 Sahel Member States and relevant regional organizations.
“The Security Council takes note of the adoption of a Declaration of the
G5 Sahel countries on the Fight against Radicalization and Viol ent Extremism
in the Sahel. The Security Council requests the United Nations Counter Terrorism Implementation Task Force (CTITF) and its member entities,
including the Counter Terrorism Committee Executive Directorate as well as
the United Nations Counter-Terrorism Centre, to support Sahel countries
efforts to counter terrorism and address conditions conducive to the spread of
violent extremism which can be conducive to terrorism. It calls on the CTITF
to explore expanding its I-ACT Initiative to all the countries of the G5-Sahel.
The Security Council recalls that the 1540 Committee as its subsidiary body
remains committed to supporting States, including the Sahel States, that
require assistance in their efforts to comply with the obligations contained in
resolution 1540 (2004). The Security Council calls on the United Nations to
accelerate action to also support the G5 Sahel in the implementation of the
African Union’s “Silencing the guns” flagship project, consistent with its
presidential statement of 16 December 2014 (S/PRST/2014/27).
“The Security Council strongly encourages another high -level visit to the
Sahel region as soon as possible by the United Nations Secretary -General, the
Chairperson of the African Union Commission, the President of the World
Bank Group, the President of the African Development Bank and the European
Union Development Commissioner, to assess the implementation of the vision
set out during the November 2013 visit, and to strengthen the focus and
commitment of the international community in the region.
“The Security Council notes with satisfaction the series of consultations
between the United Nations, the G5 Sahel and its Permanent Secretariat,
which helped promote convergence between the UNISS and the Priority
Investment Programme (PIP) of the G5 Sahel, and led to a roadmap for
consolidating cooperation between the two entities. The Security Council calls
on the OSES to continue to coordinate with the national focal points appoint ed
by the G5 Sahel, and calls on the United Nations Secretariat to hold at least
one meeting per quarter with the Permanent Representatives of the G5
Member States in New York, to share information and follow up on the
implementation of the UNISS. The Security Council encourages the SESG to
continue to meet with the officials of the G5 Member States to discuss
developments in the region, activities of the OSES, and progress toward the
implementation of the UNISS as well as the priorities of the G5 Member
States.
“The Security Council looks forward to considering the
recommendations of the Secretary-General’s strategic review of the OSES to
be conducted in December 2015, and requests the inclusion of
recommendations on the location of the OSES, in consultation with the
Member States of the Sahel region including the G5 Sahel Member States and
regional and international actors, bearing in mind the need to more fully and
directly anchor the implementation of the UNISS in the region including the
five priority countries, namely Burkina Faso, Chad, Mali, Mauritania and

4/5

15-21630

S/PRST/2015/24

Niger as well as to maximize synergies with the relevant entities of the United
Nations system.
“The Security Council requests the Secretary-General to inform it of the
progress toward the implementation of the UNISS through oral briefings as
needed, as well as through a report and a briefing no later than 31 October
2016. The Security Council also requests the Secretary-General to include in
his report, detailed information on the financial contri butions towards boosting
economic growth and eradicating poverty, through projects that would support
peace and security efforts in the Sahel region, noted in paragraph 26 of his
report of 24 July 2014 (A/69/162-S/2014/542) and recommendations for
strengthening Sahel Member States’ capabilities to prevent drivers of violent
extremism which can be conducive to terrorism. The Security Council
encourages the SESG to pursue her efforts and good offices in order to
enhance regional and interregional cooperation and strengthen coordinated
international assistance to the countries of the Sahel region in close
coordination with the Special Representatives of the Secretary -General for
West and Central Africa. In this regard, the Security Council welcomes
updates on the overall situation in the Sahel region in the Secretary -General’s
regular reports on the situations in West and Central Africa.”

15-21630

5/5
