Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committtt

2. Reaffirms that the Permanent Observer Mission of
the Palestine Liberation Organization to the United Nations
in New York is covered by the provisions of the Agreement
between the United Nations and the United States of
America regarding the Headquarters of the United Nations 2
and that the Palestine Liberation Organization has the right
to establish and maintain premises and adequate functional
facilities and that the personnel of the Mission should be
enabled to enter and remain in the United States to carry out
their official functions;
3. Ajfirms the crucial importance of the Agreement and
consequently the arrangements mentioned in paragraph 2
above concerning the functioning of the organs of the
United Nations, including the General Assembly, at Headquarters in New York;
4. Determines that the application to and enforcement
against the Permanent Observer Mission of the Palestine
Liberation Organization to the United Nations in New York
of Title X of the Foreign Relations Authorization Act,
Fiscal Years 1988 and 1989, is inconsistent with paragraph
2 above and is contrary to the international legal obligations
of the host country under the agreement;
5. Reaffirms that a dispute exists between the United
Nations and the United States of America, the host country,
concerning the interpretation or application of the Agreement, and that the dispute settlement procedure provided
for under section 21 of the Agreement, which constitutes
the only legal remedy to solve the dispute, should be set in
operation, and requests the host country to name its
arbitrator to the arbitral tribunal;
6. Requests the Secretary-General to continue his efforts to ensure the proper constitution of the arbitral tribunal
provided for under section 21 of the Agreement;
7. Deplores the failure of the host country to comply
with its obligations under the Agreement;
8. Urges the host country to abide by its international
legal obligations and to desist from taking any action
inconsistent with paragraph 2 above;
9. Notes the fact that, within the text of its order, the
lnternational Court of Justice on 9 March 1988 took note of
paragraph 5 of General Assembly resolution 42/229 A;
10. Requests the Secretary-General to take adequate
measures on a preliminary basis, if necessary, in order to
ensure the discharge of the official functions of the
Permanent Observer Mission of the Palestine Liberation
Organization to the United Nations in New York;
11. Further requests the Secretary-General to report to
the General Assembly without delay on developments m
this matter;
12.

Decides to keep the matter under active review.
109th plenary meeting
23 March 1988

42/231.

Special plan of economic co-operation for
Central America

The General Assemblv.
Recalling its resolution 42/ l of 7 October 1987, in which
it expressed its firmest support for the agreement on
"Procedures for the e<t~hlishment of a firm and lasting

3

peace in Central America", º signed by Central American
Presidents at Guatemala City on 7 August 1987, at the
Esquipulas II summit meeting, and its resolution 42/204 of
11 December 1987, in which it requested the SecretaryGeneral to formulate, in consultation with the Governments
of the region and the appropriate organs and organizations
of the United Nations system, a special plan of co-operation
for Central America to be submitted for consideration by thc
General Assembly at its current session,
Bearing in mind the Joint Declaration of Central American Presidents, issued at San José on 16 January 1988, • and
the agreement adopted at Guatemala City on 7 April 1988'
by the Executive Commission, composed of the Central
American Ministers for Foreign Affairs in accordance with
the agreement concluded at the Esquipulas II summit
meeting,
Reiterating its appreciation to the Contadora Group and
the Support Group for their contribution to the peace
process in Central America,
Noting with satisfaction the Joint Political Declaration"
and the Joint Economic Communiqué'º adopted by the
European Community and the States parties to the General
Treaty on Central American Economic lntegration and
Panama at the Ministerial Conference on Political Dialogue
and Economic Co-operation between the European Community and its member States, and the States of Central
America and of the Contadora Group, held at Hamburg.
Federal Republic of Germany, on 29 February and 1 March
1988,
Considering that fulfilment of the agreement concluded
at the Esquipulas ll summit meeting and the implementation
of a special plan of economic co-operation for Central
America require political will and determination so that
peace and development can be consolidated in the region,
Reaffirming its conviction that peace and development
are inseparable,
Deeply concerned about the emergency situation in
Central America and alarmed by the seriousness of the
economic and social crisis it is facing,
Aware of the complexity and seriousness of the situation
of the refugees and displaced persons in the Central
American region, and of its effect on the social and
economic development of the area,
Convinced of the urgent need for concerted action by the
international community in support of the commitments
made by the Central American countries to improve the
living conditions of their peoples and to achieve social
justice as a foundation for a stable and lasting peace.
1 Expresses its appreciation to the Secretary-General
for formulating and submitting the Special Plan of Economi<.· Co-operation for Central America. 11 prepared in accordance with General Assembly resolutions 42/ I and 42/204;
2. Also expresses its appreciation for the importan!
support provided by the United Nations Development
Programme, the Economic Commission for Latin America
and the Caribbean ami the various regional integration and
co-operation bodies in the preparation of the Special Plan;
3. Requests the Secretary-General, with the assistance
of the United Nations Development Programme and in closc
'A/42/521-S/19085. annn
1\J42/91 l-SJl9447. annc,
'N42/948-Sil9764. annn.
" A/42/258, annex l.
'"!bid .. annex 11.
" A/42/949. annex

4

General Assemhly-l<'ort}'-second Session

co-ordination with the Governments of Central America and
in consultation with donors, to use his best efforts in the
promotion, co-ordination, monitoring and follow-up of the
Special Plan and to make, as soon as possible, institutional
arrangements in order to facilitate the fulfilment of the
commitments of the international community;
4. Emphasizes the urgent need to provide the Central
American countries with financia! resources on concessional and favourable terms. in addition to those they are already
receiving from the international community;
5. Requests ali bodies, organs and organizations of the
United Nations system, taking into account the emergency
situation faced by the Central American countries, to take
immediate steps to mobilize additional financia! resources
and to participate actively in the implementation of the
activities supporting the goals and objectives of the Special
Plan;
6. Urges the organs and specialized agencies of the
United Nations system, in particular the United Nations
Development Programme, the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations, the Office of the United
Nations High Commissioner for Refugees, the United
Nations Children's Fund, the International Fund for Agricultura! Development, the United Nations Population
Fund, the United Nations Industrial Development Organization, the World Bank and the International Monetary Fund,
to continue and expand, to the extent possible, their
assistance programmes on a priority basis, and to co-operate
with the Secretary-General in the implementation of the
activities supporting the goals and objectives of the Special
Plan;
7. Urges the international community and international
organizations to increase their technical, economic and
financia! co-operation with the Central American countries
for the implementation of the activities supporting the goals
and objectives of the Special Plan, as a way of contributing
to the efforts being made under the agreement concluded at
the Esquipulas II summit meetingº to attain peace and
development;
8. Recognizes the vital importance of the Central
American economic integration process as a fundamental
element for the economic and social development of the
region and urges ali Governments and international organizations to contribute to the strengthening of this process;
9. Decides to review and evaluate the progress in the
implementation of the Special Plan of Economic Cooperation for Central America at its forty-fourth session and
requests the Secretary-General to submit a report on the
implementation of the present resolution with whatever
recommendations are deemed appropriate.

Justice regarding the applicability of the obligation to
arbitrate under section 21 of the Agreement between the
United Nations and the United States of America regarding
the Headquarters of the United Nations. dated 26 June
1947,-'
Having noted that. in its advisory opinion of 26 April
l 988," the Court was unanimously of the opinion that "the
United States of America, as a party to the Agreement
between the United Nations and the United States of
America regarding the Headquarters of the United Nations
of 26 June l 947, is under an obligation, in accordance with
section 21 of that Agreement. to enter into arbitration for
the settlement of the dispute between itself and the United
Nations",''
Having noted a/so that the Court pointed out that "the
purpose of the arbitration procedure envisaged by that
Agreement is precisely the settlement of such disputes as
may arise between the Organization and the host country
without any prior recourse to municipal courts, and it would
be against both the letter and the spirit of the Agreement for
the implementation of that procedure to be subjected to such
prior recourse". '"
Having noted a/so that the Court recalled '"the fundamental principle of international law that international law
prevails over domestic law","

1. Expresses its appreciation to the International Court
of Justice for having ••found that an early answer to the
request" submitted by the General Assembly on 2 March
1988 ''for advisory opinion would be desirable". and for
hav ing accelerated its procedure on the said request:
2. Takes note of and endorses the advisory opinion of
the International Court of Justice of 26 April 1988,"
concerning the applicability of the obligation to arbitrate
under section 21 of thc Agreement between the United
Nations and the United States of America regarding the
Headquarters of the United Nations, dated 26 June 194 7;
3. Urges the host country to abide by its international
legal obligations and to act consistently with the advisory
opinion of the International Court of Justice of 26 April
1988, and accordingly to name its arbitrator to the arbitral
tribunal provided for under section 21 of the Agreement;
4. Requests the Secretary-General to continue his efforts to ensure the constitution of the arbitral tribunal
provided for under section 21 of the Agreement;
5. Further requests the Secretary-General to report to
the General Assembly without delay on developments in
this matter;
6

Decides to kecp thc matter under active review.

112th p/enary meeting
/2 May 19?.R

42/232.

113th plenary meetinx
13 Mar 1988

Report of the Committee on Relations with the
Host Country

The General Assembly,
Having requested, in its resolution 42/229 B of 2 March
1988, an advisory opinion from the lnternational Court of

,•• A/421952, annex.
, • lhid .. para 58.
" lhid .. para -H
' //,id. para ,7
