NATIONS UNIES

SECURITY COUNCIL
OFFICIAL RECORDS
SECOND YEAR

CONSEIL DE SECURITE
PROCES-VERBAUX OFFICIELS
DEUXIEME ANNEE

No. 71
177eme seance

177th meeting
6 August 1947

6 aout 1947

I/ake Success

New York
( 34 p. )

TABLE OF CONTENTS
Hundred and seventy-seventh meeting

TABLES DES MATIERES
Cent-soixante-dix-septieme seance

Page

Pages

279. Provisional agenda
1795
280. Adoption of the agenda
1795
281. Continuation of the discussion on the
report by the Commission of Investigation concerning Greek Frontier Incidents
1795

279. Ordre du jour provisoire
1795
280. Adoption de l'ordre du jour
1795
281. Suite de la discussion sur le rapport
de la Commission d'enquete sur les incidents survenus it la frontiere grecque. 1795

Documents

Documents

The following documents, relevant to the hundred and seventy-seventh meeting, appears as follows:
Official records of the Security Council:
First Year, First Series, Supplement No. 1, Annex 3
The Greek Question:
Letter from Mr. A. Gromyko, acting chief of
the USSR delegation, to Mr. N. J. O. Makin,
President of the Security Council, and reply

Les documents suivants, se rapportant it la centsoixante-dix-septieme seance, figurent dans les
publications suivantes:
Proces-verbaux officiels du Conseil de securite:
Premiere Attnee, Premiere Serie, Supplhnent
No 1, Annexe 3
La question grecque:
Lettre de M. A. Gromyko, chef par interim de
la delegation de l'URSS, it M. N. J. O. Makin,
President du Conseil de securite, et reponse de
M. Makin
Lettr(; de M. Th. Aghnides, Ambassadeur de
Grece a Londres, it M. Gladwyn Jebb, Secretaire
execut:f, transmettant la declaration de la Commission des Affaires etrangeres grecques (document 5/2)

Letter from Mr. Th. Aghnides, Greek Ambassador in London, to Mr. Gladwyn Jebb, Executive Secretary, transmitting a statement by the
Greek Foreign Affairs Committee (document S/2)

First Year, Second Series, Supplement No. 5,
Annex 8
Telegram from the Minister of Foreign Affairs
of the Ukrainian Soviet Socialist Republic to the
Secretary-General, dated 24 August 1946 (document S/137)

Premiere Annee, Deuxieme Serie, SuppZCment
No 5, Annexe 8
Teh§gramme en date du 24 aout 1946, adresse au
Secretaire general pa.r le Ministre des Affaires
etrangeres de la Republique socialiste sovietique
d'Ukraine (document S/137)

Premiere Annee, Deuxieme Serie:
First Year, Second Series:
Suppl/'11',ent No 10, Annexe 16
Supplement No. 10, Annex 16
Letter from the Acting Chairman of the delega- Lettre u President par interim de la delegation
tion of Greece, dated 3 December 1946, and en- grecque, et memorandum l'accompagnant
closed memorandum
Supplement No. lOA, Annex 16A
Reproductions of photostatic exhibits submitted
by the Greek delegation at the eighty-second meeting of the Security Council in connexion with the
Greek memorandum of 25 November 1946

Supplel'nent No lOA, Annexe 16A
Reproductions des pieces photostatiques soumises
par la delegation de la Grece, lors de la quatrevingt-deuxieme seance du Conseil de securite, cl
l'appui de son memorandum du 25 novembre 1946

Second Year, Supplement No. 11, Annex 30
Letter, dated 2 May 1947, from the liaison representative of Yugoslavia on the Commission of
Investigation concerning Greek Frontier Incidents to the Principal Secretary of the Commission (document S/341)

Deuxieme Annee, SuppZCment No 11, Annexe 30
Lettre, en date du 2 mai 1947, adressee au Secn~­
taire principal de la Commission d'enquete sur
les incidents survenus it la frontiere grecque par
l'agent de liaison yougoslave (document S/341 )

Second Year, Supplement No. 15, Annex 38
Amendments to the United States draft resolution on the Greek Question submitted by the
representative of the United Kingdom at the one
hundred and sixty-second meeting of the Security
Council (document S/429)

Deuxieme Annee, Supplement No 15, Annexe 38
Amendements au projet de resolution des EtatsUnis sur la question grecque, presentes par le
representant du Royaume-Uni it la cent-soixantedeuxieme seance du Conseil de securite (document S/429)

Second Year, Supplement No. 15, Annex 39
Amendments to the United States draft resolution on the Greek Question submitted by the representative of France at the one hundred and
sixty-second meeting of the Security Council
(document S/430)

Deuxie1'1ze Annee, SuppZCment No 15, Annexe 39
Amendements au projet de resolution des EtatsUnis sur la question grecque, presentes par le
representant de la France it la cent-soixante-deuxieme seance du Conseil de securite (document
S/430)

UNITED NATIONS

SECUR'ITY
COUNCIL

CONSEIL
DE SECURITE

OFFICIAL RECORDS

PROCES-VERBAUX OFFICIEIB

SECOND YEAR

•

NATIONS UNIES

No. 177 DEUXIEME ANl'~E

No 177

HUNDRED AND SEVENTY-SEVENTH
MEETING

CENT-SOIXANTE-DIX-SEPTIEME
SEANCE

Held at Lake Success, New York
on· Wednesday, 6 August 1947, at 3 p'.m.

Tenue cl Lake Success, New-Yo:ik,
le mercredi 6 aout 1947, cl 15 heures.

Pres£dent: Mr. F. EL-KHOURI (Syria).

President: M. F. EL-KI:i:OURI (Syrie) .

Present: The representatives of the following
countries: Australia, Belgium, Brazil, China,
Colombia, France, Poland, Syria, Union of Soviet
50ci~list -Republics, United Kingdom, United
States of America.

Presents: Les representants des pays suivants:
Australie, Belgique, Bresil, Chine, Colombie,
France, Pologne, Syrie, Union des Republiques
socialistes sovietiques, Royaume-Uni, Etats-U nis
d'Amerique.

279. Provisional agenda
8/468)

279. Ordi"e du jour provisoire
ment 8/468)

(document

1. Adoption of the agenda,
2. The Greek Question:
(a) Report by the Commission of Investigation
concerning Greek Frontier Incidents to the
Security Council (document S/360) 1
(b) Letter dated 31 July 1947 from the perma-

nent representative of Greece to the United
Nations addressed. to the Acting Secretary-General, and enclosed letter dated 31
July 1947 from the Minister for Foreign
Affairs of Greece (document S /4S 1) 2.

(docu~

1. Adoption de l'ordre du jour.
2. La question grecque :
a) Rapport presente au Conseil de securite
par la Commission d'enquete sur les incidents survenus a la frontiere grecque
(document 3/360)1.
b) Lettre, en date du 31 juillet 1947, adressee
au Secret"Jre general par interim, par le
representant permanent de la Grece aupres
de l'Organisation des Nations Unies, et
lettre jointe, en date du 31 juiIlet 1947, du
Ministre des Affaires etrangeres de Grece
(document S/451)2.

280. Adoption of the agenda

280. Adoption de l'oi."dre du jour

The agenda was adopted.

L'ordre du jour est adopte.

281. Continuation of the discussion on
the report by the Commission of
Investigation concerning Greek
Frontier Incidents

281. Suite de la discussion sur le rapport de la Commission d'enquete
sur les incidents survenus it la
frontiere grecque

At the invitation of the President, Colonel
Sur l'invitation du President, le colonel KeKe-renxhi, representative of Albania; Mr. Mev- renxhi, representant de l'Alqanie; M .. M evorah,
orah, representative of Bulgaria,' Mr. Dendram.is, representant de la Bulgarie; .lVI. Dendramis, rerepresentative of Greece, and Mr. Vilfan, repre- presentant de la Grece, et M. Vilfan, representant
sentative. of Y Ltgoslavia, took their seats at the de la Yougoslame, prennent place a la table du
Council table.
Conseil.
I See Official Records of the S eCltrity Cou.ndl, Second
Year, Special Supplemerit No. 2.
.
2 Ibid., Supplement No. 17, Annex 42.

I Voir les Proces-verba1tx offic€ds du Conseil de se~urite,
Deuxieme Annee, Supplement special No 2.
2 Ibid., Supplement No 17, Annexe 42.

1795

'-'

Mr..MUNIZ (Brazil): Before we go any furth.er wIth the discussion, the Brazilian delegation
wIshes to place on record some observations conce,rning the outcome of this question. To begin
wIth, may I be allowed to give a resume of our
proceedings in the present case?
On three occasions in the course of one year
the attention of this Council has been called to
the situation in Greece. Fi.rst, there was an accusation that foreign troops stationed in that country constituted a threat to world peace!. That accURation was dismissed as unfounded.
Some months later, a similar accusation was
made, this time directed against the Greek Government itself2. Despite the desire of some members, my own Government included, to institute
an investigation, it \Va'" impossihle then to reach
agreement on such pro ~edure. The Greek Question
fell to the ground"nly to rise again when the
Greek Government itself requested the Security
Council to clear up the matters.
I do not kno,,, whether the members of this
Council were impressed by the consideration that
they were dealing with this question for the third
time, or whether we were better disposed then;
but the fact remains that in December last we
agreed to an investigation, a course which seemed
wise to everyone in our opinion. We set up a
Commission of Illvestigation4 , and gave it definite
instructions, We vested it with the necessary
powers to accomplish its functions, and at least
we were moving speedily and in the right direction.
T need not tell the memoers of the Coupcil of
the. work of that Commission. We have dwelt at
length on the analysis of its report, and those
who are interei"ted may ask the Secretary-General
how much it cost in United States dollars. It cost
a great deal. All this work and all this money
were to serve a good purpose, the very purpose
for which the Security Council was establishedto see that international peace and security prevailed throughout the world.
Unfortunately, we have reached a stage in our
deliberations where we feel more than a simple
doubt as to the result of all the trouble we have
undergone. We unanimously recognized that the
situation under consideration was likely to endanger peace, and yet we could not agree on any
measure designed to dispel that danger. It seems
as if the will-power of the Security Council is
seriously affected and that the Council is incapable of taking decisions leading to settlements.
The entire structure of the United Nations is
based upon security. The framers of the Charter
laboured under the conviction that if security
were attained by the United Nations, all the other
high aims of that Organization would be safely
achieved through peaceful collaboration. The
world would then at least enter into a period of
economic and social progress through the utiliza1 See Offu:ial Records of the SeCllrity COl/H-eil, First
Year, First Series, Supplement NQ. 1, Annex 3.
2 I~·d., First Year, Second Series, Supplemp.nt No. 5,
Annex 8.
3 Ibid., Supplements Nos. 10, lOA, Annexes 16, 16A.
4 Ibid., No. 28, 87th meeting, page 700.

M. MUNIZ (Bresil) (traduit de ranglais):
Avant que nous reprenion~ la discussion, la delegation du Bresil desire que certaines observatiom;
concernant le resuItat de nos deliberations figurent
au proces-verbal. Qu'il me soit permis tout d'abord
de faire le resume de ce qui s'est passe dans cette
affaire.
A trois reprises, au cours de la meme ~nnee,
l'attention du Conseil a ete attiree sur la situation
existant en Grece. D'abord, il y eut une accusation
d'apre:s laquelle les troupes etrangeres stationnees
dans ce pays constituaient une menace a la paix
du monde1 . Cette accusation, consideree comme
injustifiee, a ete rejetee,
Que1ques mois plus tard une accusation identique
a ete portee, dirigee cette fois contre le Gouvernement grec lui-ITH~!!le2. Nonobstant le desir de
certains membres, y campris mon Gouvernement,
d'entreprendre une enquete, it fut impossible a cc
moment d'arriver a un accord au sujet d'une telle
procedure. La question grecque demeura sans
solution et rebondit a nouveau quand le Gotlvernement grec lui-melue pria le Conseil de securite
d'elucider la question 3 •
J'ignore si les l11embres du Conaeil ont ete
impressionnes par la constatation du fait qu'ils
examinaiem ce probleme pour la troisieme fois
ou si nous nous trouvions alors clans de meilleures
dispositiom, l11ais il reste que, en decembre defTIier,
nous avons a{:cepte d'entreprendre une enqucte,
solution qui, a notre avis, pantt sage a chacun.
Nous avons cree une Commission d'enquete4 et lui
avons donne des instructions prec:ses. Nous lui
avons accorde les pouvoit,s necessaires a. l'accomplissement de sa tache et. an moins, nom. avancions
rapidement dans la bonne direction.
Point n'est besoin de relater le travail de cette
Commission. Nous avons longuement analyse son
rapport et ceux que cela interesse peuvent demander au Secretaire general combien il a coute,
en dollars des Etats-Unis. Ce montant est tres
eIeve. Tout ce travail et tout cet argent etaient
destine~; a servir un but lonable, le but meme pour
lequel le Conseil de securite a ete etabli: veiller au
maintien de la paix et de la secm·ite intemationales
de par le monde.
Malheureusement, au stade actuel de nos deliberations. nous ressentons plus qu'un simple doute
quant aux resultats de tout le mal que nous nous
sommes donne. N ous avons reconnu unanimement
que les circonstances en cause etaient de nature a
menacer la paix, et, cependant, nous n'avons pt~
arriver a un accord au sujet des mesures qUl
s'imposent pour ecarter ce danger. Il semble que
la force de volontc du Conseil de securite sait
serieusement atteinte et que le Conseil soit incapable de prendre des decisions aboutissant a des solu...Ions.
'
Toute la structure de l'Organisation des Nations
U Hies repose sur la securite. Les auteurs de la
Charte ont agi avec la conviction que, si l'Organisation des Nations Unies pouvait realiser la securite. tous les autres buts eleves de cette Organisation pourraient etre atteints sans di fficulte au
moyen d'une collaboration pacifique. Le monde
entrerait alors enfin dans une periode de progres
1 Voir les Proces-verbalM' officiels dlt COllse-il de secllrile,
Premiere Annee, Premiere Serie, Supplement No 1,
Annexe 3.
_ 2 Ibid., Premiere Annee, Deuxieme Serie, Supplement
No 5, Annexe 8.
•
3 Ibid., Supplements Nos 10, lOA, Annexes 16, 16A.
4 Ibid., No 28, 87eme seance, page 700.

tion of scientific knowledge and advanced tech- economique et social, par l'utilisation de la science
nique, thus opening all immense horizon for the et d'une technique perfectionnee, ouvrant ainsi
material and moral in:.provement of man. The un immense horizon au progres materiel et moral
outcome of the Greek Gase has regrettably affected de l'homme. Le reStlltat de nos discussions au
.sujet de la question grecque a malheureusement
that hope.
porte atteinte a cet espoir.
La procedure de vote etablie par la Charte et
The voting pro,:edure established by the Charter, originally aimed at securing unanimity of the qui tendait, a l'origine, a favoriser l'unanimite des
major Powers in grave matters of peace enforce- grandes Puissanees a propos des graves problemes
ment, has alerac1y exposed us to many disillusion- DU maintien de la paix, nous a deja cause de
ments, but in no preceding instance has disillu- nombreuses desillusions, mats jamais aupm'avant
siomnent been so great as in the present case. It la. desillusion n'a ete si grande que (:ans le cas qui
was argued at San Francisco that the veto could I nous occupe. On a pretendu, a San-Francisco, que
not be logically applied ill the field of peaceful set- le veto ne pourrait logiquement s'appliquer dans
tlement of disputes. vVe now see only too well le domaine du reglement pacifique des differends.
the force of this argument, and we can only regret Nous ne n~surons que trop bieh, maintenant, la
that recognition of it has not been embodied in the valeur de cet argument, et nous ne pouvons que
Charter. If the idea underlying the veto is that regretter qu'il n'ait pas ete reconnu par la Charte.
of preventing a great Power from being com- Si l'idee a la bas~ du veto est d'empecher qu'une
pelled to take measures of enforc~ment against grande Puissance ne se trouve dans l'obIigation
its will and interests, then the application of the de prendre des mesures coercitives contre sa voveto in the field of peaceful settlement seems to lonte et ses inten~ts, alors, l'application du veto
be illogical to say rhe least; it nullifies Chapter VI dans le domaine du reglement pacifique parait au
of the Charter and renders the Security Council moins illogique; il detruit I'effet du Chapitre VI de
powerless in preventing conflicts through peace- la Charte et rend le Conseil de securite impuissant
ful arranger;nents. All the significance of the v~to a prevenir les conflits par la voie de reglements
is thereby lost in the attempt to Htilize it outside pacifiques. Toute la raison d'etre du veto disparait
the field in which some justification might redson- ainsi, si I'on tente de l'utiIiser en dehors du domaine
pour lequel son existence peut raisollnablement se
ably be found for its existence.
justifier.
However, in view of the fact that the Security
Toutefois, en raison du fait que le Conseil de
Council has been unable to take any further action securite a ete incapable d'entreprendre toute action
on the Greek Question, it seems apparent to the ulterieure en ce qui concerne la question grecque,
Brazilian delegation that the action previously la delegation du Bres,il estime evident que les
taken stands; and until the Council decides other- mesures prises precedemment demeurent valables ;
wise, the Commission of Investigation established et, jusqu'a ce que le Conseil en decide autrement,
in December of last year, and its Subsidiary la Commission d'enquete etablie en decembre de
Group, are still in existence and fully authorized I'annee derniere, ainsi que son Groupe subsidiaire.
to proceed with their work within their terms of existent toujours et sont parfaitement autorises a
reference. The fact that the resolution establishing poursuivre leur travail dans les limites de leur
the Commission does not fix any date for the mandat. Le fait que la resolution creant la Comwinding-up of this Commission is the best evi- mission ne fixe aucune date pour la dissolution
dence that the Commission continues to exist until de cette Commission est la meiIIeure preuve que
the Council takes a decision to fhe contrary.
la Commission continue d'exister jusqu'a decision
contraire du Conseil.
We are facipg a crisis in the United Nations.
Nous nous trouvons en presence d'une crise de
Crises are frequently the symptom of a healing l'Organisation des Nations Unies. Les crises
process, when they bring into action elements of constituent souvent rles symptomes de guerison
vitality previously dormant or unknown. It may lorsqu'eIles mettent a l'ceuvre des elements de
well happen that the present crisis will set in mo- vitalite pre~demment inactifs ou inconnus. Il est
tion forces which might correct the situation and bien possible que la crise presente mette en mouvepermit the Security Council to fulfil the functions I ;'nent des forces stlsceptibles de remedier a la situafor which it was designed. THs is why we should tion et de permettre au Conseil de securite de
not lose hope. We may perhaps be able to find remplir les fonctions pour lesqueIles il a ete etabli.
elsewhere in our Organization appropriate ma- C'est pour cela que nous ne devons pas desesperer.
chinery for dealing with this Question after the I1 se peut que nous puissions trouver aiIIeurs, dans
failure of our last effort. The ample powers given notre Organisation, le mecanisme approprie nous
the General Assembly by Article 10 and more permettant d'aborder cette question apres l'echec
specifically by Article 11 of the Charter provide de notre dernier effort. Les larges pouvoirs dont
the possible alternative course in the present emer- dispose l'Assemblee generale en vertu de l'Article
gency.
10 'et, plus particulierement, en vertu de !'Article
11 de la Charte, pennettent d'envisager une autre
solution possible de la situation critique actuelle.
As regards the statement made at the hundrC";
En ce qui concerne la declaration faite a la centand seventy-sixth meeting1 by the representat:. ; soixante'-seizieme seance1 par le representant de la
of Greece, the Brazilian delegation reserves tJ e Grece, la delegation du Bresil se reserve le droit
right to express its opinion at a later date.
d'exprimer son opinion a une date ulterieure.
The PRESIDENT: Although there is a good deal
of truth in what the representative of Brazil has
said concerning the rule of unanimity, neverthe-

Le PRESIDENT (traduit de l'allglais) : Bien qu'il
y ait une bonne part de verite dans ce qu'a dit le
representant du Bresil au sujet de la regIe de I'una-

1 See Official Records of the Security C01/o11cil, Second
Year, No. 70.
,

Cl/rile, Deuxieme Annee, No 70.

I

Voir les Proces-vlJ/·bofl.,Z' officiels dfl Conseil de se-

less, as long as we are acting under the rules of
the Charter and under our rules of procedure, we
should confine our activities witbn the framework
of the Charter, to which we have pledged loyalty.
We should respect the rights conferred by the
Charter on the permanent members of the Security
Council; and we should try to. find some acceptable solution which will help to ameHorate the
sitnction, whidl at the present time is rather
critical.
It is true that the Security Council established
a Commission of Investigation in the expectation
that that Commission would render a report to
the Council and that the Council would then adopt
a resolution in regard to that n.:port. As the Security Council nas thus far failed to adopt any
such resolution, and as the CommissiC:n of Investigation remains in existence as long as no resolution in connexion with its report is adopted, it is
my opinion that the Commission should continue
its investigation and should continue to exercise
the functions bestowed upon it by the Security
Council; it may then be able to submit new proposals in the future which may perhaps be adopted
by the Council.
As regards the Subsidiary Group, the resolution
of the Security Council is clear. It states: "pending a new decision of the Security Council, the
Commission established by the resolution of the
Council of 19 December 1946 shall maintain in
the area concerned a subsidiary group composed
of a representative of each of. the members of the
Commission, to continue to tulfil suc.h functions
as the Commission may prescribe in accordance
with the terms of reference given in the above
resolution of the Council."l
I therefore consider that the Subsidiary Group
must remain in existence, and must continue fulfilling the functions allotted to it by the terms of
reference given in the afore-mentioned resolution
until a new resolution or decision is adopted by
the Security Council. No decision has been taken
by the Security Council as to the fate of the Subsidiary Group or the Commission, and it goes
without saying that their existence continues until
such a resolution is adopted.
We now have to continue with the report of the
Commission of Investigation. Perhaps we shall
be able to adopt some resolution in regard to the
report. Several draft resolutions have already
been discussed by the Security Council, but Ull~
fortunately they have not been adopted. There is
stiU before the Council the draft resolution presented by the representative of Poland. It is the
latest one, and we must take some action 'on it. I
think that the rer resentative of Poland insists on
a vote on this re"olution; I do not know whether
he wishes a vote to be taken upon it paragraph
by paragraph or as a whole. In either case, I should
like to express the view of the Syrian delegation
on this resolution. .
Although I consider the resolution acceptable
when taken paragraph by paragraph, it is not acceptable as a whole because it lacks certain elements which are essential in order to give effect
to the report of the Commission. I cannot cast a
positive vote for the resolution, because it lacks
the fundamental basis for an appropriate solution.
1 See Official Records of the Security Council, Second
Year, No. 37, 131st meeting.

nimite, i! n'en est pas moins vrai que, aussi longtemps que nous sommes regis par la Charte et le
reglement interieur, nous devons limiter notre
activite aux dispositions de la Charte, a laquelle
nous nous sommes engages a rester fideles. N ous
devons respecter les droits reconnus par la Charte
aux membres permanents du Conseil de securite~
et nous devons essayer. de trouver une solution
acceptable qui aidera a ameliorer la situation, plutot
critique en ce moment.
Il est vrai que le Conseil de securite a etabli une
Commission d'enquete, prevoyant que cette Commission lui soumettrait un rapport apropos duqud
il adopterait alors une resolution. Mais, puisque
le Conseil de securite n'a, jusqu'a present, adopte
aucune resolution de cette sorte, et p!1isque la
Commission d'enquete continue d'exister aussi
longtemps que son rapp01:t ne fera pas l'objet d'une
resoluton, j'estime que la Commission doit poursuivre son enquete et continuer a 'remplir les
hnctions qui lui ont ete devolues par le Conseil
de securite. Elle sera peut-etre en mesure ainsi
de soumettre, dans l'avenir, de' nauyelles propositions qui, peut-etre, pourront etre adoptees par
le Canseil.
En ce qui concerne le Groupe subsidiaire. la
resolution du Canseil de securite est c1aire. Elle
stipule que, "en attendant une nouvelle decision du
Conseil ,1,= securite, la Commission etablie par la
resolution du Conseil en date du 19 decembre 1946
maintiendra dans la region interessee un groupe
subsidiaire compose d'un representant de chacun
des Etats triembres de la Commission, en vue de
continuer a remplir les fonctions que la Commission pourrait lui assigner conformement au
mandat d'Mini dans la resolutiol1 pl'ecitee du Conseil de securitel".
C'est pourquQi je considere que le Groupe subsidiaire doit continuer d'exister et de poursuivre
l'accomplissement de la tache qui lui a ete confiee
dans le mandat faisant l'objet de la resolution
precitee, jusqu'a ce qu'une nouvelle resolution eu
decision soit adoptee par le Conseil de securite.
Celui-ci n'a prisaucune decision quant au sort du
Groupe subsidiaire ou de la Commission, et il va
sems dire qu'ils continuent d'exister jusqu'a ce
qu'une telle resolution ait ete adopt~.
Nous devons poursuivre maintenant l'examen
du rapport de la Commission d'enquete. Peut-etre
aurons-nous la possibilite d'adopter une resolution au sujet du rapport. Le Conseil de securite a
deja discute divers projets de resolution, mais
aucun de ceux-ci n'a malheureusement ete adopte.
I1 reste au Conseil a examiner le projet de resolution presente par le representant de la Pologne.
C'est le dernier, et nous devons prendre une
decision it son sujet. Je crois que le representant de
la Pologne insiste pour que 1'0n procede au vote
sur cette resolution; j'ignore s'il desire que 1'0n
vote paragraphe par paragraphe ou sur l'ensemble
du projet. En tout cas, je voudrais exprimer le
point de vue de la delegation de la Syrie apropos
de cette resolution.
Bien que j'estime que la resolution soit acceptable, consideree paragraphe par paragraphe, eIle
est inacceptable dans son ensemble, parce qu'il lui
manque certains elements essentiels a la mise e.n
ceuvre du rapport de la Commission. Je ne pUIS
emettre de vote positif en faveur de la resolution,
parce qu'il lui manque l'element fondamental
permettant d~arriver a une solution adequate.
1 Voir les Proces-verbCItUx officiels dll, Conseil de sewrite, Deuxieme Annee, No. 37, l'31eme seance.

Mr. LANGE (Poland) : I shall ask the President
to put the resolution to the vote paragraph by
paragraph, and I should like to explain the rea-·
S0ns why.
The President himself has explained that although the separate paragraphs may be acceptable
to many members, the resolution as a whole may
not be acceptable. Of course we understand that
members can hold that view, but I think that, because of the sharp differences of opinion which
exist between us, it is rather desirable to put on
record the subjects on which we do agree, by
voting paraglaph by paragraph.

M. LANGE (traduit de l'ang1ais): Je demande
au President de mettre la resolution aux voix,
paragraphe par paragraphe, et je voudrais expliquer pourquoi.
Le President lui-meme a indique que, hien que les
paragraphes pris separement puissent etre acceptables pour beaucoup de membres, la resolution dans
son ensemble peut etre inaccept<l.ble. Evidemment,
nous comprer>.ons que certains membres soient de
cet avis, mais j'estime que, en raison des profondes
divergences de vues qui se manifestent entre nons,
i1 est preferable que le proces-verbal reve1e, au
moyen du vote paragraphe par paragraphe, 1es
sujets qui font l'objet d'un accord.
Perhaps it may app~ar strange, and it may even
Il peut paraitre etrange, et cela peut meme paappear to be an obsession of mine, that I should raitre une obsession, que j'insiste toujours sur
always insist on the existence of certain areas of l'existence de certains terrains d'entellte meme
agreement, even in situations where there are such dans des circonstances ou se manifestent des
sharp differen·ces of opinion. I believe that this is divergences de vues si profondes. Je crois que
important, because the Security Council is an or- c'est impoi~"nt, parce que le Consei1 de securite est
gan designed to reach agreement on certain points. un organe chiirge d'aboutir it l'accord sur certains
I think that when we can register certain areas points. J e crillS que, lorsque nous pouvons trouver
of agreement, and separate clearly the flints on certains terrains d'entente: et separer nettement
which we agree from those on which we do not des autres les points qui font l'objet d'un accord, il
agree, that is a positive achievement within the y a un resultat positif, a. la portee du Conseil. Ce1a
reach of the Council. It may also have the addi- peut egalement comporter l'avantage supp1ementional adv211tage of making it 'easier to reach taire de faciliter un accord sur 1es questions en
.agreement on points which are outstanding.
suspens'.
Le representant de la Chine m'a demande si je
The representative of China asked me whether
I consider. that ~y resolu.tion .is the last chapter considere que .ma. r~solution. est le der.ni~r chapitre
on the subject. No, I conSIder It as the first ch:;tp- ;:,"ncernant ce sUJet. Non, Je la consldere comme
ter of a new effort, a chapter in which we no 1... premier chapitre d'un nouve1 effort, un chapitre
longer continue to make political demonstrations dans lequel nOU5 cessons de nous livrer a. des
or register the totality of our views, but in which demonstrations politiques ou d'enregistrer l'ensemwe try to reach practical agreements. Even though hIe de nos points de vue, mais dans leque1 nous
my resolution may not be finally adopted, I think essayerons d'aboutir a. des accords pratiques. Et
it will be a step along this road.
meme si ma resolution n'est pas adoptee en fin de
compte, je crois qu'elle constituera un pas en
avant dans cette voie.
There is, however, one further suggestion and , J e voudrais, neanmoins, faire encore une suggesappeal which I should like to make to the mem- tion, et adresser un appel aux membres du Conseil.
bers of the Council. Many members have ex- De nombreux membres ont exprirlte un doute sur
pressed doubt as to whether they can vote on the le point de savoir s'ils peuvent voter sur l'ensemble
whole of my resolution because it does not contain de ma resolution, parce qu'elle ne contient pas
enough, though they may agree with what it con- suffisamment d'e1ements, bien qu'illeur ,soit possitains. To these members I should iike to address ble d'approuver son contenu. Je desire adresser a.
an appeal which they may see fit to accept or re- ces membres un appe1, que je leur laisse le soin
ject, because they must judge for themselves. The d'accepter ou de rejeter, parce qu'i1s doivent en
appeal is that they should vote for my resolution, , juger eux-memes. J'en appelle a. eux pour qu'i1s
and shou1ci try to present what they consider to votent en faveur de ma resolution, et essaient de
be important in the subsequent stages of our dis- presenter ce qu'ils considerent comme important,
aux stades ulterieurs de nos debats et de nos
cussion and work.
travaux.

I

The ;PRESIDENT : We shall now proceed to vote.
After voting on the paragraphs one by one, we
shall vote on the entire resolution.
I ask the Assistant Secretary-General in charge
of Legal Affairs, to read the first paragraph.
M. KERNO (Assistant Secretary-General in
charge of Legal Affairs) :
The text of the preamble and paragraph 1 of the
draft resolution submitted by the representative
of Poland reads as follows:

((The Security Council,
((Having received and considered the report of
the Commission of Investigation established by
the resolution of the Council dated 19 December
1946,

Le PREsIDENT (traduit de l'ang1ais): Nous
allons maintenant proceder au vote. Apres avoir
vote sur les paragraphes, un par un, nous voterans
sur l'ensemble de la resolution.
Je prie M. le Secretaire general adjoint charge
des questions juridiques de donner lecture du premier paragraphe.
M. KERNO (Secretaire general adjoint charge
des questions juridiques) (traduit de l'anglais) :
Voici le texte du preambule et du paragraphe
premier du projet de resolution soumis par le
representant de la Pologne:

((Le Consei1 de securite,
"Ayant re~u et examine le rapport de la Commission- d'enquete constituee par la resolution dp
COnseil en date du 19 decembre 1946,

.lOVV

"Resolves that:
"1. The Security Council recommends to the
Governments of Greece, on the one hand, and Albania, Bulgaria, and Yugoslavia, on the other, to
do their utmost to establish normal good-neighbourly relations. Should subjects of complaint
arise these should be referred either through diploma':ic channels to the Governments conce':"n~d, or,
should this recourse fail, to the appropriate organs
of the United Nations."

"Dec~cle:

"1. Le Conseil de securite recommande aux Gouvernements de la Grece, d'une part, de l'Albanie,
de la Bulgarie et de la Yougoslavie d'autre part,
de faire tou~ leur possible pour etablir entre eux
des relations de bon voisinage. Au cas ou l'un des
Gouvernements aurait des plaintes a formuler.
il dev)'ait les presenter aux GOllvernements interesses par la voie diplomatique, ou bien, si cette
methode echouait, aux organes competents de
l'Organisation des Nations Unies".
Il est procede au vote amain levee. Il y a 2 voi..
• A vote was taken by a show of hands. There
were 2 votes in favour and 9 abstentions. The pour et 9 abstentions. N'ayant pas obtenu le vote
paragraph was not adopted, having failed to obtain affirmatif de sept me'fJtb,res, le paragraphe n;est
pas adopte.
the affirl1w..tive voles of seven members.
Volent pour: Pologne, Union des Republiques
Votes for: Poland, Union of Soviet Socialist
socialistes sovietiques.
Republics.
S'abstiennent.. Australie, Belgique, Bre8 i!,
Abstentions: Australia, Belgium, Brazil, China,
Colombia, France, Syria, United Kingdom, United Chine, Colombie, France, Syrie, Royaume-Uni.
Etats-Unis d'Amerique.
States of America.
Mr. KERNo (Assistant Secretary-General in
charge of Legal Affairs) : Paragraph 2 reads as
follows:
"2. The Security Council recommend that diplomatic relations should be established between
Greece on one hand, and Albania and :t3ulgaria
on the other, and that diplomatic relations between
Greece andY:ugoslavia should be !?-ormalized."
.1 vote was taken by show of hands. There were
votes in favt)1w and 7 abstentions. The paragraph was nat adopted, having failed to obtain
the affirmative votes of seven members.
V otes for: Australia, Poland, Syria, Union of
Soviet Socialist Republics.
Abstention~: Belgium, Brazil, China, Colombia,
France, United Kingdom, United States of America.
4

M. KERNO (Secretaire general adjoint charge
des questions juridiques) (traduit de l'anglais):
Voici le texte du parag'raphe 2:
.
"2. Le Conseil de securite reC'Jmr.1ande que des
relations diplomatiques soient etablies entre la
Grece, d'une part, et l'Albanie et la Bulgarie,
d'autre part, et que les relations diplomatiques
redeviennent normales entre la Grece et la Yougoslavie."
Il est procede au vote anUl,in levee. Il y a 4 voix
pour et 7 abstentions. N'ayant /Jas obtenu le vote
affirmatif de sept membres, le paragraphe n'est
pas adopte.
Votent POU1': Australie, Pologne, Syrie, Union
des Republiques socialistes sovie1:;ques.
S'abstiennent: Belgique, Bresil, Chine, Colol11bie, France, Royaume-Uni, Etats-Unis d' Amerique.

A vote was taken by show of hands. There were
4 votes in favour and 7 abstentions. The paragraph w.as not adopted, having failed to obtain the
affirnw..twe votes of seven members.
Votes for: Australia, Poland, Syria, Union of
Soviet Socialist Republics.
Abstentions: Belgium, Brazil, China, Colombia,
France, United Kingdom, United States of America.
.

M. KERNo (Secretaire general adjoint charge
des questions juridiques) (traduit de l'anglais) :
Voici le texte du paragraphe 3 :
"3. Le Cons':il de securite recommande que les
Gouvernements de la Grece, de I'A!banie, de la
Bulgarie et de la Yougoslavie, renouvellent les
anciennes conventions frontalieres bilaterales ou
signent de nouvelles prevoyant un reglement des
incidents de frontihe. Ces conventions pourront
prevoir la creation de commissions frontalieres
bilaterales."
, Il est procede au vote anzain levee. Il y a 4 voi:c
pour et 7 abstentions. N'ayant pas obtenu le vote
affirllUltif de sept membres, le paragraphe 11' cst pas
adopte.
Votent pentr: Australie, Pologne, Syrie, Union
des Republiques socialistes sovietiques.
S'abstiennent: Belgique, Bresil, Chine, Colombie, France, Royaume-Uni, Etats-Unis d'Amerique.

Mr. KERNO (Assistant Secretary-General in
charge of Legal Affairs): Paragraph 4 reads as
follows:
"4. The Security Council recommend that the
Government of Greece on one hand and the Governments of Albania, Bulgaria and Yugoslavia
on the other, settle the problem of refugees in the
spirit of mutual understanding and friendly relations among those countries."

M. KERNo (Secretaire general adjoint charge
des questions juridiques) (traduit de l'anglais) :
Voici le texte du paragraphe 4 :
"4. Le Conseil de securite recommande que le
Gouverl1f~ment de la Grece, d'une part, et les'Gouvernements de l'Albanie, de la Bulgarie et de la
Yougoslavie, d'autre part, reglent le probleme des
re£ugies dans un esprit de comprehension l11utuelle
et de relations amicales entre ces pays."

Mr. I<:ERNO (Assistant Secretary-General in
charge of Legal Affairs): Paragraph 3 reads as
follows:
"3. The Security Council recommend that the
Governments of Greece, Albania, Bulgaria, and
Yugoslavia renew old or enter into new bilateral
frontier conventions providing for a settlement of
frontier incidents. Those conventions may provide
for bilateral frontier commissions."

1801
Il est proeMe au vote amain levee. Il y a 4 Vo1-;;
A vote 'was taken by show of hands. There were
4 votes in favour and 7 abstentions. The para- pour et 7 abstentions. N'ayant pas obtenu le vote
graph was not adopted) having failed to obtain the affirmatif de sapt membres, le paragra,phe n'est
afJi1"mative votes of sQ',;'en members.
pas adopte.
Votent pour: Australie, Pologne, Syrie, Union
'tes for: Australia, Poland, Syria, Union of
Sc,ct Socia:list Republics.
des Republiques socialistes sovietiques.
S'abstiennent: Belgique, Bresil, Chine, ColomAbstenti.ons: Belgium, Brazil, China, Colombia,
France, United Kingdom. United States of i\mei:- bie, France, Royaume-Uni, Etats-Unis d.'Am~ri­
Ica.
que.
T-

Le PRESIDENT (traduit de l'anglais) : Je mets
The PRESIDEN1 ; I now put to a vote the whole
aux voix, maintenant, )'ensemble de 1<.' resolution.
resolution.
Il est procMe att vote amain levee. Il y a,2 voix
A vote was taken by show of hands. There were
:? votes in favour and 9 abstenti011S. The draft pour et 9 abstentions. N'ayant pas obtenu le vote
resolution was not adopted, having failed to obtain affi<"matif de sept membres, le projet de resolutio11
n'est pas adopte.
the affirmative votes of seven 111e11tbers.
Votent pour: Pologne, Union des Republiques
Votes for: Poland, Union of Soviet Socialist
Republics.
socialistes sovietiques.
S'abstiennent: Australie, Belgique, Bresil, Chine,
Abstentions: Australia, Belgium, Brazil, China,
Colombia, France, Syria, United Kingdom, United Colombie, France- Syrie, Royaume-Uni, EtatsUnis d'Amerique.
States of America.
The PRESIDENT: This is the last proposal on
the report of the Commission of Investigation.

Le PRESIDENT (traduit de l'anglais) : C'est la
derniere proposition relative au rapport de la Commission d'enquete.

M. PARODI (France): Je voudrais simplement
dire un mot en ce qui concerne la position que je
viens de prendre dans le vote.
Je me suis t:rouve dans la situation que le
President iui-meme a indiquee, et que M. Lange
avait indiquee egalement: cellc de trouver les parag;aphes bons en eux-memes, mais la resolution insuffisante dans son ensemble.
Je n'ai pas voulu me prononcer en faveur des
I did not want to support the paragraphs taken
separately, and then cast a negative vote when paragraphes pris separement et, ensuite, voter
the whole resolution was moved, for I wished to "contre" lors de la mise aux voix de l'ensemble-avoid the apparent contradiction and the possible ceci afin d'eviter ce qu'il y aurait eu, en appar~nce,
. misunderstanding which might have been created de contradictoire dans cette prise de position qui
by my action in voting for the paragraphs whE'~ risquait de ne pas etre comprise et qui aurait conthey were presented separately and voting against siste cl. voter des paragraphes 10rsqu'ils etaient
them when they were presented as a complete presentes separement et cl. tie plus les voter quand
resolution.
ils etaient mis aux voix comme un tout.
That is why I thought it better to abstain from
C'est pourquoi j'ai estime plus normal de
voting.
m'abstenir dans le vote.

(translated from
Mr. PAReDI (France)
French): I should like to say a word about the
vote whidi I have just cast.
I find myself in the situation to which the President himself, and Mr. Lange too, have referred:
that of fi.nding the paragraphs good in themselves,
but the resolution inadequate as a whole.

The PRESID'ENT: The next point to be taken up
Le PRESIDENT (traduit de ·l'anglais) : La questhis afternoon, to which I referred at the hundred tion qui doit etre examinee ensuite cet apres-midi,
and seventy-sixth meeting, is the suggestion of et dont j'ai fait mention cl. la cent-soixante-seizieme
the Colombian delegation that a committee should seance, est la suggestion de la delegation de la Cobe constituted to study the Greek Question and lombie, tendant cl la creation d'un sous-comite,
try to fi,nd a draft resolution which may be accept- qui serait charge d'etudier la question grecque et
able to the Security Council. The draft resolution de tenter d'etablir un projet de resolution accepwhich has been submitted by the delegation of Co- table pour le Conseil de securite. Void le projet de
lombia reads as follows:
resolution soumis par la delegation de la Colombie :
"The Security Council nsalves
"Le Conseil de securite decide
"To appoint a sub-committee of the represen"De nommer un sous-comite compose des repretatives of the delegations which have submitted sentants des delegations qui ont soumis des propoproposals on the Greek Question and amendments sitions sur la question grecque et des amendements
thereto, in order to ascertain the possibility of y relatifs, qui sera charge de rechercher la possiformulating a new draft resolution which the SUb-\ bilite de formuler un nouveau projet de resolution
committee can recommend for the approval of the que le sous-comite pourra recommander a l'appro' b a t i o n du Conseil de securite."
Council."
Mr. LOPEz (Colombia): Originally I had in
mind the idea of submitting this draft resolution
simply <.s a suggestion and, if I remember cor:ectly, I stated very clearly that I would not move
It formally unless there was a clear expression on
the part of the Council regarding the usefulness
of so doing. Discussion of the various proposals
at this late stage has drifted rather aimlessly, and
I have not been able to form any opinion as to
whether the majority of the members of this Coun-

M. LOPEZ (Colombie) (trad/tit de l'a11{!lais) :
J'avais d'abord l'inrtention de soumettre ce projet
de resolution sous forme de simple suggestion et,
si ma memoire m'est fidele, j'ai declare tres clairement que je n'en ferais pas une proposition
formelle, a moins que le Conseil n'exprime nette~
ment l'avis qu'il serait utile d'agir ainsi. Les recentes discussions !"elatives aux differentes propositions se sont deroulees de maniere plutot confuse,
et je n'ai pas ete en mesure de determiner si la

1802

cil consider that it would be worth-while to submit this proposition 'in writing as I have just done.
On second thought, I have come to believe that

~t wo~l~ be highly useful to submit this proposal

~,,:r~tl11g. Even if it is not accepted, even if a
maJonty of the members of the Council think it
will not serve any useful purpose, I submit that
it is extremely important for the Council to know
whether it would be worth-while to make a new
effort to bring together the leaders of the opposing
'views in the Council and offer them a new opportunity to reach an agreement. I submit that it
would be helpful to know, in case they do not
accept this proposal, that in their opinion it is useless to make any further attempt to hing about
a reconciliation.
In

I find that my first position really corresponds
to the position of a member of one of the two
groups into which the Council is unfortunately
divided. What we have to do is substantially to
follow the lead of the great Powers in these very
important matters about which the representatives
of the small nations have so little to say or do.
But the other position, I believe, is more consistent with what, in the last analysis, should be
done by the representatives of the small nations,
who are sitting here to represent not only their
countries but also the Organization at large. If
we continue to head for a crisis, and are eventually
to become involved in major diffiallties, I am inclined to think that millions upon millions of people all over the world will wish to know how we
eventually reached that stage. They will want to
have some record of the development of the crisis.
They will want to evaluate the responsibility.

For my own part,. I have already taken the
liberty of stating that I am an inveterate optimist
and that I still hope the Council will be able to find
some way out of its present difficulty. Therefore,
in moving this resolution, I again wish to express
the hope that it will be not only acceptable to the
Security Council but also fruitful in the sense of
approaching, if not reaching, a solution to the all··
important Greek Question.
Sir Alexander CADOGAN (United Kingdom):
When the representative of Colombia first outlined the proposal which he has now submitted to
us, I indicated that in general I would not be opposed to it, but I should not have any great faith
in the success of this resort to a sub-committee.
The mover of the resolution, in spite of his "inveterate optimism." has· himself expressed considerable doubt, and the statement from the representative of the USSR at the hundred and seventy-sixth meeting, certainly did not encourage any
hopes that it would lead to any useful result. At
the same meeting, the President expressed himself with some pessimism in regard to its prospects. Still, I am impressed with the fact that the
Council certainly has laid upon it the duty of
making every possible effort to try and find a
solution (J)f any difficulty or dispute submitted to
it; therefore, if the majority of the Council feels
that it is wise and expedient to resort to this device, it will do so.

majorite des membres du Conseil estirrcnt qu'il
serait utile de soumettre cette propositk" par ecrit,
comme je viens de le faire.
Aures re£lexion, j'ai acquis la conviction qu'il
serail: fort: utile de soumettre cette proposition par
ecrit. Meme clans l'eventualite ou elle ne serait pas
acceptee, meme si la majorite des membres du
Conseil estiment qu'elle ne saurait erre tres utile,
je pretends qu'il est extremement important que
le Conseil tSache s'il convient de tenter un nouvel
effort pour rapprocher les protagonistes des
opinions divergentes qui se sont manifestees au
sein du Conseil et leur offrir une nouvelle occasion
d'arriver a un accord. Je pretends qu'il serait
interessant de savoir, dans !'evenh:alite ou ils
rejetteraient cette proposition, s'ils estiment iEutile de tenter tout nouvel effort pour amener une
reconciliation.
J e constate que ma premiere attitude correspond,
en realite, a ce1le d'un membre d'un des deux
groupes qui, malheureusement, divisent le Consei1.
En l'occurrence, ce qu'il nous reste a faire, c'est,
en somme, de suivre la ligne de conduite tracee par
les grandes Puissances en ce qui concerne ces
importantes questions, au sujet desquelles les representants des petits pays ont si peu a dire ou a faire.
Mais l'autre attitude, je crois, est plus conforme,
en derniere analyse, a la ligne de conduite que
doivent suivre les representants des petits pays qui
siegent ici pour representer, non seulement leur
propre pays, mais egalement l'ensemble de l'Organisation. Si nous continuons a marcher vers une
crise, et si nous aboutissons eventuellement a des
difficultes capitales, je suis tente de croire que
des millions et des millions d'hommes, partout dans
le monde, desireront savoir, dans cette eventualite,
comment nous sommes arrives a un tel etat de
choses. Ils desireront connaitre les developpements •
de la crise. Ils desireront mesurer les responsabilites.
Pour ma part, j'ai deja pris la liberte de declarer
que je suis un optimiste invetere et que je persiste
'a esperer que le Conseil pourra trouver une issue
aux diHicultes actuelles. C'est pourquoi, en soumettant cette resolution, je desire exprimer a nouveau l'espoir qu'elle sera, non seulement acceptable, mais aussi profitable pour le Conseil de
securite, et: qu'elle permettra de serrerde pres
l'importante question grecque, sinon d'aboutir a
une solution de cette question.
Sir Alexander CADOGAN (Royaume-Uni) (traduit de l'anglais) : Lorsque le representant de la
Colombie a d'abord expose dans ses grandes Jignes
la proposition qu'il vient de !lOUS soumettre, j'ai
indique de fa<;on generale que je ne m'y opposerais
pas, mais que je n'aurais pas grand foi dans le
succes de ce recours a un sous-comite. L'auteur de
la resolution, en depit de son "optimisme in....etere",
a lui-meme exprime un doute assez sensible, et la
declaration du representant de l'URSS, a la centsoixante-seizieme seance, n'a certainement pas
accru l'espoir que cette entreprise conduirait a un
resultat pratique. A la meme seance, le President
a manifeste un certain pessimisme a l'egard des
per~pectives qu'elle permettrait d'envisager. Je suis
convaincu, cependant, que le Conseil a le devoir de
tenter tous les efforts possibles pour rechercher
et trouver une solution a toute difficulte DU differend qui lui sont soumis; c'est pourqoi, si la majorite des membres du Conseil estiment qu'il e~t
sage et pratique d'avoir recours a cette solution, 11
agira en consequence.

But I must make one qaalification. I do hope I Toutefois, je dois faire une reserve. J'esper~ quethat this case which has already taken up so much cette affaire, qui a deja assez accapare le temps du
of the Council's time will not be unduly delayed Conseil, ne sera pas inutilement retardee par de
by discussion all over again, in a new body, of mat- nouveaux rl.ebats, au sein d'un nouve! organisme,
ters which have been discussed almost more than au sujet de questions qui ont ete discutees pour
necessary in more than one instance. The Com- ainsi dire plus qu'il ne le faut, a plus d'une reprise.
mission of Investigation which we sent to Greece La Commission d'enquete que nous avons envoyee
pursued its deliberations for about two months. en Grece a poursuivi ses tr~vaux pendant deux
I am not quite sure that the Council has not al- mois environ. Je ne suis pas convaincu que le
ready almost equalled that period in its consider- Conseil n'a pas deja consacre un temps presque
ation of the matter, and we really cannot afford aussi long a l'examen du probleme et, reellement,
further delay. Therefore, I would support the pro- nous ne pcuvons souffrir aucun nouveau delai.
posal of the Colombian representative if the fol- C'est pourquoi j'appuierais la proposition du relowing addition could be accepted. I suggest that presentant de la Colombie si 1'0n pouvait accepter
we add at the end of the draft resolution' the fol- l'additif suivant. Je propose que nous ajoutions, a
lowing sentence:
la fin du projet de resolution, la phrase suivante:
"The sub-committee is requestea to report its
"Le Sous-Comite est prie de soumettre ses
conclusions in the course of the present week."
conclusions dans le courantde la presente semaine."
I do not like time-limits, and I admit that this
J e n'aime pas les delais imposes, et j'avoue que
is a very short period; but the representative of je propose une periode tr~d breve; mais le repreColombia has worded his draft, if I may say so, sentant de la Colombie a redige son projet, si je
very wisely and well. He gives it as the function of puis m'exprimer ainsi, tres sagement et tres bien.
this sub-committee to ascertain the possibility of Il veut donner au Sous-Comite la fanction de reformulating a new draft resolution. He does not chercher la possibilite d'elaborer un nouveau projet
ask the sub-committee to produce a ready-made de resolution. Il ne demande pas au Sous-Comite
and completely satisfactory formula. I do not think de produire une formule tout prete et entiereit would take more than a day or two at the out- ment satisfaisante. Je ne crois pas que cet orgaside for such a body to be able to report to us nisme ait besoin de plus d'un jour, deux au plus,
whether it thinks there is any possibility of reach- pour se mettre en mesure de nous dire s'il estime
ing agreement on a formula or proposal, or qu'il existe une possibilite quelconque d'aboutir a
whether it finds the opposing views are so funda- un accord sur une formule ou une proposition, ou
mentaUy and so flatly opposed to each other that s'il pense que les divergences de vue:; sont si
there is no use pursuing the matter further along profondes et si nettes qu'il n'est pas ntile de pourthese lines.
suivre dans cette voie l'examen de la question.
Therefore, I do hope that the amendment may
C'est pourquoi j'espere que l'amendement sera
be acceptr.d. With tl e amendment, I could vote accepte. S'il l'est, je pourrai voter en faveur de la
for and accept the proposal of the representative proposition du representant de la Colombie et,
of Colombia. I think, however, that if it results partant, l'accepter. Je crois toutefois que, s'il en
in a delay beyond this week, we shall incur a very resulte un delai qui depasse les limites de cette
heavy responsibility. I must refer to the fact that semaine, nous encourrons une tres lourde resincidents in this dangerous area of the iiorthern ponsabilite. J e dois mentionner ici que les incifrontier of Greece succeed one another with rather dents se succedent ~v:ec une rapidite et une intensite
alarming rapidity and intensity. We are getting plutot alarmantes dans cette region dangereuse de
into a very dangerous phase which cannot be la frontiere septentrionale de la Gn~ce. Les eveneneglected very much longer. It is true that we ments prennent une tournure h'es dangereuse, et
have on the spot what is known as the Subsidiary nous ne saurions tarder encore tres longtemps a
Group which watches the situation as best it can. nous en occuper. Il est vrai que nous avons sur
But that Group has been very much thwarttd and place ce qu'on appelle le Groupe subsidiaire, qui
hindered, and that is a matter which will have to surveille la situation de son mieux. Mais ce Groupe
be attended to later. The situation is very preca- a rencontre de nombreux obstacles et embuches,
nous; therefore, unless we have a time-limit of et c'est la une question que nous devrons examiner
that kind added to the proposal of the Colombian plus tard. La situation est tres precaire; c'est
representative, I cannot support it.
pourquoi, a moins que la proposition du representant de la Colombie ne comporte l'imposition d'un
delai determine, je ne pourrais l'appuyer.

I

Mr. JOHNSON (United States of America): My
delegation has a very deep appreciation of the
constant efforts of the representative of Colombia
and of the intere3t he has shown by his epdeavours
to bring the opposing views into some sort of
agreement. The idea behind the committee that he
proposes warrants commendation; and the United
States delegation will vote for the establishment
of that committee, with the addition suggested by
the representative of the United Kingdom that a
certain time-limit should be set on the committee's
report. I concur in the reasons given by Sir Alexander Cadogan for the necessity of setting a timelimit on the work of the committee, although I
dislike, as he does, the idea of putting time-limits
on work of this kind.

M. JOHNSON (Etats-Unis d'Amerique) (traduit
de l'anglais) : Ma delegation attache un grand prix
aux efforts constants du representant de la Colombie et a l'interet qu'il a manifeste danscette
question en essayant de concilier d'une maniere ou
d'une autre les points de vue opposes. L'esprit dans .
leque1 il conc;oit le sous-comite qu'il propose lui
merite des eloges. La delegation des Etats-Unis
votera en faveur de la creation de ce sous-comite,
moyennant l'additif propose par le representant du
Royaume-Uni et qui prevoit un dela; determine
pour le depot du rapport du sous-comite. J e partage
l'opinion de Sir Alexander Cadogan en ce qui
concerne la necessit6 d'impartir un delai determine
pour le travail du sous-comite, bien que je n'aime
pas, tout comme lui, l'idee de fixer des delais pour
des travaux de cette espece.

1804

I shall have more to say later on in the course
of this discussion regarding the new move which
has been made by the representative of Greece,
which we shall be discussing shortly.
. I think ~he Coullcil is confronted with the duty
ot attemptmg to sulve a very dangerous situation,
and it is necessary for the Council to leave no
avenue unexplored with a view to meeting the
possibillties in this situation. The danger is real,
and it is in no way mitigated or rernoved by the
fact that the Council has not been able to reach
an agreement on the methods for averting that
danger.
11r. GROMYKO (Union of Soviet Socialist Republics) (transla.fed from Russian): I expressed
some doubts yesterday regarding the proposal
brought forward by the Colombian representative.
I still doubt whether such a sub-committee can do
useful work, seeing that, as experience has shown,
proposals to establish normal relations between
Greece and her neighbouring countries are not
supported in the Security Council. This mal(es
me doubt whether those representatives who find
it impossible in the Security Council to agree to
proposals for normalizing relations between Greece
and her neighbours will approve such proposals
in the sub-committee, especially'if attempts are
made to resurrect the United States resolution
from the dead l .
With regard to the Subsidiary Group which has
been mentioned here by certain representatives,
including the President, I said yesterday that I
would give my views when this problem actually
arose. V\T e are not discussing it now, so I do not
consider myself bound either by the President's
statement regarding the Subsidiary Group, or by
tlle statements of other representatives, fo,r the
simple reason that this question is not being discussed at present. If the President had said that
this problem was not on the agenda and was not
being discussed, I would have no objections to his
statement. But any statements as to whether the
Subsidiary Group or the Commission exists or
not, whether it is working or not, or whether it
should or should not exist-these problems are
not being decided or discussed now. When anyone
raises them at the appropriate time, then every
representative, including myself, will have an opportunity of giving his views on these questions.

J'aurai quelques mots a dire plus tard, au cours
de la discussion, en ce qui concerne la nouvelle
intervention du representant de la Grece, que nous
serons amenes a discuter bientot.
J'escime que le Conseil a le devoir de s'efforeer
de trouverune solut:on a une situation tres dangereuse, et il est necessaire que le Conseil ne neglige
aucun moyen susceptible de resoudre ce probleme.
Le danger est reel, et it n'est nullement diminue ou
eearte par le fait que le Conseil n'a pas ete en
mesure d'aboutir cl un accord sur les methodes
a employer pour y parer.
M. GROMYKO (Union des Republiques socialistes
sovietiques) (tracfrztit du russe) : Hie\" j'ai exprime
certains doutes au sujet de la proposition faite par
le representant de la Colombie. Je continue a
douter que le travail d'un sous-comite de ce genre
puisse etre fructueux; eh effet, l'experience a
montre que les propositions .ayant en vue l'etablissement de relations normales entre la Greee et
les pays voisins ne trouvent pas d'appui au sein du
Conseil de securite. Il y a done lieu de se demander
si les representants, qui, lors des debats au Conseil
de seeurite, n'estiment pas possible d'accepter les
propositions ayant en vue la normalisation des
relations entre la Grece et ses voisins, voudront
.accepter ces memes propositions lorsqu'elles seront
presentees au sous-comite, surtout s'il se produit
des tentatives pour ressusciter la resolution des
Etats-Unisl •
En ee qui concerne le Groupe suhsidiaire, mentionne ici par certains representants ainsi que pal:
le President, j'ai deja declare hier que je feral
connaitre mon opinion sur cette question lorsqu'elle
sera reellement posee. N ous ne discutons pas ceUe
question en ce moment, et c'est pourquoi je ne
m'estime lie, ni par les declarations du President
au sujet du Groupe subsidiaire, ni par les declarations d'autres representants; et ceci tout simplement parce que cette question ne fait pas l'objet
des presents debats. Si le President disait simplement que cette question ne se pose pas maintenant
et ne fait pas l'objet de la discussion, je n'aurais
pas d'objections a presenter. M~is toutes le~ de~la­
rations qui portent sur le pomt .d~ sav01: SI 1:
Groupe subsidiaire, ou la Commission eXlste, SI
cet organe continue a travailler, s'il doit ou non
exister soulevent des questions qui ne font pas
l'objet'des debats et ne demandent pas a etre
tranchees en ce moment. Lorsque, en temps
opportun, ces questions auront ete posees, ehaCUll
des representants, y compris moi-meme, aura
l'occasion de preciser son attitude.

Mr. PARODI (France)
(translated from
French): After the observations which we have
just heard, I must say that in my view the questior of the Subsidiary Group is not distinct from
the Greek question as a whole. It is one of the
special aspects of the problem with which we are
concerned, and I think that those of us who have
referred to it were perfectly justified in so doing.

M. PAROD! (France): A la suite des observations que nous venons d'entendre, je tiens a dire
que, a mes yeux, la question du Groupe subsidi~ire
n'est pas distincte de l'ensemble de la questIOn
grecque. C'est un des aspects particuliers du probleme dont nous nous occupons, et je pense que
eeux cl'entre nous qui en ont traite etaient parfaitement fblldes a le faire.

The PRESIDENT: I shall make another statement
about the Subsidiary Group and the Commission
of Investigation. I do not intend to put it as a special subject for discussion. I consider, as I have

Le PRESIDENT (traduit de l' anglaris): Je vais
fain: une autre declaration en ce qui concerne le
Groupe' subsicliaire et la Commission d'enquHe.
Je ne desire pas en faire un sujet special de cliscus-

1 This resolution was introduced at the 147th meeting
and amended at the 162nd, l'63rd, 164th, 165th, 166th and
168th meetings. For principal amendments, see Official
Records of the SeCl/l'ity Council, Second Year, Supplement No. IS, Annexes 38 and 39.

1 Cett<:: resolution a ete pres'entee au cours de la 147eme
seance et modifiee au cour£ des 162eme, 163eme, 164eme,
165eme, 166eme et 168eme seances. Pour les principau~
amendements, voir les Proces-verbau:r officiels dl' COHse,l
de secllrite, Deuxieme Annee, Supplement No 1'5, Annexes
38 et 39.

1805
said, that the previous resolution of the Security
Council still stands and is in force unless some
member of the Security Council wishes to open
the subject and present a special proposal. Otherwise, I do not see any necessity of putting it as
a separate subject for discussion.

sion. Je considere, comme je l'ai dit. que la resolution anterieure du Conseil de securite subsiste
encore et reste en vigueur, a moins qu'un membre
du Conseil de securi"te ne desire revenir sur la
question afin de presenter une proposition speciale.
Dans l'eventualite cQntraire, je ne vois aucune
necessite de la considerer comme un sujet de
discussion distinct.

Mr. LANGE (Poland): The Polish delegation
consistently supports an attempts to reach an
agreement, however discouraging the situation
may appear to be at the moment. For this reason,
we support the proposal made by the representative of Colombia.
There is one point I wish to question, namely,
that of the'time-limit. We have no objection to
setting a time-limit. It seems obvious, ho.wever,
that a three-day time-limit such as has been proposed is too short, because the representatives may
want to consult their Governments. I therefore
suggest a longer time-limit.

M. LANGE (Pologne) (traduit de l'(tltglais) : La
delegation de la Pologne appuie chaleureusement
toute tentative d'arriver a un accord, quelque decourageante que puisse paraitre la situation en ce
moment. Pour cette raison, nous appuyons la proposition faite par le representant de la Colombie.
- Je desire soulever une question, a savoir celIe du
delai determine. Nous n'elevons pas d'objection a
l'imposition d'un delai. Il parrot evident, toutefois,
qu'un delai determine de trois jours comme celui
qui a ete propose est trop bref, parce que les representants peuvent desirer consulter leur Gouvernement. C'est pourquoi je propose un delai plus
long.

Mr. ]OHNSON (United States of America) : The
United States delegation accepts. the ruling of the
President regarding the existence of the Commission and Subsidiary Group, and we find it entirely
in order. We share the President's view that no
decision has been taken on the report of the Commission. Therefore, it follows without saying that
the Commission and its Subsidiary Group continue to exist, and an affirmative decision of the
Council will be necessary to terminate the existence of those bodies in the present circumstances.

M. JOHNSON (Etats-Unis d'Amerique) (trad1t£t
de l'anglais) : La delegation des Etats-Unis accepte
la decision du President en ce qui concerne l'existence de la Commission et du Groupe subsidiaire,
et nous la considerons tout it fait apropos. Nous
partageons le point de vue du President qu'aucune
decision n'a ete prise en ce qui concerne le rapport
de la Commission. Il s'ensuit donc que la Commission et son Groupe subsidiaire continumt
d'exister. et que, dans les circonstances preser,tes.
il faudra un acte positif du Conseil pour mettre
fin a l'existence de ces organismes.

The PRESIDENT: \Ve shall now consider action
on the proposal of the Colombian delegation, and
on the proposed amendment to add the following
sentence: "The Sub-Committee is requested to report its conclusions in the course of the present
week." I submit this amendment for discussion
first.

Le PRESIDENT (traduit de l}a.nglais): Nous
allons maintenant prendre une decision en ce q1)i
concerne la proposition de la delegation de la
Colombie et l'amendement propose qui consiste
en l'addition de la phrase suivante: "Le SousComite est prie de soumettre ses conclusions au
cours de la presente semaine." J'ouvre la discussion
en ce qui concerne cet an1endement d'abord.

:1\11'. LOPEZ (Colombia): I fully conc:ur in the
M. LOPEZ (Colombie) (traduit de l)anglais) :
view of fixing a time-limit in this draft resolution, Je partage entierement le point de vue qui consiste
as has been proposed by the representative of the a indiquer une d~te limite dans ce projet de resoUnited" Kingdom. However, I would suggest that lution, ainsi que l'a propose le representant du
if I am right in anticipating that we will not be Royaume-Uni. Toutefois, si je ne me trompe en
having a meeting on Saturday, and that it is pos- prevoyant que nOllS n'aurons pas de reunion samedi
sible the President may consider following the et qu'i1 est possible que le President desire suivre
various precedents which have been established by les differents precedents qui ont ete etablis par
the former Presidents of the Council in not having l'ancien President du Conseil, a savoir qu'il n'y a
meetings on Friday afternoons, there appears to be pas de seance le vendredi .apres-midi, il me semble
. no opportunity of getting the report before MOlI- qu'il n'y ait aucune necessite d'obtenir le rapport
day. I think it would be satisfactory to everybody avant lundi. J e crois qu'il serait satisfaisant pour
concerned, including the President of the Council, toutes les parties interessees, y compris le President
to have this report for the meeting next Monday. du Conseil, d'etre en possession de ce rapport pour
la seance de lundi prochain.

Mr. PARODI: (France) (translated from
M. P ARODI (Franc( : J e ::-artage les vues du
French): I agree with the views expressed by representant de la Colombie qui, d'ailleurs, ne
the representative of Colombia-in facr, they dif- different pas beaucoup de celles du representant du
fer very little from those expressed by the repre- Royaume-Uni, puisqu'il s'agit seult~ment d'ajouter
sentative of the United Kingdom, the only change 'luelques hem'es an delai propose par ce dernier.
being that the time-limit is longer by a few hours. J e rappelle cependant aux membres du Conseil
~lay I remind the Council that Monday's meeting que notre reunion de lundi est en principe reservee
15 scheduled for the examination of the Egyptian
au reglement de la question egyptienne. Ce n'est
Question. Therefore, I would say that the report donc probablement que mardi que nous pourrons
should reach us by Monday afternoon and that we examiner le rapport du Sous-Comite qui pourrait,
should examine it on Tuesday .
en consequence, nous etre remis lundi apres-midi.

1806
The PRESIDENT: Let us first decide upon the
constitution of the sub-conmuttee. After that, I
think, we can discuss the date of our ne.xt meeting
on this subject.'
'.
Sir Alexander CADOGAN (United Kingdom) : I
find it impossible to resist the suggestions of the
representatives of Colombia and France. V/hen I
suggested that the sub-committee should report
this week, I had in mind that the Council would
consider the report on Monday. However, I have
now been reminded by the French representative
that on Monday we are committed to further discussion of the Egyptian Question. Therefore, I
am brought inevitably to Tuesday, but no later
than Tuesday. Could we, then, change my amendment to read as follows: "The sub-committee is
requested to report its conclusions to the Security
Council on 11 August"?· That would mean that
their report could be circulated to the Council at
any time next Monday, 11 August, and the Council could take it under consideration on the following day.
The PRESIDENT: We shall now vote on the
amendment submitted! by the representative of the
United Kingdom.
A vote was taken by show of hands.. and the
amendment 'luas 'accepted by 10 votes to none, with
one abstention.
Votes for: Australia, Belgium, Brazil, China,
Colombia, France, Poland, Syria, United Kingdom, United States of America.
Abstention: Union of Soviet Socialist Republics.
The PRESIDENT: \'1 e shall now vote on the
resolution submitted by the representative of
Colombia, as amended.
A vote was taken by show of hands, and the
resolution was accepted by 10 votes to none with
one abstention.
Votes for: Australia, Belgium, Brazil, China,
Colombia, France, Poland, Syria, United Kingdom, United States of America.
Abstention: Union of Soviet Socialist Republics.

Le PRESIDENT (traduit de l'anglais) : Decidons
d'abord de la constitution du Sous-Comite. Apres
quoi, je crois que nous pourrons discuter de la
date de notre prochaine seance a ce sujet.
Sir Alexander ·CADOGAN (Royaume-Uni) (tradui! de l'atlglais) : Je crois qu'il m'est impossible
de resister aux suggestions des represental1ts de la
Colombie et de la France. Lorsque j'ai propose
que le Sous-Comite depose son rapport cette
semaine, j'entendais que le Conseil considererait le
rapport IUl1di. Toutefois, le representant de la
France vient de me rappeler que nous reprendro IS
lundi la discussion de la question egyptienne. C'est
pourquoi j'en suis amene inevitablement a mardi,
mais pas plus tard que mardi. Pourrions-nous
alors modifier mon amendement de maniere a lui
donner la redaction suivante: "Le Sous-Comite
est prie de soumettre ses conclusions au Conseil de
securite le 11 aout." It s'ensuivrait que le rapport
pourrait etre distribue au Conseil a tOl1t moment,
lundi prochain, 1I aout, et le ConseiI pourrait en
aborder I'examen le lendemain.
Le PRESIDENT (traduit de l'angla.is): Je vais
mettre aux voix maintenant l'amendement propose
par le representant du Royaume-Uni.
Il est procede £tu vote a main levee. Par 10 voi:r
contre ze-ro, a'vec une abstention, l'amendemenf
est adopte.
Votent pour: Australie, Belgique, Bresil, Chine,
Colombie, France, Pologne, Syrie, Royaume-Uni,
Etats-Unis d'Amerique.
S'abstient: L'Union des Republiques socialistes
sovietiques.
Le PRESIDENT (traduit de l'anglais) : Je vais
maintenant mettre aux voix, dans sa forme modifiee, la resolution proposee par le representant
de la Colombie.
.
Il est procede au vote amain levee. Pa.r 10 voi:r
cont1'e zero, avec une abstention, la resolution est
adoptee.
V O'tent pour: Australie, Belgique, Bresil, Chine,
Colombie, France, Pologne, Syrie, Royaume-Uni,
Etats-U nis d'Amerique.
S'abstient: VUnion des Republiques socialistes
sovietiques.
Le PRESIDENT Urad~tit de l'anglais) : La mesure
suivante consiste a nommer les membres du SousComite. La resolution stipule que le Sous.-Comite
sera compose de "tous les auteurs de propositions
et d'amendements sur la question grecque". Cela
signifie, si j'ai bonne memoire, que le Sous-Comite
se composera des representants de l'Australie, de
la Colombie, de la France, de la Pologne. de
I'Union des Republiques socialistes sovietiques, du
Royaume-Uni et des Etats-Unis d'Amerique.
Toutefois, j'estime que le representant de la Colombie devrait nous expliquer ce qu'il a voulu dire
en indiquant que le Sous-Comite serait compose de
"tous les auteurs de propositions et d'amendements".

The PRESIDENT: The next step is to appoint the
members of the Sub-Committee. The resolution
states that the Sub-Committee shall be composed
of "the representatives of the delegations .which
have submitted proposals on the Greek Question
and amendments thereto ... H That would mean,
as I remember it, that the Sub-Committee would
be composed of the representatives of Australia,
Colombia. France, Poland, the Union of Soviet
Socialist Republics, the United Kingdom and the
United States of America. However, I think the
representative of Colombia should have the opportunity to tell us what he had in mind when he
said that the Sub~Committee should be composed
of those who had "submitted proposals . . . and
amendments thereto."
M. LOPEZ (Colombie). (traduit de l'anglais) : A
Mr. L6PEZ (Colombia): Originally, we had
two proposals: one submitted by the United States l'origine, nous etions en presence de deux propodelegation, and the other submitted by the USSR sitions: rune soumise par la delegation des Etatsdelegation. We then had amendments submitted Unis et l'autre soumise par la delegation de
by the United Kingdom delegation and the French I'URSS. Des amendements furent alors soumis
delegation. After those were voted down, we had par la delegation du Roya1.lme-Uni et la delegation
another proposal by the Polish delegation. During de la France. Apres le rejet de ces propositions
the discussion of the United States proposal, I et amendements, nous nous sommes trouves en
offered some suggestions, but not as formal pro- presence de la proposition de ly. delegation de la
posals. The Australian F~resentative very gra- Pologne. Au cours de la discussion de la propociously agreed to propose one <;>f those suggestions sition des Etats-Unis, j'ai fait certaines sugges-

lOUt

in the name of his delegation. I therefore believe
that it would be perfectly proper, and it would
certainly be agreeable to me, to have the representative of Australia appointed to the Sub-Committee. As regards m)' serving on the Sub-Committee, I can only say that I am at the disposal of
the President and the Council if they think I can
be 0f assistance. However, I do not believe that,
under the terms of the resolution, I am actually
entitled to serve on the Sub-Committee.

tions, mais non sous forme de propositions formelles. Le representant de l'Australie a tres
gracieusement accepte de proposer une de ces
suggestions au nom de sa delegation. C'est pourquoi je crois qu'il serait parfaitement approprie,
et il me serait certainement agreable, que le representant de l'Australie fut designe comme membre
du Sous-Comite. En ce qui concerne ma presence
au Sous-Comite, je ne puis que me mettre a. la
dispositi( L1 du President et du Conseil s'ils estiment que je puis etre utile. Toutefois, je ne crois
pas que, aux termes de la resolution, j'ai reellement le droit de sieger au Sous-Comite.

The PRESIDENT: However; the representative
of Colombia is the author of this resolution; and,
as such, he should be a member of the Sub-Committee. The representives of the countries I have
hlentioned will also serve as members of the SubCommittee. They are requested to meet as soon as
possible. They may wish to meet this evening or
tomorrow or during the week-end. We are ready
to cancel a meeting of the Council, if necessary, in
order to give the Sub-Committee an opportunity
to meet.
I think we should appoint a chairman of the
Sub-Committee for the purpose of calling the members together. Would the author of this resolution
take charge· of convoking a meeting of the SubCommittee as soon as possible? After the SubCommHee has met, the members can decide their
further procedure among themselves.

Le PRESIDENT (traduit de l'anglais) : Cependant,
le representant de la Colombie est l'auteur de cette
resolution; comme tel, il devrait etre membre du
Sous-Comite. Les representants des pays que j'ai
mentiOI'nes sicgeront egalement au Sous-Comite.
Ils son: pries de se reunir aussitot que possible.
IIs des.;reront peut-etre sieger ce soir ou demain,
ou bien au cours de la fin de semaine. Nous sommes
prets a. annuler une seal1ce du Conseil, si c'est
necessaire, pour permettI e au Sous-Comite de se
reunir.
Je crois que nous devrions nommer un President
du Sous-Comite avec mission de reunir les membres. L'auteur de la resolution voudrait-il se
charger de convoquer une reunion du Sous-Comite
aussitot que possible? Apres que le Sous-Comite
se sera reuni, <ses membres decideront entre eux
de la procedure qu'ils desirent adopter.
.

Le colonel HODGSON (Australie) (tradttit de
l'anglais) : Ma delegation a vote pour l'etablissement dn Sous-Comite du Conseil, non parce qu'elle
a l.me grande confiance ou un grand espoir dans
l'ccl1vre qu'il peut accomplir, etant donhe les
graves divergences de vues qui se sont manifestees,
mais parce que cela peut etre utile, ainsi qu'il a
ete indique.
We must, however, face up to the fact that this
Nous devons toutefois tenir compte du fait que
Council has not reached a' decision, and the ap- le Conseil n'a pas abouti a. une decision, et que la
pointment of still another sub-committee is really constitution d'un nouveau sous-comite consiste, en
avoiding a decision. We say that it is imperative realite, a. eviter une decision. Nons affirmons qu'il
th2.t the Council should act now; we feel that we est imperatif que le Conseil agisse maintenant;
cannot allow the present state of affairs to con- nous estimons que nous ne pouvons pas laisser la
tinue, and we therefore think there should be a situation presente se prolonger, et c'est pourquoi
new approach based on the realities of the position. nons croyons qu'un nouvel examen de la question,
fonde sur les realites de la situation, est necessaire.
Quelles sont les realites de la situation? Un
What are the realities of the position? One side
says that the basic cause of the trouble lies in the groupe du Conseil declare que la cause fonda..
actions of the Greek Government, and that the mentale des troubles reside dans l'attitude du
internal situation in Greece is responsible for all Gouvernement grec et que la situation interieure
the frontier incidents and friction. The other side, de la Grece constitue la cause des troubles et incibasing its case on the report of the Commission cf . dents de frontieres. L'autre groupe, se fondant sur
Jnvestigation, says that the responsibility rests on le rapport de la Commission d'enquete, dit que les
the three northern neighbours.
trois voisins septentrionaux de la Grece portent
la responsabilite de la situation.
Pour permettre au Conseil d'arriver a. une deciFor the Council to reach a decision on any subject, though different solutions may be proposed,
ion sur un sujet quelconque, queUes que soient
there must be some understanding on the facts.
solutions differentes qui peuvent etre pro\Vhat are the ascertained facts? Here we have a posees, une certaine entente est necessaire, quant
case before the Council where there is no under- aux faits. Quels sont les faits etablis? Le Conseil se
standing or agreement as to the facts; but every- trouve, ici, en presence d'un cas OU il n'y a ni
one agrees, either directly or by implication, that entente, ni accord en ce qui conceme les faits, mais
the position is a threat to the peace. If I under- tout le monde admet, soit directement, soit implistood the representative of the USSR correctly, citement, que la situation constitue une menace a.
even he spoke about some 240 incidents which la paix. Si j'ai bien compris le repre~entant de
l'URSS, il a, lui-meme, parle de quelques 240
were a threat to the peace of the Balkans.
incidents qui constituerent une menace a. la paix
dans les Balkans.
C'est pourquoi mon Gouvernement estime que le
The view of my Government therefore is that
this Council should adopt an approach such as we Conseil devrait adopter une attitude semblable it

Colonel HODGSON (Australia): My delegation
voted for the establishment of the Council SubCommittee, not with any great faith or hope as to
what it can accomplish in view of the grave differences of opinion which have arisen, but because, as has been suggested, it might be useful.

.,' .pted with very good results in the Indonesian
case, which was received with acclaim by the
world. It is for us to proclaim frankly that under
Article 39-and members of the Council will see
that I am taking this case straight under Chapter
VII-the situation. is a threat to the peace. Let
us find it so.
That being so, tUlder Article 40 we are then
called on to take certain provisional measures to
remove that threat. The Australian delegation proposes a resolution to that end, and at this stage
we leave it to the discretion of the Council whether
it should be passed on to the new Sub-Committee
for the consideration as one of the possible solutions, or whether it should be considered as an
entirely separate resolution. The resolution is in
the following terms:

"The Security COlll/cil,
"Having received a·nd considered the report of
the Commission of Investigation established by the
resolution of the Council dated 19 December 1946,
"1. Determines that the situation on the northern
borders of Greece constitutes a threat to the peace
under Article 39 of the Charter of the United
Nations,
"2. Calls ttpon the parties involved, namely
Greece, Albania, Yugoslavia and Bulgaria, to
cease all acts of provocation,
"3. Directs, in accordance with Article 40 of the
Charter of the United Nations, that Greece on the
one hand and Albania, Yugoslavia and Bulgaria
on the other hand, should at once enter into direct
negotiations in an endeavour to relieve the tension
at present existing and with a view to the resumption of normal and peaceful diplomatic relations,
"4. Calls upon the Governments concerned to
report before 6 September 1947 the steps taken to
give effect to this resolution.
"To ensure that this decision is put into effect,
there shall be appointed observers with the duty of
reporting directly to the Security Council."
It will be seen that this is no compromise, but
it does not impute blame to any party. It does not
attempt to say who is right or who is wrong, because the Council cannot reach a decision on that
point, and we have to be realistic. As we see it,
as practical men we have to reach a practical
solution.
There is no question of this resolution's being
a recommendation. It is a decision by this Council.
Therefore, we avoid all these difficulties as to
jurisdiction, and all technical arguments under
Chapter VI as to whether a recommendation by
this Council would be binding or not on the respective parties.
This resolution will give any representatives here
who do not favour it adequate opportunity to put
their views on record. Further, it gives us an opportunity to prove that the machinery of the Security Council can indeed work. It enables us to
indicate our determination that the United Nations
can work; and we believe that if this Council is
to work, it has to work now.

I

celle que nous avons adoptee, avec de tres bons
resultats et aux applaudissements du monde en~ier,
dans la question indonesienne. Il nous appartlent
de proclamer franchement que, aux termes de
l'Article 39-et les membres du Conseil verront
que je considere ce cas en fonction directe du
chapitre VII-la situation constitue une menace
cl. la paix. Decidons-en ainsi.
. Cela etant dit, il nous faut alors, en vertu de
l'Article 40, prendre certaines mesures provisoires.
afin d'ecarter cette menace. La d~legation de l'Australie a propose une resolution cl. cette fin et, au
stade actuel de la discussion, nous laissons au
Conseil le soin de decider si cette resolution doit
etre transmise au nouveau Sous-Comite pour etre
consideree comme une des solutions possibles ou
si elle doit etre consideree comme une resolution
tout cl. fait distincte. La resolution se lit com111e
suit:
"Le Conseil de sent.rite,
"A)'u.nt reftt et etttd·ie le rapport de la Commission d'enquete creee par la resolution du
Conseil en date du 19 decembre 1946,
"I. Constate que la situation existant aux
frontieres septentrionales de la Greee constitue
une menace contre la paix en vertu de l'Article
39 de la Charte des Nations Unies;
"2. Invite les parties interessees, cl. savoir: la
Grece, I' Albanie, la Yougoslavie ~t la Bulgaric.
cl. cesser tous actes de provocation;
"3. Decide, conformement a l'Article 40 ele
la Charte, que la Grece, d'une part, l'Albanie,
la Yougoslavie et la Bulgarie d'autre part, doivent immediatement entreprendre des negociations directes pour s'efforcer de supprimer la
tension existant actuellement et pour assurer la
reprise de relations diplomatiques normales et
pacifiques,
"4. hwite .les Gouverneml'nts interesses a
presenter, avant le 6 septembre 1947, un rapport
sur les mesures prises pour donner effet cl. la
presente resolution.
"Pour assurer l'execution de la presente decision, il sera procede cl. la designation d'observateurs charges de faire directe111ent rapport au
Conseil de securite."
On verra que ce projet ne constitue pas un compromis, mais qu'il de tend cl. blamer aucune des
parties interessees. I1 ne cherche pas cl. etablir qui
a raison ou qui a tort, parce que le Conseil ne
peut aboutir cl. une decision a ce sujet, et nous
elevons etre realistes. A notre sens, nous devons
agir
pratiques pour aboutir a une
. en hommes
.
, solntlon pratique.
.
Il n'est pas question que c~tte reso!~tion constitne une recommandation. ElIe represente une
decision du Conseil. EJl partant ele ce point de vuc.
nons evitons toutes difficultes sur la question de
competence et tous les arguments techniques ql1C
souleverait le point de savoir si, aux termes cln
Chapitre VI, une recommandation formulee par
le Conseil lierait ou non les parties interessees.
eette resolution fournira a tont representant qui
ne l'appouvera pas la possibilite de faire consigner
son point de vue au compte rendu. En outre. elle
nous permet de prouver que le 111ecanisme clu Conseil de securite est vraiment capable de fonctionner.
Elle nous permet d'affirmer que l'Organistation
des Nations Unies peut fonctio11ner. Et nons
croyons que, si le Conseil clait travailler. c'est
maintenant qu'il doit le faire.

\Ve have seen many of our difficulties created
by the adherence of one or more nations to a particular solution which is entirely satisfactory to
them alone. We say that we have to go beyond
that ~o make the solutions of the Security Council
practIcal ones within the principles and purposes
of the United Nations, and to make this organ a
real, workable instrument.
All the representatives of the countries concerned have come to this Council, claiming that
they are innocent. They claim that they are r.cting
in good faith; they claim tl]at they are not responsible. But we know that those incidents and the
friction are still continuing. We suggest the ready
acceptance of this proposal will be an earnest of
their good will. The world wants peace, and this
Balkan question is a danger to that peace. We all
wish to see it removed as soon as possible. To that
end, we submit this resolution for the consideration of the Council.
Mr. LOPEZ (Colombia) : I feel that we are beginning to move in the right direction. We are
beginning to take account of th~ fact which was
"ery clearly stated by the Australian representative-namely, that as heretofore we have had two
conflicting points of view on which no agreement
seems to have been possibl(t, we should therefore
move out and see whether we can find a different
solution. I welcome the Australian proposal as a
"ery.constructive move, and I venture to suggest
that it should be tabled as a new draft resolution
-which, of course, the Sub-Committee just appoil1ted will naturally take into consideration.

Beaucoup de nos difficultes ont ete provoquees
par l'adhesion d'une ou plusieurs nations it une
solution particuliere qui leur donne, it elles seules,
entiere satisfaction. Nous affirmons qu'il faut nous
placer sur un plan plus eleve si nous voulons
rendre pratiques les solutions que le Conseil de
securite, respectueux des principes et soucieux des
buts de l'Organisation des Nations Unies, aura
arretees, et pour faire -de cet organe un inntrument
reel et utilisable.
Tous les representants des pays interesses entendus au Conseil ont affirme leur innocence. lIs
pretendent qu'ils agissent de bonne foi; ils declm'ent qu'ils ne sont pas responsables. Mais nous
savons que ces incidents et ces troubles persistent.
Nous pensons que l'acceptation spontanee de cette
proposition constituerait une preuve de leur bonne
volonte. Le monde desire la paix, et la question
balkanique constitue un danger pour cette paix.
Nouis desirons tous que ce danger soit ecarte le
plus tot possible. C'est it cette fin que nous soumettons au Conseil de securite la presente resolution.

M. LOPEz (Colombie) (tradl/it de fanglais) : Je
crois que nous commen<;ons it nous engager clans la
bonne voie. Nous commen<;ons it prendre en consideration le fait qui a ete tres clairement etabli par
le representant de l'Australie, it savoir que, vu que
nous nous sommes trouves juqu'it present en presence de -deux points de vue opposes qu'il semble
impossible de concilier, nous devrions nous degager de cette situation pour voir si nous pouvons
trouver une solution differente. J'accueille favorablement la proposition de l'Australie comme etant
une mesure d'ordre tres pratique, et je me permets
de proposer qu'elle soit soumise sous forme de
nouveau projet de resolution que, bien entendu,
le Sous-Comite nouvellement constitue prendra,
.""
evidemment, en consideration.
For our part, the Colombian delegation also
En cequi nous concerne, la delegation de la
proposes to submit a new draft resolution which Colombie se propose egalement de soumetlre un
will be distributed presently to the members of the nouveau prajet de resolution, qui sera bientot
Council and which, I repeat once more, we believe distribue aux membres du Conseil; nous crayons
to be differen~ and to furnish an approach more que, je le repete une fois de plus, ce projet est
acceptable to all the parties concerned.
different et pennet d'aborder le probleme sous un
angle plus acceptable pour toutes les parties
interessees.
•
Avant de formuler les quelques tres breves reBefore I make some very brief remarks about
this new draft resolution, I hope it will not be i::-: I marques que je desire faire it propos de ce nouveau
posing too much on the Council if I read it rapidly, projet de resolution, j'espere ne pas abuser du
so that the Council may be able to judge w!~:; we temps du Conseil en le lisant rapidement, pour lui
believe that it will contribute to the success of the permettre de juger pourquoi nous croyons que ce
work of the Sub-Committee just appointed. I be- projet contribuera au succes des travaux du Souslieve the Sub-Committee will do some very good Cornite qui vient d'etre institue. Je crois que le
work, but assuming that I am wrong and that all Sous-Comite accomplira une tache excellente, mais,
the members who have expressed pessimism are en supposant que je me trompe et que tous les
right, I am all the more inclined to submit my membres qui ont manifeste. du pessimisme aiel.resolution so that, in case nothing results from the raison, je suis d'autant plus enclin it presenter ma
work of the Sub-Committee, we shall have some- resolution qu'elle nous fournira un autre texte it
thing else to discuss.
discuter, dans le cas d'un echec des travaux du
Sous-Comite. Ce nouveau projet de resolution se
This new draft resolution reads as follows:
lit comme suit:
"The Secu.rity Co-uncil,
"Le Co-Ilseil de securite,
"Having considered the reports of the Com"Ayant examine le rapport de la Commission
mission of Investigation established by resolution d'enquete creee par la resolution du 19 decembre
dated 19 December 1946, finds that a situation 1946, constate qu'il existe une situation dont la
exists, the continuance of which might lead to a prolongation risque de conduire it une rupture de
breach of the peace.
la paix.
"1. Calls upon the Governments of Albania,
"I. En consequence, le Conseil de securite inBulgaria, Greece and Yugoslavia to abstaIn from vite les Gouvernements de l' Albanie, de la Bulall action, direct or indirect, which may be likely garie, de la Grece et de la Y ougoslavie it s'absto increase the tension and unrest at present exist- tenir de toute acte qui, directement ou indirecte-

1810

ing in the border areas, and rigorously to refrain
from any support of elements in neighbouring
countries aiming at the overthrow of the lawful
Government of those countries. Giving support to
armed bands formed on anv one of the four States
concerned and crossing into the territory of another State, or refusal by anyone of the four
Governments in spite of the demands of the State
concerned to take the necessary measures to deprive s.uch bands of any aid or protection, should
be aVOIded by the Government of A:lbania Bulgaria, Greece and Yugoslavia as a threat to the
peace within the meaning of the Charter of the
United Nations.

ment, serait susceptible d'accroitre la' tension et le
malaise qui existent a l'heure actuelle dans les
regions frontalieres, et a s'abstenir d'une maniere
absolue d'aider les elements des pays voisins qui
visent a renverser le Gouvernement legitime de ces
pays. L'assistance aux bandes armees qui se forment sur l'un quelconque des territoiies des quatre
Etats interesses et penetrent sur le territoire d'un
autre Etat, ainsi que le refus, par l'un quelconque
des quatre Gouvernements, malgre les demandes
presentees par l'Etat interesse, de prendre les
mesures necessaires pour priver lesdites bandes
armees de toute aide ou protection, sont des actes
que les Gouvernements de l'Albanie, de la Bulgarie, de la Grece et de la Yougoslavie doivent
eviter, paree qu'ils constituent une menace contre
la paix aux termes de la Charte des Nations Unies.
"H. Also finds that further action is required
"H. Le Conseil de securite constate egalement
for the purpose of restoring normal conditions que de nouvelles mesures sont indispensables pour
along the frontiers between Greece, on the one retablir les conditions normales le long de la fronhand, and Albania, Bulgaria, and Yugoslavia on tiere entre la Grece d'une part et l'Albanie, la
the other, and to this effect it deems it necessary Bulgarie et la' Yougoslavie d'autre part. A cet
to urge UpOt.l the four Governments concerned the effet, il juge neeessaire d'inviter les quatre Gouverfollowing recommendations:
nements a se conformer aux recommandations
suivantes:

"1. Eta:hlir, le plus tot possible, des relations
"1: To establish as soon as possible diplomatic
relations among themselves, and to maintain good- diplomatiques normales et maintenir des relations
neighbourly relations.
de bon voisinage;
"2. To enter into frontier conventions providing
"2. Conclure des conventions de frontiere qui
for effective machinery for the regulation and con- prevoient un systeme efficace de surveillance et
trol of their common frontiers, and for the pacific de controle de leurs frontieres communes ainsi que
settlement of frontier incidents and disputes.
le reglement pacifique des differends et incidents
de frontiere;
"3. To negotiate with a sincere spirit of co"3. Negoder, dans un esprit de cooperation
operation adequate conventions for the voluntary sincere, des conventions sur le transfert volontaire
transfe:r of minorities. Until such conventions come des minorites. En attendant l'entree en vigueur de
into force, individuals belonging to a given minor- ces conventions, les individus appartenant a une
ity in any of the countries concerned and desiring minorite donnee de l'un quelconque des pays
to emigrate, should be given all facilities to do so interesses et desireux d'emigrer, doivent etre aides
by the Government of the State in which they re- dans toute la mesure du possible par le Gouverneside. Arrangements for the voluntary transfer of ment du pays dans lequel ils resident. Les accords
minorities shm.tld be supervised by the interna- pour le transfert des minorites seront controles
tional body authorized by the United Nations to par l'organisme international charge par les
undertake the task.
Nations U nies d'assumer cette tache;
"4. As the 'p'resence of refugees in any of the
"4. Etant donnee que la presence de re£ugies
four countries is a disturbing factor.
dans l'un quelcol1que des quatre pays constitue un
element de trouble, il convient:
"(a) To remove such refugees as far from the
"a) D'evacuer ces re£ugies le plus loin possible
country from which they came as is practicably de la frontiere du pays d'ou ils viennent;
possible;
"( b) To segregate them in camps or otherwise;
"b) De les isoler dans des camps ou d'une
autre maniere;
((c) De prendre des mesures' efficaces pour
" (c) To take effective measures to prevent their
participation in any political or military activity. empecher qu'ils ne prennent part a une activite
politique ou militaire.
"ees camps seront places sous la surveillance
"Such camps should be placed under the supervision of some international body authorized by d'un organisme international charge par les Nathe United Nations to undertake the task.
tions Unies d'assumer eette tache.
"Afin de s'assurer que seuls les refugies authenti"In order to ensure that only genuine refugees
return to their country of origin, repatriation shall <lues retournent das leur pays d'origine, le rapanot take place except after arrangements with the triement n'aura lieu que lorsque des arrangements
Government of the country of origin or after noti- auront ete conclus avec le Gouvernement du pays
fication to the international body authorized for d'origine ou apres notification a' l'organisme
international charge de cette tache par les Nations
this task by the United Nations.
Unies.
"HI. Le Conseil de securite cree, par la pre"Ill. Hereby establishes a Commission composed of the representatives of three of its five sente resolution, une Commission composee des
permanent members and four of its six non-per- representants de trois de ses cinq membres permanents et de quatre de ses six membres non
manent members.
permanents.

1811
"This Commission shall be accredited as a subsidiary organ of the Security Council near the
Governments of A1bania, Bulgaria, Greece and
Yugoslavia and shall have the right of direct
access to them.
"Th~ functions of the Commission shall be:
"1. To co-operate with the Governments Of Albania, Bulgaria, Greece and Yugoslavia in the
negotiation and conclusion of the frontier conventions recommended under this resolution;

"La Commission sera accreditb en tant qu'organe subsidiaire du Conseil de securite aupres des
Gouvernements de l'Albanie, de la Bulgarie, de la
Grece et de la Yougoslavie et aura un droit d'acces
direct aupres d'eux.
"La Commission aura les attributions suivantes :
"1. Utiliser ses bons offices pour assister les
Gouvernements de l' Albanie, de la Bulgarie, de
la Grece et de la Yougoslavie dans la negociation
et la conclusion des conventions de frontiere recommandees par la presente resolution;
"2. Faire, apres etude, des recommandations
"2. To study and make recommendations to the
above-mentioned "Governments with respect to aux Gouvernements susmentionnes que la Comsuch additional bilateral agreements between them mission peut juger utiles en ce qui concerne taus
for the pacific settlement of disputes relating to les accords bilatereax supplementaires qu'elle jufrontier incidents or conditions along the frontier gera opportuns pour le reglement pacifique des
differends relatifs a. des incidents de frontiere ou
as the Commission may consider desirable;
a. des conditions existant a. la frontiere;
"3. Utiliser ses bons offices pour le reglement,
"3. To use its good offices for the settlement,
by the means mentioned in Article 33 of the par les moyens mentionnes a. l'Article 33 de la
Charte:
Charter, of:
"a) Des differends resultant de violations de
"(a) Controversies arising from frontier violafrontieres;
tions;
"b) Des differends directement en rapport avec
" (b) Controversies directly connected with the
application of frontier conventions' recommended l'application des conventions de frontiere, recommandees aux quatre Gouvernements par la preto the four Governments under this resolution;
sente resolution;
" (c) Complaints regarding conditions on the
"c) Des plaintes relatives aux conditions exisborder which may be brought to the attention of tant a. la frontiere, formulees par un Gouvernethe Commission by one Government against the ment contre un autre et soumises a. l'examen de la
·other.
commission;
"4. To assist the four Governments concerned in
"4. Aider les quatre Gouvernements interesses
the negotiation and conclusion of arrangements a negocier et condure des accords pour le transfert
for the transfer of refugees and minorities, and if des refugies et des minorites, et, sur la demande de
called upon by' anyone of them, to supervise the l'un quelconque d'entre eux, controler l'execution
execution ')f such conventions and to act as a regis- de ces conventions et tenir regi~tre des personnes
tration at.thority for any persons desiring to qui desirent emigrer.
emigrate.
"IV. The Commission shall hold its first meet"IV. La Commission tiendra sa premiere
ing in Geneva, Switzerland, and shall be author- seance a. Geneve, Suisse, et sera autorisee a. transized to move its headquarters to such other places ferer son siege la OU, selon son jugement, elle sera
as in its judgme'i1t will best facilitate its work.
le mieux en mesure de s'acquitter de sa tache.
"The Commission shall perform its task on
"La Commission remplira sa mission de part
either side of the Greek borders with the co-opera- et d'autre de la frontit~re grecque, en cooperation
tion of the officials and nationals of the four Gov- avec les fonctionnaires et ressortissants des quatre
ernments concerned.
Gouvernements interesses.
"The Commission shall have the staff necessary
"La Commission sera dotee du personnel necesto discharge its duties, including persons able to act saire pour lui permettre de s'acquitter de sa tache,
as border observers.
elle comprendra notamment des personnes pouvant
faire fonction d'observateurs de frontieres.
"The Commission shall establish its own rules
"La Commission fixera son reglement interieur
of procedure and methods of conducting its et ses methodes de travail.
busihesf.
"The Commission shaH commence its work as
"La Commission commencera ses travaux le
soon as prActicable after 1 September 1947, and plus tot possible apres le ler septembre 1947, et
shall supersede the Commission of Investigation remplacera la Commission d'enquete creee par la
established by resolution dated 19 December 1946, resolution du 19 decembre 1946, ainsi que le
and the Subsidiary Group thereof, established by Groupe subsidiaire cree par la resolution du 18
'resolution dated 18 April 1947.
avril 1947.
"The Commission shall render regularly monthly
"La Commission soumettra au Conseil de secureports to the Security Council or more frequently rite un rapport tous les mois; elle pourra le faire
if it thinks fit.
plus frequemment si elle le juge necessaire.
"The Commission shall remain in existence until
"La Commission demeurera en existence jusqu'a
otherwise decided by affirmative action of the ce qu'il en soit decide autrement par un acte positif
Security Council."
du Conseil de securite.
I shall now make some very brief remarks
Je n'ai plus que quelques tres breves observations
a~out this resolution. In the first place, the resolu- a. faire au sujet de cette resolution. Tout d'abord,
tIon leaves out altogether any question of the ap- elle evite absolument de faire retomber le blame
portionment of the blame to any of the parties, but sur l'une quelconque des parties, mais fait apPel a
c.alls. upon both sides to abstain from any action celles-ci pour qu'elles s'abstiennent de tout acte
lIkely to increase the tension or unrest at present susceptible d'accroitre la tension ou le malaise qui

'1812

existing in the border areas. That, we believe,
should be the first point.
Next, the resolution provides, as further action,
that the Council should make several recommendations. I believe it will not be an exaggeration if I
say that most of the members of the Security
Council, if not all, agree that these recommendations are necessary. Of cuurse, once they have
been submitted to the Council, I should expect the
representatives of Greece, Yugoslavia, Bulgaria
and Albania to give the Council an idea of whether
or not they would be prepared to accept such
recommendations; because I believe ',hat as we
have invited them to sit in the Council chamber,
we are fully entitled to a clear expression from
them or tlleir views on anything we propose to do.
On more than one occasion, I have noticed that
the members of the Council have discussed proposals submitted by various representatives, and
have passed from one to the other without giving
an opportunity to the representatives of the Balkan countries to say what they think about the
suggestions.
We argue here now and then as to whether or
not they are co-operating with the Subsidiary
Group in one way or another. We have heard the
opinions of the representatives of the Balkan
countries on some of the individual proposals, but
I do not believe that we have had a very clear
statement from anyone of them as regards his
position, except perhaps on the Greek position in
regard to the United States proposal. I believe it
would greatly facilitate the work of the Sub-Committee and of the Security Council if we .could have
the benefit of a frank expression from the representatives of the Balkan countries regarding the
different proposals that we are discussing. I fot
one agree that we shall have to make different
provisions if, for instance, we have a clear indication that these countries do not want to establish
diplomatic relations among themselves; then we
shall not be able to expect that they will be ready
to enter into any of the other conventions. Taking
that into consideration, the Security Council may
want to consider some new alternative proposals.

,

At any rate, I do not believe there is really much
in this new dtaft resolution to which anyone Govern~cnt can object or which it can regard as an
abridgement of its sovereignty or, as we have
heard, as an implication that we are placing the
Balkan countries in some kind of trusteeship. Their
sovereignty, I believe, is fully respected here and
fully taken into account.
It is clear from the information we have at hand
that something must be done by the Security
Council in order to avoid trouble in the Balkans
and to restore normal conditions between Greece
and the adjoining countries. We a:lso believe that
we would be well-advised to mention the question
of the Subsidiary Group in any new proposal. I
believe that any new proposal wi.kh fails to mention that subject will involve us in some kind of
indirect or lengthy discussion about the matter.
That is why we propose in this resolution that the
new commission shall supersede the other. It seems
clear to us that those who favour the prolongation
of the existing Subsidiary Group will be satisfied
to have this new commission supersede it. On the
other hand, if some such proposal as this is accepted, or if the Subsidiary Group will continue

existe actuellement dans les regIOns frontalieres.
Nous croyons que cela doit constituer le premier
point
Ensuite, la resolution prevoit, comme autre
mesure, que le Conseil de securite fasse plusieurs
recommandations. Je crois ne pas exagerer en
disart que la plupart des membres du Conseil de
securite, sinon tous, admettent que ces reCOl11mandations sont necessaires. Evidemment, du moment qu'elles sont soumises au Conseil, j'attends
des representants de la Grece, de la Yougoslavie,
de la Bulgarie et et l'Albanie qu'ils indiquent au
Conseil s'ils sont ou non disposes cl accepter ces
recommanda<tions, parce que je crois que, puisque
nous les avons invites cl sieger cl la table du Conseil, nous avons parfaitement le droit de connaitre
clairement leur point de vue au sujet de tout ce
que nous avons l'intention de £aire. J'ai remarque
plus d'une fois que les membres du Conseil, discutant des propositions soumises par divers representants, ont passe cl'une proposition cl l'autre sans
donner aux representan<ts des pays balkaniques
l'occasiond'exprimer leur avis cl ce sujet.
Notre discussion a porte de temps it autre sur
le point de savoir si ces pays ont collabore ou non,
d'une maniere ou d'une autre, avec le Groupe subsidiaire. Nous avons entendu les avis des representants des pays balkaniques au sujet de certaines
propositions mais je ne crois pas que nous ayons
obtenu de l'un d'eux une prise de position tres
nette, sauf peut-etre, de la Grece, it l'egard de
la proposition des Etats··Unis. Je crois que les
travaux du Sous-Comite et du Conseil de securite
se trouveraient considerablement facilites si les
representants des pa)'iS balkaniques voulaient bien
nous dire franchement ce qu'ils pensent des differentes propositions que nous discutons. Personnellement, j'admets que nous devrions modifier
nos propositions si, par exemple, nous avions l'indication precise que ces pays ne desirent pas etablir
entre eux de relations diplomatiques; nous ne
pourrions attendre d'eux, dans ces circonstances,
qu'ils consentent it conclure d'autre.s conventions.
Compte tenu de ces considerations, le Conseil de
securite desirera sans doute examiner de nouvelles
variantes de ces propositions.
De toute maniere, je ne crois pas que ce nouveau
projet de resolution renferme rien cl quoi un
Gouvernement quekonque puisse opposer des objections ou qu'il puisse considerer comme un empietement sur sa souverainete, ou encore, comme
nous l'avons entendu, comme si nous placions les
pays balkaniques sous une sorte de tutelle. Je
crois que leuI' souverainete est entierement respectee ici, qu'il en est pleinement tenu compte.
Il ressort nettement des informations que nous
possedons, que le Conseil de securite doit prendre
des mesures pour eviter des troubles dans les
Balkans et pour retablir des relations normales
entre la Grece et les pays voisins. Nous croyons
egalement qu'il serait indique que nous mentionnions la question du Groupe subsidiaire dans toute
nouvelle proposition. Je pense que toute nO\1velle proposition qui ne mentionnerait pas. ce
sujet nous conduirait it discuter la questIon
indirectement ou de fa<;on prolongee. C'est pourquoi nous proposons, dans la resolution, que
la nouvelle commission remplace I 'autre. Il noUS
:;emble evident que ceux qui desirent prolong:er
l'existence du Groupe subsidiaire seront satlsfaits de ce que la nouveI1e commission le remplace. D'autre part, si une proposition de ce genre

1813
unless by an affirmative vote· the Security Council
decides otherwise, I believe that we have something here that might be considered acceptable.

est acceptee ou si le Groupe subsidiaire cOlltinue
d'exister, a moins que le Conseil de securite n'en
decide autrement par un acte positif, je crois que
nous nous trouvons ici en presence d'une mesure
qui peut etre consideree comme acceptable.
At any rate, these are new proposals which form
De toute mani<:~re, ce sont la de nouveIles propothe basis for discussion. They can go first of all sitions qui constituent une base de discussion. Elles
to the Sub~Committee, and the Sub-Committee peuvent etre soumises tout d'abord au Sous-Comite
can determine whether it finds them useful. If the qui jugera de leur utilite. Si le Sous-Comite peut se
Sub-Committee can agree to anything, the pro- mettre d'accord sur des propositions, quelles.
posals will come to the Security Council for con- qu'elles soient, ces propositions seront soumises au
sideration separately.
Conseil de securite qui les examinera separement.
I should like to make one more suggestion before
Je voudrais faire une derniere suggestion avant
I conclude my remarks. I feel very highly-hon- de conclure. On me fait un tres grand honneur en
oured by the suggestion that I should act as m'invitant a agir en qualite de President du SousChairman of the Sub-Committee, but I should be Comite, mais il me serait agreable que le President
pleased if the P!'esident would give the task of confie cette tache a un membre qui veiIlera avec
presiding over that Sub-Committee to a member plus d'interet et d'autorite a ce que le Conseil de
with a more active interest and responsibility in securite ne perde pas de temps a considerer toutes
seeing that the Security Council loses no time in les autres propositions. Je voudrais me reserver le
taking up all the other proposals. I should like droit de soutenir mon point de vue en tant que
to reserve my right to insist on my point of view· membre du Conseil seulement, et laisser le soin
as an individual member of the Council, and to de presider ce tres important Sous-Comite a un
leave the task of presiding over this very important autre representant, a un membre du Conseil plus
Committee to one of my colleagues, Cl, member who experimente et plus competent dans la manihe de
has more experience and ability in handling dif- traiter des situations camme celle-que nous etuficult situations like the present one.
dions.
I should also like to make some clarification as
Je voudrais egaIement preciser de queUe fa<;on
to how I und.~rstand that these different proposals il conviendrait, a mon sens, de traiter differentes
should be handled. I am afraid I have been rather propositions. Je crains d'avoir presente mes idees
confusing in the presentation of my ideas. I be- de maniere plutot confuse. Je crois que la propolieve that the Australian proposal was formerly sition de l'Australie n'a ete presentee de maniere
tabled after the appointment of this Sub-Com~ fQrmelle qu'apres l'etablissement du Sous-Comite,
mittee. After the Australian proposal, the CoI..:>m- La proposition de la delegation de la Colombie a
bian delegation's proposal was submitted.
ete presenteeapres la proposition de l'Australie.
I understand' that before the Council goes into
Sauf erreur, avant que le Conseil de securite
the matter, the Sub-Commiftee will consider all aborde la question, le Sous-Comite examinera
the proposals 'submitted, and if the Sub-Committee toutes les propositions soumises, et, si le Sousreaches an agreement and makes a new draft Comite, apres avoir abouti a un accord, redige un
resolution, the consideration of that resolution will nouveau projet de resolution, le Conseil examinera
have precedence in the Council. If, however, the cette resolution par priorite. Si, toutefois, le SousSub-Committee does not reach any agreement, Comite n'aboutit pas a un accord, la proposition ge
then the Australia,n proposal will come up for con- l'Australie sera examinee en premier lieu, et la
sideration first and the Colombian proposal next. proposition de la Colombie ensuite.
The PRESIDENT: That is exactly what I was
going to do, that is, send these draft resolutions
presented this afternoon to the Sub-Committee for
consideration in order to see what it can do about
them. If the Sub-Committee agrees on a draft resolution, we will consider that first in the course of
our deliberati<¥1s. If the Sub-Committee disagrees,
we will continue our consideration of the resolutions which we have l',een examining.

Le PRESIDENT (traduit de l'allglais): C'est
exactement ce que j'avais l'intention de faire,
c'est-a-dire transmettre au Sous-Comite les projets de resolution presentes cet apres-midi pour
qu'il les examine et qu'il voie ce qu'il peut en
faire. Si le Sous-Comite aboutit a un accord an
sujet d'un projet de resolution, c'est le texte que
nous examinerons en premier lieu au cours de nos
debats. Si le Sous-Comite n'aboutit pas a un accord, nous poursuivrons nos debats au sujet des
resolutions que nous avons deja examinees.
The Sub-Committee will meet tomorrow at 10.30
Le Sous-Comite se reunira demain a 10 h.30
a.m. in conference room 5, and I shall cancel the dans la salle de conference No 5, et j'annule la
meeting of the Security Council in order that the reunion du Conseil de securite pour permettre
Sub-Committee may meet at that time. If Mr. au Sous-Comite de se reunir a ce moment. Si
L6pez does not accept the chairmanship of the M. L6pez n'accepte pas la presidence du SousSub-Committee, that body will choose its own Comite, cet organe elira son propre bureau lorsqu'il
officers when it meets. It wi1l be a closed meeting. se reunira. Il se reunira en seance privee.
As the representative of Australia has raised
Puisque le representant de l'Australie a souleve
the question of Article 39 of the Charter, that la question de l'Artide 39 de la Charte, il s'ensuit
means that the letter which was presented by the que la lettre presentee par la delegation de la
Greek delegation is now under discussion. In its Grece fait deja l!objet de la discussion. Dans
proper order it would now come up for discussion. 1'0l'dre logique, c'est maintenant que nous den'ions
We have opened the discussion, and I would ask en discuter. Mais nous avons commence les debats.
the G;-eek representative to make a statement about et je demande au representant de la Grece de faire
his letter after the representative of the USSR has une declaration au sujet de cette lettre. apres que
made his remarks on certain points.
le representant de l'URSS aura presente ses observations sur certains points.

1814

Mr. GROMYKO (Union of Soviet Socialist ReM. GROMYKO (Union des Republiques sociapublic",) (Translated from Russian): Since the listes sovietiques) (traduit du russe) : Apres que
decision to set up a sub-committee was taken, the la decision de nommer un Sous-Comite eut ete
representatives of Australia and Colombia have prise, les representants de l'Australie et de la Cobrought forward new resolutions. I repeat that lombie ont presente de nouvelles resolutions. Je
these new resolutions were submitted after it was le repete, ces nouvelles resolutions ont ete pre?ecided to set up a sub-committee. My original sentees apres que la decision de nommer un SousImpression was that the Sub-Committee wa~ being Comite eut ete prise. J'avais cru, au debut, que le
set up in order to consider various proposals. After Sous-Comite etait cree precisement pour examiner
the Sub-Committee was set up, however, the Se- les ,differentes propositions. Cependant, apres
curity Council decided to consider new proposals. l'avoir cree, le Conseil de securite a decide de disIf that is the case, it would be better, perhaps, to cuter de nouvelles propositions. S'il en est ainsi, •
do away with this Sub-Committee. I do not think peurt-etre serait-il preferable de supprimer ce Sousthat once it has been decided to set up a sub-com- Comite. J'estime que, apres avoir decide de creer
mittee, proposals should be discussed. in the Coun- un Sous-Comite, le Conseil ne doit pas disseuter
cil, especially at the same meeting of the Security de nouvelles propositions, surtout au cours de la
Council.
meme seance.
'With regard to the Colombian resolution, I menJ'ai deja pris la parole hier au sujet de la resolutioned it yesterday, although li I did not have the tion presentee par la Colombie, alors que je ne
final text before me. 'What I said about it yester- disposais pas encore du texte de£initif. Ce que j'en
day fully applies to the Colombian resolution as ai dit se rapporte tout aussi bien au texte qui nous
laid before us today. The Colombian resolution -est presente aujourd'hui. La resolution de la, Cois the United States resolution in a Colombian lombie n'est que la version colombienne de la
edition.
resolution des Etats-Unis.
The Australian representative has proposed to
Le representant de l'Australie nous a propose
us a new draft resolution which, in its form (I un nouveau texte de resolution qui, quant a la
said: in its form) incorporates the decision taken forme, je dis quant a la forme, cOh,:"ine des eleby the Security Council on the Indonesian Ques- ments de la resolution prise par le Conseil de
tion l Paragraph 2 of the Australian resolution is securite sur la question indonesiennel . Le poirit 2
somewhat reminiscent of the decision taken on the de la resolution de I'Australie rappelle quelque peu
situation in Indonesia. In paragr?-ph 4 we have the la decision prise au sujet de la situation en InUnited States proposal to set up a body of frontier .donesie. Au point 4, nous retrouvons la proposition
observers. I do not think that the mechanical com- des Etats-Unis d'instituer a la frontiere un groupe
bination of applying the United States proposal d'observateurs. Je ne crois pas que le procede qui I
to the Greek Question and giving it the form of consiste a combiner le fond de la proposition des
the resolution which we adopted onthe Indonesian Etats-Unis relative a. la question grecque et la
Question, really offers a substantial basis for agree- forme de la resolution que nous avions prise au
ment on the Greek Question. The USSR delega- sujet de l'Indonesie, nous donne automatiquement
tion considers the Australian resolution unaccept- une base reelle d'accord sur la question grecque.
able. I could speak in detail on the Australian La delegation de l'URSS considere la reso: tion
resolution, but I think this question will be dis- de l'Australie comme inacceptable. Je pourrais discussed in the Sub-Committee and I shall therefore cuter, en detail, la resolution de l'Austra1ie, mais
comme elle fera, je crois, l'objet des debats du
not dwell on it now.
Sous-Comite, je ne m'etendrai pas plus longtemps
sur cette question. .
Le PRESIDENT (traduit de l'anglais) : Ces projets de resolution ne font pas l'objet de la Sliscussion en ce moment; j'ai dit qu'ils seront transmis au Sous-Comite qui -en discutera.

The PRESIDENT: These draft resolutions are
not open for discussion now; I said that they
would be referred to the Sub-Committee for discussion there.

I

Mr. TSIANG (China) : I wish to raise a point of
M. TSIANG (Chine) (traduit de l'anglais) : Je
order. When the Council passed the resolution desire presenter une motion d'ordre. Lorsque le
calling for the creation of a sub-committee, it was Conseil a adopte la resolution etablissant un Sousunderstood that it would be the duty of that Sub- Comite, il a ete entendu que le Sous-Comite aurait
Committee to explore some other approach. The pour tache de rechercher d'autres solutions. La
resolution did not state that the resolutions of resolution ne stipulait pas que les resolutions relasubstance subsequently moved by Australia and tives au fond de la question, presentees ulterieureColombia should be referred to the Sub-Com- ment par l'Australie et la Colombie, devraient
mittee. If such reference should now be made, I etre transmises au Sous-Comite. S'il en doit etre
think that would go beyond the terms of the ainsi maintenant, je pense qu'on depaStserait le but
Colombian resolution.
de la resolution de la Colombie.
En outre, je pense qu'une telle fa<;on de proceder
Furthermore, I submit that such 'procedure
would not normally be advantageous The Sub- ne serait pratiquement pas avantageuse. Le Sou?- Committee is composed of seven members of this Comite est compose de sept membres de ce Cansed.
Council. If the seven members have a full debate, Si les sept membres procMent it un debat ,ap~ro­
there will only have to be another full debate later. fondi, i1 devra, neanmoins, y avoir un autre debat
Therefore, I hope that the Sub-Committee will be approfondi plus tard. C'est pourquoi j'esp~re qu~
called upon to perform the functions stated in the le Sous-Comite sera invite aremplir la misswn q:ll
Colombian resolution, and that the resolutions sub- lui a ete impartie dans la resolution de la Colomble
1 See Official Records of the Security Council, Second
Year, No. 68, 173rd meeting.

1 Voir les Proces-verbau% officiels du Conseil de sec1wite,.Deuxieme Annee, No 68, 173eme seance.

1815
sequently submitted by Australia and Colombia
will be reserved for discussion in the Council itself.
The PRESIDENT: The Sub-Committee was supposed to do work of the same nature as the Council on the two draft proposals which have been
presented, and there is therefore no contradiction
between the work of the Sub-Committee and the
work of the Council. The Council will not have
another meeting on this subject before Tuesday
next, and it ""auld be very convenient if the SubCommittee could have these proposals to discuss
\vith a view to reaching agreement on one of them.
If it does not agree on anything, the Council will
then discuss the two draft proposals which have
been presented to it. Perhaps that will be agree.
able to the representative of China.
Mr. JOHNSON (United States of America) : On
a point of order. If the Council is not to have
another meeting to consider the Greek case before
Tuesday next, it seems to my delegation that it is
only fair and equitable that the representative of
Greece, who is present, should have an opportunity to speak on the letter which he has already
sent to the Council.
The Council preceeded with the greatest alaC!"ity
to take action in the Indonesian case, and in the
opinion of my delegation the situation in Greece
is even more dangerous as far as world peace is
concerned, and also is urgent. The representative
of Greece has in fact, appealed as the representative
of a small country to this Council for protection.
I think that before the Sub-Committee meets and
considers the proposals already made, as well as
any o!hers it may choose to consider, the representatIve of Greece should have an opportunity
of being heard, this evening if necessary.
The PRE?IDENT: I had intended to call upon the
representatIve of Greece- when the representative
of the United States asked to speak on a point of
order. I have still on my list of speakers the representatives of Greece, Yugoslavia and the Union
of Soviet Socialist Republics.
Mr. GROMYKO (Union of Soviet Socialist ReP?blics) (translated from Russian): We have decided to set up a sub-committee to consider any
prop~sals submit,ted to it on the Greek question,
that IS to say,. on the Commission's report. We
have one question on our agenda: the Commission's-report. The letter sent by Mr. Tsaldaris is
not a separate question on the Council's agenda,
but has been forwarded in connexion with the
old Greek question, in connexion with the Commission's report, as the Greek representative told
us at the hundred and seventy-sixth Council
meeting.

If the Sub-Committee we have set up starts
work at once, all discussion of any proposals whatsoever should cease in the Council until this SubCommittee's work is ended. If the Greek representative makes a statement, then the Sub-Committee should not begin its work. It would mean
that the Security Council would continue to discuss the Commission's report at its meetings.
I think the United States representative's proposal only complicates our working procedure. I

et que les resolutions deposees ulterieurement par
l'Australie et la Colombie feront l'objet d'une discuss: .1 au sein du Conseil lui-meme.
Le PRESIDENT (traduit de I'anglais) : Le SousComit ~st cense accomplir un travail de meme
nature que celui du Conseil en ce qui concerne les
deux projets de proposition presentes, et c'est
pourquoi il n'y a aucune contradiction entre le
travail du Sous-Comite et celui du Conseil. Le
Conseil ne tiendra aucune reunion ace sujet avant
mardi prochain, et il serait tres utile que le SousComite put discuter de ces propositions en vue
d'aboutir a un accord au sujet de l'une d'elles. Si
le Sous-Comite n'aboutit a aucun accord. le Conseil abordera alors la discussion des deux projets
de resolution qui lui ont ete presentes. Cela conviendra peut-etre au representant de la Chine.
M. JOHNSON (Etats-Unis d'Amerique) (tra.duit
de l'anglais): Motion d'ordre. Si le Conseil ne
doit pas tenir une autre reunion avant mardi prochain pour examiner la question grecque, ma delegation estime qu'il serait simplement juste et
equitable que le representant de la Grece, qui est
present, ait l'occasion de presenter des observations au sujet de la letrtre qu'il a deja envoyee au
Conseil.
Le Conseil a agi avec une tres grande rapidite
dans la question indonesienne, et ma delegation
estime que la situation existant en Grece est meme
plus dangereuse en ce qui concerne la paix mondiale, qu'elle est en outre urgente. Le representant
de la Grece a, en realite, fait appel a la protection
du Conseil, en tant que representant d'un petit
pays. J'estime que, avant que le Sous-Comite se
reunisse pour examiner les propositions deja faites,
ainsi que toute autre proposition qu'il pourrait
decider d'examiner, le representant de la Grece
devrait avoir la possibilite de se faire entendre, au
besoin ce soir.
Le PRESIDENT (traduit de l'anglais) : J e me proposais de donner la parole au representant de la
Grece au moment ou le representant des EtatsUnis a demande a presenter quelques observations
sur une motion d'ordre, Trois orateurs sont encore
inscrits : les representants de la Grece, de la Yougoslavie et de l'URSS.
M. GROMYKO (Union des Republiques socialistes sovietiques) (traduit du russe): N ous
avons pris la decision de nommer un Sous-Cornite
pour que celui-ci examine les prop0sitions qui lui
seront presentees sur la question grecque, c'est-adire sur le rapport de la Commission. A notre
ordre du jour ne figure qu'une seule question: le
rapport de la Commission. La lettre envoyee par
M. Tsaldaris ne constitue pas une question separee
figuranL a l'ordre du jour du Conseil; elle a ete
envoyee a l'occasion de l'examen de la question
grecque, de l'examen du rapport de la Commission, comme le representant de la Grece l'a declare
lui-meme a la cent-soixante-seizieme seance du
Conseil.
Si le Sous-Comite que nous avons cree commence immediatement ses travaux, toutes les discussions portant sur les propositions doivent cesser
au Conseil jusqu'au moment ou ce Sous-Comite
aura termine. Le Sous-Comite ne devrait pas
entrer' en fonctions au cas ou le representant de la
Grece ferait sa declaration id; en effet, cela signifierait que la discussion du rapport de la Commission continue au sein du Conseil de securite.
Il me semble que la propcsition du representant
des Etats-Unis ne fait qu'apporter de la confusion

1816

do not think we should create confusion, no matter clans notre methode de travail. J e crois qu'it faut
whether it is or is not in someone's interest to do eviter ici la confusion, meme si certains y trouso. The Security Council should follow the ordin- vaient leur interet. Le Conseil de securite doit
ary procedure. If we have decided that the Sub- observer certaines regles elementaires. Puisque
Committee will consider all proposals on the Greek nous aVOns decide que le Sous-Comite examine
question, then let us put the Sub-Committee in a toutes les propositions sur la question grecque, il
position to consider these proposals, and not start faut egalemet-lt que nous lui permettions d'accomdiscussing at the same time in the Security Coun- plir cette tache dans une atmosph~re .favorable, et
cil the Greek communciation which, like all com- que nous n'engagions pas simultanement au Conmunications emanating from the Greek Govern- seil des debats sur la declaration de la Grece, qui.
ment, has no justification. 'vVe shall examine the d'ailleurs, comme toutes les declarations du Gouversubstance of the Greek communication when we nement grec, manque de fondement. Nous examicome to it-when we consider the SUl;-Committee's nerons 1" fond de la declaration de la Grece au
proposal.
moment voulu, lorsque nous aurons cl. etudier la
proposition que fera le Sous-Comite.
I cannot agree that we should go on discussing
Je ne puis accepter que la discussion au sujet
the Greek communication in the Security Council de la lettre du Gouvernement grec se poursuive au
and refer all other proposals to the Sub-Com- Conseil de securite, alors que les autres proposimittee. There can be no justification for such tions seraient transmises au Sous-Comite. C-:,
serait la une contradiction injusti fiable.
dualism.
The PRESIDENT: I consider that our agenda
contains the Greek Ouestion, and the Greek Ouestion is sub-divided ';;to two items. It is tru; that
we have referred the matter of formulating a draft
resolution to a sub-committee, but that does not
mean that general discussion or views concerning
the item on the agenda cannot be heard in the
Security Council until the Sub-Committee presents
its report.
I do not agree with the idea which was presented by the representative of the USSR, and
unless this ruling is successfully challenged, I
consider my ruling to be correct.

Le PRESIDENT (traduit de l'anglais) : La question grecque figure a notre ordre du jour et cette
question se divise en deux points. Il est exact
que nous avons charge un sous-comite de rediger
un projet de resolution, mais it ne faut pas entendre par la que la discussion generale et l'echange
de vues sur la question a l'ordre du jour ne peuvent
se poursuivre au sein du Conseil tant que le SousComite n'aura pas presente son rapport.
Je n'accepte pas l'avis exprime par le representant de l'URSS et, a moins qu'on n'invoque des
arguments valables contre ma decision, je la considere comme appropriee.

Mr. GROMYKO (Union of Soviet Socialist Republics) (translated fram Russian): I consider
the President's ruling to be wrong and mistaken.
I maintain my position on this question.

M. GROMYKO (Union des Republiques socialistes sovietiques) (tmd Hit du ntsse): .le
considere la decision du President comme irreguliere et erronee. J e maintiens ma position sur cette ,="
question.
Si le representant de la Grece prend la parole,
les autres representants ici presents peuvent le
faire egalement, mais alors, au lieu d'tlne seance
du Sous-Comite, fixons pour demain une seance
du. Conseil de secur.jte. Nous n'avons pas le droit
d'interrompre les debats apres avoir entendu le
representant de la Grece.
Si le Conseil decide de continuer la discussion
generale sur la question grecque, alors continuonsla.

If the Greek representative is to speak, then
other representatives present at this table have the
same right to do so, but for this purpose, instead
of holding a meeting of the Suu-Committee, let us
fix a meeting of the Security Council for tomorrow, since we have no right to stop after the Greek
representative's statement.
I f the Council decides to continue the general
debate on the Greek Question, let us continue.

The PRESIDENT: From what the representative
of the USSR said, I did not understand, whether
he challenges my ruling and wishes to put his
challenge to a vote.

Le PRESIDENT (traduit de l' art/glais) : La declaration du representant de l'URSS ne m'indique pas
s'il conteste ma decision et s'il desire que sa proposition wit mise <li,lX voix.

Mr. GROMYKO (Union of Soviet Socialist Republics) (translated fr01/'l Russia.n): I am not asking for a vote. I said that I maintain my position
and consider that the President's ruling is wrong,
mistaken and disorganizes our work. I regret to
have to say so, but I consider there can be no
question about it.

M. GROMYKO (Union c1~s Republiques socialistes sovietiques) (traduit du, ntsse): J e I~e
demande pas la mise aux voix. J'ai dit que Je
l11aintiens l11a position et que je considere que la
cIecision du President est irreguliere et erronee. et
qu'elle jette la confusion dans nos travaux. Je
regTette de devoir le dire. mais j'estime que ("est lit un fait inc1iscutable.

The PRESIDENT: I am also sorry to hear it. I
now give the floor to the representative of Greece,
after that to the representative or Yugoslavia, and
after that to the representative of Bulgaria.

Le PRI;;SIDENT (traduit de l'atlglais) : .le regrette
egalcment c1'entendrc de ielles paroles.
.le donne l11aintenant la parole all representat;t
de la Grece; nous entendrons ensuite les representants de la Yougoslavie et de la Bulgarie.

Mr. DBNDRAMIS (Greece) (translated from
French): I thank the President, for giving me the
opportunity to speak. The proposals so far submitted have been discussed in plenary Council

M. DENDRAMIS (Grece): .le remercie le
President de m'avoir donne la parole. Les propositions soumises jusqu'ici ont ete discutees par le
Conseil siegeant en seance pleniere, et non pas

1817
session and not in a small committee. I would,
therdore, like to explain in this plenary meeting
of the Security Council why this letter was sent.
When the Commission of Investigation was
studying its recommendations to the Council,
Greece requested it to base on Chapter VII of the
Charter the measures it intended to suggest for
puting an end to the threat to the peace, the existence of which was unanimously admitted. Nevertheless, the Commission decided that, under its
terms of reference, it ought to base its mild and
conciliatory recommendations on Chapter VI.
However, the Commission recognized that, if the
acts of aggression which had already taken place
were repeated, the Counc.il should regard them as
threats to the peace, or even as acts entailing the
application of the coercive measures provided for
in Chapter VII.
Before the Council had started on the examination of the report of its Commission of Investigation the Greek Government instructed me to submit
to the Council a declaration setting forth its position with regard to this question. This was the
subject of my communication of 26 June 1947
(document Sj389). I said then: "The apologists
for expansionist dictatorships describe what is
occurring in Greece as 'civil war'. When bands are
armed and trained in one country and returned
to another to overthrow the legally constituted
Government, it is not a 'civil war'. It is a clear and
•
continuing breach of the peace.
"The Commission has made certain recommendations. In the light of the circumstances existing
when they were made and so far as they go, they
are good. Greece favours their adoption by the
Security Council and gives her pledge to carry out
her part in them in good faith. But even though
the recommendations are carried out in like good
faith on the part of Yugoslavia, Albania and Bulgaria, it must be recognized that the chain of
events which these countries have already set in
motion constitutes a continuing breach of the peace
which must be dealt with. It is imFrative, in the
opinion of Greece, that the Council, while adopting the recommendations of the Commission, prepare the way for decisive action in case these
recommendations by themselves prove to be inadequate."
My statement concluded as foI1vws: "The state
of affairs described by Greece in her original complaint as one 'likely to endanger the peace', under
the circumstances now prevailing is a definite and
existing threat to the peace, breach of the peace
or act of aggression. If it becomes the view of the
Council that to make the necessary detennination
there has to be a charge by one of the countries
concerned that such a threat, breach of the peace
or act of aggression exists, it is requested that this
statement be accepted as such a charge."
When the Council started to discuss the report
of its Commission of Investigation, the representative of the United States proposed a draft resolution. Its effect was to adopt the Commission's
recommendations, and it was animated by the conc!liatory spirit of Chapter VI. After long discusSIon, this resolution which embodied the Committee's recommendations, was finaUy drafted and then
put to the vote at the hundred and seventieth
meeting.

par un c0111ite restreint. J e voudrais egalement
expliquer au Conseil de securite reuni en seance
pleniere les raisons qui ont motive I'envoi de cette
lettre.
Au moment ou la Commission d'enquete etudiait les recommandations qu'elle soumettrait au
Conseil, la Grecl#" lui demancIa de fonder sur le
Chapitre VII de Ta Charte les mesures qu'e1!~ proposerait en vue de mettre un terme it la menace
contre la paix, dont I'existence etait unanimement
admise. La Commission decida neanmoins que,
aux termes de son mandat. eIle devait fonder ses
recommandations, moden~es et conciliantes, sur le
Chapitre 'TI. La Commission reconnut toutefoi's, que, si les actes d'agression qui avaient
deja eu lieu se renouvelaient, le Conseil devrait
les traiter comme des menaces contre la paix.
voir comme des actes appelant I'application des
mesures coercitives prevues au Chapitre VII.
Avant que le Conseil n'entreprit I'examen du
rapport de sa Commission d'enquete, le Gouvernement hellenique me donna l'ordre de soumettre au Conseil une declaration exposant sa
position'en ce qui concerne cette question. Cette
declaration a fC!it I'objet de ma communication du
26 juin 1947 (document S/389). J'y disais notamment: "Les apologistes de dictatures imperialistes
qualifient de guerre civile les evenements qui se
deroulent en Grece. Lorsque des groupes d'hommes
sont armes et instruits dans un pays et renvoyes
clans un autre pour renverser le Gouvernement
legitime etabli, ce n'est pas une guerre civile. Cela
constitue un cas manifeste de rupture de la paix.
"La Commission a formule certaines recommandations. Si l'on considere quelIes etaient les
circonstances au moment de leur redaction, tclIes
qu'elles sont, ces recommandations sont' bonnes.
Le Gouvernement grec est partisan de leur adoption
par le Conseil et s'engage it executer en toute bonne
foi la part qui lui revient. Toutefois, meme si ces
recommandations sont executees de bonne foi
par la Yougoslavie, l'Albanie et la Bulgarie, il
faut reconnaitre que la suite des evenements que
ces pays ont dechaines a constitue une rupture de
la paix qu'on ne saurait ignorer. Au jugement
de la Grece, il importe essentielIel11ent que le
Conseil de securite, tout en adoptant les recommandations de la Commission, prepare les voies
pour prendre des mesures decisives au cas ou ces
recommandations s'avereraient insuffisantes it
dIes seules.
Ma declaration se terminait comme suit: "Les
conditions decrites par la Grece, dans sa plainte
initiale, COl11me susceptibles de mettre la paix en
danger, constituent, dans les circonstances actuelIes,
une menace formelIe et actuelle contre la paix.
une rupture de la paix ou un acte d'agression. Si
le Conseil en vient it estimer qu'il faut, pour
imposer une decision, que l'une des parties en
cause aIIegue qu'il existe une menace de ce genre
ou une rupture de la paix ou un acte d'agression, je
demande que I'on considere la presente declaration
COl11l11e une accusation dans ce sens."
Au moment ou le Conseil entreprit l'examen du
rapport de sa Commission d'enquete, le representant des Etats-Unis a depose un projet de
resolution. Ce projet de resolut~on avait pour cffet
d'adopter les recommandations de la Commission
et s'inspirait de I'esprit de conciliation du Chapitre
VI. A la suite de longs debats, ce projet de resolution, qui incorporait les recommandations de la
Commission, fut mis au point et fit 1'0bjet d'un
vote, au cours de la cent-soixante-dixieme seance.

1818
· This resolution recommended the interested parCe projet de resolution se bomait a recomtIes ~o try to re-establish their normal, friendly mander aux parties interessees de. chercher a
,relatIons and to conclude agreements to this effect. retablir leurs relations amicales normales et a
It envisaged the establishment of a Commission conclure des accords a cet effei:; il prevoyait I'instiwhich would help the parties in their voluntary tution d'une commission qui aiderait les parties
efforts and inform the Security Council of the ex- dans leurs efforts volontaires et informerait le
tent to which its recommendations were being Conseil de securite de la mesure dans laquelle ses
'
followed.
recommandations etaient suivies.
One paragraph of the resolution .defined the
Un paragraphe de ce' projet de resolution de£isending of armed bands across the frontiers as a nissait les expeditions de bandes armees a travers
threat to the peace. This paragraph secured a les frontieres comme une menace contre la paix.
majority of nine votes. Only Poland voted against. Ce paragraphe reunit une majorite de neuf voix.
The Union of Soviet Socialist Republics abstained. Seule la Pologne vota contre. L'URSS s'abstint.
The draft resolution was then put to the vote
Le projet de resolution dans son ensemble fut
in its entirety. The President announced that' it alors mis aux voix. Le President le decIara rejete,
had 'not been carried because one of the members par le fait qu'un des membres du Conseil qui, aux
of the Council who, under Article 27 01 the Char- termes de l'Article 27 de la Charte, aurait dt1 se
ter, should have realized it was his duty to abstain, rendre compte de son devoir d'abstention, leva la
raised his hand in veto.
main pour signifier son veto.
In his speech closing the debate on foreign afDans son discours de cloture, au cours du debat
fairs which took place in the House of Commons sur les affaires etrangeres qui se deroula a la
on 19 June, Mr. Bevin said that it was notorious Chambre des Communes le 19 juin, M. Bevin
that the undeclared war in Greece could be stopped disait qu'il etait de notoriete publique que la guerre
at any moment by simply raising a finger. The non declaree livree a la Grece pouvait etre arretee
USSR veto is the best proof that that country is a tout moment par un simple signe du doigt. Le
not prepared to make this gesture. The represen- veto de l'URSS a foumi la meilleure preuve que
tative' of the USSR preferred to raise his hand in ce pays n'est pas dispose a faire ce signe. Le
veto. This single veto frustrated the nine affirma- representant de l'URSS a prHere lever la main
tive votes. Thus, one great ·Power has contrived pour opposer son veto. Il a, par ce seul geste, mis
to overrule a decision voted, incidentally, by an en echec les neuf autres qui voterent "pour".
overwhelming majority.
• Ainsi done, une grande Puissance est parver.ue a
elle seule' a avoir raison d'un vote marque. d'autre
part, du sceau d'une majorite ecrasante.
Why does the Unio!! . . { Soviet Socialist RepubQueUe est la raison pour laquelle l'URSS s'oplics object to the Council's ~<>ing reliably informed pose a ce que le Conseil soit informe d'une maniere
by its own subsidiary organ \..' what is going on veridique, par son propre organe subsidiaire, de
and what will go on in the futLlre between Al- ce qui a lieu et de ce qui aura lieu a l'avenir entre
bania, Bulgaria and Yugoslavia on the one han1, l'Albanie, la Bulgarie et la Yougoslavie d'une part,
and Greece on the other? Why do the USSR ".ad et la Grece, de l'autre? QueUe est la raison pour
Albania, Bulgaria and Yugoslavia object to the laqueUe l'URSS et l'Albanle, la Bulgarie et la
Cou'ncil's knowing the truth about what is being Yougos1avie s'opposent a. ce que le Conseil sache
set afoot in these three last-mentioned countries? la verite sur ce qui se passe dans ces trois derniers
pays?
Comment se fait-il que ceux-ciappuientdepieuses
How is it that these countries support pious
recommendations but object to the means sug- recommandations, mais s'opposent aux moyens
gested for ens!1ring that they are respected? Every proposes pour en assurer le respect? Chacun des
member of the Council knows the answer and membres du Conseil connait la reponse, et cette
this answer does not augur well for peace.
reponse n'est pas de bon augure pour la paix.
The aim of the three northern neighbours of
L'objectif des trois voisins septentrionaux de
Greece, aided by the USSR and followed by Po- la Grece, secondes par I'URSS et suivis par la
land, is to continue violating the principles of the Pologne est de continuer a violer les principes
Charter whilst seeking to avoid being embarrassed de la Charte, mais de chercher a eviter I'embarras
by the existence of an impartial commission which ou les placerait l'existence d'une commissi?n ob~
would submit reports confirming the Greek com- jective, qui soumettrait des rapports conf!rrnant
plaints. For it would unquestionably be embar- 1es denonciations grecques. Car on ne peut mer que
rassing-the USSR member of the Subsidiary ce soit embarrassant-1e representant de l'URSS
Group at present in Greece was unable to dis- au Groupe subsidiaire actueUement en Grece ne
semble the fact-to have to deny, in the face of parvint pas a le cacher-d'avoir a nier qu'i1 y ait
tanks, half-burned-out guns and actual traces of eu une invasion du cote de l'Albanie alors qu'on
battle on the roads leading to Albanian territory, se trouve en presence de chars, de canons a moitie
that there has been an invasion from Albania. On carbonises, et des tra,ces memes de la bataille sur
th~t occasion, the USSR representative followed les routes menant en territoroire a1banais. A cette
the instructions he had received and persisted in occasion, le representant de l'URSS se conform~
declaring that there had been no fighting. It was, aux instructions re<;ues et persista a declarer qu'II
n'y avait pas eu de 1utte: ce fut quand meme la
nevertheless, a thankless task.
une tache ingrate.
The aim of the three northern neighbours of
L'objectif des trois voisins septentrionaux de la
Greece is' to achieve the semblance of a solution Grece est d'arriver a l'apparence d'une solution et
and lull the world into a false sense of security de bercer le monde dans un semb1ant de securite
until it will be too late-until the Press announces jusqu'au moment ou il sera trop tard-jusqu'au
that aU is over and that one more country has been moment ou la presse aura annonce que tout est
reduced to vassalage.
fini et qu'un pays de plus a ete reduit a I'etat de
vassal.

1819
Their aim is to give the impression that the I Leur objectif est de creel' l'impression que le
Council has done its duty and that all the effec- Conseil s'est acquitte de ses devoirs et que. toutes
tive steps taken by friendly nations to help an les mesures efficaces adoptees par des nations
independent Greece are designed to by-pass the amies pour venir en aide a l'independance grecque
United Nations. Their object is to muzzle, to ont pour effet de mettre a l'ecart l'Organisation
paralyze action which would safeguard peace.
des Nations Unies. Leur objectif est de baillonner
et de paralyser. la defense de la paix.
Their aim is to take advantage of the good faith
Leur objectif est de tirer avantage de la bonne
of the majority of the Members of the United foi de la majorite des Membres de 1'0rganisation
Nations and to create the impression that the ef- des Nations Unies et de faire croire que l·~S efforts
forts of these nations to maintain the integrity of de ces derniers en vue de maintenir l'integrite des
the States Members and of the United Nations Etats Membres et de l'Organisation des Nations
are really evidence of imperialistic aggression Unies constituent, en fait, des preuves d'une
directed against the peace-loving beneficiaries of agression imperialiste dirigee contre les benefitrue democracy as represented by a majority ciaires pacifiques de la veritable democratie instituee par la dictature de la minorite.
dictatorship. .
An now, what is the aim of Greece? Briefly,
Et maintenant, quel est l'objectif de la Grece?
Greece wants the Council to have uninterrupted En un mot, la Grece desire que le Conseil ait acces,
and unhindered access to the truth. Greece wants de maniere ininterrompue et sans entraves, a la
the Council to realize before it is too late which verite; la Grece desire que le Conseil se rende
side sincerely desires to re-establish good-neigh- compte, avant qu'il ne soit trop tard, de quel cote
bourly and normal diplomatic relations. Greece existe le desir sincere de retablir des relations de
wants to.see the continual attacks of armed bands bon voisinage et des relations diplomatiques
from over the frontier stopped so that destruction normales; la Grece desire qu'il soit mis fin aux
may give way to reconstruction. Finally, Greece attaques continuelles de 'bandes armees franchissant
wants the Council to prepare the way for decisive ses frontieres, afin que la reconstruction sucd:de
action in case these attacks should not cease.
a la destruction; la Grece desire enfin que le
Conseil prepare la voie a une action decisive au
cas ou ces attaques ne viendraient pas a cesser.
La question suivantepourrait etre posee: pourThe following question might be put: Why,
in face of the threat of the USSR veto and the ,quoi la Grece espere-t-elle qu'une action soit
defiance hurled by the USSR satellites against the possible aux termes du Chapitre VII, devant la
efforts of conciliation undertaken within the frame- menace du veto de l'URSS et le de£i jete par les
work of Chapter VI, does Greece hope that ac- satellites de l'URSS aux efforts de conciliation
tion under Chapter VII may be possible? The an- entrepris dans le cadre du Chapitre VI? La
swer is easy. This veto and this defiance have reponse est facile. On a voulu justifier ce veto
been defended by the allegation that the estab- et ce de£i par l'allegation que la constitution d'une
lishment of .a Commission of Investigation was not commission d'enquete n'etait pas autorisee par le
authorized by Chapter VI. Fallacious though it is, Chapitre VI. Le fait qa'il s'agit cl'un argument
this argument has, nevertheless, been used. Now fallacieux n'en a pas empeche l'emploi. Or, il a ete
it has been agreed that recourse should be had to admis qu'on devrait avail' recours au Chapitre VII
Chapter VII if the measures provided for under si les mesures envisage.es clans le cadre du ChapiChapter VI proved insufficient to deal with a tre VI s'averaient insuffisantes pour faire face
threat to the peace, and it has been demonstrated une menace contre la paix, et il a ete demontre par
even by those- who are in favour of Chapter VI ceux-la memes qui sont en faveur du Chapitre VI
that the provisions of this Chapter were not suffi- que les dispositions de ce Chapitre n'etaient pas
cient to provide a solution. It has also been agreed suffisantes pour permettre d'aboutir a une soluthat power to set up a commission is provided tion. De plus, il a ete admis que le pouvoir d'etablir
under Chapter VII of the Charter. There is, there- une,commission s'inscrit clans le cadre du Chapitre
fore, no excuse fbr exercising the veto or for pre- VII de la Charte. Aussi n'y a-t-il pas d'excuse
venting the establishment of a commission set up pour opposer un veto ou pour empecher la constitution d'une commission instituee aux termes du
according to the terms of Chapter VII.
Chapitre VII.
.
,
A State which has been unjustly attacked has
L'Etat injustement attaque a le droit de requerir
the right to apply for the adoption of the measures l'adoption des mesures prevues par la Charte
provided for in the Charter and to ask for these contre les Etats agresseurs et d'en demander la
measures to be applied to aggressors.
mise en application.
The debates in the Security Council will not
Les debats du Conseil de securite n'auront pas
have been altogether in vain, since they will have ete entierement vains puisqu'ils auront servi a
served to demonstrate, beyond all dispute, what demontrer, sans contestation possibl~, quels sont
are the facts and who are the aggressors.
les faits et qui sont les agresseurs.
The truth cannot be suppressed by a veto. And
La verite ne peut etre etouffee par un veto. i
the truth is that acts of aggression have been com- Et la verite est que des actes d'agression ont ete
mitted by the three satellites of the USSR; the commis par les trois satellites de l'URSS; la
truth is that there exists more than one tnreat to verite est qu'il existe plus qu'une menace contre
the peace in the Balkans; the truth is that there la paix ,dans les Balkans; la verite est qu'il s'y est
has been a breach of the peace tilere which threat- produit une rupture de la paix comportant une
ens the peace of the world.
menace pour la paix en general.
It cannot be denied that peace in the south-east
Il est impossible de nier le fait que la paix dans
of Europe has not only been threatened but has le sud-est de l'Europe n'est pas seulement menacee,
already been broken. This was true on 26 June mais qu'il y a deja !l"Upture de la paix. Ceci etait
1947 when my Government brought before the vrai de 26 juin 1947, quand mon Gouvernement
Council a charge to this effect. It was true on porta devant le COllsei!. une accusation dans ce

a

1820

sens. Ceci etait vrai le 31 juillet, quand le Ministre
de Affaires etrangeres de Grece soumit au Conseil
la communication qui se trouve devant vous. C'est
encore vrai aujourd'hui.
Depuis 1'epoque ou la Commission adopta son
Since the Commission adopted its report, bands
have been armed and sent across the northern rapport, 'des bandes ont ete armees en dehors de
frontiers of Greece, and these acts have been de- la Grece et elles ont ensuite franchi ses frontieres
fined by the majority of the Commission, by nine septentrionales; la majorite des membres de la
of the eleven members of the Council, as constitut- Commission et neuf des onze membres du Conseil
ing a threat to the peace according to Article 39 ont estime que ces actes constituaient une menace
of the Charter.
contre la -paix, conformement a. l'Article 39 de
la Charte.
Depuis 1'epoque ou la Commission adopta son
Since the Commission adopted its report, Albania, Bulgaria and Yugoslavia, by :l:-efusing to rapport, l' Albanie~ la Bulgarie et la Yougoslavie
permit the Subsidiary Group to make an investi- n'ont cesse de manquer a. 1'obligation qu'elles
gation on their territories, have continually vio- avaient solennellement assumee de respecter l'aulated the undertaking they solemnly gave to respect torite du Conseil, en refusant de permettre au
Groupe subsidiaire d'eHectuer une enquete sur
the authority of the Council.
leurs territoires.
Since the Commission adopted its report, one
Depuis 1'epcque Otl la Commission adopta son
permanent member of the Council, by vetoing the rapport, un membre permanent du Conseil n'a pas
mild and conciliatory resolution which was de- hesite a. couvrir de son autorite ces menaces contre
signed to give effect to the Commission's recom- la paix et ces manquements aux obligations assumendations, has not hesitated to give the cover of mees aux termes de la Charte, en faisant usage de
his authority to these threats to the peace and these son veto contre la resolution moderee et conciliante
violations of the obligations assumed under the destinee a. donller effet aux recommandations de
Charter. Six months of work, six months of hard la Commission. Six mois de travail, d'un labeur
and absolutely impartial efforts by a Commission dur et parfaitement objectif, effectue par un Comof the Council, have been nullified by a simple mission du Conseil, ont ete reduits a. neant par un
gesture of the hand.
simple geste de la main.
As the Greek Minister for Foreign Affairs said'
Comme le disait le Ministre des Affaires etrangein his communication to the Council of 31 July res de Grece dans sa communication au Conseil
1947: "The fact that the mild and conciliatory du 31 juillet 1947: "Les mesures moderees et
measures which the Council sought first to apply conciliantes que le Conseil de securite a cherche
were defeated by a vote of two members against d'abord a appliquer, ont ete tenues en echec par le
the nine that voted in their favour, cannot fail to vote de deux membres du Conseil, contre les neuf
encourage the bellicose elements in south-eastern qui les ont votees. Ce fait ne peut manquer d'enEurope to intensi fy their campaign of destruction. courageI' les elements belliqueux de I'Europe. du
To stop the intensification and spread of this un- sud-est a. intensifier lenr campagne de destructIon.
declared war the members of the Security Coun- Pour mettre fin a l'intensification et a. la geneil will appreciate the necessity of demonstrating ralisation de cette guerre larvee, les membres du
promptly and energetically the determination of Conseil ne manqueront pas de reconnaitre la neth.e overwh~lming majority of the Members of the cessite de demontrer \'ite et avec energie que la
United Nations to uphold the principles of the majorite ecrasante des Membres de 1'Organisation
des Nations Unies est determinee a. faire observer
Charter."
les principes de la Charte."
It is unfortunately more than evident that there
11 est malheureusement plus qu'evident que, en
exists at this moment in the south-east of Europe ce moment, il existe dans le sud-est de l'Europe
a threat to the peace, a breach of. the peace, of' an une menace contre la paix, une qlpture de la paix
act of aggression-however you like to describe ou un acte d'agression-quel que soit le nom que
this state of affairs. Nine members of the Council I'on veuille donner a cet etat de choses. Neuf
have already by their votes signified their recog- membres du Conseil ont deja. accepte, par voie de
nition of the fact that the sending of armed bands vote, de reconnaitre que les expeditions des bandes
across the frontier constitutes a threat to the peace armees a travel'S la frontiere constitue une menace
in the sense of Article 39 of the Charter. As long contre la pai:~ au sens de l'Article 39 de la Charte.
ago as at the fifty-ninth meeting of the Council,l Deja, a la cinquante-neuvieme seance du ConseiP,
another member, not included in the majority un autre membre. qui ne faisait pas partie de la
above-mentioned, maintained that ... "This situa- majorite susmentionnee, soutint que:' ".... cette
tion is fraught with serious consequences and con- situaiton est grosse de consequences graves; elle
stitutes a manifest threat to the maintenance of menace d'une fa<;on evidente le maintien de la
paix dans les Balkans".
peace in the Balkans".
C'est un fait trop evident, malheureusement.
It is, unfortunately, a fact too evident to require
discussion that the situation has not become less pour qu'il pt.:isse faire 1'objet d'une discussion.
grave since the representative of the USSR made que la situation n'est pas devenue moins grave
his statements. It matters little if, in the opinion of depuis que le representant de l'URSS a fait ses
the USSR and its satellites. the responsihility for declarations. Peu importe si, de I'avis de I'URSS
this threat to the peace should rest, as they say, et de ses satellites, la responsabilite de cette menace
with Greece on the grounds that it prefers to fol- contre la paix doit, a cc qu'ils pretendent, incomber
low a different way of life from the pattern of a la Grece parce qu'elle prHere se conformer.a
democracy which they claim to enjoy. The fact un mode de vie different du modele de democratte
remains that, whatever the reason, they have ad- dont ils pretendent jouir. Le fait demeure que,
31 July when the Greek Minister for Foreign
Affairs submitted to the Council the communication
which you have before you. It is still true today.

1 See Official Records of the Security COll1/.cil, First
Year, Second Series, No. 7, page 180. .

1 Voir

les Proces-verbawl: officiels dll Conseil de se-

write, Premiere Annee, Deuxieme Serie, No 7, page 180.

mitted the existence of a threat to the peace in the
Balkans.
. Greece respectfully asks that the Council take
immediate cognizance of this simple. question of
fact. Does there exist in the sc;mtheast of Europe a
threat to the peace, a breach of the peace or an act
of aggression within the meaning of Article 39 of
the Charter? That there does is a faet recognized
by all, and no prolonged debate should be necessarv. Each member of the Council mav have his
ow~ opinion as to who is responsible for this situation; but, as regards the fact itself, there can be
no excuse for disagreement.
:\s soon as the fact is established, Greece will ask
the Council to study the measures which it ought
to adopt to comply with the paramount aim of the
United Nations. According to Article 1, paragraph
1 of the Charter this aim is the following: "To
maintain international peace and security, and to
that end: to take effective collective measures for
the prevention and removal of threats to the peace,
and for the suppression of acts of aggression or
other breaches of the peace...."
If the Council as I am sure it does, realizes how
seriously the destiny of the United Nations will
be affected by the decision which it is called upon
to take in the face of this serious threat to the
peace, it is bound to take as quickly as possible
practical and effective action against the Balkan
aggressors in order that such action may serve as
an example. If it does not, the whole United Nations edifice, sapped in its very foundations, will
collapse; it will lose all its prestige before that
world conscience which the Organization represents, and on which it relies for the maintenance of
peace and the protection of small defenceless
countries which are the victims of aggression.

1\1y country has done a great deal for the defence of freedom. No one can expect Greece to
play ·the part of a giant after all the blood that
has been shed and all the destruction which has
been suffered. The interests at stake are not specifically Greek; they are the interests of the world
at large.
If the present t'"end of events continues, if for
some time to come foreign armed bands continue
without hindrance being directed, reinforced and
protected by Albania, Bulgaria and Yugoslavia,
the moment will come when there will no longer
be any frontier between Greece and her northern.
neighbours.
...
The PRESIDENT: I am sorry that the representative of Greece has used some words which he
should not have used in the Security Council. He
llsed the word "satellites." I do not consider that
any nation which is independent and has sovereign
equality would be a satellite of any other nation.
Therefore I hope that the Greek representative
will agree to this expression's being struck from
the record.
Further, I should explain that the Security
Council has not yet decided to deal with this matter under Chapter VII. We are dealing with it
under Chapter VI. I consider the statement made
in this connexion by the Greek representative as
simply a request from the Greek delegation for this
matter to he dealt with under Chapt0r VII of the
Charter. However, as the Security Council has

quelle qu'en soit la cause, ils ont reconnu qu'il
existe une menace contre la paix dans les Balkan>s.
La Grece demande respectueusement que le
Gonseil se saisisse tout de suite de cette simple
question de fait: existe-t-il dans le sud-est de
l'Europe une menace contre la paix, une rupture
de la paix ou une agression au sens de l' Article 39
de la Charte? C'est la un fait 't"econnu par tous,
et un debat prolonge ne serait pas necessaire.
Chacun des membres du Conseil peut avoir ses
propres vues sur le point de savoir a qui incombe la
responsabilite de cet etat de fait; mais, en ce qui
concerne le fait lui-meme, iln'y aurait pas d'excuse
pour une division des voix.
Aussitot que ce fait sera constate, la Grece demandera que le Conseil etudie les mesures qu'il
devrait adopter pour repondre au but primordial
de l'Organisation des Nations Unies. Aux termes
du paragraphe premier de l'Article premier du
Chapitre premier de la Charte, ce but est le suivant :
"Maintenir la paix et la securite internationales.
et a cette fin: prendre des mesures collectives
efficaces en vue de prevenir et d'ecarter les menaces a la paix et de reprimer tout acte d'agression
ou autre rupture de la paix ..."
Si le Conseil, comme j'en suis sur, se rend
compte de l'importance qu'aura, pour les destinees
de I'Organisation'des Nations Unies, la decision
qu'il est appele a prendre en face de cette menace
serieuse contre la paix, il lui incombe d'adopter
aussi rapidement que possible des mesures pratiques et efficaces contre les agresseurs balkaniques, afin que ces' mesures servent d'exemple.
Sinon, tout l'edifice de I'Organisation, sape dans
ses fondements memes, s'ecroulera; il s'ensuivra
une perte de prestige devant la conscience 1110ndiale
que I'Organisation represente et qui constitue son
appui pour le maintien de la paix et la protection
des petits pay,s sans de£ense victimes d'une
agression.
Mon pays a eu sa large part dans la defense de
la liberte. Personne n'a le droit d'attendre de la
Grece qu'elle assume le role d'un geant apres
tout le sang qui a ete verse et tautes les devastations subies. Les interets en jeu ne sont pas specifiquement grecs; ce sont de,S inten~ts universels.
Si les choses continuent du train dont elles vont,
si les bandes etrangeres armees continuent, pendant
quelque temps encore, et sans qu'il y soit fait
obstacle, a et'e dirigees, renforcees et protegees
par l'Albanie, la Bulgarie et la Yougoslavie, le
moment viendra, Oll il n'y aura plus de frontiere
entre la Grece et ses voisins septentrionaux.
Le PRESIDENT (traduit de l'angla.is) : Je r,egrette
que le representant de la Grece ait employ:' des
termes qui ne sont pas de mise au Conseil de
securite. Il a parle de "satellites"; j'estime que
toutc nation independante jouissant de l'egalite
sottveraine n'est satellite d'aucune autre nation.
J'espere donc que le 'representant de la Grece
acceptera que cette expression ne figure pas au
compte rendu.
Je voudrais ajouter egalement que le Conseil de
securite n'a pas encore decide d'examiner cette
question au titre du Chapitre VII. Nous appliquons
en ce moment les dispositions du Chapitre VI.
Je considere la declaration du representant de la
Grece comme une simple demande, de la part de
la delegation de la Grece, pour que le Conseil de
securite examine cette affaire d'apres les dispo-

1822
not decided anything under that heading, the question will be discussed later.

sitions du Chapitre VII. Toutefois a de£aut de
decision du Conseil, nous remettrons a plus tard la
discussion de cette question.

M. VILFAN (Yougoslavie): Lorsque j'ai deMr. VILFAN (Yugoslavia) (translated from
French): When I asked permission to speak I had mande la parole, je'n'avais sous les yeux que la
before me only the letter of Mr. Tsaldarjs dated lettre de M. Tsaldaris en date du 31 juillet et le
31 July and para,graph 1 of the resolution pre- paragraphe premier du projet de resolution presente par la delegation de l'Australie.
sented by the Australian delegation.
J e voudrais faire remarquer, a. ce sujet....
On this subject I should like to remark:
The PREStDENT: I cannot allow the r~presenta­
tive of Yugoslavia to discuss the draft resolutions
presented by the Australian and Colombian representatives, since I have already ruled that they
are not to be discussed here.

Le PRESIDENT (traduit de r anglais) : Je ne puis
permettre au representant de la Y ougoslavie de
commenter le projet de resolution soumis par les
representants de l'Australie et de la Colombie,
puisque j'ai deja. decide qu'ils ne pouvaient faire
l'objet d'une discussion au Conseil.

Mr. VILFAN (Yugoslavia) (translated from
French): I shall abide by the wishes of the President.
I only wanted to explain in advance that I cannot consider my remarks as definrrive. Now that
I have heard the representative of Greece, I think
my reply will have to be much longer than I had
anticipated. In these circumstances I shall confine
myself this evening to a single question: Is the
Greek proposa:l that a change be made in the definition of the Balkan situation justified or not?

M. VILIFAN (Yougoslavie) : Je me conformerai'
au desir du President.

1. Since 29 July not a single incident has taken
place.

J e voulais seulement expliquer d'avance que je
ne pourrais pas considerer mes remarques comme
de£initives. Apres avoir eu 1'0ccasion d'entendre
le ,representant de la Grece, je crois que ma reponse
devra etre beaucoup plus longue que je ne l'avais,
prevu. Dans ces conditions, je me limiterai,pour ce
soil', a. une seule question: la proposition de la
Grece tendant a. ce que soit modifiee la definition
de la situation balkanique est-elle fondee ou non?
J e crois que, en analysant la proposition de la
Grece, on doit surtout tenir compte du fait que,
il y a quelques jours seulement, le Conseil de
securite etait unanimement d'avis que le differend
qui fait l'objet de notre discussion n'etait qu'un
differend dont la prolot:lgation etait susceptible de
menacer la paix et la securite internationales. En
d'autres termes: il y a quelques jours seulement,
le Conseil de securite tout entier envisageait la
situation dans les Balkans aux termes du Chapitre
VI.
.
En effet, le 29 juilletl, la majorite du Conseil
s'est pronocee en faveur de la resolution amendee
des Etats-Unis; or, dans son preambule, c~lle-ci
contenait le passage suivant: "Le Conseil de
securite . . . constate qu'il se trouve en presence
d'un differend dont la prolongation est susceptible
de menacer le maintien de la paix et de la securite
internationales".
La minorite, a fortiori, n'allait pas au dela. de
la definition donnee par la majorite. Cela veut dire
que, le 29 juillet, pas un seul des membres du
Conseil de securite n'etait d'avis que nous fussions
en presence d'une menace contre la paix, ou d'une
rupture de la paix, ou d'un acte d'ag-ression.
Aujourdhui, le representant de la Grece affirme
qu'il existe 'une menace contre la paix, une rupture
de la paix, un acte d'agression.
Apres ce que je viens d edire, il est clair que,
s'il veut fonder sa these, le representant de la
Grece doit prouver que la situation a completement change deI'uis le jour ou la resolution des
Etats-Unis fut mis aux voix. Sinon, comment
pourrait-il esperer modifier l'opinion des membres
du Conseil de securite, si clairement manifestee
le 29 juillet?
Nous sommes convaincus qu'il est, absolument
impossible de demontrer qu'un tel changement
s'est produit clans la situation balkanique. En
effet:
1. Depuis le 29 juillet, pas un seul incident ne
s'est produit.

1 See Official Records of the Security Council, Second
Year, No. 66, 170th meeting, page 1602.

Cl/rite, Deuxieme Annee, No 66, 17Deme seance, page 1602.

I think that in analyzing the Greek proposal one
ought above all to remember that only a few days
ago tht Security Council unanimously agreed that
the dispute which we are discussing was only a
dispute which, if continued, was likely to endanger
international peace and security. In other words,
only a few days ago the whole Security Council
envisaged the Balkan situation in terms of Chapter VI.
Actually on ,29 JUlyl a majority of the Councii
voted in favour of the amended United States
resolution, which in its preamble contained the
following passage: ((The Security Council . .. finds
that a dispute exists, the continuance of which is
likely to endanger the maintenance of international peace and security."

A fortiori) the minority did not go beyond the
definition given by the majority. That means that
on 29 July not a single member of the Security
Council was of opinion that we were then faced
by a threat to the peace, a breach of the peace or
an act of aggression. Today the representative of
Greece affirms the existence of a threat to the
peace, a breach of the peace, an act of aggression.

.

After what I have just said it is clear that, if
he wishes to uphold his thesis, the representative
of Greece must prove that the situation has completely changed since the time when the United
States resolution was put to the vote. Otherwise,
how can he hope to change the opinion of the
members of the Security Council, so clearly indicated on 29 July?
I am convinced that it is absolutely impossible
to prove that such a change has taken place in the
Balkan situation because of the following facts:

1 Voir

les Proces-verbaux officiels clu Conseil de se-

1823
. 2. The attitude of our Government towards the
Subsidiary Group has been well-known since the
discussions which took place in April and May in
the Security Council. As regards the Yugoslav
Government that attitude was confirmed in the letter addressed to the Secretary-General on 6 June
(document'S/372) and explained several times
in the course of the discussions which preceded
the vote on the United States resolution. The
Subsidiary Group submitted a letter dated 24 July,
in which the Yugoslav Government explained why
it. could not collaborate with this ·Subsidiary
Group.l In this connexion also nothing new has
happened.
3. The exercise of a right envisaged by the
Charter cannot be considered as modifying the
Ba:lkan situation, .
• For all these reasons I think that the Greek
thesis, according to which a change has taken place
in the situation, is unfounded; and if anyone still
doubted that the; definition of the situation, as
given by the majority, fell perhaps a little short of
the facts, that doubt must certainly have vanished
after the discussion of the Indonesian Question.
There is a difference, I think, between the situation in the Balkans and the situation in Indonesia.
- In the former area there are phantom brigades.
In the latter, on both sides, there are armies. In
the Balkarts there have been, so far as the neighbouring countries are concerned, incidents, real
or fictitious. In Indonesia there has been largescale military activity.
There can be no question that the Indonesian
situation differs entirely from the Balkan situation.
In any case, the members of the Council certainly
. remember very well that some of them wanted to
describe the Indonesian situation in a way which
would bring it under Chapter VI, although everyone agreed that what was going on there was a war.
And it will cerf:;,l.inIy be remembered that eventually, in spite of the efforts of the USSR delegation, great care was taken to avoid attaching any
definition to the Indonesian situation.
The following question therefore arises: Why
this haste, now,' to modify the juridical definition
of the situation in the Balkans? What are the mo!fves behind the Greek proposal?
We see in the Greek Government's move a desire to confuse the discussion, to embitter the
relations among the Balkan countries, to create a
war psychosis which makes all compromise impossible, to enforce the setting up of a semi-permanent commission. In current language such a
move is called an act of provocation. It is a new
step by the Greek Government in a familiar 'direction, a new attempt to disguise its own responsibility for the present situation in Greece and to juscify before world opinion the oppressive measures
which it has applied to the Greek people. And the
fact that the Greek move has not remained an
isolated gesture makes me think that the responsibility rests not only with the Greek Government
but also with other Governments, and that it is not
the Greek people alone who are involved.

1 See Official Ve-rbatim Records of the Security Council,
Second Year, Supplement No. 11, Annex 30.

.

2. L'attitude de nos Gouvernements envers le
Groupe subsidiaire est bien connue depuis les
discussions 'qui, aux mois d'avrit et de mai, ont eu
lieu devant le Conseit de securite. En ce qui concerne le Gouvernement yougoslave, cette attitude
a ete confirmee dans la lettre adressee le 6 juin au
Secretaire general (document S/372) et exposee
a plusieurs reprises au cours des discussions qui
ont precooe le vote sur la resolution des EtatsUnis. Le Groupe subsidiaire a communique, le 24
juillet, une lettre dans laquelIe le Gouvelrnement
yougoslave donnait les raisons pour lesquelles it
ne peut pas colIaborer avec ce Groupe subsidiaire1 .
A cet egard aus-si, rien de nouveau.
3. L'exercice d'un droit prevu par la Charte
ne saurait etre considere comme apportant un
changement dans la situation balkanique.
C'est pour toutes ces raisons que nous croyons
que la these de la Grece selon laqueUe un changement \Se serait produit dans la situation n'est pas
fondee. Et, si d'aucuns entretenaient encore le
cloute que la definition de la situation, telle qu'elle
a ete donnee par la majorite, etait peut-etre en
dessous de la, realite, ce doute se serait certainement evanoui apres la discussion de la question
indonesienne.
II ya une difference, je pense, entre la situation
dans les Balkans et la situation en Indonesie. lci, it
y a 'des brigades fantomes. La, de part et d'autre,
une armee. lei, il y a eu, pour autant que cela
concerne les voisins, des incidents, reels ou pretendus. La, il y a eu des operations militaires de
grand style.
II est incontestable que la situation en Indonesie
est de toute autre nature que la situation dans les
Balkans. Quoi qu'il en soit, les membres duo Cot"l!Seil
se <souvieunent certainement fort bien que certains
d'entre eux voulaient donner a la situation en Indonesie une definition s'inscrivant dans !e cadre du
Chapitre VI, bien que tout le monde fut d'accord
qu'it s'agissait la d'une guerre. Et on se rappellera
certainement que, en fin de compte, malgre les
efforts de la delegation de l'URSS, on a evite avec
soin de qualifier d'une maniere quelconque la
situation en Indonesie.
La question suivante se pose donc: pourquoi
cette hate, maintenant, de modifier la definition
juridique de la situation dans les Balkans? Quels
sont les motifs de la proposition de la Grece?
Nous voyons, dans l'initiative du Gouvernement
grec, un desir de troubler la discussion, d'exacerber
les relations entre les pays balkaniques, de creer
une psychose de guerre qui rende impossible tout
compromis, de forcer la creation cl'une commission
semi-permanente. Dans le langage courant, une
telle initiative s'appelle une provocation. C'est un
nouveau pas du Gouvernement grec dans la direction bien connue, une nouvelle tentative en vue
de masquer sa propre responsabilite a l'egard de
la situation actuelle en Grece et de justifier devant
l'opinion publique mondiale les mesures d'oppression appliquees par lui au peuple grec. Et le fait
que l'initiative de la Grece n'est pas restee isolee
nous suggere la pensee qu'il ne s'agit pas seulement de la :responsabilite du Gouvernement grec,
mais aussi de la responsabilite d'autres Gouvernements, et qu'il ne <s'agit pas uniquement du peuple
grec.
1 Voir

les PrfYces-verba1l:t: afficiels dlt Canseil de se-

mrite, Deuxic!De Annee, Supplement No 11, Annexe 30.

1824
The Greek move reminds me of certain statements made during the discussion of the United
States resolution. When I criticized the idea of a
semi-permanent commission1 (amongst other arguments I cited the Charter itself, pointing out that
. such a commission as that proposed by the United
States resolution was not in the spirit of the
Charter), I was told in effect : Very well, if you
are not ready to accept such a commission according to Chapter VI, you will have to accept it u.nder
Chapter VII 1
It appears that this threat is now in process of
being realized. This procedure reflects a strange
conception of the Charter and the whole United
Nations Organization. It would be natural, I
think, to ask oneself: "What provision is there in
the Charter for this particular situation?" Instead
of that we see that the opposite procedure is being
adopted and that the question which is .being asked
is: "\Vhere can we find in the Charter a suitable
Article to justify our policy?"---i.e. the policy of
the countries interested in the Balkan situation.
It is clear that such a procedure reduces the
United Nations to the level of an organ of policy
for certain States or groups of States. We maintain our conception of the United Nations as an
organization responsible for ensuring collaboration between the Member States. That is why I
believe that the Greek proposal should be rejected.
Mr. PARODI (France) (translated from
French): We have worked to a rather late hour.
I think that the speakers still on the list would
have no objection to postponing their statements
until tomorrow afternoon's session.
There is a meeting of the Sub-Committee fixed
for tomorrow morning, but there will be a Council meeting tomorrow afternoon. I think that if the
speakers still on the list would agree to postpone
making their speeches until tomorrow, they would
have the advantage of a larger audience and better attention from us. I therefore propose that the
meeting be adjourned until tomorrow.

L'initiative de la Grece nous rappelle certaines
declarations faites au cours de la discussion sur
la resolution des Etats-Unis. Quand nous critiquions l'idee d'une commission1 semi-permanente
(entre autres arguments, nous citions la Charte
elle-meme en disant qu'une commission, telle que
celle que prevoyait la resolution de Etats-Unis,
n'etait pas dans l' esprit de la Gharte), on nous
repondait: "Eh bien, si vous n'etes pas prets a
accepter une telle commission, aux termes du
Chapitre VI, vous serez obliges de l'accepter aux
termes du Chapit-re VII I"
Il semble qu'on procede maintenant a la realisation de cett... menace. Ce procede montre une conception etrange de la Charte et de l'Organisation
des Nations Unies tout entiere. Il serait nature1, je
crois, de se demander: "Que prevoit la Charte pour
cette situation determinee?" Au lieu de cela, nous
voyons qu'on procede inver<sement et qu'on demande: "OU trouver dans la Charte un' article
approprie pour justifier not-re politique ?"-e'esta-dire la politique des pays interesses a la situation
dans les Balkans.
Il est clair qu'un te1 procede abais>se l'Organisation des Nations Unies au niveau d'organe de la
politique de certains Etats ou d'un groupe d'Etats.
N ous tenons a notre conception de 1'Organisation
des Nations Unies en tant qu'organ~sation chargee
d'assurer la collaboration des Etats Membres. C'est
pourquoi nous sommes d'avis que la proposition
cle la Grece doit ~tre rejetee.

M. PARODI (France):' Nous avons pour,suivi
nos travaux jusqu'a une heure assez avancee ce qui
est tout a notre honneur. Je pen se que les orateurs
quirestent inscrits ne verraient pas d'inconvenients
a ce que les declarations qu'ils ont cl. fail::e soient
reportees a la seance de demain apres-midi.
Nous avons prevu une reunion du Sous-Comite
demain matin, mais nous avons une seance demain
apres-midi. J e pense que, si les orateurs qui restent
inscrits acceptaient que leur audition £ut repartee
a demain, ils auraient le benefice d'un public plus;
nombreux et cl'une attention plus .fraiche de natre '
part.'
J~ propose clonc que la sean..:e soitajournee a
demain.

The PRESIDENT: The agenda for our meeting
Le PRESIDENT (traduit de l'ang1ais): Deux
tomorrow afternoon will consist of the Indonesian questions sont inscrites a l'ordre clu jour de la
Ouestion and a continuation of the discussion on reunion de demain apres-lTIidi: la question indothe Greek Question. Those speakers on the Greek nesienne, et la suite de la discussion sur la question'
Question who have not as yet been heard, will I grecque. Les cleux orateurs qui ont clemande la'
parole sur la question grecque et que nous n'avons
have an opportunity to speak tomorrow.
pu entendre ce soiT prendTont la parole demain.
The Sub-Committee will meet tomorrow mornLe Sous-Comite se reunira demain matin a
ing at 10.30 a.m. in conference room 5. The Secur- 10 h. 30 dans la salle de conference NoS. Le
ity Council will meet tomorrow afternoon at 3 p.m. Conseil de securite se reunira demain a 15 heures.·
The meeting rose at 7.15 p.m.
La seance est levee a 19 h. 15.

---1 See Official Records of the Security Council, Second
Year, No. 59, 159th meeting.

1 Voir les Praces-verbau:J: officiels dlt Coltseil de sewrite, Deuxieme Annee, No 59, 15geme seance.

SALES AGENTS OF THE UNITED NATIONS PUBLICATIONS
DEPOSITAIRES DES PUBLICATIONS DES NATIONS UNIES
ARGENTINA-ARGENTINE
Editorial Sudamericana S.A.
Alsina 500
BUENOS AIRES

AUSTRAlIA-AUSTRALlE
H. A. Goddard Pty. Ltd.
255a George Street
SYDNEY, N. S. W.

BELGIUM· ·-BELGIQUE
Agence et Messageries d6 la
Presse, S. A.
14·22 rue du Persil
BRUXELLES

BOLlVIA-BOLlVIE
Libreria Cientifica y Literaria
Avenida 16 de Julio, 216
Casilla 972
LA PAZ

CANADA
The Ryerson Press
299 Queen Street West
TORONTO

CHILE-CHill
Edmundo Pizarro
Merced 846
SANTIAGO

CHINA-CHINE
The Commercial Press Ltd.
211 Honan Road
SHANGHAI

COLOMBIA-COlOMBIri:
Libreria Latina Ltda.
Apartado Aereo 4011
BOGOTA

COSTA RICA-COSTA·RICA
Trejos Hermanos
Apartado 1313
SAN JOSE

CUBA
La Casa Belga
Rene de Smedt
O'Reilly 455
LA HABANA

CZECHOSLOVAKIATCHECOSLOVAQUIE
F. Topic
Narodni Trida 9
PRAHA 1
DENMARK~DANEMARI<

Einar MUIiksgaard
N~rregade6
K~BENHAVN

DOMINICAN REPUBLICREPUBLlQUE DOMINICAINE
Libreria Dominicana
Calle Mercedes No. 49
Apartado 656
CWDAD TRUJILLO

ECUADOR-EQUATEUR
Muiioz Hermanos y Cia.
N ueve de Octubre 703
Casilla 10·24
GUAYAQUIL

EGYPT-EGYPTE
Librairie "La Renaissance d'Egypte"
9 Sh. Adly Paaha
CAIRO

ETHIOPIA-ETHIOPIE
Agence ethiopienne de puhlicite
P. O. Box 8
ADDIS•. "REBA

FINLAND-FINLANDE
Akateeminen Kirjakauppa
2, Keskuskatu
HELSINKI

FRANCE
Editions A. Pedone
13, rue SoufHot
PARIS, Ve

GREECE-GRECE
"Eleftheroudakis"
Librairie internationale
Place de la Constitution
ATHENES

GUATEMALA
Jose Goubaud
Goubaud & Cia. Ltda,
Sucesor
Sa Av. Sur No. 6 y 9a C. P.
GUATEMALA

HAI.I
Max Bouchereau
Lihrairie "A la Caravelle"
Boite postale 1l1·B
PORT·AU·PRINCE

ICELAND-ISLANDE
Bokaverzlun Sigfusar Eymundsonnar
Austurstreti 18
REYKJAVIK

INDIA-INDE
Oxford Book & Stationery Company
Scindia House
NEW DELHI

IRAN
Bongahe Piaderow
731 Shah Avenue
TEHERAN

IRAQ-IRAK

Mackenzie &~acken~e
The Bookshop
BAGHDAD

LEBANON-L1BAN
Lihrairie universelle
BEYROUTH

LUXEMBOURG
Lihrairie J. Schummer
Place Guillaume
LUXEMBOURG

NETHERLANDS-PAYS·BAS
N. V. Martinus Nijhoff
Lange Voorhout 9
'S·GRAVENHAGE

NEW ZEALANDNOUVELL,c-ZELANDE
Gordon & Gotch, Ltd.
Waring T,,"lor Street
WrLLINGTO.,
United Nations Association of
New Zealand
P. O. 1011, G.P.O.
WELLINGTON

NICARAGUA
Ramiro Ramirez V.
Agencia de Publicaciones
MANAGUA, D. N.

NORWAY-NORVEGE
Johan Grundt Tanum Forlag
Kr. Augustgt. 7A
OSLO

PERU-PEROU
Librerfa internacional del Peru,
S.A.
Casilla 1417
LIMA
.

PHILIPPINES
D. P. Perez Co.
132 Riverside
SAN JUAN, RIZAL

POLAND-POLOGNE
Spotdzielna Wydr.wnicza
"Czytelnik"
38 Poznanska
WARSZAWA

SWEDEN-SUEDE
A.·B. C. E. Fritzes Kungl.
Hofbokhandel
Fredsgatan 2
STOCKHOLM

SWITZERLAND-SUISSE
Librairie Payot S. A.
LAUSANNE, GENEVE, VEVEY,
MONTREUX, NEUCHATEL,
BERNE, BASEL
Hans Raunhardt
Kirchgasse 17
ZURICH I

SYRIA-SYRIE
Librairie
DAM.AS

~niver8elle

TURKEY-TURQUIE
Librairie Hachette
469 Istiklal Caddesi
BEYOGLU·lsTANBUL

UNION OF SOUTH AFRICAUNION SUD·AFRICAINE
Central News Agency
Commissioner & Rissik Sts,
JOHANNESBURG and at CAPE'l:!.lWN
and DURBAN

UNITED KINGDOMROYAUME·UNI
H. M. Stationery Office
P. O. Box 569
LONDON, S.E. 1
and at H.M.S.O. Shops in
LONDON, EDINBURGH, MANCHESTE
CARDIFF, BELFAST, BmMINGHA?rl
and BRISTOL

UNITED STATES OF AMERICAETATS·UNIS D'AMERIQUE
International Documents Service
Columbia University Press
2960 Broadway
NEW YORK 27, N. Y.

URUGUAY
Oficina de Representacion de
Editoriales
Av. 18 de Julio 1333 Esc. 1
MONTEVIDEO

VENEZUELA
Escritoria Perez Machado
Conde a Pinango 11
CARACAS

YUGOSLAVIA-YOUGOSLAVIE
Drzavno Preduzece

J ugoslovenska Knjiga
MoskC'vska Ul. 36
BEOGRAD
M<lrrh 1949-3
