S/PV.7714

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-first year

7714

th meeting
Tuesday, 14 June 2016, 11 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Lamek. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(France)

Members:

Angola. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Egypt. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Japan. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Malaysia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
New Zealand. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Senegal . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Spain. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ukraine. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Uruguay. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Gimolieca
Mr. Xu Zhongsheng
Mr. Mahmoud
Mr. Akahori
Mrs. Adnin
Mr. Taula
Mr. Iliichev
Mr. Seck
Mr. Gasso Matoses
Mr. Yelchenko
Mr. Wilson
Mr. Pressman
Mr. Rosselli
Mr. Suárez Moreno

Agenda
The situation in Guinea-Bissau

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

16-17191 (E)
*1617191*

S/PV.7714

The situation in Guinea-Bissau

The meeting was called to order at 11.05 a.m.

(PAIGC), as the party that holds the absolute majority
in the Parliament.

Adoption of the agenda

(spoke in English)

The agenda was adopted.
The situation in Guinea-Bissau
The President (spoke in French): In accordance
with rule 37 of the Council’s provisional rules of
procedure, I invite the representatives of Guinea-Bissau
and Timor-Leste to participate in this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the following
briefers to participate in this meeting: Mr. Modibo
Touré, Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral and Head of the United Nations Integrated
Peacebuilding Office in Guinea-Bissau; and Mr. Ovídio
Manuel Barbosa Pequeno, Special Representative and
Head of the African Union Liaison Office in GuineaBissau.
On behalf of the Council, I welcome Mr. Touré
and Mr. Pequeno, who are joining today’s meeting via
video-teleconference from Bissau.
The Security Council will now
consideration the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I give the floor to Mr. Touré.
Mr. Touré (spoke in French): It is my honour to
brief the Security Council for the first time since my
appointment on recent developments in Guinea-Bissau.
As Council members are aware, on 26 May, the
President of the Republic, His Excellency Mr. José Mário
Vaz, appointed Mr. Baciro Djá as Prime Minister by
presidential decree. Mr. Djá’s Cabinet was sworn in on
2 June. The new Cabinet consists of 19 Ministers and 12
Secretaries of State. However, two critical ministerial
positions — Interior and Foreign Affairs — remain
vacant.
The appointment of the new Prime Minister
triggered a political stand-off, whereby members
of the dismissed Cabinet led by Mr. Carlos Correia
refused to leave their offices, claiming that the recent
presidential decree on the appointmentwas not in line
with the Constitution and the Supreme Court’s decision
of 8 September 2015. Mr. Correia insisted that he and
his Ministers would hand over their responsibilities
only to a Government nominated by the Parti africain
pour l’indépendance de la Guinée et de Cabo Verde
2/7

14/06/2016

The prolonged impasse over the new Cabinet, the
fourth since the legislative elections of May 2014, came
close to a confrontation as security forces strengthened
their presence at the Government palace, following a
48-hour ultimatum issued by the Prosecutor General
on 3 June. Further events — notably the death on
4 June of Ms. Carmen Pereira, a historical figure of the
country’s liberation struggle who was also a veteran of
the PAIGC and a staunch supporter of the dismissed
Government — compounded the already tense situation
and raised additional tensions between the sworn-in
Government and the PAIGC over the organization of
her funeral.
In an attempt to defuse tensions, I met with President
Vaz, the dismissed Prime Minister Carlos Correia,
the President of the opposition Parti du renouveau
social, Mr. Alberto Nambeia, and the President of
the PAIGC, Domingos Simões Pereira, appealing for
restraint, political dialogue and respect for the rule of
law. I also mobilized the international community in
Bissau to explore options for a peaceful solution to the
stand-off at the Government palace and the handling of
Ms. Pereira’s funeral. On 8 June, the day of Ms. Pereira’s
funeral ceremony, I issued a condolence note that was
broadcast on the radio, calling on all stakeholders to
remain calm in this moment of national mourning. In
the end, the funeral was held peacefully.
Following intense overnight negotiations involving
representatives of civil society, religious leaders, the
Economic Community of West African States Mission
in Guinea-Bissau (ECOMIB) and the United Nations
Integrated Peacebuilding Office in Guinea-Bissau, on
9 June the remaining members of the dismissed Cabinet
and their supporters peacefully vacated the Government
Palace, ending a 14-day stalemate. Earlier on the same
day, following consultations among international
partners, the representatives of the African Union, the
Community of Portuguese-speaking Countries (CPLP),
the Economic Community of West African States
(ECOWAS), the European Union and my Office had
issued a joint communiqué expressing our support for a
peaceful solution to the impasse.
The peaceful resolution of the stand-off may have
helped avert a potentially serious crisis. However,
further challenges loom ahead. The PAIGC has
16-17191

14/06/2016

The situation in Guinea-Bissau

initiated legal proceedings challenging the President’s
recent appointments. Furthermore, the status of the
15 Members of Parliament expelled by the PAIGC in
January, as well as the ongoing impasse at the National
Assembly, add to the legal confusion and institutional
uncertainty facing the country. Following a decision
of the new Cabinet on 3 June to dismiss the director
of the national radio, the latter has filed a case with
the Supreme Court, challenging the constitutionality of
the presidential decree of 26 May, appointing Mr. Djá
as Prime Minister. As Council members may recall,
it was the same action by this appellant, after having
been dismissed from the same post, that triggered
the Supreme Court’s proceedings that voided the
appointment of Mr. Djá in September 2015.
Regardless of the judicial outcomes, a sustainable
solution to the ongoing political crisis can only be
found through genuine political dialogue. Yet, one of
the primary forums for such dialogue — the National
Assembly — suspended its current session on 18 May
as a result of disputes over the agenda and the status
of the 15 Members of Parliament. Earlier today, that
parliamentary session was closed; the next one is
expected to open later this month.
Against this backdrop, and since my arrival
in Bissau, I have engaged in an intensive round of
consultations with national and regional leaders, as well
as international partners. I have specifically sought to
shore up the commitment of ECOWAS to the presence
of ECOMIB. In the lead-up to, as well as on the margins
of the forty-ninth ordinary session of the Authority of
Heads of State and Government of ECOWAS, I met
with President Olusegun Obasanjo, Special Envoy of
the Nigerian President, in his capacity as Chairman
of the Regional Contact Group on Guinea-Bissau;
Mr. Marcel de Souza, Chairperson of the ECOWAS
Commission; President Alpha Condé of Guinea, in his
capacity as the ECOWAS Mediator for Guinea-Bissau;
and President Ibrahim Boubacar Keita of Mali to enlist
their support in favour of an extension of ECOMIB and
to help mediate a sustainable solution to the situation in
Guinea-Bissau.
In this regard, we welcome the decision of the
ECOWAS Heads of State of 4 June to extend the mandate
of ECOMIB for another year, on the understanding that
the international community would provide funding,
as appropriate. As Council members are aware, the
Heads of State also entrusted a high-level delegation,
comprising the Presidents of Guinea, Senegal, and

S/PV.7714

Sierra Leone, to engage with political stakeholders
in Guinea-Bissau and better assess the situation in
the country. In addition, they directed the ECOWAS
Commission to consult with the CPLP with a view to
convening a meeting of the International Contact Group
on Guinea-Bissau. My Office stands ready to provide
any assistance required to ensure the implementation
of these key decisions.
Soon after the ECOWAS Summit, in an effort to
maintain the Dakar momentum, I travelled to Abidjan
to meet with President Alassane Ouattara and had
follow-up conversations with his peers, the Presidents
of Senegal and Guinea. In the days ahead, I shall also
engage with the new Chair of ECOWAS, President
Ellen Johnson Sirleaf, and with President Ernest Bai
Koroma of Sierra Leone.
While we focus our energies on finding a political
and sustainable solution, it is also important that we
continue to provide the required support to the people
of Guinea-Bissau, whose lives and livelihoods have
been adversely impacted by the country’s recurrent
instability. We have seen in March and April how
strikes in the health and education sectors seriously
affected the school year and deprived citizens of key
preventative and medical services, including maternal
and child health.
The longer the crisis continues, the more likely it
is that we will see a setback to the gains of the postelectoral period, including positive economic growth,
increase in revenues and commitment to key reforms
in defence and security, justice and public services. In
a country where the official development assistance
amounts to about 15 per cent of gross domestic product
and almost 80 per cent of the budget, the current
suspension of disbursements and direct budget support
from the International Monetary Fund, the World Bank,
the European Union and the African Development
Bank creates financial pressure that could negatively
affect the running of the State, including the payment
of salaries.
The current situation calls for innovative strategies
to deliver services and support the resilient population
of Guinea-Bissau. With the United Nations country
team, I shall continue to engage with partners to support
the population, especially those most vulnerable. That
would contribute to greater stability, while fostering
dialogue with authorities on development and reform
priorities as leverage for peace and development.

16-171913/7

S/PV.7714

The situation in Guinea-Bissau

The attention given by the Security Council to
the situation in Guinea-Bissau and its support to the
search for a sustainable solution to the political and
institutional challenges in the country are of the utmost
importance.
The President (spoke in French): I thank Mr. Touré
for his briefing.
I now give the floor to Mr. Pequeno.
Mr. Pequeno (spoke in French): I thank you, Sir,
for this opportunity to brief the Council on the political
and security situation in Guinea-Bissau.
(spoke in English)
I fully concur with the statement made by the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General,
Mr. Modibo Touré. Allow me to add some points.
The security situation in Guinea-Bissau remains
calm and the military has so far kept out of politics. It is,
however, questionable how long it can remain politically
neutral, considering the fragile political situation.
On top of that, the security sector reform process has
stalled due to a lack of funding, as has the justice and
public adminstration reform. We should recognize the
critical importance of the role played by the Economic
Community of West African States Mission in GuineaBissau (ECOMIB), and welcome the decision taken by
the Heads of State of the Economic Community of West
African States (ECOWAS), who recently held a Summit
in Dakar on 4 June to extend the mandate of ECOMIB
for another year, which we believe will further stabilize
the country. In that regard, we urge the defence and
security forces of Guinea-Bissau to better collaborate
and coordinate with ECOMIB.
In addition, we stress the importance of the
ECOWAS high-level mission made up of three heads
of State, which will go to Guinea-Bissau to engage in
a dialogue with national political stakeholders with a
view to encourage dialogue and find a lasting political
solution to the continuing political crisis. The African
Union stands ready to provide any assistance, in
coordination with other partners, to ensure the success
of the visit.
The crisis in Guinea-Bissau has long undermined
peace and stability. The general tensions in the ruling
party — the African Party for the Independence of
Guinea and Cabo Verde — and the divisions among
political actors are the causes for the political and
4/7

14/06/2016

institutional crisis, which needs to be addressed with
a compressive approach. It is our conviction that only
a genuine and inclusive dialogue, based on respect for
the country’s Constitution and its laws, will lead to
a resolution of the crisis. We therefore encourage all
national political actors to exercise restraint, uphold the
rule of law and engage in a constructive dialogue to
resolve their differences, safeguard peace and stability
and foster socioeconomic development, with a view to
alleviating the suffering of the people of Guinea-Bissau.
Lastly, I would like to highlight the excellent level
of coordination and collaboration among ECOWAS,
the CPLP, the European Union, the United Nations
and the African Union, as well as the role they have
been playing to address the crisis in Guinea-Bissau. I
look forward to working in the same spirit. Similarly, I
would like to urge the CPLP and ECOWAS to convene
an International Contact Group meeting on GuineaBissau to contribute to a resolution of the crisis.
We still have a long way to go. Two important
portfolios in the new Government, as Mr. Touré
mentioned, namely, the Minister for the Interior and
the Minister for Foreign Affairs, are yet to be filled.
Furthermore, the programme and budget of the
Government need to sail through the National Assembly
in due time.
I thank the Council for this opportunity and for its
continued attention to the people of Guinea-Bissau.
The President (spoke in French): I thank
Mr. Barbosa Pequeno for his briefing.
Mr. Seck (Senegal): (spoke in French): Before
I go into my statement, I would like to thank the
French presidency for quickly acceding, with the
Security Council having such a busy programme, to
the request by the delegation of Senegal to hold this
briefing on the situation in Guinea-Bissau. On behalf
of the members of the Economic Community of West
African States (ECOWAS), I would like to thank the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General for
Guinea-Bissau for his detailed briefing. I also thank
the representatives of the African Union and of the
Community of Portuguese-speaking Countries (CPLP)
for their commitment to Guinea-Bissau.
As has been clearly pointed out, there have been
many developments in the political situation in GuineaBissau since the dissolution by President José Mário
Vaz of the Government led by Prime Minister Carlos
16-17191

14/06/2016

The situation in Guinea-Bissau

Correia, on 12 May, and the subsequent appointment
Mr. Baciro Djá to succeed him, on 26 May. The African
Party for the Independence of Guinea and Cabo Verde
(PAIGC) rejected that decision, which it called illegal,
and stated that, according to the Constitution, the
Prime Minister was to be chosen by the majority party.
In spite of the consultations held and the alternative
proposals submitted by the PAIGC, President Vaz
chose the option put forward by the Party for Social
Renewal, naming Mr. Djá as Prime Minister. Given
the tensions in the political class and the risk of an
escalation, formal consultations were held at various
levels to encourage dialogue among the stakeholders in
order to find a solution acceptable to all.
I would like to welcome the active preventive
efforts, made in particular by the Security Council, on
this matter. There were many statements by the Council
President to the press to express the Council’s great
concern at the impasse in the country for many months,
as well as to call on political leaders to overcome that
impasse and return to dialogue. The Council also
adopted resolution 2267 (2016), on 26 February, which
extended the mandate of the United Nations Integrated
Peacebuilding Office in Guinea-Bissau (UNIOGBIS)
until 28 February 2017. The resolution also calls upon
Guinea-Bissau’s President, Prime Minister, Speaker of
Parliament and leaders of political parties to abide by
their commitment to restore political stability in the
country, in the interests of the people of Guinea-Bissau.
The Council also visited Bissau on 7 March to repeat
the same message and to undertake an exchange with
the various stakeholders in the country’s crisis. Lastly,
discussions were recently held, on 12 May, on various
issues, including as well the Council’s consultations on
26 May, both of which were followed by a statement to
the press by the President of the Council, expressing the
great concern of the members in the face of the latest
developments that had exacerbated tension among the
political class and that risked undermining the country’s
security and stability, especially in the then run-up the
end of the mandate of the ECOWAS Mission in GuineaBissau (ECOMIB).
Against that backdrop, at this stage I am pleased
to refer to the conclusions of the forty-ninth Ordinary
Summit of ECOWAS Heads of State and Government,
held in Dakar on 4 June. The main elements
included the extension of the ECOMIB mandate for
an additional year; the deployment to Bissau of a
presidential delegation, made up of President Macky

S/PV.7714

Sall of Senegal, President Ernest Bai Koroma of Sierra
Leone and President Alpha Condé of Guinea, to hold
discussions with parties to the crisis in order to gain
a better understanding of the current situation in the
country; the adoption by the ECOWAS Commission
of the necessary provisions to settle the arrears due
to ECOMIB troop-and police-contributing countries;
and the launch of consultations between the ECOWAS
Commission and the CPLP with a view to the holding a
meeting of the International Contact Group on GuineaBissau. It should be noted that the ECOWAS Summit
expressed its deep concern at the ongoing crisis in
Guinea-Bissau, which undermines the implementation
of commitments undertaken by development partners
in March 2015 to provide financial assistance to the
country. ECOWAS also urged political actors to engage
in dialogue to resolve the political and institutional
crisis, while also welcoming the professionalism of the
army, which had remained on the sidelines of political
developments, and encouraging it to so continue.
Those decisions by ECOWAS reflect the full
engagement of the subregion for a peaceful and lasting
resolution to the crisis in the country. Consultations are
taking place to determine the date for the visit of the West
African presidential delegation, which will be preceded
by a mission made up by a delegation of Ministers
for Foreign Affairs, Integration and/or Defence from
the three countries I mentioned, accompanied by the
Chair of the ECOWAS Commission, with the aim of
identifying, along with the political actors in GuineaBissau, specific issues for the Heads of State to take up,
including potential recommendations that could follow.
On behalf of all ECOWAS member countries, the
delegation of Senegal welcomes the tireless efforts of
Guinea-Bissau’s partners, bilateral and multilateral
alike, including the United Nations, the African Union,
the European Union and the CPLP. We reiterate to
them our gratitude for their very valuable support.
ECOWAS also welcomes the outstanding work done by
the Guinea-Bissau configuration of the Peacebuilding
Commission and commends the latest press release,
issued on 9 June. We are convinced that by working
together and pooling all of our efforts, we will be able
to contribute to restoring the cohesion and political
stability so desired by the people of Guinea-Bissau,
who deserve to enjoy the dividends of peace.
To conclude, ECOWAS reiterates its support to
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General

16-171915/7

S/PV.7714

The situation in Guinea-Bissau

and encourages him to continue his good offices and
mediation efforts.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Guinea-Bissau.
Mr. Da Gama (Guinea-Bissau): I wish to thank
you, Mr. President, for having invited my delegation
to the Council table and for allowing me to take the
floor. I also congratulate you on your assumption of the
presidency of the Council for the month of June and to
wish you successful deliberations.
Allow me to recognize Mr. Modibo Touré, the new
Special Representative of the Secretary-General, for
his prompt engagement in the current issues facing my
country upon his arrival and for all of the diligent efforts
of the United Nations Integrated Peacebuilding Office
in Guinea-Bissau in addressing the latest developments
in Guinea-Bissau.
The work of the Peacebuilding Commission
configuration, through the personal engagement
of Ambassador Antonio Patriota of Brazil, on
peacebuilding in Guinea-Bissau is very important
and deeply appreciated. I also would like to thank
Ambassador Maria Pires, Permanent Representative
of Timor-Leste and Chair of the Community of
Portuguese-speaking Countries (CPLP), for her
statement. I wish also to thank the Ambassador of
Senegal for his important statement on Guinea-Bissau.
Guinea-Bissau is once again facing political and
institutional crises, as we just heard from the briefing
delivered by Mr. Modibo Touré, Special Representative
of the Secretary-General, whom I wish to thank. I also
request him, on behalf of the people of Guinea-Bissau,
to remain closely engaged together with the States
members of our subregion, the Economic Community of
West African States (ECOWAS), especially our closest
neighbours, Senegal and the Republic of Guinea, which
have been working hard to help Guinea-Bissau find a
solution leading to sustainable peace.
Allow me to thank also Mr. Ovídio Pequeno, Head
of the African Union Liaison Office in Guinea-Bissau,
for his briefing and for the active role that he is playing
in my country.
The recent Summit of Heads of State and
Government of ECOWAS, held in Dakar, and the
decision taken on the visit by the Presidents of the
Republic of Guinea, Senegal and Sierra Leone to
Bissau is very commendable. All of the people of
6/7

14/06/2016

Guinea-Bissau look forward to this mission, which will
be crucial in showing the engagement of ECOWAS in
the process of bringing peace, security and stability not
only to Guinea-Bissau but to our subregion as a whole.
Allow me also to commend Senegal, through
its Permanent Representative, Ambassador Fodé
Seck, for the engagement of President Macky Sall to
Guinea-Bissau, especially during his chairmanship of
ECOWAS.
After the very comprehensive briefing on the
current situation in Guinea-Bissau, all I have to add
is that the country is practically paralysed, people are
suffering, and everyone is apprehensively awaiting the
Supreme Court ruling and the visit of the three Heads
of State from the region. We are aware that the political
and institutional crises that have isolated our country
for the past year require political will on the part of
the main actors in our country. However, the continued
strong support of the international community as a
whole, in a coordinated and single-minded manner,
might help us to achieve a solid solution to the persistent
impasse.
Very well-coordinated diplomatic efforts, such as
the meeting of the Guinea-Bissau International Contact
Group, in which the entire international community and
our partners can participate, would be a step towards
joining other voices to that of the people of GuineaBissau at this moment.
The financial support of the European Union,
which allowed for the extension of the mandate of the
ECOWAS Mission in Guinea-Bissau for one more year,
is very much appreciated.
As stated by the Heads of State of ECOWAS, the
persistent crisis in Guinea-Bissau is undermining the
implementation of the financial commitments made
by our development partners in March 2015. For this
we need coordinated support to bring stability to the
country, which desperately needs to get back to normal
functioning so that it can regain the trust of our partners
and make the very encouraging results of the Brussels
round-table conference on Guinea-Bissau a reality.
The people cherish the hope that these steps will
help the country to finally concentrate on development
as well as to continue with the needed security-sector
reform, which should include a dignified pension for
retired armed forces professionals. As the Council is
aware, so far the armed forces have stayed out of the
16-17191

14/06/2016

The situation in Guinea-Bissau

present crisis, and we want them to continue with this
republican position and non-interference in the political
disputes of the country.
Before concluding, I would like to thank all present
for their support during these dark times and wish to
appeal to them not to abandon Guinea-Bissau and to
remain even more engaged with the country in helping
to consolidate and make stronger its institutions by
working much more closely with the national authorities
and all political stakeholders in terms of guidance,
through an open and frank dialogue, so as to bring back
peace and security.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Timor-Leste.
Ms. Pires (Timor-Leste): I would like to commend
you, Mr. President, on your assumption of the Security
Council presidency for this month and to thank you for
inviting me and my delegation to address this meeting.
I wish also to thank Mr. Modibo Touré, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General in GuineaBissau, and the African Union Special Representative to
Guinea-Bissau, Mr. Ovídio Pequeno, for their briefings
today. I also commend Mr. Touré for the efforts he has
undertaken since he assumed his post.
I am honoured to address the Council on behalf
of the Community of Portuguese-speaking Countries
(CPLP), whose members are Angola, Brazil, Cabo Verde,
Equatorial Guinea, Guinea- Bissau, Mozambique,
Portugal, Sao Tome and Principe, and my own country,
Timor-Leste.
The CPLP member States regret the evolution of
the political situation since the last Council meeting
on Guinea-Bissau (see S/PV.7632) and are deeply
concerned at the current political impasse. The CPLP
will continue its close cooperation with all partners in
Guinea-Bissau in order to ensure sound coordination in
all our efforts.
We welcome the efforts being made by ECOWAS
to support Guinea-Bissau, in particular the decision to
nominate the Heads of State of Sierra Leone, Senegal
and Guinea to meet and conduct discussions with the
political leadership in that country with a view to
finding a political solution and preventing the escalation
of the conflict.

S/PV.7714

We call on all stakeholders, namely, the organs
of sovereignty, the political parties, civil society
and others, to continue to engage in a constructive,
inclusive political dialogue while respecting democratic
principles and the Constitution. Statesmanship is
required at this time to move the country forward so
as to meet the aspirations of the people of the GuineaBissau for greater political stability and socioeconomic
development, as well as for the consolidation of the
rule of law and the protection and promotion of civil,
political, economic, social and cultural rights.
The CPLP also wishes to acknowledge the armed
forces of Guinea-Bissau, which have displayed
remarkable professionalism by not interfering in the
political crisis, and wishes to urge the armed forces to
maintain this position.
The document presented by President Jose Mário
Vaz and former Prime Minister Domingos Simões
Pereira at the donor round table in Brussels in March
garnered the support of the international partners. It is
deeply concerning that the instability in the country has
forced international partners to delay disbursements of
pledges made in March. Such delays will only affect the
people of Guinea-Bissau, who are already suffering a
highly negative social and economic impact.
The CPLP wishes to recognize the concerted
efforts of the international community to assist GuineaBissau in this crisis. In this regard, we appreciate and
commend the efforts of the Peacebuilding Commission
(PBC), in particular those of the Ambassador of Brazil,
Antonio Patriota, in his capacity as chair of the GuineaBissau configuration of the PBC, as well as the support
provided by the European Union, the African Union and
the United Nations. We would also like to acknowledge
the important role of the International Contact Group
on Guinea-Bissau, and remain prepared to co-organize
its next meeting.
To conclude, we recognize that the path travelled
by Guinea-Bissau has been difficult, but we stand
firmly in solidarity with our Bissau Guinean brothers
and sisters and we are confident that Guinea-Bissau is a
country with a bright future.
The President (spoke in French): I now invite
Council members to informal consultations to continue
our discussion on the subject.
The meeting rose at 11.40 a.m.

16-171917/7
