United Nations

S/PV.9307

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-eighth year

9307

th meeting
Wednesday, 19 April 2023, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Nebenzia/Ms. Evstigneeva

(Russian Federation)

Members:

Albania
Brazil
China
Ecuador
France
Gabon
Ghana
Japan
Malta
Mozambique
Switzerland
United Arab Emirates
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland
United States of America

Mr. Spasse
Mr. De Almeida Filho
Mr. Zhang Jun
Mr. Pérez Loose
Mr. Olmedo
Mrs. Ngyema Ndong
Mr. Agyeman
Mr. Ishikane
Ms. Gatt
Mr. Fernandes
Mr. Hauri
Mr. Almazrouei
Mr. Kariuki
Mr. Wood

Agenda
The situation in the Great Lakes region
Report of the Secretary-General on the implementation of the Peace, Security
and Cooperation Framework for the Democratic Republic of the Congo and the
Region (S/2023/237)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of
the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room AB-0601
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

23-11175 (E)
*2311175*

S/PV.9307

The situation in the Great Lakes region

The meeting was called to order at 10 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in the Great Lakes region
Report of the Secretary-General on the
implementation of the Peace, Security and
Cooperation Framework for the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and the Region
(S/2023/237)
The President (spoke in Russian): In accordance with
rule 37 of the Council’s provisional rules of procedure,
I invite the representatives of Burundi, the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and Rwanda to participate in
this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s provisional
rules of procedure, I invite the following briefers to
participate in this meeting: Mr. Huang Xia, Special Envoy
of the Secretary-General for the Great Lakes Region;
and His Excellency Mr. Ivan Šimonović, Permanent
Representative of Croatia to the United Nations, in his
capacity as Chair of the Peacebuilding Commission.
The Security Council will now begin its consideration
of the item on its agenda.
I wish to draw the attention of Council members to
document S/2023/237, which contains the report of the
Secretary-General on the implementation of the Peace,
Security and Cooperation Framework for the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and the Region.
I now give the floor to Mr. Huang Xia.
Mr. Huang Xia (spoke in French): I thank the Security
Council for this opportunity to brief it on developments in
the Great Lakes region since the submission of the most
recent report (S/2023/237) of the Secretary-General. As I
speak here today, a slight improvement can be noted.
On the military front, a fragile calm has taken root in
the eastern part of the Democratic Republic of the Congo.
There have been no major clashes in recent days between
the Forces armées de la République démocratique du
Congo and the Mouvement du 23 mars (M-23), while a
fragile ceasefire also seems to be holding. The deployment
of troops from the regional force of the East African
Community is continuing. Undiplomatic exchanges
between Kigali and Kinshasa has decreased.
2/22

19/04/2023

Nevertheless, regardless of some progress, serious
risks continue to exist. The retreat by the M-23 from
occupied areas remains incomplete. The disarmament
and cantonment of combatants, provided for under the
Luanda road map, is yet to be achieved. The negotiated
political solution they themselves are increasingly
calling for is lagging behind. The risk of a resumption
of hostilities remains a genuine possibility. Local and
external armed groups continue to sow terror and fuel
insecurity. They include the Allied Democratic Forces,
the Forces démocratiques de libération du Rwanda and
the Résistance pour un État de droit au Burundi.
The social and humanitarian consequences of this
state of affairs are disastrous. They fuel the endless
cycle of tensions between communities and favour the
proliferation of hate speech. Approximately 600,000
people have been displaced in North Kivu province
alone. More than 38,000 Congolese became refugees
between October 2022 and February of this year.
Tensions continue between Rwanda and the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, and trust between the two
countries appears to be at an ebb.
There is a stark contrast in the panorama across
the Great Lakes region — in some cases encouraging
while, in others, revealing a security and humanitarian
situation that continues to be quite troubling. That
disparity requires that the Security Council and all of
the region’s partners renew and strengthen our efforts.
We must take advantage of the current small window
of opportunity. We must prioritize a real decrease in
tensions. We must support the efforts by the region to
put an end to the crisis. Lastly, we must encourage the
comprehensive implementation of all the commitments
undertaken in the Peace, Security and Cooperation
Framework for the Democratic Republic of the Congo
and the Region, which is more relevant than ever so
long as it is fully realized through concrete actions
guided by robust and ever-stronger political will.
Nevertheless, the urgent thing is to put an end to
the crisis. We must avoid an escalation to war. Let us
say it again: the Great Lakes region does not need a new
war. In that context, we should welcome and support
regional peace efforts, including the Luanda process,
led by President Lourenço of Angola, which aims to
re-establish peaceful relations between the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and Rwanda; and the Nairobi
process, led by the East African Community under
the leadership of President Ndayishimiye and former
President Uhuru Kenyatta, focused on convening
23-11175

19/04/2023

The situation in the Great Lakes region

political consultations and on military efforts. Those
two crucial initiatives require stronger unanimous
support from us. They make up the two complementary
tracks towards a resolution of the current crisis, which
together should lead to a resolution. Once that phase
is completed, the countries of the Great Lakes regions
should, in the medium and long-term, focus on the
implementation of the Addis Ababa Framework. The
ongoing discussions on revitalizing it mark an important
stage. On behalf of the United Nations, my Office
will provide the necessary support and contribution,
alongside other guarantor institutions.
Allow me to emphasize the point that, 10 years
after the signing of the Addis Ababa Framework,
consensus exists as to the fact that it remains relevant
and important for the region’s stability. But there is
also an emerging consensus today that there is a need
to revitalize it, as embraced by the African Union Peace
and Security Council on 17 February. Following that,
on 29 March, the African Union Commission brought
together, among others, representatives of the guarantor
institutions to the Framework. That meeting drew up
recommendations. On 12 and 13 April at Nairobi, the
signatory countries held a first exchange on the subject
during a meeting of the technical support committee
for the implementation of the Framework, which I
co-chaired with my colleague from the African Union.
Lastly, the eleventh summit of the Regional Oversight
Mechanism of the Peace, Security and Cooperation
Framework will take place in Bujumbura on 6 May,
where Heads of State from the region will provide their
respective views. I hope that it will be an opportunity
to strengthen the coordination and harmonization of
regional processes to put an end to the current crisis.
In the current circumstances, we must not spare any
effort and must entrench the achievements to date. To
that end, allow me to conclude by sharing some views
on the way forward for the coming months.
As mandated by the Security Council and on the
instructions of the Secretary-General, I will continue
my good offices and to underscore the imperative of
pursuing dialogue and a political solution. My Office
will continue to support the holding of the next highlevel meeting of the Regional Oversight Mechanism
planned for Burundi, a summit that, as I mentioned,
will be an important event, especially when it comes
to continuing dialogue among the Heads of State of
the region and for speeding up the implementation of
decisions emerging from the ongoing political effort,

S/PV.9307

namely, the Nairobi and Luanda processes. Moreover,
my Office will continue its support to the operational
cell on non-military measures. That regional initiative
works to disarm and repatriate foreign armed
combatants present in the eastern part of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo. It also aims to strengthen the
hosting and reintegration capacities in countries of
origin. Lastly, we will step up our efforts to implement
the United Nations strategy for the Great Lakes region
and the flagship initiatives. We will do all that in
close cooperation with all the United Nations agencies
involved, as well as with international partners. The
latter have supported us tirelessly, as demonstrated by
the success of the meeting of aid agencies co-organized
with Belgium on 28 March. In that connection, I would
like to take this opportunity to once again express my
deep gratitude to all partner countries.
All of those efforts also aim to ensure greater
participation by women and young people in dialogue
and peace processes, as well as to advocate for more
transparent management of natural resources.
The Great Lakes region needs the Security Council
more than ever before — to foster an immediate
de-escalation of tensions in the region, encourage a
political solution to the current crisis and support more
serious implementation of the Addis Ababa Framework.
That support from the Council will be decisive, crucial
and urgent.
The President (spoke in Russian): I thank
Mr. Huang Xia for his briefing.
I now give the floor to Mr. Šimonović.
Mr. Šimonović: I thank you, Mr. President,
for inviting me to brief the Security Council in my
capacity as Chair of the Peacebuilding Commission
(PBC). Building on its previous advice to the Council
in October 2022 (see S/PV.9165), as well as its
continuing engagement in the Great Lakes region,
the Commission encourages the Security Council to
consider the following.
Reiterating its demand for all armed groups
to immediately lay down their weapons and
cease hostilities.
Continuing to firmly support regional peace
initiatives, including the International Conference on
the Great Lakes Region-led Luanda process and the
East African Community-led Nairobi process, as well
as its inter-Congolese dialogue.

23-111753/22

S/PV.9307

The situation in the Great Lakes region

Calling for the implementation by all States of
the commitments within the Peace, Security and
Cooperation Framework for the Democratic Republic
of the Congo and the Region and the strengthening
of confidence-building measures and to help build
an atmosphere conducive to constructive dialogue
and debate.
Calling for strengthened international support to
alleviate the extreme humanitarian situation in the
eastern Democratic Republic of the Congo.
Emphasizing inclusivity as key to advancing local,
national and regional peacebuilding objectives to
ensure long-term sustainable peace and encouraging
the continuation of efforts under way in strengthening
the role of women in political and peace processes and
structures at local, national and regional levels.
Stressing the importance of youth inclusion and
noting the need to increase national and regional efforts
to include young people in political processes and
socioeconomic development.
Expressing support for efforts towards a
sustainable and transparent management of natural
resources, in line with the recommendations of the 2021
Khartoum workshop aimed at ensuring the effective
implementation of the Great Lakes regional initiative to
fight against the illegal exploitation of natural resources
and calling for strengthening the capacity of the Great
Lakes region’s mineral certification framework.
Expressing support for existing accords that
promote regional economic and financial integration
and contribute to sustainable development.
Continuing to promote good offices and support to
address the root causes of conflict in the region with
a view to achieving sustainable peace, security and
development based on national ownership.
Calling for increased efforts to promote
reconciliation, accountability, transitional justice and
the fight against impunity in the region, including
through support to national institutions and the Great
Lakes Regional Judicial Cooperation Network.
Expressing its support for partnerships with
regional and subregional organizations, including the
African Union, the International Conference on the
Great Lakes Region, the East African Community and
the Southern African Development Community.
4/22

19/04/2023

Expressing its support for adequate funding for
peacebuilding activities in the region, including through
the involvement of the private sector, as appropriate,
and requesting international and regional financial
institutions to expedite their support for disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration programmes.
Continuing to reiterate the importance of a
strategic and coherent approach by the United Nations
and stakeholders in the region, to sustain peacebuilding
gains, in particular in the context of the transition of the
United Nations Organization Stabilization Mission in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo.
The Peacebuilding Commission stands ready to
further support the Council’s engagements in the Great
Lakes region.
The President (spoke in Russian): I thank
Mr. Šimonović for his briefing.
I shall now give the floor to those members of the
Council who wish to make statements.
Mr. Olmedo (France) (spoke in French): I thank
the Special Envoy and the Chair of the Peacebuilding
Commission for their briefings.
I would like to return to three points: first, the role
of regional mechanisms; secondly, the humanitarian
situation; and thirdly, the role of the European Union.
The regional peace instruments, including the Addis
Ababa Framework Agreement, which is celebrating its
tenth anniversary, must be implemented and supported.
Armed groups continue their attacks in the eastern
part of the Democratic Republic of the Congo. While the
situation around Goma remains volatile, it is showing
signs of improvement. We encourage all parties to
pursue the path of de-escalation and peace.
France recalls three cardinal principles of the
Framework Agreement for the region: not to support
armed groups, to respect the sovereignty and territorial
integrity of neighbouring States, and not to harbour or
provide protection to persons accused of international
crimes. These principles and all commitments set forth
in the Framework Agreement must be respected by all
parties. The next summit of the Regional Oversight
Mechanism should give new impetus in this regard, in
addition to the efforts undertaken in the framework of
the Nairobi and Luanda processes.
23-11175

19/04/2023

The situation in the Great Lakes region

France welcomes the support provided by the
United Nations to regional peace processes. The
United Nations Organization Stabilization Mission in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo and the Special
Envoy must support the verification mechanisms,
in particular the one deployed by Angola. The needs
of these mechanisms must also be clarified. The
establishment of a joint verification mechanism office
will promote synergies and coherence in the work of
the mechanisms.
United Nations support must continue in preparation
for the fourth round of inter-Congolese consultations
under the Nairobi process. The Special Envoy spoke
of his support for the contact group on non-military
measures for the repatriation of former combatants of
non-Congolese armed groups. This is important.
Secondly, we must address the deteriorating
humanitarian situation and the root causes of conflict.
Millions of people, especially women and children,
need humanitarian assistance. Humanitarian access
must be ensured, and the safety of humanitarian
personnel guaranteed.
France has supported the European Union’s
airlift to Goma since last March, which has brought
in 140 tons of medical and nutritional supplies. In
accordance with the commitments made by President
Emmanuel Macron, France is providing €34 million in
humanitarian aid in 2023.
France welcomes the progress made in the
implementation of the Kinshasa Declaration on
Enhancing Judicial Cooperation in the Great Lakes
Region. The protection of human rights and the
fight against impunity are necessary. Efforts must
be redoubled to prevent hate speech and incitement
to violence.
France condemns the looting of natural resources in
the region, which fuels the activities of armed groups.
The Great Lakes States and their partners must fight
trafficking and work together to improve value chains.
Thirdly, the European Union will remain a
committed partner in the Great Lakes region. Last
February, it adopted a renewed strategy for the region.
This strategy has three objectives: peace, sustainable
management of natural resources and regional
integration. The European Union will also act through
sanctions if necessary.

S/PV.9307

Among the other aspects of the European
commitment, I would also like to mention the
“Global Gateway” strategy, which aims to strengthen
interconnections between electricity networks and
efforts to increase the supply of renewable energy. As a
sign of their commitment, President Emmanuel Macron
and Commissioners Urpilainen and Breton participated
in the Euro-Congolese economic forum in Kinshasa on
4 March. The European strategy is aligned with that of
the United Nations for the Great Lakes region, which
France supports.
Mr. Ishikane (Japan): I would like to express my
gratitude to Special Envoy Huang Xia for his briefing
and to the Chair of the Peacebuilding Commission
(PBC), Mr. Šimonović, for his advice. I also welcome
the participation of the representatives of States of the
region in today’s meeting.
The recurrent violence by armed groups,
aggravating human security crises, and the increasing
tensions between the Democratic Republic of the Congo
and Rwanda are of serious concern. This grave situation
continues to prevent the region from harnessing its
enormous potential, which the population has long
deserved. Our efforts must come together to guarantee
the integrity and sovereignty of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo. The signatory countries to
the Peace, Security and Cooperation Framework
for the Democratic Republic of the Congo and the
Region, together with the guarantors, must renew their
commitment, at national, regional and international
levels, to its full implementation.
As was highlighted by the PBC Chair, the ongoing
regional peace initiatives, including the Nairobi process
and the Luanda process, have a vital role to play. An
immediate cessation of hostilities is the very first step
to achieving the common goal of sustainable peace. All
armed groups must fully engage in those processes, and
any attempts to support armed groups incompatible with
the regional initiatives cannot be tolerated. Military and
non-military measures should be well coordinated in a
synergetic manner aligned with the ongoing efforts of
the United Nations Organization Stabilization Mission
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO).
International assistance must continue to
focus on creating an environment conducive to
successful regional initiatives and cooperation.
Confidence-building measures and constructive
dialogues need to expand further among stakeholders.

23-111755/22

S/PV.9307

The situation in the Great Lakes region

It is also imperative to ensure uninterrupted support
to address the extreme humanitarian situations, which
are affecting women and children most, and which
are exacerbated by the use of armed force. We expect
Special Envoy Huang Xia and his Office to continue to
help advancing women, youth, peace, and security in
the region.
The complexity of the challenges the region faces
requires us to take a comprehensive, cross-border
approach based on the humanitarian-developmentpeace nexus. The United Nations Strategy for Peace
Consolidation, Conflict Prevention and Conflict
Resolution in the Great Lakes Region rightly reflects
this in its flagship initiatives.
One of the main pillars of the Strategy involves
action to prevent the illegal exploitation of natural
resources, which remains one of the drivers of conflict.
Enhanced border control and judicial cooperation are
essential to effectively addressing this long-standing
challenge, and United Nations entities should further
assist in these efforts. The Peacebuilding Fund is wellsuited to help cross-border projects and should play a
catalytic role in promoting further regional initiatives.
Our bilateral support should also be a wellintegrated component of larger international efforts
and complement and amplify the effects of regional
initiatives. With this in mind, Japan, in partnership with
United Nations agencies, funds and programmes, has
been working to help improve the lives and well-being of
people, which includes supporting the strengthening of
social resilience; helping disarmament, demobilization,
and
reintegration;
and
providing
emergency
humanitarian assistance to internally displaced persons
and refugees.
Japan continues to be fully engaged with all
partners, including MONUSCO, for a peaceful and
prosperous Great Lakes region.
Mr. De Almeida Filho (Brazil): The Brazilian
delegation is grateful to Special Envoy Huang Xia
and Ambassador Ivan Šimonović for their informative
briefings. I welcome the delegations of Rwanda,
Burundi and the Democratic Republic of the Congo to
today’s meeting.
We have followed the latest developments in the
Great Lakes region closely, and the security situation
remains a matter of great concern to us. The threat
posed by armed groups to the countries of the Great
6/22

19/04/2023

Lakes region is still palpable, as a series of events in
the recent report (S/2023/237) of the Secretary-General
have demonstrated. The increase in the activities of
armed groups that we have witnessed in the region in
recent months has had a devastating impact on local
communities and millions of refugees and internally
displaced persons from various perspectives, ranging
from human rights to economic development, and also
represents a threat to the lives of the peacekeepers who
are on the ground. The activities of those groups often
lead to sexual violence, a lack of access to humanitarian
aid, the recruitment of children in armed conflict and
the illicit exploitation of natural resources, jeopardizing
the current efforts to reach a sustainable peace.
On the occasion of the tenth anniversary of the
Peace, Security and Cooperation Framework for the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and the Region, we
would like to praise all the advancements made by the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and the signatory
countries on the implementation of its commitments, as
well as the work of guarantor institutions. We are hopeful
that the next meeting of the Framework’s Regional
Oversight Mechanism, which will take place in May in
Bujumbura, will shed some light on the best path ahead
to address the serious security and humanitarian crisis
facing the region. We would also like to commend all
the regional efforts in that regard. Such efforts deserve
our encouragement and full support. In that sense, we
wish to commend the leading and constructive role
played by the International Conference on the Great
Lakes Region and the East African Community. We
would like to praise the mediation efforts carried
out by Angola and Kenya in the Luanda and Nairobi
processes. It is crucial that all the parties take concrete
steps to implement the recommendations agreed under
the auspices of those processes. In such a challenging
regional scene, we can never overemphasize the
importance of adopting confidence-building measures
to restore trust and bring the peace process back on the
right track.
In the aim of protecting the achievements of the
ongoing peace process, it is imperative to expedite the
implementation of the disarmament, demobilization
and reintegration programmes. At the same time, it is
necessary to strengthen the reintegration pillar and to
ensure that former combatants, women and youth have
access to economic opportunities that provide them with
the tools to improve their livelihoods. In that vein, we
would like to voice support for the work of the Special
23-11175

19/04/2023

The situation in the Great Lakes region

Envoy and highlight the contribution of the United
Nations Strategy for Peace Consolidation, Conflict
Prevention and Conflict Resolution in the Great Lakes
Region in bringing coherence and comprehensiveness to
the peacebuilding initiatives. We also wish to underscore
the importance of national ownership in order to attain
lasting peace and prosperity in the region and, in that
sense, we want to welcome and echo the Peacebuilding
Commission’s advice in favour of support to the countries
of the Great Lakes in the promotion of regional economic
and financial integration, as well as its contribution to
sustainable development. That is a fundamental step to
build peace.
Finally, we call on all the States in the region to
persevere on the path of an inclusive political dialogue.
No durable solution can be found without the meaningful
participation of all stakeholders, including women
and youth.
Mr. Wood (United States of America): I thank
Special Envoy Huang Xia for his informative briefing. I
also welcome the Chair of the Peacebuilding Commission
and appreciate the advice to the Security Council he
outlined this morning.
Today’s meeting comes at a critical moment for the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and the broader Great
Lakes region. Just last month, the Council travelled to
Kinshasa and Goma. Two weeks ago (see S/PV.9298),
Special Representative of the Secretary-General Keita
provided an update on the critical contributions to,
and sacrifices for, peace made by the United Nations
Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic
of Congo (MONUSCO) in the eastern Democratic
Republic of the Congo. The United Nations Strategy for
Peace Consolidation, Conflict Prevention and Conflict
Resolution in the Great Lakes Region is another important
means of bringing peace to the region. The United States
appreciates the Special Envoy’s use of his good offices
to generate international support for the East African
Community (EAC)-led Nairobi and Luanda processes.
We welcome the initiative and commitment of regional
partners and welcome the recent decrease in fighting.
Yet despite those efforts, the situation in the Great
Lakes region continues to deteriorate and tensions
remain between the Democratic Republic of the Congo
and Rwanda. The United States calls on all the parties
to act expeditiously to meet their commitments under
the Luanda communiqué in full, including the full
withdrawal of the Mouvement du 23 mars (M-23) to the

S/PV.9307

Sabyinyo line, followed by cantonment and disarmament.
Rwanda must also withdraw its troops and end support
to the United Nations-sanctioned M-23. I also reiterate
our call on the Democratic Republic of the Congo
Government to immediately end cooperation with armed
groups, including the Forces démocratiques de libération
du Rwanda, and to pursue security sector reform,
continue denouncing hate speech and hold individuals
accountable for inciting violence. Unfortunately, the
Islamic State in Iraq and the Sham-Democratic Republic
of the Congo, also known as the Allied Democratic
Forces, has taken advantage of the situation and will
continue to pose a threat. We must not lose sight of that
pressing security challenge.
We must also increase our focus on the grave
humanitarian crisis. In 2023 alone, conflict has displaced
more than half a million people, many of whom are being
forced to live without access to adequate food, water
or medical care in camps filled far beyond capacity.
Thousands of women and children are being exploited
by organized sex trafficking operations. The United
States is the largest provider of humanitarian assistance
to the eastern Democratic Republic of the Congo,
contributing more than $140 million since 1 October.
As we speak, our partners are working in perilous
conditions to provide life-saving assistance to hundreds
of thousands of people in North Kivu. The Government
of the Democratic Republic of the Congo must do
considerably more to protect its citizens, including by
providing land for sites where displaced people can
receive services and by enforcing its own laws against
trafficking and the exploitation of women and girls.
The last time Special Envoy Huang Xia briefed
the Security Council (see S/PV.9165), regional troop
deployments under the aegis of the regional force of the
EAC were in the initial planning stages. In recent weeks,
Burundi, Uganda and South Sudan deployed troops to
North Kivu province. Angola has also committed to
deploying troops to help restore peace. It is imperative
for additional security forces not to aggravate an already
tense situation. As such, I repeat my call on regional
leaders to ensure their forces respect human rights,
prioritize the safety of civilians and refrain from illicit
activities, such as the extraction of natural resources.
It is equally critical that they coordinate with, and
complement the important work of, the Forces armées
de la République démocratique du Congo (FARDC),
MONUSCO and United Nations humanitarian agencies
and non-governmental organizations.

23-111757/22

S/PV.9307

The situation in the Great Lakes region

This year marks 10 years since the signing of the
Peace, Security and Cooperation Framework, but the
region remains marked by instability. Through the
Nairobi and Luanda processes, we have the political
structures necessary to pursue dialogue. Through the
FARDC, MONUSCO and the regional force of the EAC,
we have the capacity to protect civilians. And through
the United Nations, the Office of the Special Envoy
and our own bilateral efforts, we have the necessary
platforms to coordinate and engage diplomatically. What
we are missing is the commitment and political will to
use those tools for their intended purposes — bringing
about peace. We cannot wait another 10 years for peace
in the Great Lakes. The region’s people deserve it now.
Mr. Zhang Jun (China) (spoke in Chinese): I
thank Special Envoy Huang Xia and the Chair of the
Peacebuilding Commission, Ambassador Šimonović,
for their briefings. I also welcome the presence of
the representatives of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, Rwanda and Burundi at today’s meeting.
Recently, the increasing challenges in the Great
Lakes region and the worsening security situation in
eastern Democratic Republic of the Congo have had
an impact on regional peace and stability. This year
marks the tenth anniversary of the signing of the
Peace, Security and Cooperation Framework for the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and the Region. The
international community should support the countries
of the region in summarizing their experiences
and revitalizing that important process to build a
common future.
I would like to emphasize the following points.
First, we must insist on peaceful coexistence.
Ten years ago, the countries of the region signed the
Peace, Security and Cooperation Framework for the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and the Region
and jointly made solemn commitments to respect for
sovereignty and territorial integrity, non-interference
in internal affairs, respect for each other’s legitimate
security concerns and non-support to armed groups.
Those commitments set an example for mutual respect
and peaceful coexistence.
In the face of ongoing trouble caused by armed
groups and increased tensions in eastern Democratic
Republic of the Congo, the countries of the region
should draw lessons from history, fulfil their common
commitments and resolve their differences through
diplomacy and dialogue. The pressing issue now is to
8/22

19/04/2023

urge armed groups to cease the fighting and put an
end to the violence. China supports the African Union
(AU) and the countries of the region in revitalizing the
Peace, Security and Cooperation Framework and looks
forward to a successful outcome to the summit to be
held in Burundi in May.
Special Envoy Huang Xia has done a lot of work
in promoting the Peace, Security and Cooperation
Framework, and we hope that he will continue to play a
leading role, strengthen his diplomacy and good offices
and create conditions for dialogue and mutual trust
among the parties.
Secondly, we must insist on regional cooperation.
The AU, the East African Community (EAC), the
International Conference on the Great Lakes Region
and the Southern African Development Community
have recently held summits, one after another, in
an effort to use their good offices with regard to the
eastern Democratic Republic of the Congo issue and
to promote regional initiatives such as the Nairobi and
Luanda processes. The EAC and Angola are carrying
out peacekeeping and security operations in eastern
Democratic Republic of the Congo. The international
community should support efforts made to find African
solutions to African problems and bring the two
processes into effective play.
At the same time, non-military means should be
promoted in parallel. China supports the regional
Contact and Coordination Group on non-military
measures as it continues to engage with armed groups,
promote disarmament, demobilization and reintegration
and help the countries of the region to deepen exchanges
on defence and border security.
The new strategy for the Great Lakes region is an
important framework for the Organization to bolster
regional cooperation. China appreciates the efforts made
by the Office of the Special Envoy in establishing an
integrated secretariat to implement flagship initiatives,
the new strategy and action plan. China is ready to
provide assistance within the framework of the United
Nations peace and development trust fund. We expect
our key partners to actively contribute to the fund and
support the implementation of the new strategy.
Thirdly, we should insist on common development,
which will help to bind the interests of the countries of
the region together and solidify the material foundations
for their common security. The Democratic Republic of
the Congo, the United Republic of Tanzania, Burundi,
23-11175

19/04/2023

The situation in the Great Lakes region

Zambia, Rwanda, Uganda and other countries in the
region are actively establishing bilateral cooperation
committees, signing economic and trade agreements
and carrying out cross-country and cross-regional
infrastructure projects, making tremendous efforts to
enhance the development momentum from within the
region and promoting regional cooperation — all of
which is to be commended. United Nations agencies
such as the Office of the Special Envoy for the Great
Lakes should broker such efforts and assist with
regional cooperation.
The illicit extraction of natural resources is an
important factor affecting regional stability and
constraining regional development. The international
community should support the countries of the region
in curbing illicit trade by armed groups and actively
support legitimate trade to make natural resources a
highlight of regional cooperation.
China has always firmly supported the sustainable
development of the Great Lakes region and has
implemented a large number of cooperation projects
with the countries of the region in the fields of
infrastructure, energy, mining resources, climate
change response and the improvement of livelihoods
and job creation. China’s Global Development Initiative
is aimed mainly at developing countries, such as those
in Africa. This afternoon, the Permanent Mission of
the People’s Republic of China, together with China
International Development Cooperation Agency and
the United Nations agencies in China will jointly hold
a high-level event presenting the most recent progress
on implementing the Global Development Initiative.
We look forward to deepening cooperation with the
countries of the region within the framework of the
Global Development Initiative and injecting new
momentum for achieving peace and development in
the region.
Mr. Kariuki (United Kingdom): I thank Special
Envoy Huang Xia for his briefing and Ambassador
Šimonović for his presentation on behalf of the
Peacebuilding Commission. I welcome the participation
of the countries of the region in this meeting.
I will focus on the situation in eastern Democratic
Republic of the Congo and regional processes to end
the conflict.
The United Kingdom remains deeply concerned by
the intensifying violence and deteriorating humanitarian
situation in the Great Lakes region, particularly in

S/PV.9307

eastern Democratic Republic of the Congo. We strongly
condemn the continuing violence by all armed groups,
including the United Nations-sanctioned Mouvement
du 23 mars (M-23) armed group. In the limited areas
from which it has withdrawn, the horrors perpetrated
by M-23 are gradually being exposed, with allegations
of mass rapes and summary killings.
The redeployment of resources to tackle M-23
has also undermined the protection of civilians
elsewhere. There have recently been horrifying
accounts of executions and attacks on civilians by the
Allied Democratic Forces and the Coopérative pour le
développement du Congo. We call for comprehensive
investigations into allegations of human rights and
international humanitarian law abuses by armed groups
and for those responsible to be held accountable. All
support to those non-State armed actors must stop.
We reiterate our full support for regional diplomatic
efforts, including the Nairobi and Luanda processes,
which promote de-escalation and are aimed at creating
the conditions for lasting peace in the region. We
are making a financial contribution to the Nairobi
process to that end. We urge all parties to respect the
commitments made under those processes, including
the withdrawal of M-23, to end all support to armed
groups and to stop the use of incendiary hate speech.
We welcome Special Envoy Huang Xia’s support to
those processes and encourage increased engagement
as the conflict worsens.
We welcome M-23’s handing over of some locations
to the East African Community regional force, but
any withdrawal must be complete and in line with the
agreed processes through the Luanda road map. We
hope that the forthcoming Angolan troop deployment
will help reinforce that withdrawal.
There is only one way out of the conflict. The
violence must stop to give dialogue and peace a chance to
succeed. The United Kingdom calls upon the countries
of the region, the members of the Council and Special
Envoy Huang Xia to intensify efforts to de-escalate
the situation, improve regional cooperation, address
security challenges, improve humanitarian access and
bring peace to the Great Lakes region.
Mr. Hauri (Switzerland) (spoke in French): I thank
the Special Envoy of the Secretary-General and the Chair
of the Peacebuilding Commission for their briefings. I
welcome the participation of the representatives of the
States in the region.

23-111759/22

S/PV.9307

The situation in the Great Lakes region

Ten years ago, the countries of the region signed
the Peace, Security and Cooperation Framework for
the Democratic Republic of the Congo and the Region.
Today the facts on the ground stand in stark contrast to
the hope for a lasting peace that prevailed at the time
of the signing.
The President of the Swiss Confederation saw that
first-hand during his visit to the Democratic Republic of
Congo last week. In the Bushagara camp for displaced
persons and at the Panzi Hospital, he observed the
extent of the violence, which is affecting the entire
region. However, above all, he saw the extraordinary
resilience of the people, their desire to find peace and
the need to do everything possible to protect civilians.
As Nobel Peace Prize winner Denis Mukwege said, we
cannot limit ourselves to repairing the consequences of
violence; we must treat its causes.
Switzerland is committed throughout the Great
Lakes region to promoting peace, fostering respect
for human rights and supporting humanitarian aid and
development cooperation. In that spirit, since 2016, we
have been organizing Great Lakes Region retreats with
the Office of the Special Envoy. That forum supports the
actors involved, including civil society, in developing
ways to address the crisis.
I would like to underscore three points that are
essential for those efforts to have a genuine chance
of success.
First, cooperation among all States in the Great
Lakes region is crucial for long-term prosperity and
stability. In that context, the deterioration of relations
between the Democratic Republic of the Congo and
Rwanda is a major concern. We welcome the leadership
of the States in the region in encouraging a peaceful
solution to the crisis in the eastern Democratic Republic
of the Congo. In that regard, we support the Nairobi
and Luanda processes. Indeed, we are convinced
that dialogue, which includes the active participation
of women and young people, and genuine regional
collaboration remain the only possible way to promote
trust and lasting peace.
Secondly, it is imperative that the attacks on
civilians and civilian infrastructure be brought to an end
immediately. Those attacks constitute gross violations
of international humanitarian law, as well as violations
and abuses of human rights law. We call on all parties
to respect their obligations under international law. The
intensification of fighting in the eastern Democratic
10/22

19/04/2023

Republic of the Congo has aggravated an already
precarious humanitarian situation and has led to the
forced displacement of more than 900,000 people since
March 2022, many of them children. As underscored in
the Nairobi process, the status of refugees and internally
displaced persons is a fundamental issue that requires
concerted solutions at the regional level. Switzerland
reaffirms its support for the territorial integrity and
sovereignty of the Democratic Republic of the Congo
and strongly condemns any support to local or foreign
armed groups.
Thirdly, in order strengthen peace, the root causes
of conflict in the region must be addressed. That
means strengthening the rule of law, extending State
authority and public services and ensuring respect
for fundamental rights. At the same time, the illegal
exploitation and trade in natural resources by armed
groups and transnational criminal networks undermine
peace in the Great Lakes region. There is an urgent
need to institute a more sustainable management of
natural resources and to tackle illicit financial flows
in order to promote sustainable development. Finally,
the negative impacts of climate change contribute to
regional instability. I am thinking in that regard of
the recent floods in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo and Burundi, for example, which have caused
large-scale displacement and further impacted an
already vulnerable population.
Peace, stability and cooperation are the objectives
of the Framework Agreement signed by the States of
the Great Lakes region. The ink on that Agreement
has long since dried, but the guns have not been
silenced. We therefore call for more dialogue and
confidence-building measures among the States of
the region, civil society and international partners.
Switzerland stands ready to support those efforts.
Ms. Gatt (Malta): I thank Special Envoy Huang
Xia and Peacebuilding Commission Chair Šimonović
for their informative briefings. I welcome the
representatives of Rwanda, Burundi and the Democratic
Republic of the Congo to the meeting.
Since the beginning of this year, the Council has
been engaged in addressing the deeply concerning
security situation in the eastern Democratic Republic
of the Congo, which threatens the stability of the
Great Lakes region. The Security Council has been
united in its messages to actors involved in the eastern
Democratic Republic of the Congo crisis while actively
23-11175

19/04/2023

The situation in the Great Lakes region

S/PV.9307

supporting ongoing regional initiatives. The Nairobi
and Luanda processes are key to achieving longterm sustainable peace and security. We reiterate the
need for sustained commitment by all parties to their
successful implementation.

In order to successfully tackle the root causes
of conflict, it is essential that proper management of
natural resources be part of our collective efforts. We
applaud the role played by Special Envoy Huang Xia in
the region in that regard.

Malta acknowledges the African Union Peace and
Security Council’s extensive engagement in the region.
The recent endorsement of the final communiqué
from last February’s summit of the Eastern African
Community and the International Conference on
the Great Lakes Region represents an important
joint endeavour.

Malta remains deeply concerned with the
humanitarian situation in the eastern Democratic
Republic of the Congo. As Special Envoy Huang Xia
said earlier in his briefing, it is devastating. Conflict
and climate-induced food insecurity, among other
issues, continue to cause suffering for some of the
region’s most vulnerable population groups. Women and
children, as well as refugees and internally displaced
persons, remain as disproportionately impacted as ever.

The Peace, Security and Cooperation Framework
for the Democratic Republic of the Congo and the
Region remains the best structure for achieving peace
and stability in the region and needs to be translated into
reality. In that regard, we look forward to the holding
of the eleventh summit of the Regional Oversight
Mechanism of the Peace, Security and Cooperation
Framework next month.
We also acknowledge the work of other subregional
organizations, such as the Economic Community
of Central African States and the Southern African
Development Community, as they are constructively
contributing to growth and stability in the region.
As a member State of the European Union (EU),
Malta is deeply committed to complementing peace
efforts in the region. In line with the United Nations
Strategy for Peace Consolidation, Conflict Prevention
and Conflict Resolution in the Great Lakes Region, the
respect for democracy, good governance, the rule of
law, human rights and international humanitarian law
all lie at the heart of the recently adopted renewed EU
Great Lakes Strategy. That will be translated into the
promotion of free and fair elections, transitional justice
and the fight against impunity and corruption — all key
priorities for Malta. In the same vein, the EU’s efforts
are complemented by the Global Gateway initiative in
the region.
Efforts must be focused on breaking the cycle of
violence in the region. It is crucial that we place local
populations — women, youth, marginalized groups,
civil society and the private sector — at the front and
centre of our purpose. As we encourage the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and Rwanda to return to dialogue,
we also urge all armed actors to lay down their weapons,
de-escalate and engage in the disarmament process.

As armed groups continue to control and ravage
local communities in the eastern Democratic Republic
of the Congo, we condemn their actions in the
strongest terms and call for them to lay down their
arms. Malta also deplores the reported instances of
movement restrictions and access denials for medical
and humanitarian organizations seeking to deliver
life-saving aid to those most in need often in the face
of grave danger.
In conclusion, we must prevent history from
repeating itself and work tirelessly to heal the collective
trauma of generations of people who have grown
accustomed only to conflict and insecurity and strive
to bring them back to peace and stability.
Mr. Agyeman (Ghana): I have the honour to
make this statement on behalf of the three African
members of the Security Council (A3), namely, Gabon,
Mozambique and my own country, Ghana.
I take this opportunity to commend the dynamism
of Mr. Huang Xia, Special Envoy of the SecretaryGeneral for the Great Lakes Region, who is actively
working for the consolidation of peace in that region.
His exhaustive presentation provides us with additional
elements which allow for a better understanding of the
situation in the Great Lakes region. We also extend our
appreciation to Ambassador Ivan Šimonović, Chair of
the Peacebuilding Commission, for his equally useful
insights in that regard. The A3 welcomes the presence
of our brothers, the Permanent Representatives of
the Democratic Republic of the Congo, Rwanda and
Burundi, whose perspectives we look forward to hearing,
as they represent the countries concerned in the region.

23-1117511/22

S/PV.9307

The situation in the Great Lakes region

Our intervention will be limited to four
points on the security, political, economic and
humanitarian situations.
The A3 remains deeply concerned about the
deterioration of the security situation in the region,
including the serious daily abuses experienced by
civilian populations who are subjected to the cycles
of terror imposed by armed and terrorist groups in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo. We reiterate
in the strongest terms our condemnation of such
acts of violence, perpetrated mainly by the armed
groups — the Mouvement du 23 mars (M-23), the
Allied Democratic Forces, the Coopérative pour
le développement du Congo, Mayi-Mayi Zaire and
others — which has led to the massive displacement of
populations in the Democratic Republic of the Congo
but also in neighbouring countries. The A3 takes note
of the withdrawal of the M-23 from several previously
occupied territories and calls for their complete
withdrawal from the eastern Democratic Republic of the
Congo. We reiterate our demand for the withdrawal of
all foreign armed groups from the Democratic Republic
of the Congo, the immediate cessation of all external
support to armed groups, adherence to the Nairobi
process by local armed groups, their participation
in the Disarmament, Demobilization, Community
Recovery and Stabilization Programme and the full
implementation of the outcome of the mini-summit held
in Luanda on 23 November 2022, which was reaffirmed
in the communiqué by the African Union Peace and
Security Council on 17 February.
We look forward to the upcoming fourth round
of consultations between the Government of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and the Congolese
armed groups as an opportunity for all local armed
groups to recommit themselves to silencing the guns
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo and adhering
to the ongoing political processes. The gravity of the
situation risks taking us back to the darkest hours in the
history of the region of the Great Lakes, more than 25
years ago. We must not wait for the security situation
to worsen further and the region to flare up once again.
The escalation in tensions in the region is already at a
climax, and the combination of terrorist attacks, daily
massacres of civilians perpetrated by armed groups and
the approach of the important electoral deadline in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo must now lead us to
mobilize all diplomatic, political and security channels
to stem the wave of violence.
12/22

19/04/2023

At the political level, the dynamism of the
subregional organizations to restore peace in the region
is to be commended. The African Union — the Peace
and Security Council of which just carried out a field
visit to the Democratic Republic of the Congo from
20 to 23 March — and the Luanda and Nairobi processes
reflect the continued commitment of Africa to the
stabilization of the Great Lakes. Ghana, Mozambique
and Gabon commend the continued involvement of
Presidents João Lourenço, William Ruto and Evariste
Ndayishimiye and former President Uhuru Kenyatta,
facilitator of the East African Community (EAC), who
has worked tirelessly to restore confidence among the
leaders of the countries of the region. The A3 commends
the East African Community regional force and the
United Nations Organization Stabilization Mission in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO)
troop-contributing countries for their commitment to
promoting regional peace and security and welcomes
the recent deployment of Ugandan, Kenyan and South
Sudanese troops to the eastern Democratic Republic of
the Congo to augment the regional force.
The A3 also welcomes the decision made by the
Angolan Government to deploy troops to the eastern
Democratic Republic of the Congo for one year to ensure
stability and protect ceasefire monitors. We believe that
the work of the Expanded Joint Verification Mechanism
and the ad hoc verification mechanism is necessary to
strengthen confidence-building measures. We recall
that, for the regional mediation processes to be effective,
it is crucial that the massacres against civilians cease,
dialogue be re-established and confidence be restored
among all relevant stakeholders of the region. We
welcome the African Union’s decision to support the
deployment of the East African Community regional
force through an allocation of resources from the crisis
reserve facility of the African Union Peace Fund and
invite international partners to provide financial,
logistical, material and technical expertise to the
force and the ongoing regional initiatives in Luanda
and Nairobi.
Cognizant of the number of troops deployed in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, the A3 calls for the
establishment of a real coordination and cooperation
mechanism between the Congolese defence and security
forces, MONUSCO and regional and bilateral forces for
optimal protection of civilians. As we celebrate the tenth
anniversary of the signing in Addis Ababa of the Peace,
Security and Cooperation Framework Agreement for
23-11175

19/04/2023

The situation in the Great Lakes region

the Democratic Republic of the Congo and the Region,
Ghana, Mozambique and Gabon underscore the strategic
importance of its effective implementation by all. The
Agreement remains a compass on which the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and the signatory countries can
continue to rely to succeed in pulling the region out
of the recurrent upheavals of violence and instability.
To that end, it is essential to proceed with its urgent
revitalization, with the genuine political will of all the
signatory countries to respect their commitments. It is
clear that, in the face of the uncertainties that cloud the
future of the Great Lakes region, the mobilization of
the international community is essential, but that must
be concerted and coordinated in support of the regional
initiatives of Nairobi and Luanda, which are currently
the credible ways out of the crisis.
As is widely known, there can be no development
without peace, and the nexus between peace and
development is a major challenge to extracting the Great
Lakes region from endemic crises. In that regard, we
cannot address the security situation in the Great Lakes
region without examining the issue of the plundering of
natural resources to the detriment of the populations.
We are pleased to note that the region’s growth rate
in 2022 was 4.5 per cent, driven in particular by the
recovery in global demand in the mining, industrial and
services sectors. That performance would have been
even better had the region’s economies not been strained
by the combined effects of the coronavirus disease
pandemic, the Ebola crisis, fuel shortages, soaring food
prices and other factors. We must remember that, in
view of the economic potential of the region, it could
become the economic lung of Africa. The dynamism of
the economy of the Democratic Republic of the Congo
plays a great role to that effect, given the wealth of its
natural resources and the potential of taking advantage
of the internal market of the Great Lakes region. The
fight against the illicit trafficking of natural resources
should lead to the development of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and the countries of the region.
The development of natural-resource wealth offers
the countries of the Great Lakes region the opportunity
to build a region of shared prosperity. In that regard,
efforts to integrate the economies of the region by
strengthening economic cooperation and trade must
continue. That is bolstered by the effectiveness of
regional mechanisms such as the Regional Mineral
Certification Mechanism, established by the
International Conference on the Great Lakes Region.

S/PV.9307

In that connection, we welcome the meeting of the
Regional Committee on the Fight against the Illegal
Exploitation of Natural Resources, held from 15 to
18 November 2022.
The A3 recalls that drying up the sources of
financing of armed and terrorist groups undoubtedly
requires the strengthening of judicial institutions in
the countries of the region. It is essential to punish all
individuals and entities involved in the massacre of
populations and the destabilization of the countries of
the region. Ending impunity is no longer an option, and,
in that regard, we welcome the support provided by the
Office of the Special Envoy to strengthen the judicial
capacities of the Democratic Republic of the Congo
and the countries of the region. We note with concern
that in conflict zones, human rights abuses are steadily
increasing, with 82 per cent of violations committed
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo in conflictaffected areas, 74 per cent of which were committed by
armed and terrorist groups. Respect for human rights
is inherent in the restoration of peace, and we welcome
the support provided by the International Organization
of La Francophonie to strengthen the capacities of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo in that area.
The humanitarian emergency in the Great Lakes
region is symptomatic of the security crisis. There are
approximately 9.4 million internally displaced persons
in the region, including 6.2 million in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, resulting in millions of children
out of school, whose future is being jeopardized.
We urge the international community to continue its
efforts in financing the humanitarian response plans
of the countries of the region in order to alleviate
the suffering of refugees and displaced persons. It is
crucial that humanitarian workers be able to carry out
their mandates safely and in an unhindered manner.
(spoke in French)
Finally, the A3 commends the commitment of
Special Envoy for the Great Lakes Region Huang
Xia. Gabon, Mozambique and Ghana reiterate their
solidarity with the peoples of the Great Lakes region,
and we reaffirm our firm commitment to respecting the
sovereignty, territorial integrity and inviolability of the
borders of the countries of the region.
Mr. Almazrouei (United Arab Emirates) (spoke
in Arabic): I thank the Special Envoy for his thorough
briefing and efforts, and thank his Office for the efforts
made to support peace and stability in the Great Lakes

23-1117513/22

S/PV.9307

The situation in the Great Lakes region

region. We also thank the Chair of the Peace Building
Commission for his valuable briefing and appreciate
the contributions of the Commission to the Council’s
discussions today. We welcome the representatives of
Burundi, the Democratic Republic of the Congo and
Rwanda in today’s meeting.
Despite the persistent efforts of the countries of
the region to confront internal and regional challenges,
the road ahead remains long. As the Special Envoy
said today, more efforts must be made to restore goodneighbourliness, address disputes through peaceful
means and strengthen cooperation among countries of
the region to promote regional peace and security. In
my statement today I will focus on three aspects related
to the developments in the Great Lakes region.
First, the interconnected nature of the challenges
facing the region requires continued focus on regional
dialogue and good-neighbourliness, as they are key
pillars to address those challenges. In that regard, we
commend the ongoing regional initiatives, including
the Luanda and Nairobi processes, to discuss ways
to strengthen cooperation and relations among the
countries of the region. We hope that the decision
adopted by the joint mini-summit of the International
Conference on the Great Lakes Region and the East
African Community will contribute to enhancing
consistency and integration of those regional efforts.
In the context of acknowledging the importance of
urgently promoting the work related to establishing
peace and security, we stress that political will is key to
that end. We also emphasize the importance of ensuring
the full, equal and meaningful participation of women
throughout dialogue and various regional peace efforts
as a prerequisite for achieving sustained agreements.
Secondly, we must continue to address the security
challenges in the region, foremost of which acts of
violence, to achieve sustainable peace and security.
That includes addressing the ongoing attacks by armed
groups in the eastern part of the Democratic Republic
of the Congo, especially attacks against civilians. As
we all know, armed groups represent serious threats
to the people in the Democratic Republic of the Congo
and across the Great Lakes region. We mentioned
previously that all armed groups must immediately
cease hostilities, refrain from targeting civilians or
civilian institutions and unconditionally lay down
their weapons, while also committing to all relevant
ceasefires in the region.
14/22

19/04/2023

As armed groups continue to finance their criminal
activities through the illegal exploitation of natural
resources, it is critical to maintain our focus on cutting
off those funding sources. In that context, we are
pleased that the Special Envoy and the International
Conference on the Great Lakes Region participated in
the tenth Dubai Precious Metals Conference, held in
November 2022, which provided an opportunity to hold
important and urgent discussions about the impacts
of that illegal trade and ways to address it, including
by strengthening regional cooperation and capacitybuilding for States, at their request, to sustainably
manage and protect their natural resources.
Thirdly, the humanitarian crisis in the region should
not be overlooked. It is exacerbated by armed conflicts
and climate change and is further complicated by the
increase in the number of people who have been forced
to leave their homes in search of safety and security.
There are approximately 5 million refugees and more
than 9 million displaced people in the region, of whom
5.8 million are in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo. In that regard, we appreciate the humanitarian
efforts of the Governments of the Sudan and Uganda
in dealing with that crisis by hosting the largest
number of refugees in the region. In order to prevent
further displacement and ensure an effective response
to humanitarian needs, we call on all arms bearers to
adhere to international humanitarian law, including the
protection of civilians and humanitarian workers.
We also stress that we will continue to pay close
attention to the health situation in the region, especially
given its vulnerability to outbreaks of diseases such as
Ebola. In that regard, we commend Uganda’s tireless
efforts to combat the virus and its success in halting its
spread within the country.
In conclusion, the United Arab Emirates reiterates
its commitment to supporting regional efforts, the
United Nations and all other partners in establishing
peace in the Great Lakes region. The people of the
region deserve no less.
Mr. Pérez Loose (Ecuador) (spoke in Spanish): I
thank the Special Envoy of the Secretary-General for
the Great Lakes Region, Mr. Huang Xia, for his briefing.
I take this opportunity to highlight his work, which
fosters dialogue and supports regional peace efforts.
We appreciate the information provided by
Ambassador Šimonović, Chair of the Peacebuilding
Commission, and welcome the presence of the
23-11175

19/04/2023

The situation in the Great Lakes region

Permanent Representatives of Rwanda, Burundi and
the Democratic Republic of the Congo.
We highlight the role of regional and subregional
organizations in Africa, as it provides a collaborative
and comprehensive approach to supporting its members
in peacebuilding efforts, in accordance with their
priorities and consistent with the motto “African
solutions for African problems”.
Ecuador views with concern the deterioration in the
security situation in the east of the Democratic Republic
of the Congo and the region, due to the resurgence of
the activities of armed groups that have created tensions
in bilateral relations between the Democratic Republic
of the Congo and Rwanda. We therefore highlight the
statements of Mr. Huang Xia who, on the occasion of
the anniversary of the Peace and Security Framework
for the Democratic Republic of the Congo and the
Region, referred to the persistent challenges to peace
and security in the region and called on the signatory
countries to renew their commitment to working to
restore regional peace and stability.
We are confident that the decisions taken at the
twentieth extraordinary summit of Heads of State
and Government of the East African Community,
held in Burundi, will provide new opportunities and
alternatives, such as the creation of a verification
mechanism. We support the efforts made in the context
of the Nairobi process in preparation for a fourth round
of dialogue between the Congolese Government and the
armed groups.
We consider the coordination between the Luanda
and Nairobi processes, agreed upon during the minisummit convened by the East African Community,
and specifically the adoption of a timetable for the
implementation of priority actions related to armed
groups, particularly the Mouvement du 23 Mars, and
the bilateral relations between the Democratic Republic
of the Congo and Rwanda, to be fundamental. The
cooperation provided by Angola for the protection of
the members of the ad hoc verification mechanism
under the Luanda process in the North Kivu region
has been crucial to that process. The deteriorating
humanitarian situation requires the immediate attention
of the international community, whose response
must be accompanied by actions that are conducive
to peacebuilding by addressing the root causes of
conflict, paving the way for sustainable development.
In that context, Ecuador supports the Chair of the

S/PV.9307

Peacebuilding Commission’s briefing, in which he
highlighted elements such as the promotion of dialogue
that contribute to building more inclusive societies.
In that regard, Ecuador would like to highlight the
importance of women’s participation in peace processes,
as well as in national and local political structures.
The United Nations programmes and actions in the
Great Lakes region are key elements in reducing threats
to peace and security, precisely because they address
the root causes of conflicts and deal with issues such as
the sustainable and transparent management of natural
resources, human rights and the implementation of the
agendas on women and peace and security, children
in armed conflict and youth and peace and security,
thereby paving the way for the implementation of the
action plan of the United Nations Strategy for Peace
Consolidation, Conflict Prevention and Conflict
Resolution in the Great Lakes Region.
Finally, we reiterate our belief that regional
organizations — the guarantors of peace processes in the
Great Lakes region — are the cornerstone of preventive
diplomacy and the search for solutions through peaceful
means, equipped with the tools to de-escalate armed
conflicts and with rapidly deployable, highly effective
forces on the ground.
Mr. Spasse (Albania): We thank Special Envoy
Huang Xia and Ambassador Šimonović for their
informative briefings. We also welcome the participation
of the representatives of Rwanda, Burundi and the
Democratic Republic of the Congo in today’s meeting.
Ten years after the signing of the Peace, Security and
Cooperation Framework for the Democratic Republic
of the Congo and the Region, a crucial instrument for
achieving peace and stability in the region, Albania is
profoundly concerned about the deterioration of the
security situation, despite the relative calm in recent
days. It has seriously eroded progress on regional
cooperation and economic integration. The heightened
tensions between the Democratic Republic of the
Congo and Rwanda can trigger a spiral with irreversible
consequences. Albania urges both parties to refrain
from blaming each other and to come to a reasonable
settlement of disputes within the existing regional
mechanisms. No military strategy can resolve the longstanding grievances.
Regrettably, armed groups that had already chosen
to disarm have taken up arms again, forming new
alliances and creating new enemies. The sovereignty

23-1117515/22

S/PV.9307

The situation in the Great Lakes region

and territorial integrity of the Democratic Republic
of the Congo must be respected and any support for
the Mouvement du 23 mars must stop. We take note
of that group’s partial withdrawal from some areas in
North Kivu and call for its complete retreat from all
controlled territories. We also repeat our call for all
Congolese groups to participate in the disarmament
process and for foreign armed groups to leave the
country immediately. In particular, groups such as
the Allied Democratic Forces, the Coopérative pour
le développement du Congo and Zaire have used the
vacuum left by the Congolese security forces to gain a
stronghold in those areas by attacking civilians fleeing
their homes. The number of refugees and displaced
persons all over the region is alarmingly high. The
States of the region should make comprehensive and
sustainable efforts to enable their return and improve
their living conditions.
Albania sees the Luanda and Nairobi processes
as complementary and crucial to the political efforts
to defuse regional tensions and bring armed groups to
the negotiating table. As such, both processes should
be supported, while the States of the region should
renew their commitment to fully implementing the
Peace, Security and Cooperation Framework. In that
vein, the eleventh summit of the Regional Oversight
Mechanism, postponed to May, is an opportunity that
should not be squandered. The missions conducted by
the operational cell of the Contact and Coordination
Group on non-military measures in South Kivu and
Ituri provinces are critical steps in building a pathway
towards the disarmament and repatriation of more
members of foreign armed groups in the eastern
Democratic Republic of the Congo.
We have repeatedly emphasized that the region
will not be able to find peace without dealing with
the underlying sources of the conflict. The illicit
exploitation of natural resources is a fundamental
one, allowing armed groups to finance their horrors.
We have followed the outcomes of the meeting held
in November of the Regional Committee on the Fight
against the Illegal Exploitation of Natural Resources,
and we encourage countries of the region and those of
transit and destination to reinforce their cooperation in
curbing that illicit trade by improving transparency and
the monitoring of the entire supply chain.
Lastly, we affirm our support for the Special
Envoy and commend him for his leading efforts in
implementing the United Nations Strategy for Peace
16/22

19/04/2023

Consolidation, Conflict Prevention and Conflict
Resolution in the Great Lakes Region, as well as its
action plan.
The President (spoke in Russian): I shall now make
a statement in my capacity as the representative of the
Russian Federation.
We thank Special Envoy Huang Xia and Mr. Ivan
Šimonović, Permanent Representative of Croatia to
the United Nations and Chair of the Peacebuilding
Commission, for their briefings. We welcome the
participation of the representatives of Burundi, the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and Rwanda in
today’s meeting.
The situation in the Great Lakes region mainly
hinges on the situation in the eastern Democratic
Republic of the Congo. We are particularly concerned
about the continuing clashes between the Congolese
Government forces and the Mouvement du 23 mars
(M-23) group in North Kivu province, as well as the
tensions between Kinshasa and Kigali. We note that
by virtue of the fact that the Forces armées de la
République démocratique du Congo, the United Nations
Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic
of Congo (MONUSCO) and the regional force of the
East African Community (EAC) have been forced to
focus their efforts on dealing with the M-23 problem,
other illegal armed groups have been taking advantage
of the situation by expanding their illegal activities,
attacking civilians, exploiting natural resources with
impunity and strengthening their positions in the east
of the country.
In general, as has already been said today, natural
resources are one of the most important factors in the
instability in the Great Lakes region. The worsening
security situation significantly complicates matters
in the region, increasing ordinary people’s suffering.
Members of the Security Council visited Kinshasa and
Goma on a field mission from 9 to 12 March, where
they saw first-hand how difficult the humanitarian
situation is in the eastern provinces of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo. We believe it is important to
continue to seek a diplomatic solution to the conflict,
including within the framework of the Luanda and
Nairobi negotiation formats. We believe that the priority
should be to achieve a cessation of hostilities and a
comprehensive and inclusive dialogue. In that regard,
we hope that the regional leaders will succeed in taking
further steps to create the conditions for advancing
23-11175

19/04/2023

The situation in the Great Lakes region

the inter-Congolese negotiation process and restoring
good-neighbourly relations between the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and Rwanda.
Speaking more generally, we believe it is important
to continue to integrate synergistic efforts and
initiatives for regional cooperation in order to achieve
meaningful results. We hope that the understandings
reached at the twentieth extraordinary summit of
Heads of State and Government of the EAC in early
February in Bujumbura, as well as at the meeting
between members of the EAC and the International
Conference on the Great Lakes Region, held on the
margins of the thirty-sixth Summit of Heads of State
and Government of the African Union in Addis Ababa
in mid-February, will help implement the Luanda road
map and facilitate the withdrawal of the M-23 from the
occupied areas. We expect the Angolan contingent to
play a constructive role in that by supporting the ad hoc
verification mechanism.
We support the efforts of MONUSCO and its
leadership. We consider the presence of Blue Helmets in
the conflict zone to be an important stabilizing factor. The
recent protests against the Mission’s presence are cause
for concern. Attacks on peacekeepers are unacceptable.
It is important that to ensure not only that MONUSCO
carries out informational outreach activities with the
local population regarding the objectives of its presence
and the content of its mandate but also that it listens to the
views of the public and the authorities, which will enable
it to do its work more effectively. We believe firmly that
MONUSCO’s withdrawal plan must be implemented
based on the reality on the ground and without the
imposition of artificial timelines. In accordance with
resolution 2666 (2022), we await the Secretary-General’s
proposals on the reconfiguration of the Mission by July,
in the light of the ongoing consultations with Kinshasa.

S/PV.9307

the consolidation of the efforts of the States in the region,
as well as their awareness of their common responsibility,
and their practical interest, where stabilizing the
situation in the Great Lakes region is concerned, an area
where various interests are closely intertwined. Peaceful
and sustainable development, mutually beneficial
cooperation and a focus on the collective resolution of
long-standing problems — including those related to
the illegal exploitation of natural resources as one of the
key factors fuelling armed conflict — will benefit all the
countries of the Great Lakes basin.
We call for intensifying the efforts to achieve the full
implementation of the fundamental Peace, Security and
Cooperation Framework Agreement for the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and the Great Lakes Region of
2013, and we welcome the commitment of the African
Union to revitalizing it. For our part, we reaffirm our
readiness to support the stabilization of the Great
Lakes area by encouraging dialogue and constructive
cooperation among the States of the region. We look
forward to working together with the relevant United
Nations bodies and their representatives.
In conclusion, we want to emphasize that Russia
fully supports the activities of Special Envoy Huang
Xia to promote an inter-State dialogue with a view to
reducing tensions in that part of Africa.
I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.
I give the floor to the representative of Rwanda.

In order to increase the effectiveness of efforts to
protect the civilian population, we look forward to greater
coordination between the Congolese armed forces and
MONUSCO, as well as the regional and national bodies
involved in resolving the conflict. We note the significant
role played by United Nations agencies in alleviating the
humanitarian consequences of the crisis.

Mr. Gatete (Rwanda): Thank you for allowing
me to contribute to today’s Security Council briefing
on the Great Lakes region. I thank the Special Envoy
of the Secretary-General for the Great Lakes Region
and the Chair of the Peacebuilding Commission for
their briefings. Rwanda commends the Special Envoy
for his dedication to the peace and development of
our subregion. We also welcome the convening of the
eleventh high-level meeting of the Regional Oversight
Mechanism of the Peace, Security and Cooperation
Framework Agreement for the Democratic Republic
of the Congo and the Great Lakes Region to be held in
Bujumbura, which Rwanda looks forward to attending.

It is clear that it will not be possible to achieve a
lasting normalization of the situation in the eastern
Democratic Republic of the Congo and the Great Lakes
region by military means alone. Dialogue and effective
confidence-building measures are essential, along with

Today’s briefing presents an opportunity to look back
10 years, to the moment when the Peace, Security and
Cooperation Framework Agreement for the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and the Great Lakes Region was
signed on 24 February 2013. The Agreement presented

23-1117517/22

S/PV.9307

The situation in the Great Lakes region

a valuable opportunity for all parties to build on the
work started by the region and the wider continent and
to focus seriously on addressing the real problems, as
clearly identified. It was crucial that the signing of
the Agreement not be seen as the end result of a peace
process but as a big step in the right direction. The
Framework Agreement signed 10 years ago recognized
a holistic approach that addressed the multifaceted
root causes as the only way to end instability. Any
meaningful contribution to lasting peace in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and the Great Lakes
region had to abandon the self-defeating practice of
selectivity in both memory and responsibility regarding
the known, long-standing causes of recurring conflict.
Rwanda expected that the Framework would
lead to peace, security, stability and development
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo and the
Great Lakes region as a whole. Ten years later, the
scorecard indicates that the situation is no better.
An evaluation of the Framework is long overdue to
assess its effectiveness and the challenges emanating
from its lack of implementation. There is a need to
genuinely address the real problems of rights, justice
and development and to commit to finding sustainable
solutions for the peoples who look to us for leadership.
As the preparations continue for a fourth round of
the Nairobi peace talks aimed at containing Congolese
armed groups, the facilitator has recommended
including the Mouvement du 23 mars (M-23), in the light
of its compliance with the Luanda recommendations. Its
withdrawal from previously captured areas, which are
now occupied by the East African Community regional
force, is evidence of a productive regional effort, as well
as the M-23’s resolve to respect the regional leaders’
road map reached through the Luanda and Nairobi
processes. Despite the facilitator’s satisfaction with the
M-23’s compliance, President Tshisekedi Tshilombo
of the Democratic Republic of the Congo stated at a
joint press conference in Kinshasa on 13 April with the
President of Switzerland that he would not negotiate,
saying “There is no way that there will be political
dialogue with the M-23.”
The Democratic Republic of the Congo’s stance
is disturbing, as it clearly hinders all regional and
continental efforts aimed at achieving peace in the
eastern Democratic Republic of the Congo. The
region and the international community are expecting
Kinshasa’s cooperation in order to achieve lasting
peace in the eastern Democratic Republic of the Congo
18/22

19/04/2023

following the M-23’s withdrawal. If negotiations are off
the table, once the M-23 completes its withdrawal the
peace mechanisms may hit a dead end yet again and the
consequence would be a recurrence of the atrocities.
At a time when Rwandans and the world are
commemorating the 1994 genocide against the Tutsi,
I would like to remind the Council that the United
Nations-sanctioned terrorist group that carried out the
genocide — the Forces démocratiques de libération du
Rwanda (FDLR) — is still at large in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo. Furthermore, the FDLR enjoys
the support and political shield that the Government
of the Democratic Republic of the Congo provides
while it is actively violating United Nations sanctions.
Since fleeing to the Democratic Republic of the Congo
29 years ago, the group has persistently spread its
genocidal ideology there, resulting in the killings of
hundreds of thousands of Congolese Tutsi. That is in
addition to multiple cross-border attacks on Rwanda.
President Tshisekedi’s attitude to the FDLR and his
recent statement are therefore problematic. In the press
briefing with the President of Switzerland, he went so
far as to sanitize the FDLR terrorist group, claiming
that it poses no threat to Rwanda and saying,
“The pretext that the Forces armées de la République
démocratique du Congo support the FDLR is a
fallacy. The FDLR is a residual force; it no longer
attacks Rwanda and has no political vindictiveness
towards Rwanda.”
Members may also recall that the United Nations
Special Adviser on the Prevention of Genocide,
Ms. Alice Nderitu, has twice issued statements clearly
indicating that the FDLR is very active and spreading
genocidal ideology. As a result, she has called for the
international community to attend to the warning signs
of a possible genocide in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo.
The situation in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo is complex. But while it would not be difficult
to resolve, the statements from the country’s leaders
regarding the situation and the FDLR in particular are
counterproductive where the regional efforts and peace
processes, as envisioned in the Framework Agreement,
are concerned. Instead, the Government of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo continues to make
no effort to implement any of the signed agreements,
which, to say the least, contradicts the Agreement in
word and in spirit.
23-11175

19/04/2023

The situation in the Great Lakes region

We must acknowledge progress in some areas, and
I would like to commend the ongoing deployment of
contingents of the East African Community regional
force to the Democratic Republic of the Congo and the
M-23’s continued withdrawal.
In conclusion, all the parties involved are
implementing the regional agreements — except for
the Democratic Republic of the Congo. In that regard,
Rwanda urges all parties to the conflict to strictly
respect the ceasefire agreements and build on them
to implement the regional agreements’ road maps
in the hope of peaceful negotiations and ultimately a
peaceful resolution.
The President (spoke in Russian): I now give the
floor to the representative of Burundi.
Mr. Maniratanga (Burundi) (spoke in French): At
the outset, I would like to thank the Russian Federation,
which is presiding over the Security Council during
the month of April, for having organized this meeting
and, at the same time, to reaffirm our full support for
its mandate.
I welcome the detailed briefing by Mr. Huang Xia,
Special Envoy of the Secretary-General for the Great
Lakes Region, and note with great appreciation the
rich contributions made by Chair of the Peacebuilding
Commission and the statements made today by the
members of the Security Council. I am also pleased at
the participation of my colleagues from the Democratic
Republic of Congo and Rwanda.
We take note of the report of the Secretary-General
(S/2023/237) and commend the efforts of the United
Nations undertaken by its Special Envoy to bring peace
to the Great Lakes region.
At a time when the eastern Democratic Republic of
Congo continues to face a security and humanitarian
crisis affecting the stability of the country and the
region, as well as children, women and the elderly who
are living in conditions of indescribable suffering,
as Council members noted during their visit to the
Democratic Republic of the Congo in early March,
Burundi reaffirms the relevance of the Peace, Security
and Cooperation Framework for the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and the Region, signed in Addis
Ababa on 14 February 2013.
Now more than ever, the international community
should play an effective role as a guarantor in the
search for peace in the region by taking concrete

S/PV.9307

action to support the tireless efforts of the East African
Community (EAC) and the International Conference on
the Great Lakes Region in the form of a regional force,
meetings of the Chiefs of General Staff of the EAC for
improved coordination and summits of Heads of State
and Government.
The insecurity situation in the east of the Democratic
Republic of Congo has led to the perpetuation of
conflicts in the Great Lakes region, with the corollary
of an increase in the number of local and foreign rebel
groups whose goal is essentially to control and exploit
many mineral resources. That has created a kind of
permanent insecurity and tends to spread the conflict
throughout the region, which in itself constitutes a
genuine threat to international peace and security and
should draw special attention from Security Council
members in the light of the risks of a spillover into
the region.
With less than three weeks to go before the
eleventh Summit of Heads of State and Government
of the Regional Mechanism for the Implementation
of the Framework Agreement on Peace, Security and
Cooperation for the Democratic Republic of Congo and
the Region, which will be held on 6 May, it is important
to use all the means at the disposal of the international
community to stop the war, neutralize the terrorist
forces in the region, begin a dialogue and launch
a disarmament, demobilization and reintegration
mechanism, as recommended by the Nairobi process,
but that requires a great deal of resources that the
region itself does not have. The financial and logistical
contribution of the United Nations and the African
Union to the costs borne by the EAC regional forces at
this time is therefore crucial.
In view of that context and the threats of a regional
spillover, a constant striving for peace explains the firm,
constant and continuous commitment of His Excellency
Mr. Evariste Ndayishimiye, President of the Republic of
Burundi, current Chairperson of the EAC and African
Union Champion for Youth, Peace and Security. He
has tirelessly deployed all means of diplomacy through
the holding of the summits of Nairobi, Luanda and
Bujumbura and is striving to bring all regional and
multilateral partners together in support of his vision
of building a regional peace architecture that addresses
the constant and increasingly complex security threats
in the eastern Democratic Republic of Congo and the
Great Lakes region.

23-1117519/22

S/PV.9307

The situation in the Great Lakes region

The 6 May summit in Bujumbura seems to be well
on its way to revitalizing the Framework Agreement in
order to further operationalize the various mechanisms
established to secure peace in the region, but which are
not sufficiently tailored to the new challenges posed by
the international and regional situation 11 years after
the Framework Agreement was reached.
It also seems to be on track to better understand
various implications of the transnationalization of
violence in the eastern Democratic Republic of Congo
and the Great Lakes region before submitting to the
region potential sustainable solutions that should take
into consideration the porous nature of the borders, arms
trafficking and natural resources, which seem to be the
main factors of instability in the Great Lakes region.
The summit also seems on track to enable the region
to revisit the mechanism of the Framework Agreement
and the system it has established to prevent and manage
conflict for sustainable peace and development in the
subregion; to assess and reinvent itself and adapt to the
regional circumstances, which involve complex threats
now and in the future.
In addition to the efforts under way under the
leadership of the Presidents of Burundi and Angola
through the Nairobi and Luanda processes, respectively,
the 6 May summit in Bujumbura will seek to rally the
entire region to arrive at tangible solutions and positive
measures to promote peace and stability in the region.
Burundi, which maintains excellent relations
with all its neighbouring countries, is pleased with
the participation in the highest summit at the level
of Heads of State and Government and international
organizations, such as the United Nations and
the African Union, guarantors of the Framework
Agreement, and will spare no effort to ensure that this
meeting marks a new starting point for greater unity
and solidarity in the region in coordinating efforts for
peace in order to limit the impact of that instability on
the economies of the region.
In that regard, the upcoming summit of the
Framework Agreement will provide clear signals
indicating the conditions conducive to an environment
of peace and will require the support all partners in the
region and the guarantors of the Framework Agreement
to bury the hatchet and enter a new era that will involve
education, peace and respect for human rights and will
culminate in the establishment of a culture of peace,
tolerance and non-violence.
20/22

19/04/2023

The President (spoke in Russian): I now give the
floor to the representative of the Democratic Republic
of the Congo.
Mr. Nzongola-Ntalaja (Democratic Republic of the
Congo) (spoke in French): At the outset, I would like to
congratulate you, Mr. President, on your presidency of
the Security Council for the month of April and thank
you, Sir, for organizing this meeting on the situation
in the Great Lakes region. I would also like to thank
the Secretary-General, His Excellency Mr. António
Guterres, for his commitment to my country’s cause.
I extend my thanks to all Security Council members
without forgetting to mention the three representatives
of the African continent within this body. I also
welcome the Chair of the Peacebuilding Commission,
His Excellency Ambassador Ivan Šimonović, and the
Special Envoy of the Secretary-General for the Great
Lakes Region, Mr. Huang Xia. I had a good talk with
him on Monday, and he is doing excellent work in
our region.
My delegation has taken note of the report of
the Secretary-General on the implementation of the
Peace, Security and Cooperation Framework for the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and the Region
(S/2023/237), dated 30 March, which Ambassador
Huang Xia presented to us. Let me make a few
comments on the issues raised in the report.
Rwanda, which operates with the Mouvement du 23
mars (M-23), as if it were necessary to remind anyone,
is one of the signatory countries to the Addis Ababa
Framework Agreement. On 6 May in Bujumbura, the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, which is reaching
the end of its term as Chair of the regional mechanism
since February 2013, will hand over the chairmanship to
Burundi. We hope that under Burundi’s chairmanship it
will be able to do its work effectively. The Special Envoy
announced a workshop in Durban that will provide
a framework for charting the future. My delegation
appreciates the initiative, but like my colleague from
Burundi, we would like to remind those interested in
taking part that the mechanism was conceived more
than 10 years ago and that much has changed since. We
therefore need to revisit it.
My Government’s immediate major concern
is focused on stabilizing the security situation by
disarming the M-23 and other major foreign and foreigninfluenced local terrorist groups, such as the Allied
Democratic Forces-Medina wa Tawhid wal Muwahdeen,
23-11175

19/04/2023

The situation in the Great Lakes region

the Coopérative pour le développement du Congo and
the Résistance pour un État de droit au Burundi. We
urge for the preliminary cantonment of M-23 elements
in the group’s camp in Kiwanja before its relocation to
Maniema, which accords with the joint Luanda-Nairobi
road map adopted at the mini-summit held in Luanda
on 23 November 2022, as well as with the views of
the African Union Peace and Security Council and the
Security Council. The plan to canton the M-23 members
on Congolese territory far from Rwanda is crucial if we
are to genuinely disarm those terrorists so as to prevent
massacres such as those that took place in Kishishe from
22 November to 1 December 2022. Kishishe was fully
under the occupation of the M-23 terrorists, supported
by troops of the Rwandan Defence Forces (RDF).
My delegation calls on the members of the Council
to join the Democratic Republic of the Congo in
holding accountable the perpetrators of those atrocities.
As President Tshisekedi Tshilombo of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo underscored pursuant to our
Parliament’s decision, my delegation reiterates that the
elements of the armed groups will never be integrated
into the Forces armées de la République démocratique
du Congo (FARDC). We will not negotiate with the
M-23. There is no country that we know of today that
negotiates with terrorists. Rwanda has never negotiated
with the Democratic Liberation Forces of Rwanda
(FDLR). Why then are we asked to negotiate with the
M-23?
Let me clarify a point raised concerning the FDLR
in the report before us. Contrary to the false accusations
that the army of the Democratic Republic of the Congo
is collaborating with and supporting the FDLR, I
would like to cite five major robust unilateral and joint
operations that the FARDC and the Rwandan Defence
Forces conducted against the FDLR between January
2009 and February 2022. They are, first, Operation
Umoja Wetu, from 20 January to 25 February 2009;
secondly, Operation Kimia II and subsequently Amani
Leo, from March 2009 to 2012; thirdly, the voluntary
disarmament programme; fourthly, an operation that
was conducted from January 2015 to December 2018;
and, fifthly, the joint FARDC-RDF operations.
I want to point out that the remaining FDLR
elements, whose leadership was eliminated by the
army of the Democratic Republic of the Congo during
the operations I just mentioned, no longer constitute
a military threat capable of attacking Rwanda. They
have not made the smallest incursion into Rwanda for

S/PV.9307

years. That was not the case in 1994 and 1995, but, to
date, we have seen nothing of the sort. The remnants of
the FDLR no longer pose a military threat to Rwanda.
They are rather a source of socioeconomic insecurity
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo that benefits
Rwanda. Rwanda has the most to gain by the presence
of the remaining FDLR elements in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, because it gives them a pretext
for justifying incursions into our country. They carry
out aggressions against the Democratic Republic of the
Congo and take a well-organized approach to cheerfully
plundering our natural resources, which is one of the
major causes of the crisis that we are going through in
our country today.
We often hear from Rwandans loyal to Paul Kagame’s
dictatorial regime that the Congolese threaten the lives
of Rwandans through their collaboration with the FDLR
and ethnic hatred for Kinyarwanda speakers. So far, we
have seen no credible examples of xenophobic violence
comparable to that of other countries. We have not seen
that. Even Ms. Alice Nderitu, who was cited here today,
made her statement before her visit to the Congo. She
then went to the Congo, and, when she came back, she
doubled down on what she said. But so far there has
been no proof. Another accusation made by Rwandans
is that the Congolese complain only when they are
responsible for their problems. We are apparently
incapable of analysing the reasons for the underlying
causes of our shortcomings. But the reasons for the root
causes of the Congolese crisis emanate from Rwanda,
not the Congo. Let me conclude by commenting on
four root causes that are entirely Rwandan-made. They
are the plundering of the Congo’s resources, as the
representative of Albania rightly underscored earlier,
militarism, ethnic hatred and expansionism.
With regard to the militarism, ethnic hatred and
expansionism of President Kagame, during his recent
press conference in Cotonou, in Benin, Mr. Kagame
revealed his expansionist tendencies by saying that
parts of Congo and Uganda belonged to Rwanda before
colonization. That is not the first time that Rwandan
leaders have propagated those lies. Pasteur Bizimungu
was the third President of Rwanda, but he wielded no
power because he was a member of the marginalized
Hutu ethnic group, thousands of whom were massacred
in our country in 1994. The 2010 mapping report of the
Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for
Human Rights states that what happened in the Congo
can legally be considered a genocide. That is not my

23-1117521/22

S/PV.9307

The situation in the Great Lakes region

opinion. That is what is in the mapping report in the
archives of the United Nations, something that no
one really wants to publicize. After Mr. Kagame and
Mr. Bizimungu came the strongman James Kabarebe,
whom Kagame had appointed Commander-in-Chief
of the Congolese army from May 1997 to July 1998.
Mr. Kabarebe recently said that they will continue to
fight until they get their land, which is in the Congo, back.
All of that is contrary to history and jurisprudence.
Historians of Rwanda, among them my former
professor at the University of Wisconsin at Madison,
Mr. Jan Vansina, a Belgian, and the Congolese historian,
Mr. Isidore Ndaywel, have shown in the scholarship
that no king of pre-colonial Rwanda had succeeded in
conquering even a small piece of the present Congo. But
Mr. Kagame, who comes from a royal family, would
like to do what his ancestors had failed to accomplish.

22/22

19/04/2023

We also want to draw the attention of Council
members to recent dangerous statements calling for
the redrawing of borders in the Great Lakes. These
statements, which the Council must condemn and
proscribe, reveal expansionist impulses that exacerbate
tensions in the region. As a reminder, the inviolability
of borders was a key principle affirmed by the
Organization of African Unity (OAU), now the African
Union, on 21 July 1964, at the second OAU summit, in
Cairo, Egypt. The Democratic Republic of the Congo
will defend every inch of its territory. We will not
negotiate with terrorists.
The President (spoke in Russian): There are no
more names inscribed on the list of speakers.
I now invite Council members to informal
consultations to continue our discussion on the subject.
The meeting rose at 12.05 p.m.

23-11175
