212

General Assembly-Thirty-second Setision

Noting with appreciation the efforts made by States
at the bilateral level ,to provide assistance in the teaching and study of international law,
Convinced, nevertheless, that States, international organizations and institutions ,should be encouraged to
give fur.ther support to the Programme and to increase
their activities to promote the teaching, study, dissemination and wider appreciation of international law,
in particular those activities which are of special benefit
to persons from developing countries,
Recalling that, in ,the conduct of the Programme, it
is desirable to use as far as possible the resources and
facilities made available by Member States, international
organizati.ons and others,
l. Authorizes the Secretary-General to carry out
in 1978 and 1979 the activities specified in his report,
inc1uding .the provision of:
(a) A minimum of fifteen fellowships m 1978 and
1979, at the request of Governments of developing
countries,
( b) Assistance in the form of a travel grant for one
participant from each developing country who will be
invited ,to the regional courses to be organized in 1978
and 1979,
to be financed from provisions in the regular budget
and also voluntary financial contributions which would
be ,received as a result of the requests set out in paragraphs 7 and 8 below;
2. Expresses its appreciation ,to the Secretary-General for his con.structive efforts to promote training and
assistance in international law within the framework of
the United Nations Programme of Assistance in the
Teaching, Study, Dissemination and Wider Appreciation of International Law in 1976 and 1977;
3. Expresses its appreciation to the United Nations
Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization for
its participation in the Programme, in particular for
,the efforts made to support the teaching of international
law;
4. Expresses its appreciation to the United Nations
Institute for Training and Research for its participation
in the Programme, particularly in the organization of
regional meetings and in the conduot of the fellowship
programme in international law sponsored jointly by
the United Nations and the Institute;
5. Expresses its appreciation to the Governments
of the Bahamas, Bangladesh and Qatar for providing
host facilities for the regional training and refresher
courses held in 1976 and 1977;
6. Urges all Governments to encourage the inclusion of courses on international law in the programmes
of legal studies offered at institutions of higher learning;
7. Requests the Secretary-General to continue to
publicize the Programme and to invite periodically
Member States, universities, philanthropic foundations
and other interested national and international institutions and organizations, as well as individuals, to make
voluntary contributions towards the financing of the
Programme or otherwise assisting in its implementation
and possible expansion;
8. Reiterates its request to Member States and to
interested organizations and individuals to make voluntary contributions towards the fina•ncing of the Pro-

gramme and expresses its appreciation to those Member States which have made voluntary contributions for
this purpose;
9. Requests the Secretary-General to report to the
General Assembly at its thirty-fourth session on the
implementation of the Programme during 1978 and
1979 and, following consultations with the Advisory
Committee on the United Nations Programme of Assistance in the Teaching, Study, Dissemination and
Wider Appreciation of International Law, ,to submit
recommendations regarding the execution of the Programme in subsequent years;
10. Decides to include in ,the provisional agenda of
its thirty-fourth session ,the item entitled "United Nations Programme of Assistance in the Teaching, Study,
Dissemination and Wider Appreciation of International
Law".
105th plenary meeting
16 December 1977
32/147.

Measures to prevent international terrorism which endangers or takes innocent human lives or jeopardizes fundamental freedoms, and study of the
underlying causes of those forms of
terrorism and acts of violence which
lie in misery, frustration, grievance and
despair and which cause some people to
sacrifice human lives, including their
own, in an attempt to effect radical
changes

The General Assembly,
Deeply perturbed over acts of international terrorism
which are occurring with increasing frequency and
which take a toll of innocent human lives,
Recognizing the importance of international cooperation in devising measures effectively to prevent
their occurrence and of studying their underlying causes
with a view to finding just and peaceful solutions as
quickly as possible,
Recalling the Declaration on Principles of International Law concerning Friendly Relations and Co-operation among States in accordance with the Charter of the
United Nations, 24
Taking note of the report of the Ad Hoe Committee
on International Terrorism,2~
Deeply convinced of the importance to mankind of
the continuation of the work of the Ad Hoe Committee,
1. Expresses deep concern over increasing acts of
international terrorism which endanger or take innocent
human Hves or jeopardize fundamental freedoms;
2. Urges States to continue to seek just and peaceful solutions to the underlying causes which give rise
to such acts of violence;
3. Reaffirms the inalienable right to self-determination and independence of all peoples under colonial
and racist regimes and other forms of alien domination,
and upholds the legitimacy of their struggle, in particular ,the stmggle of national liberation movements,
24 Resolution

2625 (XXV), annex.
Records of the General Assembly, Thirty-second
Session, Supplement No. 37 (A/32/37).
25 Official

IX,

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Sixth Committee

in accordance with the purposes and principles of the
Charter and the relevant resolutions of the organs of
the United Nations;
4. Condemns the _continu_ation of !epre~s~ve a~d
terrorist acts by colonial, racist and alien regime~ m
denying peoples their legitimate right to self-d_etermmation and independence and other human nghts and
fundamental freedoms;
5. Appeals to States which have not ye! done so
to examine the possibility of . becomll!-g parties to the
existing international conventlo~s wh1c~ relate to. va:
rious aspects of the problem of mternat10nal terrorism,
6. Invites States to take all appropriate measures
at ,the national level with a view to the speedy and final
elimination of the problem, bearing in mind the provisions of paragraph 3 above;
7 Invites the Ad Hoe Committee on International
Ter;orism to continue its work in accordance with the
mandate entrusted to it by the General Assembly under
resolution 3034 (XXVII) of 18 December 1972, first
by studying the underlying causes of terrorism and -then
by recommending practical measures to combat terrorism;
8. Invites the States which have not yet done so to
submit their observations and concrete proposals as
soon as possible to the Secretary-General so as to
enable the Ad Hoe Committee to carry out its mandate
more efficiently;
9. Requests the Secretary-General to transmit to
the Ad Hoe Committee an analytical study of the
observations of States submitted under paragraph 8
above;
10. Requests the Ad Hoe Committee to consider
the observations of States under paragraph 8 above and
to submit its report with recommendations for possible
co-operation for the speedy elimination of the problem,
bearing in mind the provisions of paragraph 3, to the
General Assembly at its thirty-fourth session;
11. Requests the Secretary-General to provide the
Ad Hoe Committee with the necessary facilities and
services, including summary records of its meetings;
12. Decides to include the item in the provisional
agenda of its thkty-fourth session.

105th plenary meeting
16 December 1977

32/148.

Drafting of an international convention
against the taking of hostages

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 31/ 103 of 15 December
1976,
Having considered the report of the Ad Hoe Committee on the Drafting of an International Convention
against the Taking of Hostages, 26
Considering that the Ad Hoe Committee has been
unable to complete the mandate given to it within the
allocated time,
Mindful of the need to conclude, under the auspices
of the United Nations, an international convention
against the taking of hostages, taking into account the
20 Ibid.,

Supplement No. 39 (A/32/39).

2U

urgency of formulating effective measures to put an
end to the taking of hostages,
Bearing in mind the recommendation of the Ad Hoe
Committee that it should continue its work in 1978, 27
l. Takes note of the repmt of the Ad Hoe Committee on the Drafting of an International Convention
against the Taking of Hostages;
2. Decides that the Ad Hoe Committee, as constituted,28 should continue, in accordance with paragraph 3
of General Assembly resolution 31/103, to draft at the
earliest possible date an international convention against
the taking of hostages and, in the fulfilment of its mandate, to consider suggestions and proposals from any
State, bearing in mind the views expressed during the
debate on this item at the thirty-second session of the
Assembly;
3. Invites Governments to submit, or to bring up
to date, suggestions and proposals for consideration by
the Ad Hoe Committee;
4. Requests the Secretary-General to r,ender all
assistance to the Ad Hoe Committee, including the preparation of summary records of its meetings;
5. Requests the Ad Hoe Committee to submit its
report and to make every effort to submit a draft convention against the taking of hostages to the General
Assembly at its thirty-third session;
6. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of
its thirty-third session the item entitled "Drafting of
an international convention against the taking of hostages".
105th plenary meeting
16 December 1977

32/150.

Conclusion of a world treaty on the
non-use of force in international relations29

The General Assembly,
Considering that, in conformity with the Charter of
the United Nations, States shall refrain in their international relations from the threat or use of force against
the territorial integrity or political independence of any
State, or in any other manner inconsistent with the purposes of the United Nations,
Reaffirming the need for universal and effective application of this principle in international relations and
for assistance by the United Nations in this endeavour,
Recalling its resolution 31/9 of 8 November 1976,
in which it invited Member States to examine further
the draft World Treaty on the Non-Use of Force in
International Rclations 30 submitted by the Union of
21 Ibid., para. 14.
28 As a result of the

appointment of the Byelorussian Soviet
Socialist Republic (see A/31/479/Add.l), the Ad Hoe Committee on the Drafting of an International Convention against
the Taking of Hostages is composed of the following Member
States: Algeria, Barbados, Byelorussian Soviet Socialist Republic, Canada, Chile, Democratic Yemen, Denmark, Egypt,
France, Germany, Federal Republic of, Guinea, Iran, Italy,
Japan, Jordan, Kenya, Lesotho, Libyan Arab Jamahiriya,
Mexico, Netherlands, Nicaragua, Nigeria, Philippines, Poland,
Somalia, Surinam, Sweden, Syrian Arab Republic, Union of
Soviet Socialist Republics, United Kingdom of Great Britain
and Northern Ireland, United Republic of Tanzania, United
States of America, Venezuela and Yugoslavia.
29 See also sect. X.B.2, decision 32/442.
30 Official Records of the General Assembly, Thirty-first
Session, Annexes, agenda item 124, document A/31/243, annex.
