S/2015/82

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
2 February 2015
Original: English

Second report of the Secretary-General pursuant to
paragraph 6 of resolution 2169 (2014)
I. Introduction
1.
In paragraph 6 of its resolution 2169 (2014), the Security Council requested
me to report every three months on progress made towards fulfilling the mandate of
the United Nations Assistance Mission for Iraq (UNAMI). The present report covers
key developments related to Iraq, and provides an update on the activities of the
United Nations in Iraq since the issuance of my first report dated 31 October 2014
(S/2014/774).

II. Summary of key political development pertaining to Iraq
A.

Internal developments
2.
Since my previous report, the Government of Iraq has made significant
preliminary progress in promoting national reconciliation by securing the support of
various Iraqi components to counter the threat by the Islamic State in Iraq and the
Levant (ISIL) and liberating areas under its control. The improvement of relations
between the federal Government and the Kurdistan Regional Government,
particularly after the conclusion of a landmark agreement on energy exports and
revenue-sharing, marks a key achievement towards national reconciliation. The
Government of Iraq also moved forward with the implementation of its ministerial
programme, including through the adoption of measures for the reform of the
security sector and for institutional reform, and by engaging countries in the region
in efforts to promote stability in Iraq.
3.
Regional and international partners continued to enhance their support for the
efforts of the Government of Iraq in its fight against ISIL. However, ISIL and
associated armed groups remained in control of large swathes of territory in the west
and north of the country, where they continue to inflict civilian casualties, cause
massive displacement and perpetrate systematic human rights violations that may
amount to war crimes or crimes against humanity.

15-01030 (E)

060215

*1501030*

S/2015/82

B.

Political situation
4.
Since my previous report, the Government of Iraq has continued to take steps
to advance its reform agenda across the political, security and economic spectrum.
In particular, Iraq’s political leadership continued to focus on consolidating support
for the fight against ISIL and strengthening security cooperation. To augment the
capabilities of the Iraqi security forces, the Government of Iraq continued to deploy
popular mobilization force volunteers and steadily gained the support of tribal
fighters to join military operations in areas under ISIL control in Anbar, Ninewa,
Diyala, Kirkuk and Salah al-Din governorates. On 6 November, the Anbar
Provincial Council announced the formation of a coalition of some 40 tribes to fight
ISIL in Anbar. On 6 November, 2,000 volunteer fighters from the peace brigades
(formerly known as the Mahdi Army) deployed alongside the Iraqi security forces
and the Anbar tribes in the ongoing military operations to liberate the town of Hit,
Anbar governorate, from ISIL control. Security cooperation amongst Sunni tribes
also strengthened as they joined forces in Anbar, Salah al-Din and Diyala to protect
their communities from ISIL.
5.
As discussed in the Council of Ministers on 6 November, the Government of
Iraq has pledged to provide military and financial assistance to local leaders and
tribal fighters to aid their fight against ISIL. On 11 November, the Speaker of the
Council of Representatives, Salim al-Jabouri, announced the Government’s plan to
receive, arm and train local tribal and volunteer fighters at the Ein al-Assad base.
On 10 December, the Salah al-Din Provincial Council announced the decision by
the Government of Iraq to disburse 25 billion Iraqi dinars to the governorate and to
grant the Provincial Police the authorization to arm tribes, including in Tikrit.
However, several tribes in Iraq remain concerned about the pace of the
Government’s response to their needs for financing and arms.
6.
During the reporting period, the Government of Iraq has also taken measures
to initiate security sector reform. As part of ongoing efforts to professionalize Iraq’s
military and security institutions, Prime Minister Haider al-Abadi issued an
executive order on 12 November retiring a number of senior army officers while
transferring others to new posts. On 28 November, the Minister of the Interior,
Mohammed al-Ghabban, announced that responsibility for security in Baghdad
would be transferred from the army to the police so that army personnel could be
redeployed to reinforce the armed forces in Iraq’s western and north-western
governorates. On 30 November, al-Abadi informed the Council of Representatives
that some 50,000 non-serving Iraqi army soldiers would be removed from the
payroll as part of ongoing efforts to counter corruption.
7.
Reports of sectarian attacks perpetrated by militia groups allied with the Iraqi
security forces continued to challenge the Government’s efforts to strengthen the
rule of law. On 10 November, a delegation from Diyala briefed the Prime Minister
on ongoing apparent sectarian attacks in the governorate. The Prime Minister
reiterated that he had given strict orders to the Iraqi security forces to deal firmly
with armed groups committing violations, including abductions. On 26 November,
the Speaker of the Council of Representatives issued a statement condemning
sectarian attacks by militias in the liberated areas of Sa’adiya and Jalawla in Diyala
governorate, saying that they were jeopardizing national reconciliation efforts. On
1 December, the Minister of Defence, Khalid al-Ubaidi, visited Diyala, where he
called on the Iraqi security forces to act with neutrality and respect for human

2/18

15-01030

S/2015/82

rights. On 3 December, at the international conference on counter-terrorism held in
Brussels, Prime Minister al-Abadi affirmed Iraq’s constitutional commitment to
prohibiting armed groups and militias from operating outside the control of the Iraqi
security forces.
8.
On 27 January, the Council of Ministers approved, in principle, the formation
of a national guard and established a committee chaired by the Deputy Prime
Minister, Bahaa al-Araji, to finalize relevant legislation. Diverging views among
political blocs, including over its composition and its command and control
structure, had delayed finalization of a draft law.
9.
Since the date of the submission of my last report, the Government of Iraq has
taken measures to strengthen due process and the rule of law. On 1 December, the
Prime Minister issued an executive order prohibiting arbitrary arrest and detention
in Iraq, mandating the electronic registration of detainees, accelerating the release
of detainees already ordered by the courts and criminalizing unlawful imprisonment,
abductions and attacks against civilians, in line with the Constitution. On
17 December, the Minister of the Interior informed my Special Representative that
steps are being taken to electronically register the names of detainees and their place
of detention, and confirmed that manual registration is the method currently being
used for this purpose. On 8 January, the Federal Judiciary announced that 10,384
detainees found not guilty had been released from custody. On 25 January 2015, the
Federal Judicial Authority announced that 7,862 detainees, including 1,291
individuals indicted on terrorism charges, had been released during the month of
January alone.
10. Iraq’s political leadership remained committed to furthering national
reconciliation and promoting inclusive governance. Following a meeting between
Prime Minister al-Abadi, Speaker al-Jabouri and President Fuad Masum on
3 December, Vice-President Ayad Allawi was formally assigned to lead national
reconciliation efforts. In a letter addressed to me on 23 November, Vice-President
Allawi outlined his road map for national reconciliation, which envisages building
public trust in the State through legislative reform, strengthening of the rule of law,
prohibiting the activities of armed groups outside the control of the State,
compensating persons affected by military operations and terrorism, reconstructing
damaged areas and returning displaced persons to their homes. Furthermore, on
16 December, President Masum outlined the following three key elements for
furthering national reconciliation to my Special Representative: countering
sectarianism through intensive political dialogue; expediting legislative reform; and
granting amnesty. Discussions continued between stakeholders on legal frameworks
to amend the Justice and Accountability Act and to grant amnesty.
11. The reporting period witnessed a new era of political compromise and
strengthened partnership between Baghdad and Erbil. The initial breakthrough came
on 13 November, when Baghdad and Erbil reached an interim deal under which the
federal Government agreed to the transfer of $500 million to the Kurdistan Regional
Government for the outstanding payment of civil servants’ salaries. In turn, Erbil
committed to transfer 150,000 barrels of oil per day through the national State Oil
Marketing Organization, thus resuming its contribution to the federal budget.
12. The interim deal was followed by intensive negotiations that led to a further
ground-breaking agreement between Baghdad and Erbil on 2 December, covering
energy exports, revenue-sharing and the federal bankrolling of Peshmerga salaries.

15-01030

3/18

S/2015/82

Under the agreement, the Kurdistan Regional Government will export 250,000
barrels of oil per day and help the federal Government export 300,000 barrels per
day from Kirkuk through the State Oil Marketing Organization using the pipeline
controlled by the Kurdistan Regional Government. In return, Baghdad will resume
the disbursement to the Kurdistan Regional Government of a 17 per cent allocation
of the federal budget. Baghdad also agreed to allocate $1.2 billion per annum to the
Peshmerga. The agreement took effect as of 1 January 2015 and joint committees
will be formed to monitor its implementation. By the end of 2014, two transfers
from the federal Government of $500 million had been made to the Kurdistan
Regional Government. On 3 January, the Minister of Oil, Adel Abdul Mehdi,
announced that oil production had commenced in Kirkuk, totalling 175,000 barrels
per day. Both sides also agreed to prepare a timetable for future negotiations on the
implementation of article 140 of the Constitution, related to Iraq’s disputed internal
boundaries.
13. Security cooperation between Baghdad and Erbil was also strengthened during
the reporting period. On 3 November, President Masum and Minister of Defence
al-Ubaidi visited Erbil, where they met the Prime Minister of the Kurdistan
Regional Government, Nechirvan Barzani, and the Minister of Peshmerga Affairs,
Mustafa Said Qadir, to discuss bilateral security cooperation. During the meeting it
was agreed that the federal Government would provide the Peshmerga with heavy
weaponry. On 7 January, the federal Government and the Kurdistan Regional
Government held a joint ministerial security meeting in Baghdad aimed at
strengthening security cooperation, boosting intelligence-sharing and raising levels
of expertise.
14. On 29 January, the Council of Representatives approved the 2015 federal
budget bill. The estimated $108 billion budget, with an anticipated deficit of
$22 billion, is based on projected revenues of $56 per barrel of oil and on estimates
that Iraq will export an average of 3.3 million barrels per day throughout 2015. Oil
revenues represent approximately 84 per cent of the total budget. Approximately
25 per cent of the entire budget is allocated to defence and security.
15. During the reporting period, the budget deficit constrained the Government’s
ability to pay outstanding budgetary allocations to the governorates, with Muthanna,
Basra and Ninewa among those having to halt the payment of public servants’
salaries. On 9 December, the Council of Ministers instructed the Minister of Finance
to release the outstanding amount of petrodollars owed to Basra, at the rate of $2 a
barrel of oil, compared to $5 promised by the previous Government, and to provide
an advance payment of $1 million to Ninewa to cover its debts and meet its
immediate operational expenses. Muthanna governorate, however, declared
bankruptcy on 9 December.
16. In November, Members of the Parliament in Basra announced the distribution
of a petition to transform Basra into an administrative region. Several
demonstrations took place in Basra during November and December in support of
that initiative. On 29 December, Prime Minister al-Abadi participated in a meeting
of the Supreme Committee for provincial coordination in Basra, where he reiterated
his Government’s commitment to decentralization. On 30 December, the Council of
Ministers withdrew its complaint to the Federal Court, lodged on 7 January 2014,
challenging the validity of Law No. 21 of 2008, the law of governorates not

4/18

15-01030

S/2015/82

incorporated into a region, as amended by Law No. 19 of 2013, paving the way for
the devolution of more authority to local government.

C.

Security
17. During the reporting period the security situation in Iraq remained volatile,
with fighting continuing between ISIL and associated armed groups on the one hand
and Iraqi security forces, Peshmerga and allied tribal and volunteer fighters on the
other. Conflict and armed violence was largely concentrated in areas under ISIL
control in Anbar, Ninewa, Diyala and Salah al-Din governorates. ISIL continued to
control large swathes of territory in Iraq but made no further significant territorial
gains. Iraq’s armed forces, aided by allied tribal and volunteer fighters, made
limited but steady progress against ISIL, recapturing areas in Diyala, Salah al-Din
and Ninewa.
18. During the reporting period, there were an increased number of international
coalition airstrikes against ISIL positions around Mosul City and surrounding
districts, the Sinjar Mountains, the south of Kirkuk city, around the Baiji oil
refinery, Tikrit and the north-east of Diyala governorate. Coalition airstrikes also
targeted ISIL-held areas across Anbar governorate and along Iraq’s border with the
Syrian Arab Republic.
19. Iraq’s armed forces launched successful military operations, aided by the
volunteer fighters who form the popular mobilization forces, to retake areas in
Diyala. On 20 November, the Iraqi security forces liberated Sa’adiya district, northeast of Diyala, while on 23 November, Peshmerga forces liberated Jalawla, along
Iraq’s border with the Islamic Republic of Iran, and on 25 January, recaptured
Muqdadiyah and surrounding villages from ISIL control. The security situation in
the north-central region remains highly volatile, with armed clashes near Baqubah
in Diyala governorate.
20. In Salah al-Din, the Iraqi and Peshmerga forces, tribal fighters and the popular
mobilization forces launched joint military operations to regain ground taken by
ISIL. On 27 December, the Iraqi security forces, aided by volunteer fighters,
liberated the village of Yathrib and broke ISIL’s siege on the town of Dhuluiyah,
located 40 kilometres south of Samarra. Activity around Baiji city and its nearby
refinery remained fluid. Iraqi security forces launched ground operations in Baiji in
November to expel ISIL elements from around the area, but had limited success.
Although the Iraqi security forces control access to the town of Baiji and the
refinery, ISIL continues to maintain a presence outside these immediate areas. The
city of Samarra remained under Government control with areas along the Samarra
and Tirkit highway still contested.
21. In Ninewa, the Peshmerga re-established their presence in strategic areas
between Mosul City and Iraq’s border with the Syrian Arab Republic, including
Zummar town and the adjacent oilfield, a key facility captured by ISIL in July. On
17 December, Peshmerga forces, aided by popular mobilization force volunteers,
launched a major ground offensive in the foothill areas of Sinjar Mountain,
reportedly regaining territory from ISIL. The ongoing push by Peshmerga forces
enabled the opening of safe corridors for the affected population to flee the conflict
areas.

15-01030

5/18

S/2015/82

22. In Anbar governorate, no territorial gains were made by either side during the
reporting period. The central cities of Ramadi, Karma and Haditha remained under
Government control, while the majority of areas in the governorate remained either
contested, under siege or in the control of ISIL. The security situation in Anbar was
highly fluid, with widespread clashes in several areas. Prolonged armed clashes
were reported in towns north-west of Ramadi throughout November. Ramadi city
itself was the target of three concerted ISIL attacks in November, during which it
seized a number of government offices. Major intersections and important roads
leading out of Ramadi that were taken over by ISIL during the November attacks
remain contested. Clashes and artillery bombardments continue around Ramadi and
Fallujah.
23. During the reporting period, Baghdad continued to be afflicted by acts of
terrorism, such as targeted killings and kidnappings, intersectarian violence and the
use of improvised explosive devices, vehicle-borne improvised explosive devices
and suicide bombers targeted at civilians. The deadliest incident occurred in Sadr
City on 4 December, when 21 civilians were killed and 69 were wounded in two
vehicle-borne improvised explosive attacks.
24. During the reporting period, ISIL continued to seize military hardware and
equipment from the Iraqi security forces following attacks on their convoys. In
addition, it was reported that three vehicle-borne improvised explosive devices were
employed in suicide attacks against the Iraqi security forces, using armoured
vehicles captured from Iraqi security forces. This is of concern to the United
Nations after the claim of the Al Nusra Front that it used a stolen United Nations
armoured vehicle in a suicide bombing attack on a Syrian army position on
7 December in Dara’a province.

D.

Regional and international developments
25. The Government of Iraq continued to pursue its policy of improving bilateral
relations, especially with its neighbours, aimed at obtaining political, security,
humanitarian, economic and reconstruction support to address the impact of ISIL.
The international community expanded its support to Iraq, with additional States
providing assistance to both the federal Government and the Kurdistan Regional
Government.
26. These issues were at the centre of the discussions held between senior-level
Iraqi delegations and their regional counterparts during official visits to Bahrain,
Egypt, Qatar, Saudi Arabia, Turkey and the United Arab Emirates. During the
reporting period, senior officials from countries in the region, including Egypt,
Jordan, Kuwait and the United Arab Emirates, visited Baghdad to reaffirm their
support for Iraq. The announcements by Qatar and Saudi Arabia that they will
re-establish their diplomatic presence in the country, after a long absence, are
among some of the indicators that Iraq’s bilateral relations with its neighbours are
strengthening.
27. As part of its efforts to stem the threat of ISIL, the Kurdistan Regional
Government deployed around 150 Peshmerga fighters on 1 November to the
northern Syrian city of Kobani/Ayn al-Arab. On 1 December, 150 Peshmerga
fighters were deployed to replace the first contingent.

6/18

15-01030

S/2015/82

28. Both the Government of Iraq and the Kurdistan Regional Government
continue to welcome the assistance of the Islamic Republic of Iran. Iranian efforts
come amidst growing bilateral cooperation, with the Islamic Republic of Iran
expressing a vested interest in advancing the stability, unity and integrity of Iraq.
29. On 9 December, at the meeting of its Supreme Council, the Gulf Cooperation
Council (GCC) issued its Doha declaration, in which, among other things, it
welcomed the Iraqi Government’s “new direction” and called on Baghdad to forge a
national partnership among all of Iraq’s communities. The Council also reiterated its
support for the implementation of Security Council resolution 2170 (2014).
30. At the international level, the anti-ISIL coalition held a ministerial-level
meeting in Brussels on 3 December, at which the representatives of some
60 countries outlined their current and prospective efforts to help the Government of
Iraq to eliminate the threat of ISIL. Participants expressed their commitment to
implement Security Council resolutions 2170 (2014) and 2178 (2014), as well as
other relevant decisions. They welcomed the participation of the Iraqi delegation,
which was headed by Prime Minister al-Abadi, and expressed appreciation for the
inclusive policies pursued by the Government of Iraq. They also stressed the need
for an organized international response to support United Nations agencies, the
Government of Iraq and the Kurdistan Regional Government in their efforts to
manage the crisis. On 22 January, the anti-ISIL coalition met in London. Co-chaired
by the Secretary of State for Foreign and Commonwealth Affairs of the United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland and the Secretary of State of the
United States of America, the meeting was attended by Prime Minister al-Abadi and
representatives of 18 other Member States, as well as the High Representative of the
European Union, Federica Mogherini. Participants affirmed the need to support the
Government of Iraq and to improve joint efforts to counter foreign fighters,
financing and propaganda.
31. On 18 December, the Governing Council of the United Nations Compensation
Commission (UNCC) held a special session to consider a request from the
Government of Iraq to defer payment of the remaining $4.6 billion in reparations
that are owed to the Government of Kuwait under Security Council resolution 1956
(2010). The members of the Governing Council expressed solidarity with Iraq in the
face of the current challenges and decided to support the request of the Government
by postponing Iraq’s obligation to deposit 5 per cent of its oil proceeds into the
Compensation Fund until January 2016. They also welcomed Kuwait’s support for
Iraq’s request.

III. Update on the activities of the United Nations Assistance
Mission for Iraq and the United Nations country team
A.

Political activities
32. Following the formation of an inclusive Government in Iraq led by Prime
Minister al-Abadi, my Special Representative has worked in close partnership with
Iraq’s political leadership in the implementation of the ministerial programme,
essential to making progress on security and returning Iraq to the path of
reconciliation and stability. My Special Representative advocated, and provided
advice to key stakeholders on, furthering national reconciliation, strengthening the

15-01030

7/18

S/2015/82

rule of law through security sector and legislative reform and institution-building.
My Special Representative held regular meetings with President Masum, Prime
Minister al-Abadi, Speaker al-Jabouri and Foreign Minister al-Jaafari. He also met
the heads of political blocs, tribal leaders and local government officials from the
conflict-affected governorates of Salah al-Din, Ninewa and Anbar.
33. My Special Representative engaged key political actors in Iraq to facilitate the
establishment of a national guard force to augment the strength of the Iraqi security
forces, a principal tenet of the ministerial programme. He and other UNAMI
officials met regularly with Iraq’s senior security leadership to discuss the nature,
structure and legal framework for such a national guard. In Erbil, my Special
Representative met the Prime Minister of the Kurdistan Regional Government and
the Minister of the Interior, Kerim Sinjari, while my Deputy Special Representative
for Political Affairs met with the Speaker of the Kurdistan Parliament, Yusuf
Mohammed Sadiq, and the Minister of Peshmerga Affairs to discuss the possible
role of the Peshmerga in such a force.
34. UNAMI also engaged interlocutors in support of national reconciliation efforts
undertaken by Iraq’s political leadership. My Special Representative met with
Vice-President Allawi, and the Prime Minister’s adviser on national reconciliation,
Mohammed Salman. My Deputy Special Representative received a delegation from
the Peace Council for Tolerance and Good Governance, recently established by
religious scholars, civil society activists and former Council of Representative
members, to discuss expectations of various Iraqi communities on this issue. On
26 and 27 November, UNAMI convened a round-table meeting on social cohesion,
with the participation of prominent Iraqi political, religious and civil society
representatives, who discussed the causes of social division, as well as measures to
unite Iraqis. The outcome was a set of recommendations which were presented to
the Government for consideration on 15 December.
35. My Special Representative and my Deputy Special Representative also
engaged Iraqi interlocutors on support for legislative reform. Options prepared by
UNAMI on amnesty and criminal justice system reforms were shared with the Prime
Minister, the Speaker of the House of Representatives, the Deputy Prime Minister,
the Minister of Justice and the Minister of Human Rights. My Special
Representative also provided follow-up information to relevant stakeholders on the
implementation of the Prime Minister’s executive order of 1 December prohibiting
violations of civil and political rights.
36. My Special Representative used his good offices to facilitate agreements
between Baghdad and Erbil on energy exports, revenue-sharing and funding of the
Peshmerga. On 18 December, he travelled to Erbil to urge the Prime Minister of the
Kurdistan Regional Government to build on the 2 December agreement and to work
on resolving longstanding issues with Baghdad.
37. My Special Representative actively engaged Iraq’s neighbours and the wider
international community to strengthen support and cooperation for the Government
of Iraq in its fight against ISIL, as well as for humanitarian, reconstruction and
recovery efforts. He undertook official visits to Egypt, Kuwait, Qatar, the United
Arab Emirates and the United States of America. My Special Representative also
paid an official visit to the Islamic Republic of Iran, where he met with senior
Iranian officials and clerics, including the Minister for Foreign Affairs, Mohammad
Jawad Zarif, the Chair of the Expediency Council, Akbar Hashemi Rafsanjani, and

8/18

15-01030

S/2015/82

the Senior Adviser on International Affairs, Ali Akbar Velayati, and others. The
Iranian interlocutors noted that Tehran was planning to further expand its
cooperation with Baghdad, and was committed to respecting Iraq’s sovereignty and
to working with the United Nations.
38. On 3 December, my Special Representative attended the ministerial-level
meeting in Brussels of the international coalition to counter ISIL, where he provided
a briefing on the latest developments in Iraq, as well as on the response and
assistance of the United Nations. On 8 and 9 December, he attended, on my behalf,
the meeting of the Supreme Council of the Gulf Cooperation Council in Doha. On
22 January, my Special Representative attended the anti-ISIL coalition meeting in
London, where he affirmed the need for a political solution to the crisis in Iraq and
highlighted the need to support the efforts of the Government of Iraq to implement
reforms, strengthen national unity and promote national coexistence. He also
announced the United Nations partnership with Iraq in the establishment of a joint
reconstruction and rehabilitation trust fund for areas liberated from ISIL.
39. During the reporting period, representatives of UNAMI made further efforts to
promote agreement from international partners that they would provide aid to the
Government of Iraq at this time of financial strain. During his visit to Kuwait from
23 to 25 November, my Special Representative facilitated discussions on request of
the Government of Iraq that it be allowed to defer its compensation payments to
Kuwait. He met with the Prime Minister, Sheikh Jaber Al-Mubarak Al-Hamad
Al-Sabah, and the Deputy Prime Minister and Minister for Foreign Affairs, Sabah
Al Khalid Al Sabah. On 4 December, he provided an informal briefing to members
of the United Nations Compensation Commission in Geneva, and held further
discussions with senior Iraqi and Kuwaiti officials.
40. UNAMI continued to actively advocate women’s rights. On 25 November, my
Deputy Special Representative addressed the campaign “16 days of activism against
violence against women”, which was attended by Iraqi Government officials and
civil society organizations.
41. On 2 November, the Director General of the United Nations Educational,
Scientific and Cultural Organization (UNESCO), Irina Bokova, visited Iraq and held
discussions with Iraqi interlocutors on the protection of the national cultural
heritage from the threat of ISIL. On 3 December, my Special Representative
attended the UNESCO conference in Paris on cultural heritage at-risk in Iraq and
the Syrian Arab Republic, at which he delivered a speech on the threat posed by
ISIL to Iraq’s cultural heritage and identity, and outlined United Nations assistance
to the Government of Iraq to counter this threat.

B.

Electoral assistance
42. During the reporting period, UNAMI’s Electoral Assistance Office continued
to engage and support the Independent High Electoral Commission and committees
in the Council of Representatives and the Council of Ministers in their ongoing
review of the national electoral framework. Upon the invitation of the legal
committee of the Council of Representatives, representatives of UNAMI
participated in committee meetings to review the law on the elections of provincial,
district and sub-district councils (Law No. 36 of 2008). The five meetings held so
far have focused on the legal framework for electoral campaigns and campaign

15-01030

9/18

S/2015/82

financing, electoral procedures in Kirkuk, and the provisions on seat allocation. On
30 November, at a workshop organized by the Office of the Speaker, UNAMI
presented a paper on the work of independent commissions and their relationship
with the executive and legislative branches of Government.
43. UNAMI also monitored developments following the enactment of the draft
law on the Kurdistan Independent High Electoral Commission on 23 July,
establishing an electoral management body in the Kurdistan Region. On
3 December, the Kurdistan Regional Parliament confirmed the composition of the
Commission, voting in nine Commissioners, including one female and two members
of the Christian and Turkmen communities. In a meeting with UNAMI on
3 December, the chair of the Commission’s interim selection committee stated that
United Nations assistance to the Commission would be vital. UNAMI underscored
the need for dialogue between the national and regional commissions and expressed
its readiness to provide guidance on how to ensure effective coordination between
the two bodies.
44. The Independent High Electoral Commission resumed the biometric voter
registration process that now covers 11 out of 19 governorate electoral offices,
including Najaf, Missan, Basra, Qaddisiya, Thi-Qar, Muthanna, Baghdad Rusafa,
Baghdad Karkh, Karbala, Babylon and Wassit. Reports indicate an increasing rate of
voter participation, with a total number of 188,228 voters registered as of
7 December 2014. Of these, 39 per cent are female (73,969) while 61 per cent are
male (114,257). However, there is as yet no indication on when the biometric voter
registration exercise will start in the remaining eight governorates, including the
conflict-affected areas of Diyala, Kirkuk, Salah al-Din, Ninewa and Anbar, as well
as the governorates of Erbil, Dohuk and Sulaymaniya in the Kurdistan Region.

C.

Developments in the area of human rights in Iraq and
related activities
45. UNAMI continues to monitor the situation of civilians in relation to the
ongoing armed conflict and terrorism. Since my last report, as of 20 January, 2,026
civilians have been killed and 3,745 have been wounded in incidents of armed
violence and terrorism. From 1 January to 31 December 2014, UNAMI recorded a
total number of 35,408 civilian casualties (12,282 killed and 23,126 injured). The
number of civilian casualties (including police) in 2014 is the worst experienced in
Iraq since the violence of 2006-2007. I note that the special investigation team from
the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights (OHCHR),
which is mandated by the Human Rights Council to collect evidence relating to
violations of international law by ISIL and associated armed groups, arrived in Iraq
in December. The special investigation team is expected to report to the Council in
March 2015.
46. UNAMI continued to receive reports of systematic and widespread violations
of international law perpetrated by ISIL, including attacks deliberately targeting
civilians and civilian infrastructure, executions and other targeted killings of
civilians, abductions, rape and other forms of sexual and physical violence
perpetrated against women and children, the destruction or desecration of places of
religious or cultural significance, forced recruitment of children, wanton destruction
and looting of property and denial of basic rights and freedoms. Particularly

10/18

15-01030

S/2015/82

affected were the diverse ethnic and religious communities of Iraq, including the
Turkmen, Shabak, Christian, Yezidi, Sabaean, Kaka’e, Faili Kurd and Shiite Arab
communities and Sunni tribes aligned or suspected to be aligned with the
Government of Iraq, which ISIL and associated armed groups intentionally and
systematically targeted for serious human rights violations.
47. Violations of women’s rights by ISIL continue to be of grave concern.
Thousands of women and children remain in captivity by ISIL. Women who escaped
have confirmed in interviews with UNAMI that many had been subjected to sexual
and physical violence, trafficked as slaves, been forcibly wed to ISIL fighters and
used as human shields. ISIL also attacked and killed female community and political
leaders. On 23 November, ISIL executed two women in Mosul who had stood in
parliamentary elections.
48. ISIL continues to subject civilians living in areas under its control to grave
violations of their basic human rights. UNAMI has recorded at least 165 executions
during the reporting period that have been carried out following sentences passed by
“courts” established by ISIL in the areas under their control. Mass graves,
containing hundreds of victims of ISIL, have been discovered in a number of
locations, including in the subdistrict of Jalawla and Kobashi, in Diyala governorate
and in Qayyarah south of Mosul on 3 December, and in Athba and Hlayla villages
south of Mosul on 7 December.
49. ISIL continued to target persons and groups suspected of being allied with the
Government of Iraq or opposed to their ideology. On 30 November, ISIL executed
three elders of the al-Jbouri tribe outside the Ninewa Governorate Office in Mosul
based on accusations they were supporting the Government of Iraq. On 2 November,
ISIL attacked the al-Jbouri tribe in al-Alam subdistrict, north of Tikrit, and seized
around 250 male members of the tribe. ISIL then began systematically destroying
civilian homes with improvised explosive devices. In November, ISIL conducted a
series of mass killings of members of the Albu Nimr tribe in Anbar governorate.
UNAMI sources suggest the number could exceed 400, including children and
women. Reportedly more than 200 bodies were found in mass graves in Ramadi and
Hit areas in early November. On 13 November, ISIL reportedly attacked members of
the Albu Nimr tribe near Lake Tharthar, abducting and subsequently executing 16 of
them.
50. ISIL continues to destroy sites of religious or cultural significance in areas
under its control. On 24 November, ISIL destroyed a Christian monastery in Mosul.
On 25 November, ISIL destroyed the Sheikh Isma’il Sunni shrine in the village of
Shbecha in the Daquq area of Kirkuk governorate.
51. UNAMI continued to receive reports of failures of the Iraqi security forces and
affiliated armed groups to fully respect international humanitarian law and
international human rights law. These include failures to abide by the principles of
distinction and proportionality required by international humanitarian law in the
conduct of military operations, particularly shelling. Despite the fact that ISIL and
associated armed groups are known to deliberately base themselves in civilian areas
to shield themselves from attack or to cause civilian casualties, the Iraqi security
forces have failed, on some occasions, to ensure that civilian casualties are
absolutely minimized when they are carrying out military operations. Reports of
civilians killed by airstrikes continued; but it is not possible to provide a full report
on the numbers of those killed in areas controlled by ISIL.

15-01030

11/18

S/2015/82

52. UNAMI continued to receive reports that some armed groups and militias are
operating outside the law, perpetrating targeted killings, including of captured ISIL
fighters and associated armed groups, the abduction of civilians and other abuses.
On 11 November, members of an armed militia reportedly raided the Grathool area
of the Yathrib subdistrict, abducting 93 males of the Grathool tribe and burning
homes. Fourteen bodies (including three children), bearing gunshot wounds to the
head and chest, were later discovered in a small trench near the village. According
to sources, 46 persons were released after a few days, during which time they had
been subjected to ill-treatment. The fate of the remaining 33 missing abductees
remains unknown. UNAMI also received a high number of reports of abductions,
purportedly carried out by militias in Diyala governorate. While some were freed
following the payment of a ransom, others were killed. In some cases, victims were
killed despite the payment of a ransom. Members of the Sunni community have also
been targeted for abduction in Basra and other areas in the south of the country.
53. UNAMI continued to receive reports of unidentified bodies in Baghdad, Salah
al-Din, Ninewa, Kirkuk, Diyala, Basra and Babil governorates, most bearing
gunshot wounds to the head and chest. It has not been possible to identify the
perpetrators of these crimes.
54. The ongoing armed conflict and acts of terrorism continued to detrimentally
affect children in Iraq. The Task Force on Children and Armed Conflict, co-chaired
by UNAMI and the United Nations Children’s Fund (UNICEF), documented
99 incidents of violence against children during the reporting period. Acts of
terrorism and armed conflict, particularly crossfire, indiscriminate shelling and the
use of improvised explosive devices, claimed at least 94 child casualties (33 killed
and 61 injured) from November to December 2014, and it is important to remember
that many cases of child casualties may go unreported. In addition, there was a
marked increase in the number of reports of child recruitment by ISIL in all areas
under its control and by pro-Government militias in all conflict-affected areas as
well as in Baghdad and Basra.

D.

Camp Hurriya
55. During the reporting period, my Special Adviser for the Relocation of Camp
Hurriya Residents Outside of Iraq continued to lead United Nations efforts to
identify suitable solutions for the relocation of Camp Hurriya residents outside the
country. Ms. Holl Lute is in close contact on a regular basis with all relevant
stakeholders, including the residents of Camp Hurriya. On 23 and 24 November,
Ms. Holl Lute visited Baghdad, where she held meetings with Iraqi Government
officials and members of the diplomatic community to discuss the status of residents
and suitable solutions for their relocation outside Iraq.
56. UNAMI continues to monitor the human rights and humanitarian situation of
the residents of Camp Hurriya and to facilitate solutions to camp management
issues between the Government of Iraq and representatives of the residents. At the
time of publication of the present report, 632 Camp Hurriya residents had been
relocated to third countries. 2,491 individuals remained in Iraq — 2,480 residents
were in Camp Hurriya and 11 individuals (defectors) were accommodated in
Baghdad (at the Muhajer Hotel).

12/18

15-01030

S/2015/82

57. The United Nations continues to seek durable solutions for the Camp residents
through relocation and through consular and humanitarian channels. As at
21 December, 632 individuals had been relocated outside Iraq, of which 30 left for
Albania through an independent channel, 123 had been relocated through consular
readmission to nine countries (Belgium, Denmark, Italy, Germany, the Netherlands,
Spain, Sweden, the United Kingdom and Norway), 448 had been relocated through
humanitarian admission to four countries (Albania, Italy, Norway and the United
States of America) and 32 had been relocated through relocation channels to five
countries, namely Denmark, Finland, Norway, Sweden and the United Kingdom. A
group of 233 individuals departed to Albania under the humanitarian stream
organized by the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees
(UNHCR) in November. In addition to these cases, one individual from the safe
accommodation and four individuals from the temporary transit location have been
accepted by four countries and are awaiting departure from Iraq and 1,248
submissions remain pending with 18 countries through the humanitarian, relocation
and consular streams.

E.

Humanitarian assistance, reconstruction and development
58. The armed conflict continued to exacerbate the humanitarian situation during
the reporting period, with over 2 million persons internally displaced since the
beginning of 2014. An estimated 946,266 internally displaced persons are residing
in the Kurdistan Region, while an estimated 904,170 are in the central belt of Iraq
and an estimated 153,630 are in the southern governorates: 800,000 people are
hosting the displaced. In addition, 2.2 million individuals are currently located in
areas controlled by ISIL, and their security and access to humanitarian assistance
remains of primary concern. The population affected by the crisis now totals
5 million individuals.
59. On 17 December 2014, my Deputy Special Representative and Humanitarian
Coordinator for Iraq and the Iraqi Deputy Prime Minister and Chair of the High
Committee on internally displaced persons, Saleh al-Mutlaq, inaugurated the Joint
Coordination and Monitoring Centre. The Centre will strengthen coordination
within the Government, and between the Government and the United Nations and its
partners, as well as monitor the effectiveness of the response.
60. The United Nations is in urgent need of funding to help meet the needs of the
displaced. On 14 December, the Government of Iraq, supported by the United
Nations, held a donor meeting seeking additional financial support from donors. On
18 December, the Under-Secretary-General for Humanitarian Affairs approved the
allocation of nearly $15 million from the Central Emergency Response Fund to
address the most urgent needs of the up to 200,000 people who have been displaced
in northern and central Iraq since September. To date, approximately $715 million
has been provided in response to the 2014-2015 Iraq strategic response plan, leaving
a shortfall of approximately $1.5 billion needed to cover needs over the next
15 months.
61. The United Nations continues to scale up its humanitarian response to contend
with the large number of displaced. During the reporting period, the World Food
Programme (WFP) distributed 13,539 metric tons of food commodities, assisting
953,442 individuals. WFP also rolled out food voucher assistance programmes in

15-01030

13/18

S/2015/82

the Kurdistan Region, providing 140,256 people with monthly vouchers valued at
$26 each to spend in local shops. In addition, 20,000 people have benefited from a
rapid response mechanism launched by WFP in October in partnership with
UNICEF and non-governmental organizations to pre-position stocks of food rations,
hygiene kits and bottled water.
62. With the onset of winter, it is critical that the displaced population be provided
with appropriate shelter. Since June, 28 camps have opened across Iraq and
10 additional camps are being built to cater for a total of 409,000 individuals, while
the vast majority will have to reside with host communities in substandard
conditions at collective centres or communal buildings. Winterization funding
received thus far has enabled UNHCR to provide more than 450,000 people with
basic domestic items and modified shelter. In the Kurdistan Region, 180,000
families have received winter items, including jerrycans, blankets, plastic sheeting
and heating stoves. In November, UNHCR launched seven airlifts from Lahore,
Pakistan, to reach families in need of winterization assistance.
63. Since November, the World Health Organization (WHO) has procured over
$9 million in medicines and supplies and provided 12 fully-equipped mobile clinics
to the Government. WHO has also worked with the Government and partners on
twinning two Iraqi public health institutes with the Public Health Institute of
Finland and the Imperial College, London, accrediting the health facilities that are
delivering primary health care based on family practice and introducing a cadre of
community health-care workers in selected governorates.
64. During the reporting period, over 1,400 schools across Iraq were used as
shelters by internally displaced persons. As part of the UNICEF response,
830 schools were vacated and have been re-opened, as of 1 December, with 337 of
the schools having been rehabilitated to minimum standards, permitting the
resumption of classes. Over 450 temporary learning spaces have been set up,
benefiting over 40,000 students. Educational and recreational materials have been
provided to 26,800 students. Recreational activities have benefited over 28,000
internally displaced students. UNICEF and its partners have also provided 13,000
children with psychosocial support.
65. During the reporting period, UNICEF and WHO supported the Iraqi Ministry
of Health in the conduct of six national and four subnational polio immunization
campaigns, in which over 5.6 million children were immunized. Of that number,
some 340,000 internally displaced children were also vaccinated against measles. In
addition, UNICEF has provided 13,500 children with nutrition and growthmonitoring interventions.
66. Ensuring adequate Water, Sanitation and Hygiene for All (WASH) support for
the large number of internally displaced people has been challenging during the
reporting period: 82,000 have been provided with bottled drinking water and have
benefited from the installation of 193 water tanks in Kirkuk, Diyala, Najaf,
Baghdad, Anbar and Basra governorates; 81,853 have benefited from improved
sanitation measures; 207,449 have been reached through hygiene promotion
activities; and 37,074 have received hygiene kits through local and international
non-governmental organizations and local authorities.
67. During the reporting period, the United Nations Development Programme
(UNDP) supported the Kurdistan Regional Government in providing sustainable

14/18

15-01030

S/2015/82

infrastructure in camps for the internally displaced, benefiting around 10,000
individuals. The United Nations Human Settlements Programme (UN-Habitat),
under its “Durable shelter support for internally displaced persons in Iraq” initiative,
has installed shelter sites throughout the Kurdistan Region, consisting of a total of
854 prefabricated units, with the United Nations Office for Project Services
undertaking the installation of solar streetlights and providing solar lamp kits to
each household. In all, at 20 camps, with the support of the United Nations,
UNESCO and UNICEF, schools are being built. In addition, WHO is providing
clinics and medical equipment and the United Nations Population Fund is
establishing reproductive health-care clinics and women’s spaces.
68. During the reporting period, more than 20,000 refugees from Kobani/Ayn
al-Arab in the Syrian Arab Republic arrived in the Kurdistan Region of Iraq
following the opening of the Ibrahim Khalil border crossing between Turkey and
Iraq. The majority settled in host communities, with some choosing to reside in
pre-existing refugee camps, bringing the total number of refugees to more than
240,000. The average number of new arrivals per day has decreased from an
average of 475 in October, to an average of 295 per day during November and
175 in December.
69. In December, WFP expanded its voucher programme, transitioning the 76,000
refugees in the Akre and Darashakran camps from in-kind food distribution to
assistance consisting of vouchers valued at $31 per person per month. The transition
was widely accepted, since the refugees are now able to purchase fresh produce and
other commodities directly from camp shops, based on their families’ needs. During
the reporting period, WFP and Islamic Relief Worldwide also continued to deliver
individual food parcels to the 1,000 Syrian refugees in the al-Obaidi camp in Anbar
governorate. UNESCO partnered with local non-governmental organizations to open
10 community learning centres in Erbil and Dohuk to provide literacy and life skills
training to vulnerable refugees, and handed over two secondary schools, which will
accommodate 1,000 refugees, in the Darashkran and Kwargowsak camps to the
Kurdish Ministry of Education.
70. On 18 December, UNHCR and UNDP launched the regional refugee response
and resilience plan for Syrian refugees hosted by Iraq, in an effort to address both
immediate humanitarian needs, as well as to provide medium- to longer-term
resilience plans to reduce dependence on external aid over time. The combined
requirements of the plan totalled $426 million.
71. On 15 December, my Special Representative and Deputy Special
Representative co-chaired a round-table meeting, involving key Government
ministers and officials, to discuss appropriate policy responses to address key
development challenges in Iraq. These challenges and recommended responses were
articulated in a series of policy briefs drafted by the United Nations, for the new
Government, covering fiscal and economic issues, decentralization, social
protection, public sector modernization, durable solutions for the displaced
population, human rights, hydrocarbon revenue management and recovery and
reconstruction in liberated areas.
72. On 17 December, UNDP and the Government of Iraq jointly launched the
national “Human Development Report 2014”, which focused on youth, detailing the
challenges they face and highlighting the importance of providing them with
education and employment opportunities.

15-01030

15/18

S/2015/82

F.

Security and operational issues
73. United Nations operations in Iraq are ongoing. A suicide attack using a
vehicle-borne improvised explosive device that deliberately targeted a UNAMI
convoy in Baghdad on 16 November, with the clear intention of harming United
Nations personnel, has not deterred the Mission from carrying out its mandate. The
Organization resolutely continues its operations in Iraq while maintaining the
security of its personnel among its highest priorities. The Baghdad office and field
offices continue to monitor security closely and they have taken requisite mitigation
measures accordingly. The General Assembly, in its resolution 69/264, approved a
reduction of $120 million in the budgets for special political missions for the
biennium 2016-2017. To be able to meet these reductions, there is a need to review
the mandates of special political missions, including that of UNAMI. I intend to
carry out an assessment and to present my findings before the end of the Mission’s
mandate on 31 July 2015.

IV. Observations
74. Despite the gains made by the Iraqi armed forces during the reporting period,
ISIL’s capability for terror and for violations of the norms of humanity continues to
pose a grave threat to Iraq and to the broader region. I am pleased that the regional
and international community has rallied to Iraq’s defence in strength. There must be
no easing of these efforts to stand by Iraq during this most serious security and
humanitarian challenge. I urge the international community to continue to support
Iraq’s requests for security, humanitarian and reconstruction support, including in
those areas liberated from ISIL.
75. I am heartened by the preliminary yet significant steps that the new
Government of Iraq has embarked upon under its ministerial programme to resolve
longstanding issues of concern to all components of Iraqi society. A military
solution to the threat posed by ISIL will have to be complemented by good
governance and national reconciliation. The grievances and aspirations of the
different components will have to be addressed in an inclusive manner, in
conformity with the Constitution. All communities should be able to again feel safe
and heard.
76. I welcome the political consensus reached within the Council of
Representatives to adopt Iraq’s federal budget for 2015, a significant achievement
that will enable the Government to develop sustainable fiscal policies, promote
economic growth and encourage foreign investment. I am encouraged that the
budget reflects the Government’s political commitments to restore security, alleviate
poverty, promote national reconciliation, provide humanitarian relief to displaced
persons and rebuild areas in Iraq affected by the ongoing conflict and military
operations. The implementation of the budget will provide much needed relief to
Iraqis affected by the ongoing conflict.
77. I am similarly encouraged by the Government’s emphasis on national dialogue
to engage disenfranchised communities and regain their trust. I reiterate the
readiness of the United Nations to extend its full support for all efforts towards
national reconciliation and social cohesion. I also urge Iraqi stakeholders to forge
consensus without delay on the formation of a national guard.

16/18

15-01030

S/2015/82

78. I urge countries in the region and the international community to extend their
full support and assistance to the efforts of the Government of Iraq for national
reconciliation, the strengthening of civilian institutions, and the re-establishment of
security and stability. I laud the efforts of the Iraqi leadership to strengthen ties with
the region and the high-level visits made to countries in the region. I am greatly
encouraged by their response to Iraq’s requests for support and urge them to
continue to work together towards a coherent approach to counter the threat posed
by ISIL.
79. I commend the leadership of the Government of Iraq and the Kurdistan
Regional Government for their commitment to dialogue and spirit of unity in
concluding the important agreement signed on 2 December, which serves the
interest of all Iraqis. I urge both sides to fully implement the agreement, including
proceeding with the oil exports from the Kurdistan Region and Kirkuk through the
State Oil Marketing Organization, as well as the disbursement of the Kurdistan
Region allocation of the federal budget. I further welcome the commitment of the
Government of Iraq to support the Peshmerga through the payment of salaries and
provision of weaponry. I call upon both sides to seize the momentum and swiftly
move towards a comprehensive, fair and constitutional solution to all outstanding
issues, including the enactment of oil and gas, and revenue-sharing legislation, and
to further strengthen their cooperation and coordination in the joint fight against
ISIL. The United Nations stands ready to continue to provide its good offices.
80. Respect for the rule of law and human rights are integral to a plural and
democratic society, which includes respect for the rights of persons subject to the
criminal justice system. In this regard, I am encouraged by the Ministerial decree
requiring security forces and those responsible for the administration of justice to
respect due process by ensuring that any person detained is charged within the
period stipulated by law and is transferred to facilities under the authority of the
Ministry of Justice. I encourage the Government to consider further reforms of the
criminal justice system and to ensure full respect for due process and fair trial
standards, in compliance with Iraq’s international obligations. Effective, socially
inclusive policies cannot succeed without addressing the issue of accountability for
past and ongoing human rights violations in a manner that supports the rule of law
and promotes respect for human rights.
81. I am appalled by reports of atrocities committed by ISIL, which include
beheadings, the enslavement of women, the destruction of religious heritage and
blatant disrespect of human rights, human dignity and human life, some of which
may constitute crimes against humanity. I welcome the deployment of the special
investigation team by the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for
Human Rights on ISIL and associated armed groups. I encourage witnesses and
those in possession of relevant knowledge to come forward to give information and
evidence to the team in its very important mission.
82. I welcome the establishment of the Joint Coordination and Monitoring Centre.
Over the past months, the humanitarian crisis in Iraq has grown exponentially. Iraq
has a staggering population of 5.2 million people who are in need of humanitarian
assistance, turning Iraq into one of the United Nations five global “level 3”
humanitarian emergencies. The United Nations and the Government of Iraq have
launched a joint appeal to raise some $2.2 billion to cover the provision of
humanitarian assistance and protection for 5.2 million people across Iraq until

15-01030

17/18

S/2015/82

December 2015. With more than $600 million generously contributed to date by the
donor community, including $500 million from Saudi Arabia, an additional
$1.6 billion is still urgently needed. I urge Member States to continue their support.
83. I remain very concerned about the continued lack of a status-of-mission
agreement for UNAMI. I urge the Government of Iraq to intensify its cooperation
with the United Nations in finalizing the agreement without any further delay. I also
seek the support of the Security Council in encouraging the Government to ensure
the earliest possible resolution of this long-standing issue.
84. Finally, I would like to thank my Special Representative, Nickolay Mladenov,
and the women and men of the United Nations in Iraq for their perseverance and
often courageous efforts. They will continue to support and assist the Government
and all the people of Iraq. I would like to express my gratitude to my former Deputy
Special Representative for Development and Humanitarian Affairs, Jacqueline
Badcock, who completed her tenure on 31 December, for her leadership in
addressing the humanitarian and development needs in Iraq. I trust that international
partners and Iraq’s neighbours will continue to support my Special Representative
and UNAMI in the implementation of their mandate.

18/18

15-01030
