S/PV.8671

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-fourth year

8671st meeting

Thursday, 21 November 2019, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Ms. Pierce . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(United Kingdom of Great Britain
and Northern Ireland)

Members:

Belgium. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Côte d’Ivoire . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Dominican Republic. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Equatorial Guinea. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Germany . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Indonesia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kuwait. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Peru. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Poland . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
South Africa . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Pecsteen de Buytswerve
Mr. Wu Haitao
Mr. Ipo
Mr. Singer Weisinger
Mrs. Mele Colifa
Mr. Michon
Mr. Schulz
Mr. Syihab
Mr. Alotaibi
Mr. Duclos
Ms. Wronecka
Mr. Repkin
Mr. Matjila
Mr. Barkin

Agenda
The situation in Somalia
Report of the Secretary-General on Somalia (S/2019/884)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

19-37781 (E)
*1937781*

S/PV.8671

The situation in Somalia

The meeting was called to order at 10 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in Somalia
Report of the Secretary-General on Somalia
(S/2019/884)
The President: In accordance with rule 37 of the
Council’s provisional rules of procedure, I invite the
representative of Somalia to participate in this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the following
briefers to participate in this meeting: Mr. James Swan,
Special Representative of the Secretary-General and
Head of the United Nations Assistance Mission in
Somalia; Mr. Francisco Caetano José Madeira, Special
Representative of the Chairperson of the African Union
Commission for Somalia and Head of the African Union
Mission in Somalia; Ms. Halima Ismail Ibrahim, Chair
of the National Independent Electoral Commission of
Somalia; and Mr. Osman Moallim, Executive Director
of Somalia Youth Development Network.
Mr. Madeira and Mr. Moallim are joining this
meeting via video-teleconference from Mogadishu.
The Security Council will now begin its consideration
of the item on its agenda.
I wish to draw the attention of Council members to
document S/2019/884, which contains the report of the
Secretary-General on Somalia.
I also draw colleagues’ attention to the fact that
we have a lot to get through this morning and that we
also have consultations, so it would be a courtesy if
delegations and briefers kept to the allotted time.
I now give the floor to Mr. Swan.
Mr. Swan: I congratulate you, Madam President,
on assuming the presidency of the Security Council for
the month of November. I am honoured to report to the
Council today on the situation in Somalia.
Let me begin by recognizing the important progress
achieved in Somalia over the past decade. That progress
has included building national and federal member
state institutions, scoring significant military gains
against Al-Shabaab, enhancing economic growth and
improved public sector management. Somalis want to
2/24

21/11/2019

see that progress consolidated in 2020 and, indeed,
made irreversible, and so do their international partners
and friends. I am pleased to confirm a number of
examples of further progress since my previous report
to the Council three months ago (see S/PV.8601).
Somalia remains on the path to debt relief, with
favourable assessments by the International Monetary
Fund and strong creditor support. A new national
development plan was adopted by the Government
in September and will guide international partner
programmes. Somali National Army troops have held
territory they captured from Al-Shabaab earlier this
summer in Lower Shabelle. On the diplomatic front,
President Mohamed Abdullahi Mohamed Farmajo and
his Kenyan counterpart, President Uhuru Kenyatta, met
last week and announced plans to normalize bilateral
relations that had been strained since February. To boost
prospects for further advances in 2020, the Somali
Government hosted the Somalia Partnership Forum on
1 and 2 October, which identified critical priorities for
2020 and defined specific objectives and timelines in a
mutual accountability framework agreed with partners.
Progress on the ambitious agenda for 2020 will
require a high degree of political consensus. That will
entail dialogue and compromise between the central
Government and federal member states, between the
executive and legislature, between current office holders
and those now out of power and between elite leaders
and those community elders, civil society organizations
and women’s and youth groups who give voice to so
many Somalis. After more than a year without effective
cooperation between the central Government and key
federal member states, the situation has become an
obstacle to improving and achieving important national
priorities. Somalia’s leaders must act urgently to
break the stalemate between the centre and the federal
member states in the interest of the nation.
Political dynamics in Somalia are increasingly
driven by a focus on the 2020 election. I wish to
underscore the critical importance of Parliament
passing the electoral code and adopting amendments
to the law on political parties before the end of
December. Any delay in that timeline puts the 2020
electoral calendar at risk. I commend the Government
for confirming an initial tranche of financing towards
costs related to voter registration. I also commend the
Government for naming the national electoral security
task force in September, which must now urgently
begin its important work.
19-37781

21/11/2019

The situation in Somalia

While that technical progress is encouraging, I
must again underscore the need for Somalis to forge
a broad political consensus on the electoral system for
2020. In that regard, I very much welcome yesterday’s
meeting between President Farmajo and his two
predecessors and encourage more such consultations.
As the election approaches, I call on authorities at all
levels of Government to ensure that political space is
preserved. Citizens must have the right to speak out,
to access media, to organize and meet and to travel
to engage fellow Somalis throughout the country. At
the same time, I call on all political leaders to act with
responsibility, to eschew violence and to protect the
integrity of national institutions.
Somalis are also paying close attention to
reconciliation and electoral processes at the federal
member state level. Reconciliation efforts in Galmudug
state now face challenges as competition intensifies
over the composition of the parliament. Tensions in
Jubaland resulting from the disputed electoral process
in August continue to pose risks of violence, clan
divisions and even external intervention if not carefully
managed. We urge that those situations be addressed
through dialogue, compromise and pragmatism.
With respect to relations with Somaliland, we urge
authorities in both Mogadishu and Hargeisa to focus on
the needs of the population and to remain open-minded
about new initiatives to encourage dialogue. With
parliamentary elections also expected in Somaliland in
2020, it is important that political freedoms and human
rights be respected there, too.
The Federal Government has committed to
adopting an amended federal constitution by June 2020.
Somali leaders and stakeholders must now redouble
their efforts to complete that foundational document.
It must address the central issues of the federal model,
such as the allocation of powers, the structure of
Government and the status of the capital, Mogadishu,
and guarantee women’s political representation. Peace
and stability in Somalia require strong institutions to
protect the human rights of citizens and build trust in
the State. I call on the central Government and federal
member states to reach an agreement on the justice
and corrections model and establish the constitutional
court, judicial services commission and human rights
commission. Among other priority legislation, I urge
expedited consideration and passage of the sexual
offences bill by Parliament.

S/PV. 8671

Insecurity remains a major challenge to making
progress in Somalia. Al-Shabaab continues to
execute deadly terrorist attacks against civilians and
military targets. With a view to disrupting attacks in
Mogadishu, the Somali National Army, with support
from the African Union Military Observer Mission
in Somalia (AMISOM) and international partners,
began operations in April to recapture territory from
Al-Shabaab in the Lower Shabelle region. Following
its previous offensive in August, the Somali National
Army has successfully held its ground, despite
repeated Al-Shabaab counterattacks. Additional force
generation is now required not only to continue those
advances but also to support other institutional reforms
that are needed in order to implement the security
transition plan.
On the economic front, Somalia is on track to reach a
decision point under the Heavily Indebted Poor Countries
Initiative by early next year. The Federal Government
and federal member states have fully cooperated at the
Finance Minister level in making progress towards
that shared goal. I welcome the Federal Government’s
adoption of the new National Development Plan. Its
content was thoroughly consulted with federal member
states and international partners alike. Donors have
pledged to align their programmes with the Plan. While
the Government and partners remain committed to the
longer-term peacebuilding and development agenda for
the people, Somalia regrettably continues to be hard
hit by humanitarian crises. Thanks to the leadership of
the Somali Government’s humanitarian team and the
generosity of many international partners, lifesaving
support has been afforded to those most in need. We
express our steadfast solidarity with those Somalis
affected by the recurring crises.
In closing, I commend the courage and tenacity
of Somali and AMISOM forces in their continued
efforts to improve security throughout the country. I
underscore the centrality of respect for human rights
in all of our collective efforts in Somalia. I reiterate the
importance of women, youth and civil society as vital
partners in building Somalia’s future.
The President: I thank Mr. Swan for his briefing.
I now give the floor to Mr. Madeira.
Mr. Madeira: I thank you, Madam President, for
the opportunity to brief the Council once again on the
situation in Somalia. Addressing the Council remains
a great privilege. Let me also take this opportunity

19-377813/24

S/PV.8671

The situation in Somalia

to congratulate your country, Madam, the United
Kingdom, on assuming the presidency of the Security
Council this month.
The African Union stands in solidarity with the
population of Beledweyne and the state of HirShabelle
in general, who have had their livelihoods disrupted by
the recent floods. The floods have affected a substantial
number of people, of whom an estimated 231,000
have been displaced. That tragedy is compounding
the effects of insecurity in and around Beledweyne,
resulting in a significant number of people being forced
to migrate to areas where they can seek shelter and
assistance. In an attempt to mitigate the impact of the
floods, we have seen a Somali-led the response in which
the Federal Government of Somalia, the HirShabelle
regional Government and individual Somalis, including
politicians and civil society members, are responding
to the humanitarian crisis in HirShabelle, particularly
in Beledweyne.
Working in collaboration with local partners,
troops of the African Union Military Observer Mission
in Somalia (AMISOM) on the ground have helped to
transport people from flooded areas — particularly
vulnerable older people, women and young children — to
higher ground. AMISOM troops have also been assisting
the regional Government in repairing roads and
bridges damaged by flood water. While humanitarian
partners are scaling up their response, much more is
still needed. AMISOM will also soon be providing
blankets, mosquito nets and plastic sheeting to over 800
displaced families in and around Beledweyne. That will
build on the health care that AMISOM and the military
are already providing in their operational sectors.
When I briefed this organ at the beginning of this
year (see S/PV.8440), I described what the African
Union saw as optimism coming from Somalia. As we
draw towards the end of 2019, I wish to state that there
are still signs of hope radiating from Somalia and for
its people. I would also like to add that those signs
of hope are still fragile and require our continuing
collective attention. In my briefing today, I will seek
to highlight those signs of hope, which if sustained and
properly harnessed as we approach 2020, will lead us
and Somalia towards lasting peace and security.
While the Federal Government is committed to
maintaining and enhancing cooperative relations with
federal member states, we see efforts being deployed
aimed at finding a solution to relations with Jubaland
4/24

21/11/2019

and Puntland. In fact, since my briefing in August
(see S/PV.8601), we have witnessed commendable
steps being taken by the Federal Government aimed at
achieving reconciliation and conflict resolution across
Somalia. What happened yesterday at Villa Somalia
is of extreme significance to the future of détente
and inclusive politics in the country. The most senior
leaders of the country have chosen to meet and discuss
its issues. We should welcome that development and
collectively continue to encourage and support those
Somali initiatives and harness all opportunities to help
diffuse tension and promote understanding.
In Galmudug, we welcomed the efforts that led to the
successful reconciliation conference in Dhuusamarreeb
in September, at which the presence of AMISOM troops
helped to enhance the required conducive environment.
We witnessed more than 700 representatives from
11 clans reach consensus on modalities aimed at
unifying Galmudug. The Dhuusamarreeb conference
represents an example not only of the progress made
in achieving inclusive politics but also of the solidarity,
positive concurrence and complementarity of efforts
between AMISOM and the Somali National Army, on
the one hand, and civilians, on the other, in supporting
and helping to advance the political process across
Somalia. We need to continue to work to ensure that
the current misunderstandings in that regional state
are overcome and that the process follow and continue
its route. While AMISOM troops will maintain their
presence in Dhuusamarreeb, with the consent of all
parties, including Ahl al-Sunna wal-Jama’a, we look
forward to a peaceful outcome of the second phase of
the political process and urge all stakeholders to refrain
from any action that could delay the establishment of an
inclusive Galmudug administration.
We are equally encouraged by the momentum
gained through the peaceful resolution of the clan
dispute between the Xeraale and Huurshe communities,
an initiative led by Prime Minister Khayre in
September. Similar efforts have also been extended to
South-West state by the Federal Government. We have
seen the Federal Government work in partnership with
the South-West administration to undertake a series of
consultative visits to Baidoa, Bay, Hudur, Bakool and
Merca to engage local communities. The impact of that
outreach is bringing local communities closer to each
other and the Government. A good example of that is
the recently held Government-led social reconciliation
workshop for South-West traditional elders in October.
19-37781

21/11/2019

The situation in Somalia

On the constitutional review process, the Minister
of Constitutional Affairs, the Oversight Committee
and the Independent Constitutional Review and
Implementation Commission continue to meet, consult
and carry out outreach work. With most of the technical
work nearly completed, AMISOM will continue to call
for dialogue and political engagement in line with the
2020 Mutual Accountability Framework commitments,
with a view to completing the debate and adopting the
federal constitution by June 2020.
Regarding elections preparations, the African
Union continues to see real commitment by south
Somalia to deliver on that key milestone. But before
speaking more about that progress, allow me to first
welcome the reaffirmation of the commitment by
Mr. Mohamed Farmajo in September at the General
Assembly (see A/74/PV.7) to hold universal elections in
the last quarter of 2020.
While the passage of the electoral bill and the
political pact bill remain critical next steps, we must
not lose sight of what has already been achieved.
Progress has been made during the past three months
on reviewing the electoral bill, with the commendable
work of the 15-member ad hoc parliamentary committee
completing consultations with all federal member
states. We also witnessed the recent positive steps in
the appointment of the national electoral security task
force and the development of the draft joint concept for
security for voter registration under the provisionally
approved list of potential voter registration sites.
The African Union will continue to work with the
Government and the National Independent Electoral
Commission on all aspects of electoral preparations.
In that regard, AMISOM has realigned itself to
better support preparations for the elections. We now
have a dedicated AMISOM election cell, the police
component of which, in cooperation with other partners,
has helped develop the draft joint concept for security
for voter registration, which is now being considered by
the electoral task force.
Furthermore, to ensure that the African Union
is strengthening its support to the electoral security
task force, I am pleased to report that, following a
meeting on 19 November with the Somali Police
Force Commissioner, General Ali Hassan Mohamed,
in his capacity as the electoral task force chair,
AMISOM will be providing assistance to develop an
election communication strategy for public security.

S/PV. 8671

The communication strategy will be an extension of
AMISOM’s ongoing election awareness support to the
National Independent Electoral Commission, focusing
on persuasive communication to assure and deepen
confidence in the security preparations prior to, during
and after the 2020-2021 elections. That will also include
continuous outreach engagement with community
policing, with an emphasis on informing the general
population of their safety and security at the polls.
Al-Shabaab remains a threat to peace and security
in Somalia, with its targeting of innocent civilians,
Government facilities and personnel, security forces
and international partners, including AMISOM.
Despite the group’s ability to destabilize, AMISOM has
observed a decline in the group’s activities since the
beginning of October. In our assessment, a combination
of three factors substantiate that fact.
First, 2019 continues to see an increase in the
number of lethal strikes against Al-Shabaab by partners,
particularly concentrated strikes in the Lower Shabelle
and Lower Juba areas. The impact of those strikes is
now forcing Al-Shabaab to disperse and hide where it
cannot be easily identified, isolated and targeted.
Secondly, with the arrival of the Somali rains,
Al-Shabaab has found it increasingly difficult to operate
along a number of main supply routes. In real terms,
those have seen a reduction in improvised explosive
device attacks and Al-Shabaab ambushes.
Thirdly, the successive and successful bridge town
operations, together with the mobile search and find
operations against Al-Shabaab, conducted jointly by
Somali security forces and AMISOM, have pushed
Al-Shabaab back. The resulting effect has been for
Al-Shabaab to contend with ceding more territory in
key areas. Despite the overall reduction in Al-Shabaab’s
activities during the reporting period, Al-Shabaab
continues to focus on Mogadishu, in spite of there being
enhanced security measures now in place in the city.
An illustration of Al-Shabaab’s focus was witnessed on
13 October when Al-Shabaab fired nine mortar rounds
at the Aden Abdulle International Airport zone, within
which the AMISOM and other partners of the United
Nations compounds are located. Those mortar attacks
resulted in eight people sustaining injuries.
Turning to the status of the implementation of the
transition plan, I am pleased to report that AMISOM,
in support of the Somali security forces, continues
to register tangible progress in implementing the

19-377815/24

S/PV.8671

The situation in Somalia

transition. Despite grappling with challenges on the
operational pillar of the transition, during the reporting
period AMISOM successfully accomplished some key
tasks in support of the Somali security forces. Those
include capturing territories from Al-Shabaab and
transferring the security responsibility.
In August, AMISOM and the Somali security forces
jointly recovered Awdheegle, the third bridge town in
Lower Shabelle. Awdheegle is still being jointly held
by AMISOM and the Somali National Army. That is
building on our previous recovery operations of three
bridge towns in the Lower Shabelle.
As part of extending military operations under
the transition, also in August, AMISOM conducted
targeted operations to disrupt Al-Shabaab’s activities
in Cowsquori and Dare Salam, both in AMISOM
sector 2. Meanwhile, in Warsheikh in September, and
in line with the transitional requirements, AMISOM
transferred security responsibilities over that town to
the Somali Police Force. The Force is still holding that
town at present, and that is something of which we must
take note.
As AMISOM proceeds with the implementation of
its obligations under the transition plan, the next steps
would be to complete the recovery of the remaining
bridge towns in Lower Shabelle and proceed to
implement other earmarked benchmarks for the second
phase of the plan. To that effect, the current derails
are a factor that needs to be taken into account. The
other factor is the need to fill the current gaps with
regard to force generation. That is a central factor in
our joint effort to accomplish our mandated tasks in the
area of defence and security. Military pressure against
Al-Shabaab needs to be continuous and unremitting to
dependably yield the expected results. The enhancement
of our capacity to collect and process good, timely and
actionable intelligence and the mobility of the forces to
conduct effective targeted operations, with the required
elements of speed and surprise, combined with the
capacity to sustainably hold the recovered territory,
remain essential for us to achieve our transitional
objectives in the way they have been planned and
approved by the Council and by the African Union
Peace and Security Council.
For that, more well-trained and well-equipped
Somali battalions of the Somali National Army,
supported and complemented by other components of
the Somali security forces, are required in the theatre
6/24

21/11/2019

of operations. We are cognizant of the contribution
of partners in that regard but the facts on the ground
clearly show that more support and a more sizeable
response are needed.
The African Union looks forward to the upcoming
force generation conference in Mogadishu in December
in terms of support for the transition requirements. We
equally welcome the decision of the European Union
to redirect part of its staff and support to funding the
federal Darwish training as part of the force generation
effort. In parallel with our operational activities on the
military front, the AMISOM police continue to support
the enhancement of the institutional capacity of the
Ministry of Internal Security and HirShabelle regional
state, to mention but a few.
The President: I am very sorry to interrupt but
I wonder if I could ask Mr. Madeira to kindly bring
his remarks to a close, as there are two other briefers,
followed by the statements of the Council members.
The Special Representative of the Secretary-General
has requested that the Council then hold consultations.
I give the floor to Mr. Madeira to conclude
his remarks.
Mr. Madeira: At the beginning of my statement
I mentioned that there are signs of hope in Somalia as
we look forward to 2020. Allow me to end on the same
optimistic note. The recent rapprochement between
Somalia and Kenya is a testament to the potential that
exists in the Horn of Africa. The measures agreed
between both countries will no doubt have a positive
impact on both the neighbouring sisterly countries.
We are going to implement the threat assessment
decision that was taken by this body. Concrete steps
have been taken and things are going well.
The President: I thank Mr. Madeira for his briefing.
I now give the floor to Ms. Ibrahim.
Ms. Ibrahim: I am pleased to address the
Security Council regarding Somalia’s democratization
process. From the outset, I wish to extend my sincere
appreciation to the members of the Council and the
international community for their support for Somalia
and, in particular, for assisting the National Independent
Electoral Commission (NIEC) in its effort to carry out
its mandate of conducting universal suffrage elections.
Since Somalia formally became an independent
State in 1960, universal suffrage elections have been
19-37781

21/11/2019

The situation in Somalia

conducted only twice, in 1964 and, most recently, in
1969. The essential platforms for promoting democracy,
including political parties and the Constitution, were
suspended when the military took over in 1969.
After 21 years in power, the military Government
was removed from power by clan militias in 1991. The
country descended into civil war, as those clan-based
factions failed to agree on power-sharing and universal
suffrage has not been in effect over the past 50 years.
Currently, Somalia has an estimated population
of 12 million, with a large population living in major
cities across all member states as internally displaced
persons. Following several decades of State failure and
in the absence of a functioning Government, a clanbased power-sharing model was agreed upon at the end
of 2016 and in early 2017. Under the clan power-sharing
model, clan leaders were given the mandate to nominate
candidates and delegates from their respective clans. In
the end, the elders managed to choose 275 members of
the Lower House and 54 members of the Upper House.
Although the model facilitated the indirect election
of Members of Parliament and the President at the
federal level, the process was compromised by extensive
vote buying. There was a great deal of corruption in the
process, the limited participation of women in the two
Houses and the complete exclusion of marginalized and
minority groups.
The National Independent Electoral Commission
was first established in 2015. Soon after its formation,
the NIEC Board of Commissioners begun building
an institutional foundation to prepare the country for
elections in 2020/2021. The NIEC’s preparatory work
commenced with the formulation of a strategic plan
that was based on the constitutional principles and
harmonized with the country’s national development
plan and Constitution. The four-year preparation by the
NIEC has focused on the following areas.
First is the capacity-building of the NIEC
Commissioners and the secretariat. The second
aspect is the provisional registration of political
parties. To date, 57 political parties have temporary
registration. The third aspect is the establishment of
NIEC field offices in all federal member states. The
fourth area is the development of the voter education
curriculum, supporting materials and voter education
messages. Fifth is the identification and verification
of potential voter registration sites and the selection
of the voter registration model. The sixth area is the

S/PV. 8671

development of the concept of operations and budget
for voter registration operations. Seventh is overseeing
the construction on the NIEC data processing centre
and warehouse building. The eight element is the
preparation of all the necessary rules and regulations
for the adoption of the electoral law.
The significant progress in the preparation for
the 2020/2021 election would not have been possible
without the support of the Federal Government of
Somalia, federal member states and our international
partners, particularly the Integrated Election Support
Group, the United Nations arm created to provide
assistance to Somalia’s elections in 2020/2021 and the
African Union. There are also several international
non-governmental organizations.
Since 2011, Somalia’s political leaders have agreed
to holding a one-person one-vote election as the basis
for the process of choosing leaders and a substitute
for the clan-based power-sharing. Besides the leaders’
decision, the findings from a nation-wide feasibility
study conducted by the NIEC indicate significant
public support for a fair and credible election given
that it is the cornerstone for building a vibrant society
in Somalia. Moreover, the Somali public support the
one-person one-vote system because they believe that
it is the only mechanism whereby marginalized groups
can regain their rights to take part in the political
decision-making process.
I want to remind the members of the Council
that 2020 is a pivotal year for Somalia’s citizens, who
have been denied their right to political participation
for 50 years. The 2020 election is a milestone for the
international community, which has been investing
heavily in Somalia for several decades with a view
to introducing and promoting democracy and good
governance. However, that milestone will be realized
only when the Somali leaders and the international
community show a commitment to ensuring that
one-person-one-vote elections take place in 2020
and 2021.
I want to reiterate that the clan power-sharing
model was initially designed as a temporary measure
to support the transitional Government of Somalia
in preparing the country for one-person-one-vote
elections. That is why various meetings of Somali
political leaders and partnership forums have all called
for one-person-one-vote elections and an end to the
clan-based power model. It is also worth noting that

19-377817/24

S/PV.8671

The situation in Somalia

any election model that does not enable the Somali
people to exercise their right to vote violates Somalia’s
Constitution and the various human rights conventions
that Somalia has ratified. Article 46 of the Constitution
specifically stipulates that the public representation
system shall be open and shall give everyone the
opportunity to participate, and that its procedures and
rules shall be simple and understandable.
In order to restore the right of the Somali people
to a free election, as stipulated in article 22 of the
Constitution, and also in recognition of the fact that
one-person-one-vote elections are the cornerstone for
building Somalia’s democratic governance, I therefore
want to make the following appeal to Somalia’s leaders
and international partners. The National Independent
Electoral Commission is requesting that the country’s
leaders treat the 2020-2021 one-person-one-vote
elections as a constitutional obligation and a national
priority, and that they provide the political and
financial support that the Electoral Commission needs
to carry out its mission to conduct one-person-one-vote
elections. The Electoral Commission also appeals
to our international partners to make the necessary
funding for election operations available. The overall
operational cost of the election in Somalia is estimated
at $53 million, excluding the cost of election security
and the Electoral Commission’s annual operational
costs. The Electoral Commission also expects political
support from the international community.
I want to remind our partners that there are several
post-conflict countries whose elections have been guided
by the United Nations and the international community
with costs several times higher than the total projected
costs of Somalia’s election. But that was done because
the international community believed that elections were
a vital part of the process of rebuilding those countries.
While the National Independent Electoral Commission
appreciates the support that the Somali Government
and the international community have given in the past
to promote Somalia’s democratization, we believe their
efforts of the past years will be wasted if they do not
genuinely support the holding of one-person-one-vote
elections in Somalia in 2020 and 2021.
The President: I thank Ms. Ibrahim for her briefing.
I now give the floor to Mr. Moallim.
Mr. Moallim: I am very honoured and humbled to
be among the invited briefers and to have been given
this opportunity to address the Security Council as a
8/24

21/11/2019

representative of civil society in Somalia. My name
is Osman Moallim. I am the Chairperson of Somali
Non-State Actors and the Executive Director of
Somalia Youth Development Network. I want to begin
by thanking the Council for giving me the opportunity
to address its members as the Chair of Somali
Non-State Actors. I also want to stress the importance
of this opportunity to represent Somalia’s civil society.
It means a lot for civil society, not only because it
encourages inclusivity, but also because it empowers
the vital role of Somalian civil society in achieving a
stable and progressive governance system in Somalia. I
would like to take this opportunity not only to indicate
our concerns but to strongly express our gratitude to
the international community and the Security Council
for their commitment to supporting the Somali people
in their time of need.
Somalia is certainly a work in progress and is
coming of age in terms of recovering from conflict,
transforming society and improving security and the
functionality of its regional and federal State institutions,
as Special Representative Swan made clear in August
in his remarks to the Security Council on the situation
in Somalia (see S/PV.8601). However, Somalia’s
progress is reaching a precarious crossroads, where if
it takes the wrong road by postponing or cancelling the
upcoming election, it will undoubtedly compromise
years of international and Somali peacebuilding and
State-building efforts. On the other hand, by taking the
right road it can indeed further solidify and enhance
the gains made so far. The right road for Somalia now
is to organize the anticipated 2020-2021 elections in
a free, fair and inclusive manner. Credible elections
will provide a foundation for the country to address
all of its other pressing issues, such as the economy,
ensuring a peaceful society and security, so as to enable
it to make improvements on the political, economic and
social fronts.
Frankly, there are many challenges to transforming
the vision of universal elections in 2020 and 2021 into
reality. The time for organizing them is limited, as they
are to be held a year from now. There are concerns
about a lack of clarity among key stakeholders on
the progress that has been made towards making the
elections a reality. There is also a strong feeling among
stakeholders that the Federal Government and the
federal member states are remaining silent on such
important national issues as the electoral process, the
completion of the critical electoral law and amendments
19-37781

21/11/2019

The situation in Somalia

to the Constitution regarding the election process
and policies envisaged, such as the electoral dispute
resolution mechanism, which have yet to be finalized.
As a civil-society organization, we have reviewed
the situation and provided our recommendations to the
Government and the National Independent Electoral
Commission. We have made it clear that notwithstanding
the insecurity and the fragility of the institutions in
most of the country, civil society generally welcomes
the one-person-one-vote process, coupled with the
required safeguards to protect and promote the political
rights of minorities and underrepresented groups such
as women and young people. Implementing a system
of proportional representation at this time, even if it
is limited by our many challenges, would open up the
political space and overcome many vested and corrupt
interests in the status quo. That would be a massive
improvement over the previous process for selecting
members of Parliament. It would increase the quality
of citizens’ participation in that institution and reduce
the group-think mentality that is currently plaguing
our country.
We are also aware that the current relationship
between the Federal Government and the federal
member states is tense. That affects our security,
political institutions and State-building efforts.
Without cooperation between the Federal and regional
Governments, very little progress can be made
towards organizing a credible election. Security still
remains a major obstacle to the one-person-one-vote
election process. Although some major cities could
be relatively safe for the polls, people outside these
areas will probably face difficulties in voting or even
travelling to the urban hubs. Other obstacles include
designing the right process and putting the necessary
technical, logistical and financial requirements in place
before elections can be held.
It is imperative to ensure that as we transition to the
2020-2021 elections they can take place in the interests
of the people and of stability and democracy in Somalia.
Fair and free elections will increase confidence in good
governance and effect change through peaceful means.
We therefore need a new momentum to advance the
process is if Government institutions are to become
more inclusive and accountable and establish the rule
of law in the country.
I would therefore strongly recommend that the
international community encourage and support the

S/PV. 8671

Government and the people of Somalia in the following
ways. They should improve security. The Federal
Government and the federal member states should be
brought together to enable them to reach a political
accommodation on a number of important issues, such
as the electoral model and other constitutional issues.
Representation and participation in the upcoming
electoral process should be strengthened and expanded.
The role of women in preventing and resolving conflict,
as well as in the electoral and political process, should
be strengthened. The general public’s knowledge of the
electoral process should be enhanced and bureaucratic
delays should be resolved. Logistic and technical advice
should be provided when and where applicable, and
tensions between the Federal Government and federal
member states should be mitigated in the interests of
peace and stability for the people of Somalia.
Ultimately, we strongly recommend that the
upcoming one-person-one-vote election proceed
by consensus with no significant delays. With the
continued support of Somalia’s international partners,
I believe that the Somali Government and people will
be able to continue on their journey towards a peaceful
and prosperous future. Somali civil society is able and
ready to support the process once a political consensus is
achieved. Once again, I am grateful for the opportunity
to address the Council. I ask Council members to accept
the warm greetings of the Somali people for their
constant support in helping us re-energize Somalia
so that it can start taking steps forward again, since it
seems that the momentum has stalled.
I would like to end on this parting note. Women
in Somalia are known as the backbone of Somali
households and should also be recognized as the
backbone of the Somali nation. Without that backbone,
we would be paralysed. Their involvement in all
processes is imperative if we want to succeed as a
nation, but we must also protect our backbone.
The President: I thank Mr. Moallim for his briefing.
I now give the floor to those Council members who
wish to make statements.
Mr. Michon (France) (spoke in French): I would like
to start by thanking our briefers for their statements. I
also want to express our sadness on hearing of the death
yesterday in Mogadishu of the human rights defender
Ms. Almaas Elman. We offer our condolences to her
family, especially Ms. Ilwad Elman, who was with us
the day before yesterday (see S/PV.8668), as well as to

19-377819/24

S/PV.8671

The situation in Somalia

the Governments and peoples of Somalia and Canada.
We hope that the full circumstances surrounding her
death will be brought to light. I would like to highlight
four points today.
First, with regard to the political situation in
Somalia, France remains extremely concerned about the
deadlock in relations between the Federal Government
of Somalia and some federal member states, which
represents a major obstacle to the completion of critical
projects for Somalia. As the Special Representative said,
it is therefore urgent to see that dialogue is resumed,
particularly between the Federal authorities and the
authorities of Jubaland, Puntland and Galmudug. That
dialogue should in no way be conditioned by time
pressures surrounding local elections to the detriment
of national interests.
Secondly, regarding the 2020-2021 elections,
France welcomes the commitment made by the Somali
Federal Government at the Somalia Partnership Forum
to adopting a new electoral code by the end of this year,
which is a fundamental step in the process for elections
to be held at the end of 2020 or the beginning of 2021
in line with the principle of one person, one vote, as
Ms. Ibrahim recalled, and with the full and effective
participation of Somali women.
Turning to the security situation, France
remains concerned about the frequency of attacks by
Al-Shabaab, particularly in Mogadishu. In that context,
we want to emphasize the importance of continuing to
implement the plan for transitioning security from the
African Union Mission in Somalia (AMISOM) to the
Somali security forces. The operations conducted in
Lower Shabelle were a step in the right direction, but
efforts must now continue in coordination with regional
forces, AMISOM and international partners. Of course,
it is also extremely important that the Somali Federal
authorities continue their force-generation efforts.
With regard to AMISOM, France is paying close
attention to the issue of respect for the deadlines fixed
by the Council, in particular the reduction of the troop
ceiling by 1,000 military personnel by 28 February
2020. We believe that AMISOM’s reconfiguration
must be a gradual process and conducted in the most
stable areas of the country. It is therefore essential
that the Council’s decisions are fully complied with.
In addition, I would like to reiterate that the European
Union’s support for AMISOM is part of a cooperation
framework based on mutual commitment. Our
10/24

21/11/2019

significant efforts hinge on tangible results on the part
of Somali’s Federal authorities, both in terms of the
security transition, which I have already mentioned,
and on the resumption of dialogue with federal member
states. This was the approach taken in the run-up to the
signing of the Mutual Accountability Framework at the
Somalia Partnership Forum, which we commend.
Finally, France remains concerned about the serious
humanitarian situation and the ongoing violations of
international humanitarian law and human rights. I
particularly have in mind the acts of violence against the
civilian population, including sexual and gender-based
violence and violence against children, crimes that
we know are perpetrated by terrorist groups but also,
regrettably, sometimes by the Somali security forces.
It is therefore essential to ensure that such violations
cease and that those responsible are prosecuted. The
reintegration of survivors of such violence is also
essential to ensure a return to lasting peace.
Before concluding, I would like to reiterate the
importance France attaches to smooth cooperation
between the Somali Federal authorities and United
Nations entities generally, especially the Panel of
Experts of the Committee established pursuant to
resolution 751 (1992), concerning Somalia, which we
hope will be able to conduct a visit to the country as
soon as possible.
Mr. Barkin (United States of America): At the
outset, we would like to thank our briefers for joining
us today. We would like to join others in expressing
our condolences for the tragic death of Ms. Almaas
Elman and urge justice and security for all of Somalia’s
civil society.
Since the Council’s most recent meeting on Somalia
in August (see S/PV.8601), we have seen varying
degrees of progress towards long-term security and
stability in Somalia. The United States applauds the
recent successes of the Somali national security forces
against Al-Shabaab with the support of the African
Union Mission in Somalia (AMISOM), particularly in
Lower Shabelle. We are encouraged by United Nations
reports of fewer incidents of armed conflict during the
past three months compared to the same period last
year, as well as by the fact that Somali security forces
are successfully reclaiming and holding territory from
Al-Shabaab in the face of repeated counterattacks.
We further support the ongoing efforts of
AMISOM’s leadership and look to the Somali security
19-37781

21/11/2019

The situation in Somalia

forces and institutions to undertake the reforms and
development efforts that will enable them to take on
greater responsibilities from AMISOM in accordance
with the transition plan. In that regard, the United
States is pleased to help build capacity within Somalia’s
security forces, and we appreciate Somalia’s partners
on the Council, who are also contributing to capacitybuilding for the country’s security. It is crucial that
we ensure collaboration and coherence in this overall
effort. We are also encouraged by the fact that tensions
between Somalia and Kenya appear to be easing and
we remain prepared to facilitate future dialogue and
reconciliation efforts.
Additionally, we congratulate Somalia on its
progress on fiscal reforms, as it seeks eventual debt
relief next year through the Heavily Indebted Poor
Countries Initiative, and we encourage the Somali
authorities to continue their efforts.
With that in mind, the United States underscores
the important role that sanctions have played in
limiting Al-Shabaab’s operational capabilities, and
we look forward to working with our partners to use
the Somali sanctions regime to choke off funding and
other sources of support to Al-Shabaab and to further
degrade its ability to carry out attacks against Somalia,
and its neighbours and partners.
We are, however, concerned about ongoing
political divisions and the lack of positive engagement
between the Federal Government in Mogadishu and
the federal member states. We acknowledge the recent
confidence-building efforts of the Federal Government
and state Governments of Galmudug and South-West
state with regard to political, security and development
challenges in their communities, but more needs to
be done.
We are troubled by the recent events in Jubaland and
the state presidential elections in August. We urge the
Federal Government and Jubaland’s Ahmed Mohamed
Islam “Madobe” to engage in direct dialogue to address
outstanding issues, and we encourage neighbouring
federal states and international partners to support
efforts to reach a resolution.
Finally, looking to the 2021 elections, the United
States urges the Federal Government and the state
Governments to be transparent in their preparations
and respect the rights of independent journalists to
freely inform the public about electoral issues and
developments. We also stress the importance of

S/PV. 8671

completing the outstanding elections-related laws that
will serve as the foundation for the elections and deepen
the trust between the Federal and state Governments.
We caution that limiting electoral processes or delaying
legislation will only damage the country’s goals of
peace, stability and economic growth.
Mr. Matjila (South Africa): On behalf of the
three elected African members of the Security
Council — Côte d’Ivoire, Equatorial Guinea and South
Africa — I would like to start by thanking Mr. James
Swan, Special Representative of the Secretary-General
and Head of the United Nations Assistance Mission
in Somalia (AMISOM); Mr. Francisco Caetano José
Madeira, Special Representative of the Chairperson
of the African Union (AU) Commission for Somalia
and Head of the African Union Mission in Somalia;
Ms. Halima Ismail Ibrahim, Chair of the National
Independent Electoral Commission of Somalia; and
Mr. Osman Moallim, Executive Director of Somalia
Youth Development Network, for their briefings. The
African members of the Security Council also welcome
our colleague the Permanent Representative of Somalia
to this meeting concerning his homeland.
We also join other colleagues in offering our
condolences to the family of Ms. Almaas Elman, who
was killed in Somalia yesterday.
The African members of the Council are pleased
to note that Somalia is making progress on the road
to political, security, economic and social recovery,
despite enormous challenges. That progress is a result
of Somalia’s continued focus on national priorities
that are guided by the Somali transition plan and the
National Development Plan framework. The African
Union, through AMISOM, continues to support the
efforts of the Federal Government to ensure inclusive
and enhanced relations with the federal member states.
However, Somalia needs the support of all its
partners to harness and sustain ongoing efforts towards
effective stabilization and assistance in preparing for
post-conflict reconstruction and development across
the country. In that regard, critical questions remain
with regard to prospects for credible and timely
one-person-one-vote elections in 2020 and 2021.
As the focus shifts to elections, there is the
potential for increased political tensions. The federal
member states’ agreement on the electoral law, security
planning and funding will be crucial. The international
community should push for accelerated electoral

19-3778111/24

S/PV.8671

The situation in Somalia

21/11/2019

preparations, including the legal framework, as well as
security and logistics.

forces, civilians, AMISOM, the United Nations and
international actors.

The African members of the Security Council call
on the Council to support the work of the National
Independent Electoral Commission on the finalization
of the preparations for the upcoming elections,
such as public outreach and pre-voter registration
preparations, including the identification of voter
registration locations that can be secured and supported
by AMISOM. The completion of the constitutional
review process is a critical milestone for Somalia as it
forges ahead in laying the foundations for lasting and
sustainable peace and security in the country.

In that regard, the three African Security Council
members strongly condemn the mortar attack on
the United Nations and AMISOM compounds on
13 October. We extend our wishes for a speedy and
full recovery to the injured personnel and call for the
enhancement of international efforts to counter the
threat of terrorism and violent extremism in Somalia.

In that regard, improved collaboration and
cooperation between the Federal Government and its
federal member states are crucial to advancing security,
including the integration and generation of forces to
fight side by side with AMISOM, the implementation
of the transition plan, deepening federalism and
completing the constitutional review process.
The three African members of the Security
Council also want to emphasize the important role of
women. Through continued engagement and advocacy,
notably of women in AMISOM and the United Nations
Assistance Mission in Somalia (UNSOM), together with
Government officials, Somali women’s participation in
the political process, including in the electoral process,
is increasing. Prior to the 2016-2017 elections, the aim
was to secure and achieve 30 per cent representation in
Parliament. Women secured 24 per cent of the seats in
the current Parliament.
It is also important to create the conditions for
the political mobilization of youth and enable them to
participate fully and responsibly in the future elections
in Somalia. In that regard, it is important to commend
the work of UNSOM to help better identify the obstacles
to youth participation and to call on the Somali
authorities, national civil society and the international
community to strengthen their actions in that regard.
The African members of the Security Council
commend the progress made in the security sector in
Somalia with the support of AMISOM. The process
that led to the capture from Al-Shabaab and continued
holding of the bridge towns of Sabiid, Bariire and
Awdheegle in Lower Shabelle is the most telling
example in that regard. However, Al-Shabaab retains
its operational capabilities, as evidenced by consistent
counter-attacks and systematic attacks against security
12/24

In addition, the pace of generating Somali security
capacities and force transition from AMISOM have
been slow and well short of expected timelines. It is
therefore crucial to find ways of supporting the force
generation of Somali security forces to ensure that they
undertake joint operations with AMISOM, hold newly
liberated territories, protect civilian centres and secure
the main supply routes.
The three African Security Council members
encourage the AU, AMISOM, the United Nations
and the Federal Government of Somalia to undertake
a joint threat assessment of the situation in Somalia,
pursuant to resolution 2472 (2019) and the communiqué
of the AU Peace and Security Council, in order to
prepare for the upcoming AMISOM troop reduction
of 1,000 by 28 February 2020. It will be recalled
that in the fulfilment of its mandate, as stipulated in
the relevant Security Council resolutions and AU
Peace and Security Council communiqués, AMISOM
has already reconfigured and drawn down its force
strength by 2,000 troops. By February 2020, another
1,000 effectives are expected to be withdrawn from the
Mission’s theatre of operations.
The African Security Council members urge the
Council to ensure that any AMISOM drawdown or
reconfiguration, as well as the transition, is conditioned
and guided by the actual situation on the ground. That
should also be based on the capacity and capability of
the Somali security forces to guarantee security and
stability for the country’s people.
The deterioration of the humanitarian situation,
in particular owing to drought, food insecurity and
the increase in the number of internally displaced
persons, is a cause of serious concern for the African
members of the Security Council. The situation, in
fact, increases the need to help and protect those
populations in distress. It is therefore urgent that the
international partners continue to redouble their efforts
to provide the funds that are lacking in the financing of
19-37781

21/11/2019

The situation in Somalia

the 2019 humanitarian response plan and support the
humanitarian response in 2020 in order to address the
food-security crisis faced by more than 2 million people.
In conclusion, the three African member States
on the Security Council reaffirm their support and
appreciation for AMISOM, UNSOM, the United
Nations Support Office in Somalia and all other
international partners for their important contributions
to the restoration of peace and stability in Somalia. We
also pay tribute to and salute the gallant peacekeepers
who paid the ultimate sacrifice in assisting Somalia in
its struggle to ensure the peace and safety of its people.
Mr. Singer Weisinger (Dominican Republic)
(spoke in Spanish): We would like to thank the briefers
for the information they shared with us today.
The Dominican Republic welcomes the forum held
on 1 and 2 October in Mogadishu, in which specific and
priority commitments were defined, such as the holding
of elections at the end of 2020 or the beginning of 2021,
the adoption of the draft electoral law by December
2019 and the completion of the constitutional review
by June 2020.
The political stalemate continues to be an obstacle
to achieving significant progress, making it necessary
for Somali leaders to redouble their efforts aimed
at finding solutions to problems through consensus,
prioritizing the interests of the Somali people. We stress
the need for further progress on the legal framework
for the 2020 and 2021 elections and urge the Federal
Government and the federated member states to spare
no effort in reaching an agreement on a comprehensive
political framework for the key electoral issues. We
welcome the Federal Government’s efforts in the
constitutional review process and its commitment to
finalizing the Constitution by June 2020. We urge the
parties to continue pursuing constructive, inclusive and
transparent dialogues based on consensus.
We strongly condemn the assassination of Almaas
Elman and would like to express our condolences to
her family and to the people of Somalia. We have lost a
brilliant young peacebuilder and a great humanitarian.
Just two days ago, her sister, Ilwad, was in this Chamber
urgently calling on us to protect the humanitarian
workers and human rights defenders who continue to
be killed, disappeared and abducted (see S/PV.8668).
We will therefore continue to support the struggle of
the Elman sisters. Those responsible for this inhumane
act must be identified and brought to justice.

S/PV. 8671

The inclusion of women and young people has
great potential to transform societies, which is why we
must increase their political participation and powersharing. Women must be involved at all levels in order
for them to reach a minimum of 30 per cent of seats in
the 2020 elections.
We condemn the attacks perpetrated by the terrorist
group Al-Shabaab, which continues to be the main
source of violence, targeting Government facilities and
personnel, security forces, and public places through
the use of improvised explosive devices.
The humanitarian situation in Somalia is of
particular concern because of the high level of
widespread severe acute malnutrition at a time when
humanitarian operations continue to be hampered by
restricted access to vulnerable areas. It is therefore
essential that all local actors contribute to facilitating
humanitarian access and that the international
community redouble cooperation efforts as part of the
humanitarian response plan for Somalia in order to save
lives and alleviate the needs of the most vulnerable.
In conclusion, we would like to acknowledge the
important role of the United Nations Support Office in
Somalia, the African Union Military Observer Mission
in Somalia and the United Nations Assistance Mission
in Somalia in achieving lasting peace and stability
in the country. We are confident that the process of
preparing for and holding future elections will be a
gateway to a new stage of dialogue that will promote
the development of an increasingly participatory
democracy by contributing to the search for lasting
solutions to the many challenges that the Somali people
are facing.
Mr. Alotaibi (Kuwait) (spoke in Arabic): At
the outset, we would like to thank Mr. James Swan,
Special Representative of the Secretary-General,
and Mr. Francisco Caetano Jose Madeira, Special
Representative of the Chairperson of the African Union
Commission for Somalia and Head of the African Union
Mission in Somalia. We also wish to thank Ms. Ibrahim,
Chair of the National Independent Electoral Commission
of Somalia, and Mr. Moallim, Executive Director of
Somalia Youth Development Network.
In the light of the current developments in Somalia,
I wish to focus on several points. First, with regard
to political progress and development, the Federal
Government of Somalia has achieved a great deal
despite the numerous challenges the country is facing.

19-3778113/24

S/PV.8671

The situation in Somalia

We therefore applaud its success as it progresses on the
path towards national reconciliation, notwithstanding
the obstacles, thanks to Government-led efforts aimed
at building and strengthening institutions of the State,
particularly through its support for the Somali national
development plan. At Annual Meetings of their Boards
of Governors in October, both the World Bank and the
International Monetary Fund pointed to the fact that the
plan was on track.
We also welcome the steady improvements
witnessed in the political and security situation,
particularly in terms of the establishment of conditions
conducive to the holding of elections in 2020 and 2021,
the adoption of the draft electoral law by December, and
the conclusion of the constitutional review process by
June 2020, as was reaffirmed at the Somali Partnership
Forum held at the beginning of October, which
resulted in an agreement on the Mutual Accountability
Framework. We wish to highlight role the League of
Arab States has played in technical meetings with the
Federal Government of Somalia in setting up a support
mechanism for the Somali national development plan
and in ensuring the implementation of its initiative on
the forgiveness of foreign debt.
On the security situation, we appreciate the
important role being played by the African Union
Military Observer Mission in Somalia (AMISOM),
working in tandem with the Somali national security
forces, to bolster stability and improve the security
situation. However, we remain concerned by the
growing offensive capability of armed groups, in
particular Al-Shabaab. Indeed, the report of the
Secretary-General (S/2019/884) mentions significant
developments in Al-Shabaab’s ability to manufacture
improvised explosive devices. In this regard, we
condemn all the attacks carried out by Al-Shabaab,
whether they be against the United Nations and
AMISOM or international partners. We call upon the
international community to fully support the Federal
Government of Somalia in its efforts to rebuild and
rehabilitate security and military institutions and step
up efforts to improve Somali security capabilities,
especially in the light of the transition plan and the
gradual drawdown of AMISOM.
Turning to the humanitarian situation, like
others, we are concerned about the dire humanitarian
challenge and its effects on the population, in particular
the increasing number of internally displaced persons
as a result of the floods, drought and armed conflict
14/24

21/11/2019

that continue to exert tremendous pressure on Somali
citizens, the Government and international partners.
We call upon donors to redouble their efforts so as
to prevent the emergence of a food insecurity crisis
affecting more than 2 million Somalis and to address
the acute malnutrition and food insecurity in the
country. Accordingly, we welcome the efforts of the
United Nations, the Office for the Coordination of
Humanitarian Affairs, the World Health Organization
and other humanitarian organizations present on the
ground, all of which deliver assistance to those in need.
In conclusion, we call on the international
community to support the Federal Government of
Somalia in every way possible and to safeguard its
security, sovereignty and territorial integrity, with a
view to consolidating and strengthening the country’s
national unity.
Mr. Duclos (Peru) (spoke in Spanish): We
thank Special Representative James Swan and the
various briefers invited to today’s meeting for their
valuable contributions. We join others in expressing
our condolences at the passing of Almaas Elman, a
prominent human rights defender in Somalia, which we
hope will be duly investigated so as to shed light on the
circumstances of this tragic death.
Peru welcomes the recent developments in Somalia
in the run-up to the forthcoming elections, including
the renewed commitments made by the Federal
Government of Somalia at the Somalia Partnership
Forum in October, which clearly set out the next steps
in that direction. We underscore in particular the
commitments made to hold elections in the year 2020
or 2021, to adopt the electoral law in December and to
complete the constitutional review by the middle of
next year. Implementing this agenda and other political
reforms, and their development under the principles
of inclusion and transparency, are critical factors in
ensuring that the electoral process is a success and in
building a Federated State with broad-based support.
However, we regret the absence of the leaders of
Jubaland and Puntland from the Somalia Partnership
Forum just mentioned. We are also concerned by the
incidents that occurred during the regional elections
in Galmudug. We call on the Federal Government of
Somalia and its federated member states to resolve the
outstanding issues through dialogue and cooperation
with a view to contributing to the necessary process
of reconciliation.
19-37781

21/11/2019

The situation in Somalia

We underscore the importance of promoting the
active participation of women and young people in the
country’s political life. Incorporating their contributions
into decision-making and reconciliation processes is
the only way to establish an inclusive democratic State.
We hope that the reforms approved by the Government
lead to the fulfilment of the 30 per cent quota for the
participation of women established in 2016.
At the same time, we regret that, despite the
increasing offensive capacity of the Somali forces,
Al-Shabaab continues its senseless destruction,
especially against civilian targets. We are worried by
the large-scale attacks using improvised explosive
devices and we underscore the importance need for
international partners to continue providing support
to the Somali Government in order to tackle this
terrorist threat.
Similarly, we note with concern the grave
humanitarian situation affecting millions of Somalis.
The growing number of internally displaced persons as
a result of the droughts and armed conflict represents
an immense challenge. We call on the international
community to address this situation, which has been
exacerbated by the adverse climatic conditions of
recent months.
In conclusion, I commend the work carried out
by the African Union Mission in Somalia, the United
Nations Assistance Mission in Somalia and the United
Nations Support Office in Somalia in supporting the
efforts of the authorities and the people of Somalia. We
also stress the important need for the African Union,
the United Nations and other international partners to
continue providing sustained support to joint efforts
aimed at bringing about the conditions needed to build
a safe and stable Federal Somali State.
Mr. Pecsteen de Buytswerve (Belgium) (spoke
in French): I should like to thank all the briefers for
their contributions. I should also like to join other
speakers in expressing our condolences to the family of
Ms. Almaas Elman, who worked tirelessly for peace in
Somalia. In her honour, we must redouble our efforts to
make her dream a reality.
I should like to make a few remarks on the political
situation, security issues and the humanitarian situation
in Somalia. First of all, Belgium welcomes the progress
made by Somalia and the political will of its President.
We are all aware of the challenges. To overcome them,
political decisions require consultation between the

S/PV. 8671

Federal Government of Somalia and the federal member
states. It is therefore imperative that relations between
these levels of power be relaunched.
The time has also come for progress in preparing
for the universal suffrage elections in 2020 and
2021. It is good news that Parliament has resumed its
work. We call on the federal authorities to redouble
their efforts to respect the established timetable by
reaching an agreement with the federal member
states that incorporates key electoral issues and by
promptly adopting the electoral law with the necessary
amendments. The law on political parties also requires
amendment. The National Electoral Security Task
Force must get to work quickly.
Secondly, in the security sector, the transition plan
must remain the common thread of the Government’s
actions. The operations of the Somali National Army are
an encouraging sign of the way national capacities are
developing. These capacities must now help establish
the conditions for the handover of responsibilities from
the African Union Mission in Somalia (AMISOM).
In this regard, I would recall the support provided to
Somalia by the European Union, including through
its financing of AMISOM and the missions of the
European Union Training Mission for Somalia, the
European Union capacity-building mission and the
counter-maritime-piracy force, Operation Atalanta.
The report of the Secretary-General (S/2019/884)
confirms once again that Al-Shabaab is the leading
threat to security and stability in Somalia. Terrorist
attacks have continued bring mourning to Somalia,
and we strongly condemn them. Indeed, the Security
Council has just renewed the sanctions regime that
aims precisely to degrade Al-Shabaab’s capacities.
Finally, in the humanitarian areas, the fate of the
Somali population remains at the heart of our concerns.
The figures we have heard illustrate the extent to which
Somalia is vulnerable to climate shocks, manifesting as
ever-more frequent droughts. Against this challenging
backdrop, which is exacerbated by the insecurity and
violence generated by Al-Shabaab and Da’esh as well
as by other tensions and conflicts between communities
or between federal member states, it is the most
vulnerable — women and children — whom we have a
particular duty to protect.
Mr. Wu Haitao (China) (spoke in Chinese): China
thanks the Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral, Mr. Swan, Special Representative of the

19-3778115/24

S/PV.8671

The situation in Somalia

Chairperson of the African Union Commission,
Mr. Madeira, Chair of the Somali National Independent
Electoral Commission, Ms. Ibrahim, and Executive
Director of the Somalia Youth Development Network,
Mr. Moallim, for their briefings.
Somalia is a strategically important country in the
Horn of Africa. Maintaining its peace and stability
has a direct bearing on peace and development in
the continent.
According to the two most recent reports of the
Secretary-General (S/2019/884 and S/2019/661), the
situation in Somalia is largely stable. The Somali
Federal Government has advanced in earnest the
process of State reconstruction and made significant
progress in the political, economic and security fields.
Its campaign against piracy and armed robbery off the
coast has borne fruit. Preparations are under way for
the election schedules for late 2020 or early 2021.
At the same time, Somalia continues to face
multiple challenges in terms of peace and security. The
international community should continue to pay close
attention to the situation in the country and focus its
constructive assistance on the following areas. First,
to help Somalia improve its governance capacity, the
Security Council and the international community
should adhere to the principle of Somali leadership
and ownership and, on that basis, respect the Somali
Government’s leadership, help the country advance in
its political process, enhance federal institutions and
improve relations between the Federal Government and
the governments of the federal member states, so as to
create favourable conditions for next year’s elections to
be peaceful and smooth and to further consolidate the
momentum of the Somali peace process.
Secondly, to strengthen Somalia’s security situation,
there must be capacity-building and renewed support
for the African Union Mission in Somalia (AMISOM)
in implementing its mandate to improve security in
the country. The hard part is tackling the terrorist
threat. Since its establishment, AMISOM has been an
active force in combating such terrorist organizations
as Al-Shabaab and has played an important role in
maintaining peace and stability in Somalia. The
international community should continue to support
the Mission in delivering on its mandate, provide
it with stable, predictable and sustainable financial
support, assist Somalia in security capacity-building so
that the Somali security forces can gradually take over
16/24

21/11/2019

security tasks and effectively assume responsibility for
maintaining national security.
Thirdly, efforts should be made to deepen
cooperation among the United Nations, the African
Union and countries of the region on issues relating
to Somalia.
The international community should support the
efforts of African countries to apply African solutions to
African problems and also support the African Union, the
Intergovernmental Authority on Development (IGAD)
and other regional and subregional organizations, play
a leading role in the political settlement of the Somalia
issue and facilitate an improvement in the situation in
the Horn of Africa.
At the same time, the Security Council should send
more positive signals on the Somalia sanctions and make
timely adjustments to the relevant sanctions in keeping
with the developing situation and the requirements of
the African Union, IGAD and the Somali Government.
Fourthly, efforts must be intensified to address
the root causes of conflicts and promote Somalia’s
economic and social development. The protracted
conflicts there have dealt a heavy blow to Somalia’s
economic and social development and given rise to
serious humanitarian challenges. The international
community should step up its assistance in the fields of
education, health, food security and infrastructure, inter
alia, with particular attention given to the pertinence
and effectiveness of assistance, so as to help Somalia
achieve independence and sustainable development
and enable its people to enjoy peace dividends as soon
as possible.
China has always supported Somalia’s efforts in
pursuit of peace and development, actively participated
in the Somali peace process and played a positive role
in the political settlement of the Somali issue.
China has sent escort vessels to Somali waters and
the Gulf of Aden and helped the countries concerned
to fight piracy. During the 2018 Beijing Summit
of the Forum on China-Africa Cooperation, China
announced that it would provide 6,500 tons of food aid
to Somalia. Some of that aid has arrived in Somalia
and will benefit disaster-affected women, children and
displaced persons.
China stands ready to continue to play a
constructive role in the achievement of peace, stability
and development in Somalia and the Horn of Africa.
19-37781

21/11/2019

The situation in Somalia

Ms. Wronecka (Poland): At the outset, I should
like to thank today’s briefers for their presentations.
Poland welcomes the successful holding of the
Somalia Partnership Forum in Mogadishu and the
renewed commitment of the Somali authorities to
State-building, with clearly defined objectives and
timelines for political, security and economic reforms.
Against that positive backdrop, we note with concern
the persistence of tensions between the Federal
Government and the federal member states, which pose
a major obstacle to the carrying out of the tasks crucial
to achieving a lasting peace in Somalia.
We call on the Federal Government of Somalia and
the federal member states to resolve the outstanding
issues through dialogue and compromise. The country
cannot waste valuable time and requires consensus and
concerted efforts on the part of all actors to advance
political and security reforms and build a stable future
for the Somali people.
With the deadline for elections approaching, we are
deeply convinced that the Federal Government and the
federal member states should spare no effort in working
to reach an agreement on a political framework for
fundamental electoral issues. In that context, we stress
the importance of adopting, by the end of the year,
an inclusive and credible electoral law in order to
ensure that federal one-person one-vote elections are
held according to the agreed timeline. We believe that
peaceful, inclusive, credible and transparent universal
suffrage would be a historic step in the rebuilding of a
democratic Somali State.
My country remains convinced that durable peace
will be hard to achieve without inclusivity and the
genuine involvement of women and young people in
political processes in Somalia. We underscore the
importance of promoting the active participation of
women in the political life of the country, including in
decision-making at all levels of Government. We hope
that reforms by the Government will include gendersensitive provisions and that the means for achieving
at least a 30 per cent quota of women in the Federal
Parliament will be provided.
Let me reiterate that Poland commends the
ambitious reform agenda set by the Federal Government
and the significant progress made so far in Somalia.
There is no doubt, however, that many challenges
remain, including the very fragile security situation
and the continued threat posed by Al-Shabaab, as well

S/PV. 8671

as the slow pace of the implementation of the transition
plan. The dire humanitarian situation is another cause
of serious concern for us.
There is no doubt that Somalia cannot overcome
those challenges alone. It is only through close
cooperation and coordination among the Federal
Government of Somalia and the federal member states,
supported by the African Union, the United Nations
and other international partners, that the country will
be able to achieve lasting peace. The international
community should continue to support the Somalis and
stand ready to cooperate with the authorities, in the
spirit of mutual trust and in the interest of the stability
and development of Somalia.
Allow me to conclude, as always, by expressing
Poland’s continued appreciation for United Nations
actors and the African Union Mission in Somalia for all
of their efforts and sacrifices.
Mr. Schulz (Germany): I would like to thank all of
our briefers for their insightful presentations.
Somalia has in the past decade made remarkable
progress in establishing more functional national
institutions and State-building as well as in enhancing
security and stability. But today Somalia is once again at
a critical juncture. The task and challenge ahead today
is to consolidate the gains made and at the same time
make further progress in transitioning to democracy
and in State-building. Two areas are particularly crucial
to achieving this objective: first, cooperation between
the Federal Government of Somalia and the federal
member states and, secondly, the elections scheduled
for 2020 and 2021.
On the issue of federalism and the cooperation
between the Federal Government and the federal
member states, let me first of all express our appreciation
for the renewed commitment of the Somali Government
to State-building at the Somalia Partnership Forum.
Germany welcomes the clearly defined objectives and
targets of the Mutual Accountability Framework with
regard to the elections to be held in 2020 and 2021, as
well as the legislative reforms concerning the political
party law, the electoral bill and the constitutional review.
In order to achieve these goals, constructive
political cooperation between the Federal Government
and all federal member states must be given the highest
priority. Unfortunately, we have not seen sufficient
progress since the Somalia Partnership Forum, and we

19-3778117/24

S/PV.8671

The situation in Somalia

think that coordination meetings should be resumed
swiftly and take place regularly in order to resolve the
outstanding issues.
Turning to the elections — the first democratic
elections since 1969, as we have been reminded by our
briefers — Germany underscores that credible, free
and fair elections in 2020 and 2021 are absolutely key;
this is obviously one of the most important tasks ahead
for the Somali Government. Somalis deserve to vote
in a timely fashion in a one-person one-vote election.
I think that the principle of a one-person one-vote
election cannot be overemphasized. Because presentday power-sharing models before the next democratic
elections have, to a large extent, excluded women
and some marginal groups, such one-person one-vote
elections are is absolutely critical from our point
of view.
For this to become a reality, two conditions must
be met: first, the timely adoption of the electoral
code by the end of the year, which is in five weeks,
and, secondly, a broad consensus across the political
spectrum on the modalities of its implementation. Let
me also say that we attach great importance to the vital
role of the National Independent Electoral Commission.
Germany has supported the Commission financially,
and we would like to assure it of our continued political
support for its very important and difficult work. Let me
also say that, with respect to the timeline that has been
agreed, in our view any extension is not an option. It
would put last year’s achievements at risk, and therefore
the current agreed timetable should absolutely be met.
I would like to briefly refer to two or three other
areas that are also very important to us. First of all,
as many briefers have mentioned, the current political
situation with regard to the states of Galmudug and
Jubaland is an obstacle to further progress and must
be tackled through dialogue and compromise. The
political processes must do some major catching up in
view of the 2020 elections.
My second point is about the security situation,
which, unfortunately and obviously, continues to
remain a huge challenge despite considerable progress
achieved in the security sector. We are particularly
saddened and shocked by the news that civil-society
activist and former diplomat Almaas Elman was killed
yesterday in the vicinity of Mogadishu airport. I extend
our condolences to her family and the people of Somalia.
Another reminder of the challenging security situation
18/24

21/11/2019

is the fact that only last month the United Nations
compound was again the target of an Al-Shabaab
mortar attack, reminding us that the support provided
by the United Nations and the African Union Mission in
Somalia to the Somali authorities to fight Al-Shabaab,
and their contribution to security and stability, remains
absolutely crucial.
Lastly, I would also like to say a word about the
current humanitarian situation. Germany remains
extremely concerned about the situation and its impact
on civilians. Drought and flooding, in addition to
existing challenges, are a very heavy burden on Somali
society. It is urgent that we continue current efforts to
redress the growing food insecurity. We would like
to encourage partners to continue operationalizing
measures to address that nexus. The aggravating
effects of climate change on Somalia’s humanitarian
situation and fragile statehood clearly demonstrate
the challenges that climate change poses to regional
stability and security, and we feel that it is high time
for the Council to take due account of climate change
as a factor relevant to peace and security.
Before concluding, I would like to take this
opportunity to ask Ms. Ibrahim, the Chair of the
National Independent Electoral Commission, a question.
I would be interested in her views on a particular issue
related to the upcoming elections. Given the number
of challenges, most partners and experts appear to
agree that a paper-based registration process seems
more practical at this stage than a biometric one, and
I would be very interested to know whether she agrees
with that assessment and how she envisages taking
things forward.
Mr. Syihab (Indonesia): Let me begin by expressing
our condolences to the family of Almaas Elman and
to the Somali people. May her soul rest in eternal
peace. I would also like to express our appreciation
to all the briefers for their comprehensive briefings.
My statement today will focus on three issues — the
political, security, and humanitarian situations.
On the first issue, we welcomed the convening of the
Somalia Partnership Forum. The Mutual Accountability
Framework agreed in the Forum identified priority
commitments for both Somalia and international
partners between now and December 2020 in the areas
of inclusive politics, security and justice and economic
and social development. That ambitious agenda requires
not only the continued support of the international
19-37781

21/11/2019

The situation in Somalia

community but also strong cooperation between the
Federal Government and the federal member states. The
two must engage in constructive dialogue to peacefully
resolve all their outstanding differences.
My delegation welcomes the outreach efforts of
the leadership of the Federal Government, including
yesterday’s meeting between President Mohamed
Abdullahi Mohamed Farmajo and his predecessors.
We also support the critical role of the United Nations
Assistance Mission in Somalia (UNSOM) in promoting
an inclusive political settlement led by the Somali
Government. Ending the political deadlock is essential
in order to accelerate progress on many fronts and to
ensure that the agreed timelines are met, including for
preparations towards inclusive 2020-2021 elections
and for the adoption of an electoral code by the end
of the year. My delegation is heartened by some
encouraging developments, including the signing into
law of bills on an anti-corruption commission and
revenue management.
Secondly, we are very concerned about the ongoing
threat posed by Al-Shabaab, including its enhanced use
of improvised explosive devices and the expansion of its
ability to generate revenue. My delegation condemns all
of Al-Shabaab’s recent attacks, including last month’s
mortar attacks on the compounds of the United Nations
and African Union Mission in Somalia (AMISOM). We
welcome the gains made through the joint operations
of the Somali National Army and AMISOM in Lower
Shabelle in support of the transition plan, including the
capture of towns previously under A1-Shabaab control.
The importance of enhanced coordination and support
for stabilization efforts in recovered areas cannot be
overstated. The Secretary-General’s report (S/2019/884)
attests to the fact that the Somali National Army has
struggled to meet its force-generation target. AMISOM’s
reconfiguration plan must take that challenge and the
joint threat assessment, in line with resolution 2472
(2019), into consideration. My delegation calls for
accelerated and coordinated international assistance to
support force generation and build a well-trained and
-equipped Somali security force that will eventually be
able to take over security responsibilities.
Lastly, we must not forget that the efforts to
promote peace and stability in Somalia are taking
place against the backdrop of a troubling humanitarian
situation. In 2019 alone, more than 300,000 people
have been displaced by drought and conflict, adding
to the 2.6 million internally displaced persons. The

S/PV. 8671

recent flooding also displaced tens of thousands of
people. Overall, 2.1 million people are facing acute
food insecurity. Regrettably, attacks on humanitarian
actors and the creation of obstacles to their work persist
in Somalia, exacerbating the already challenging and
dangerous operating environment. My delegation
stresses the imperative of fully protecting civilians
and respecting human rights and international
humanitarian law, and calls for safe, unhindered access
for humanitarian assistance.
I would like to conclude by commending the
Federal Government for demonstrating leadership and
determination in implementing its reform agenda, some
aspects of which are beginning to bear fruit. I want to
affirm Indonesia’s respect for Somalia’s sovereignty
and territorial integrity and to pay the highest tribute
to UNSOM, the United Nations Support Office in
Somalia, AMISOM and all the actors working to bring
peace and stability in Somalia.
Mr. Repkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We thank Special Representative of the
Secretary-General James Swan for his comprehensive
briefing on developments in Somalia. We also thank
the other briefers for the information they have shared
with us. We join other speakers in expressing our
condolences in connection with the tragic death of
Ms. Almaas Elman.
Russia supports Mogadishu’s efforts to achieve
domestic political and socioeconomic stability. We are
committed to working diligently in the Security Council
to facilitate a resolution to the crisis in Somalia while
preserving both its unity and territorial integrity. We
note the importance of the general elections planned for
2020 and 2021 for strengthening Somali statehood. We
welcome the steps taken by the Somali authorities to
prepare for that event, which is historic in every sense,
with the holding of a popular vote based on the principle
of one person, one vote, for the first time in 50 years.
Somalia’s National Independent Electoral Commission
is now functioning smoothly, and the National
Electoral Security Task Force has been established
with the support of international partners. In our view,
the next logical steps are enacting an electoral law and
introducing the necessary constitutional amendments.
In that connection, we welcomed Mogadishu’s
commitment, affirmed at the Somalia Partnership
Forum at the beginning of October, to meeting the
deadlines for those undertakings. We hope the process
will continue to develop according to plan.

19-3778119/24

S/PV.8671

The situation in Somalia

The situation in Somalia remains highly volatile.
The Federal Government is dealing with numerous
challenges, including the need to restore State
institutions and establish a dialogue between the
centre and the regions, as well as among the regions
themselves. We call for continued efforts to strike a
balance of interests among all clans. We believe that the
federal states’ ultimatums with regard to Mogadishu and
their lack of commitment to constructive cooperation,
along with the conflicts between individual regions,
threaten to unleash a spiral of decentralizing trends.
That hampers the national dialogue and makes it
difficult to organize collective efforts on major issues
on Somalia’s domestic agenda. We are pleased about
the results that the Federal Government achieved in the
reconciliation processes in Galmudug and South-West
states. That success should be developed further. We
call for intensifying efforts to build bridges with the
Jubaland and Puntland authorities.
We are concerned about the increase in Al-Shabaab’s
activity, which is producing growing numbers of
casualties among civilians as well as personnel of the
Somali National Army and the African Union Mission
in Somalia (AMISOM), including foreign specialists.
We believe that AMISOM is an essential component in
countering Al-Shabaab, and we call on the international
community to continue the agreed measures to build
up the capacity of the Somali National Army and
AMISOM. While it is clear that African peacekeepers
cannot remain in Somalia indefinitely, the drawdown
of the Mission should be carried out in stages, based
on the level of the Somali National Army’s readiness
to provide security independently to the State and its
citizens. Given the difficult humanitarian situation
in Somalia, the Russian Federation will continue
to provide assistance to the country and to Somali
refugees in neighbouring countries through earmarked
contributions to the relevant World Food Programme
funds. We also intend to continue to provide training to
Somali civilian personnel.
In conclusion, I want to emphasize once again
that the only way to effectively combat all these
challenges is through strict respect for the sovereignty
of Somalia and non-interference by foreign players in
its internal affairs.
The President: I shall now make a statement in my
capacity as the representative of the United Kingdom.
20/24

21/11/2019

I thank the Special Representative for his briefing
and all the work that he and his team do on the ground.
I also thank our colleague on the screen for all the
great work that the African Union Mission in Somalia
(AMISOM) does and the sacrifices of the AMISOM
troop-contributing countries, alongside the Somali
national security forces, as they fight Al-Shabaab. And
I am very grateful to our civil-society briefers.
I would also like to join others in extending
the United Kingdom’s condolences to the family of
Ms. Almaas Elman, the aid worker and advocate for
survivors of sexual violence in Somalia who was so
tragically killed yesterday. As others have noted, her
sister Ilwad was here in the Council just two days ago
during our meeting on the importance of peace and
reconciliation (see S/PV.8668). Our deepest sympathies
and condolences go to their family.
I can be brief, because many colleagues have drawn
attention to the points that I wanted to make. We are
very worried by the floods and the people affected and
displaced by them. We are supporting Somalia in relief
efforts by contributing drinking water, hygiene supplies
and health services, and we will continue to be a friend
of Somalia in that regard. We hope that Member States
will provide sustained humanitarian funding.
We have been watching the Somalia Partnership
Forum carefully and hope that it will now work
closely with the international community to implement
the milestones agreed on. The United Kingdom’s
total spending for next year in Somalia is more than
$400 million. We therefore hope that the commitments
that Somalia has made on debt relief, security-sector
reform, operations from force generation and the
electoral law and constitutional review will be fulfilled.
We commend Somalia’s ambition to fully re-engage
with the international financial institutions and hope for
further progress. I believe that there have been recent
positive discussions between the ministers of finance
of the Federal Government and the federal member
states, which shows that cooperation can happen.
I want to concentrate my remarks on the elections.
We are at a critical juncture. The citizens of Somalia,
as we heard from Mr. Moallim, have asked for
one-person-one-vote elections in 2020 and 2021. It
is vital to ensure that there is no delay in delivering
peaceful, inclusive, credible and transparent elections,
in line with the provisional Constitution, as we heard
from the Special Representative. Specifically, and as the
19-37781

21/11/2019

The situation in Somalia

S/PV. 8671

Special Representative said, we agree that an affordable
and implementable electoral model should be signed
into law by the end of this year, which was agreed to
at the Somalia Partnership Forum. We also need to
see an amended political parties act. And we believe
that those laws should be based on a broad national
consensus agreed to by the Federal Government and
federal member states.

lost, and if we do not try to stop that, we will lose even
more. I myself am a victim of that loss, because my
husband, who was working for peace and development,
was killed too. I am not alone in this, because there are
others, too. But in spite of that we must keep working
together to overcome our problems, build up Somalia
and consolidate a Somali State. We will prevail if we
continue on our path.

I was pleased that so many colleagues drew
attention to the issue of the full, equal and meaningful
participation of women at all stages, and that is something
that we too feel is important, alongside freedom of the
media, which is another vital cornerstone of a credible
and peaceful election. Above all, we join others in
calling for sustained dialogue and cooperation between
the Federal Government and the federal member
states. That will not only aid the elections but will help
complete the journey towards debt relief. We urge all
the parties to engage in dialogue to resolve the situation
in Jubaland and make progress on reconciliation efforts
and the organization of regional elections in Galmudug.

I will now respond to some of the questions. First,
there are several reasons why one-person-one-vote
elections are important for Somalia as opposed to the
clan model. If we go back to the selection methods
that we have been using, the corruption will get worse.
Some politicians talk about the enhanced 2016 election.
We say that it was enhanced in terms of corruption
because there was a great deal of vote buying and
corruption. Somalia therefore continues to sustain the
corruption status.

The United Nations and the African Union and their
member States, as well as the European Union, have
an important role to play in Somalia, but the initiative
on dialogue must come from Somali leaders at the
Federal and state levels. To end where I began, there
is a huge task coming in future years, which is that of
delivering a transition to Somali-led security. As I said,
the commitment of AMISOM and the Somali national
forces is to be commended, and we will continue to
support that.
I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.
We will hear from the Special Representative
in consultations, but the representative of Germany
addressed a question to Ms. Ibrahim about elections,
and I give her the floor to answer it.
Ms. Ibrahim: I would like to thank the members
of the Security Council for their condolences to the
family of Ms. Almaas Elman. I know that family has
a background of working on peace. Her father, with
whom I had the opportunity to work, was a remarkable
person who worked for peace, and her mother is also
doing tremendous work in peacebuilding. It is really
a tragedy and disaster for Somalia to continue to see
such losses as Somali citizens continue to work hard
to achieve peace and stability in Somalia. We have lost
so much. Ms. Elman is not the only thing that we have

Another matter is the possibility of Al-Shaabab
becoming part of the parliamentarians because recently
Al-Shabaab has been calling together the elders in
areas it controls and providing training and instruction,
directing them as to whom they should nominate and
elect. That is a great risk.
The exclusion of women and minorities is another
issue. If we go back to a clan-based election, women
will not have any opportunity. Two weeks ago, there
was a consultation meeting with the ulema or sheikhs.
Their point was to exclude women’s participation
in Parliament or the Ministerial Council. That is
why we need a one-person one-vote election in order
to give opportunities to women, minorities and
marginalized groups.
Another question concerns why it is not a paperbased election versus biometric. First of all, there is no
census in Somalia. No one knows how many people
can vote. Also, there was a war among Somalis, or clan
fighting. No one trusts anyone else. Every clan says
that it has a majority and that it must have more seats
than the others. So how can that be clarified? It would
be difficult.
Another issue is that most Somalis have the same
name. Many people are called Mohamed, Mohamed
Ali and so on and there is no photograph identification,
since we do not have a census. How can we differentiate
between people? How can one say that this is Mohamed
and he is also Mohamed if there is nothing on which to
really base that?

19-3778121/24

S/PV.8671

The situation in Somalia

But, most importantly, two years ago, the National
Independent Electoral Commission and the United
Nations convened a meeting with an international
organization supported by the United States Agency
for International Development. Together, we carried
out a feasibility study, which was based on the election,
whether people wanted one and if there was an election,
how good would they want the voter registration to be.
We went to all the federal member states and met all the
leaders and all sectors of civil society. We met women
and young people separately, as well as the sheikhs.
Every Somali said they did not trust a piece of paper. So
how can we adopt something that people do not want?
When we returned, we decided to study what
kind of biometric system would be possible for us
economically as well as technically. The Integrated
Election Support Group and its creative team provided
us the most knowledgeable experts on election
processes. We sat together several times and discussed
what kind of biometric system we should choose. They
presented us with different kinds of biometric systems,
which we studied one by one. We did not choose the
most expensive or most complex technologically but
the simplest, which is just taking a photograph so that
we know who is voting. That is the biometric system
that we are using, and it is what the Somalis want.
Some international partners are now asking why we are
not using paper. Why did they not ask two years ago
when the Commission approved it. The Commission
approved it two years. We have studied it and we know
what works for Somalis.
Regarding the election modalities, in, I think,
July 2018, the federal member states and the Federal
Government went to Baidoa and came up with modalities
that they had decided. They were then discussed by
the Ministry of the Interior, which was preparing the
draft electoral law and included them. The choice of
modalities now depends on Parliament. That does not
mean going back to the federal member states or to civil
society. They have been discussed, agreed and signed.
That is now with Parliament in the electoral law. So we
are waiting for the electoral law.
The President: I thank Ms. Ibrahim for the
clarifications she has provided.
I now give the floor to the representative of Somalia.
Mr. Osman (Somalia): At the outset, I wish to
extend the appreciation of the Federal Government to the
briefers — Ambassador Swan, Special Representative
22/24

21/11/2019

of the Secretary-General; Ambassador Madeira, Special
Representative of the Chairperson of the African Union
Commission for Somalia; Ms. Halima Ibrahim, Chair
of the National Independent Electoral Commission; and
Mr. Osman Moallim, Executive Director of Somalia
Youth Development Network.
Together, their insights give us an overview of the
significant progress that Somalia continues to make,
and their work is contributing to the vision of Somalia’s
future that has been clearly set out by the Federal
Government of Somalia. That vision was endorsed and
strongly supported at the Somalia Partnership Forum,
convened by the Federal Government of Somalia with
its partners in Mogadishu on 1 and 2 October. The
Forum was an important opportunity to set out the
Federal Government’s reform agenda and the significant
progress that has already been achieved and to secure
partner support for the remaining challenges.
We now have an agreed direction for the coming
year and Somalia’s priorities are very clear. We intend
to conclude the constitutional review process and to
continue preparations to hold one-person one-vote
elections in the last quarter of 2020. Furthermore, we
are defeating the terrorist group Al-Shabaab through
offensive operations led by the Somali National Army
as we strengthen our security institutions and processes
to support our security forces and protect our people
and territory.
We are a step closer to meeting the ambitious
benchmarks in the fourth staff-monitored programme
of the International Monetary Fund early next year.
We continue to build Somalia’s resilience to weather
events, both drought and flooding, while improving
social services for all Somalis.
This is a bold reform agenda, but the Federal
Government is fully committed to achieving it with the
support of our partners. We urge all partners to redouble
their efforts to help us to achieve these objectives and to
align their support to these agreed priorities.
The Federal Government of Somalia recognizes
that our goals will not be met without the cooperation
and engagement of the federal member states. They
are a vital component of the governance in Somalia.
It is essential that we work in partnership in the
national interest.
President Mohamed Abdullahi Mohamed Farmajo
and the Federal Government of Somalia are currently
19-37781

21/11/2019

The situation in Somalia

engaged in a dialogue with all federal member states
and expect an agreed blueprint to advance the national
interests of Somalia. We are committed to ensuring that
all federal member states play their part and we urge
our partners to support us in holding the leadership of
each member state accountable and to contribute to the
Somalia of the future, not the past.
That means undertaking genuine reconciliation
efforts and holding fair, transparent and inclusive
elections, not only at the federal level but also at the
level of the federal member states. Where the electoral
process does not meet those criteria, the Federal
Government of Somalia will not recognize the outcome,
and we call on our partners to do the same.
We are working to overcome past practices
of electoral interference and influence over the
independent bodies appointed to administer elections.
Therefore, despite ongoing political disagreements, we
call on our partners to continue to support the National
Independent Electoral Commission on the whole,
including technically and financially, with a view to
implementing the agreed critical benchmarks, such as
voter registration, and thereby moving a step closer to
fulfilling the promise of elections in 2020-2021.
In order to build trust in the Government, we
must hold the Federal and state-level Governments
to a higher standard of conduct than in the past.
Falling back on old, destructive ways certainly has
no place in Somalia’s bright future. We are making
significant progress in laying the foundations for more
inclusive and transparent governance. In Galmudug,
reconciliation efforts are ongoing and we are working
with all the stakeholders to ensure that communities are
fairly represented and that elections can be held under a
unified Galmudug administration.
In Jubaland, the Federal Government of Somalia
and the international community are engaging with all
stakeholders, including members of the local authorities,
with a view to finding a way forward and allowing
the people of Jubaland the same opportunities for an
inclusive and forward-looking state administration.
The Federal Government of Somalia is continuing
to make preparations for the holding of one-person
one-vote elections in the last quarter of 2020. To do
that, the Somalia Partnership Forum is committed to
passing the electoral law by the end of December and
to concluding a review of the Constitution by June
2020. Just yesterday, President Mohamed Abdullahi

S/PV. 8671

Mohamed Farmajo met with two of Somalia’s former
Presidents — His Excellency Sheikh Sharif Ahmed
and His Excellency Hassan Sheikh Mohamud. The
President is also meeting all other political parties and
peaceful opposition leaders this coming Saturday. The
unity of purpose and leadership shown by President
Mohamed Farmajo in convening to meet those former
Heads of State and other opposition leaders sends a
strong signal of Somalia’s commitment to holding truly
historic democratic elections next year.
Somalia also continues to make strides in
strengthening security. Operations have continued in
Lower Shabelle in order to better protect Mogadishu
and form part of a strategic Mogadishu security plan.
For the first time, the Somali National Army is capable
of holding ground and can successfully repel vicious
Al-Shabaab attacks. We pay tribute to the African
Union and our colleagues from the African Union
Military Observer Mission in Somalia (AMISOM)
who fight alongside the Somali security forces, and
we extend our sincere thanks to the troop- and policecontributing countries to AMISOM, who demonstrate
every day their solidarity in our fight against terrorism.
Another significant step in that direction was the
passing of the anti-corruption bill, signed into law by
President Farmajo in September. That forms part of a
wider package of reforms designed to tackle corruption
and to ensure that funds are not diverted from urgent
national priorities.
In order to fund those priorities, in October the
Cabinet approved a budget of $350 million for the years
2019-2020. That rise in revenue was made possible by
fiscal reform and the Somali population, who worked
with the Government to collect taxes. Fifty-five per
cent of the budget will be financed by internal revenue
sources, while the deficit will be financed by donor
support, representing another significant step on
Somalia’s path to self-sufficiency. As we build on those
reforms, we are working steadily towards the decision
point on debt relief in early 2020, and we count on all
our partners to support us in achieving that important
milestone for Somalia.
Despite our energetic efforts, Somalia continues
to face significant challenges, and no more so than in
facing severe weather events. The rains experienced
across central and southern Somalia have brought
destruction and devastation to hundreds of thousands
of people. The Federal Government of Somalia has
responded with emergency support and relief efforts,

19-3778123/24

S/PV.8671

The situation in Somalia

but in parallel we are putting in place measures that will
enable Somalia to build resilience in order to better deal
with future events of that kind. Infrastructure, water
management and the management of the water economy
are critical components of that strategy, and the Federal
Government of Somalia is committed to addressing
not only the immediate needs of those impacted by the
floods, but the long-term needs of Somalia in coping
with severe weather events in the future. We therefore
emphasize the importance of the nexus between
humanitarian and development assistance.
In conclusion, significant sustainable change,
especially in the complex process of State-building, is
taking place at a steady rhythm of incremental progress.

24/24

21/11/2019

The briefers today have set out how that change is
taking place on the ground. We are cognizant that
the change might be viewed as not happening quickly
enough or immediately enough, as numerous obstacles
remain. But with the strong commitment of the Federal
Government and people of Somalia and the continuing
support of our partners, we will continue to overcome
them one step at a time.
The President: There are no more names inscribed
on the list of speakers.
I now invite Council members to informal
consultations to continue our discussion on the subject.
The meeting rose at 12.15 p.m.

19-37781
