S/PV.7382

United Nations

asdf

Security Council

Provisional

Seventieth year

7382nd meeting

Sunday, 15 February 2015, 5 p.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Liu Jieyi . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(China)

Members:

Angola. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Chad . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Chile . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Jordan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Lithuania .. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Malaysia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
New Zealand. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Nigeria .. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Spain . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . .
United States of America .. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Mr. Lucas
Mrs. Alingue
Mr. Barros Melet
Mr. Delattre
Mrs. Kawar
Ms. Murmokaitė
Mr. Haniff
Mr. McLay
Mr. Laro
Mr. Safronkov
Mr. Oyarzun Marchesi
Sir Mark Lyall Grant
Ms. Power
Mr. Ramírez Carreño

Agenda
The situation in the Middle East

15-04195 (E)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

*1504195*

S/PV.7382

The situation in the Middle East

The meeting was called to order at 5.10 p.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in the Middle East
The President (spoke in Chinese): The Security
Council will now begin its consideration of the item on
its agenda.
Members of the Council have before them document
S/2015/116, which contains the text of a draft resolution
submitted by Angola, Chad, France, Jordan, Lithuania,
Malaysia, New Zealand, Spain, the United Kingdom
of Great Britain and Northern Ireland and the United
States of America.
It is my understanding that the Council is ready to
proceed to the vote on the draft resolution before it. I
shall put the draft resolution to the vote now.
A vote was taken by show of hands.
In favour:
Angola, Chad, Chile, China, France, Jordan,
Lithuania, Malaysia, New Zealand, Nigeria,
Russian Federation, Spain, United Kingdom of
Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United States
of America and Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of)
The President (spoke in Chinese): There were
15 votes in favour. The draft resolution has been
adopted unanimously as resolution 2201 (2015).
I shall now give the floor to those members of the
Council who wish to make statements after the vote.
Mrs. Kawar (Jordan) (spoke in Arabic): Jordan
welcomes the adoption by the Security Council of
resolution 2201 (2015), which we submitted along with
the United Kingdom and which reflects our eagerness
to restore security and stability in Yemen as soon as
possible.
The development of events in Yemen has created
a massive political and security vacuum and an
accelerated deterioration of the situation therein. We are
concerned that the continuation of this situation without
the engagement of the international community and the
Security Council will have a dire outcome, not only at
the local level in Yemen but also in the entire region.
Therefore, the unanimous adoption of the resolution
by the Council today reflects the unity of the Council

2/8

15/02/2015

in addressing developments in Yemen and conveys a
significant message that should be taken seriously by
all Yemeni parties.
The Council has condemned the acts of the Houthis,
inter alia, the seizure of Government institutions and
the dissolution of the legislative authority represented
by the Parliament. They are also obliged to immediately
engage in good faith in the United Nations-brokered
negotiations; to withdraw their forces from Government
institutions, including in the capital, Sana’a; to normalize
the security situation in the capital and other provinces;
to relinquish Government and security institutions;
to release to safety President Hadi Mansour, Prime
Minister Khaled Bahah, members of his Cabinet and all
individuals under house arrest or arbitrarily detained;
and to refrain from further unilateral actions that could
undetmine the political process in Yemen.
We reiterate today the centrality and significance
of a peaceful, inclusive and political transition process
that would involve all parties in Yemen, in accordance
with the Gulf Cooperation Council (GCC) Initiative
and Implementation Mechanism, the outcomes of
the National Dialogue Conference and the Peace and
Partnership Agreement, which all constitute a genuine
basis for ensuring the security and stability of Yemen
with a view to finalizing and adopting the draft
constitution, reforming the electoral system and holding
the general elections afterwards. In this context, we
stress the central and significant role of the Special
Adviser to the Secretary-General, Mr. Jamal Benomar,
in promoting a convergence of views, brokering the
peaceful transition in Yemen and coordinating the
assistance extended by the international community to
support the political transition process.
The coming period in Yemen will be crucial
and sensitive, as the country is at a crossroads that
requires the international community in general, and
the Security Council in particular, to carry out the
responsibilities assigned to us in order to help the
Yemeni people to move forward on the path of peace,
security and stability.
In conclusion, I should like to express my
appreciation to the States members of the Security
Council that have demonstrated their readiness and
resolve to prevent Yemen from sliding into the abyss
and have heeded Jordan’s repeated requests to play
their expected role promptly and unequivocally. We
also commend them for assuming their responsibility

15-04195

15/02/2015

The situation in the Middle East

for the maintenance of international peace and security
and for their response to the concerns of the countries
of the GCC, as well as for their consideration of the
potential political and security repercussions for the
entire region if the situation in Yemen were to further
deteriorate, thereby giving terrorism and extremism
a greater opportunity to further expand, seize more
territory, propagate its violence more broadly and
threaten the Middle East, in particular the neighbouring
countries of the Gulf.
Sir Mark Lyall Grant (United Kingdom): We
welcome the unanimous adoption of resolution 2201
(2015). It was clear at the open briefing earlier this
week (see S/PV.7381) that the world was waiting for a
powerful message from the Security Council in response
to recent developments in Yemen. Today, we have made
clear that those who use violence and intimidation to try
to dictate Yemen’s future are undermining the security
of all Yemeni citizens and eroding the political progress
made since 2011. The Houthis must take responsibility
for their actions and stop using violence and coercion
as political tools. They must ensure the immediate and
safe release of President Hadi Mansour, Prime Minister
Bahah and members of the Cabinet from house arrest.
There can be no doubt that the principles underlying
the Gulf Cooperation Council (GCC) Initiative, the
National Dialogue and last September’s Peace and
National Partnership Agreement are the only legitimate
road map for Yemen’s transition. The Council has sent
a clear message today that all parties in Yemen, and
especially the Houthis, need to pull back from the
brink and implement these commitments on a swift and
inclusive basis.
I would like to express my appreciation for the
continued work of the Special Adviser to the SecretaryGeneral, Mr. Jamal Benomar, and call on the Houthis
and on all parties to engage in good faith in United
Nations-brokered negotiations. The Council has once
again spoken in one voice and delivered a strong and
unified message. I would like to thank Jordan and all
delegations for their support and flexibility in agreeing
this important resolution. I am particularly grateful
for the close and productive consultations that Jordan
and the United Kingdom have enjoyed with the GCC.
Their leadership on this issue so close to their borders
is critically important.
Ms. Power (United States of America): The United
States is pleased to support the adoption of a Security

S/PV.7382

Council resolution that sends a clear message. All
parties in Yemen, especially the Houthi, must commit
to resolving the country’s political crisis by consensus
through a peaceful and inclusive dialogue.
Today, the Council deplores unilateral attempts by
the Houthi to take over Government institutions and to
dissolve Parliament by force, and the Council reaffirms
the road map for implementing Yemen’s transition
provided by the Gulf Cooperation Council Initiative
and Implementation Mechanism and the outcomes of
the comprehensive National Dialogue Conference. The
people of Yemen deserve a clear path back to the political
transition process and a legitimate Government based
on these agreements and the resolutions of the Council
with a publicly announced timeline and specific dates
for the completion of a new constitution, a constitutional
referendum and national elections.
We continue to strongly support the efforts of the
Special Adviser to the Secretary-General, Mr. Jamal
Benomar, to mediate a consensus solution to this
political crisis — a process vital to defusing tensions on
the ground. We also underscore the Security Council’s
demand for the Houthi to release President Hadi
Mansour, Prime Minister Bahah and other members
of the Cabinet from house arrest immediately. Their
continued detention is unacceptable, and they must
be granted full freedom of movement. We strongly
condemn the use of force against peaceful protesters in
Ibb on 14 February.
The United States will continue supporting all
Yemenis who are working toward a peaceful, prosperous
and unified Yemen.
Mr. Safronkov (Russian Federation) (spoke
in Russian): The Russian Federation supported the
adoption today of resolution 2201 (2015), which
encourages all parties in Yemen to pursue dialogue,
intensify their efforts to resolve the political crisis,
and strive to implement the arrangements reached in
the context of the Gulf Cooperation Council Initiative
and Implementation Mechanism and the outcomes of
the National Dialogue Conference and the Peace and
National Partnership Agreement. The resolution urges
all parties to agree upon and announce publicly dates
for completing the constitutional consultation process,
to hold a referendum on the constitution, and to conduct
elections.
It is clear that the use of unilateral force will be
counterproductive to efforts to advance the political

15-041953/8

S/PV.7382

The situation in the Middle East

process and only further exacerbate the crisis. Such
actions must be avoided, as categorically demanded
in the resolution, which gives them due attention.
We support the steps taken by the parties, with the
assistence of the Special Adviser of the SecretaryGeneral, Mr. Benomar, to find a formula for a longterm and sustainable settlement in Yemen that would
meet the interests of all the inhabitants of the country. It
is important that the parties honour their commitments
under the agreements reached.
The Russian Federation insists that the leading
political forces in Yemen pursue constructive dialogue
on the internal political agenda and on issues related
to drafting a formula for State governance. That is
particularly relevant in the light of the growing terrorist
threat to the region, the country and the territorial
integrity of Yemen.
Mr. Delattre (France) (spoke in French): France
thanks the United Kingdom and Jordan for having
prepared resolution 2201 (2015). We are pleased that,
with the constructive engagement of Council members,
the text could be negotiated quickly and unanimously
adopted. We believe, indeed, that the very difficult
circumstances currently facing Yemen necessitated the
expression by the Council of at least three messages.
The first is that of the full ability of the Council
to act in unision in support of the Yemeni transition.
Between 2011 and 2014, in a turbulent regional
environment, Yemen demonstrated its exemplary
ability to conduct a peaceful and orderly incremental
transition to democracy, with the support of the Gulf
Cooperation Council and the Security Council. Since
July 2014, this positive momentum has been reversed to
an alarming extent. While the transition was entering
its final phase — not only the most important but also
the most sensitive — Yemen has gradually become
mired in political and security instability that threatens
to negate the efforts of the Yemeni people and the
international community. It was essential, in this very
delicate phase, that we remain united alongside the
Yemeni people.
The second message is stresses the urgent need
for the Yemeni parties to engage in the good-faith
negotiations facilitated by the United Nations to
resolve their differences through a political solution.
We recall, in this respect, our full support for the good
offices mission conducted by the Special Adviser to
the Secretary-General, Mr. Jamal Benomar. Through

4/8

15/02/2015

resolution 2201 (2015), the international community
unequivocally rejects the use of force to achieve
political goals and unilateral acts that contradict the
search for a negotiated solution. Instead, it calls on all
parties in Yemen to respect the rules of the democratic
game and to define, in the framework of an inclusive
process, a consensual political solution that respects
previous agreements, including the GCC Initiative and
Implementation Mechanism, the conclusions of the
National Dialogue Conference, the Peace and National
Partnership Agreement and its security annex. As
the resolution points out, while previous agreements
have not been respected, this solution must be strictly
implemented.
Lastly, the resolution sends a firm message in
favour of the unity, integrity and stability of Yemen.
The political vacuum in the country promotes the
manifestation of violent discord that threatens its
integrity. This is true not only politically, with the
divisions that I have just mentioned, and at the regional
level with the disturbing ascendency of secessionist
tendencies, but also in terms of security, with the
strengthening of the threat posed by Al-Qaida in the
Arabian Peninsula. France is particularly concerned
about this aspect in the light of the violent attacks
sponsored by that terrorist organization in early
January.
While the extension of a situation without inclusive
political solution crisis reinforces terrorism, France
renews its commitment to a resumption of the political
transition that would restore the conditions of the
anti-terrorist cooperation.
Mr. Oyarzun Marchesi (Spain) (spoke in Spanish):
I thank you, Sir, for having convened this meeting of
the Security Council, and the delegations of the United
Kingdom and Jordan for having introduced resolution
2201 (2015), the adoption of which is very good news
for two reasons. The first is that the Security Council’s
credibility depends to a large extent on its effectiveness
in response to such threats; the second, we believe, is
that it will help to stop the escalating violence in Yemen.
Spain urges all Yemeni stakeholders to return
to the path of dialogue and to relaunch the transition
process supported by the Gulf Cooperation Council
Initiative and its Implementation Mechanism. The
Gulf Cooperation Council has played an absolutely
fundamental role. An inclusive dialogue is the only

15-04195

15/02/2015

The situation in the Middle East

possible solution to make progress and achieve the
goals of unity and prosperity in Yemen.
I would like to express Spain’s gratitude for the
work done by the Secretary-General’s Special Adviser
Jamal Benomar, as well as to assure the members of
the Council that the situation of insecurity and the lack
of appropriate conditions have led Spain temporarily to
suspend its presence in Yemen. We have departed for
the time being, but we will return as soon as conditions
allow our mission to do so.
However, as well as we might have done it, our
work does not end today. For, among the many issues,
there are three matters of particular concern to Spain.
First, all experts agree that Ansarallah is a group made
up mostly of people with little or no training in politics,
and we cannot be entirely certain that they can start
along the path towards a return to democracy. Secondly,
the very interesting report Small Arms Survey 2014 sets
out the current situation in Yemen. This is no less than
the third country in the world with the most weapons
per inhabitant. And, thirdly, as some delegations have
pointed out, in this type of conflict terrorist movements
such as Al-Qaida always take advantage of the situation.
I would like to conclude by mentioning a phrase that
is usually found in all resolutions but which sometimes
goes unnoticed. As found in paragraph 15 of resolution
2201 (2015), that phrase is “decides to remain actively
seized of the matter”. I believe that the Council should
remain seized of the matter of Yemen.
Mrs. Alingue (Chad) (spoke in French): First of all,
I would like to thank Jordan and the United Kingdom
for initiating the text of resolution 2201 (2015).
Chad welcomes the unanimous adoption by the
members of the Security Council of resolution 2201
(2015). This once again attests to Council unity in the
face of the serious situation prevailing in Yemen, which
is more than ever endangering the political process and
threatening the country’s unity and cohesion.
We voted in favour of the resolution because it
seems to us to be strong, balanced and to the point.
It is strong in that it deplores the unilateral actions
taken by the Houthis and clearly calls on them to
immediately remove their forces from State institutions
and to normalize the situation in the capital and in the
country’s provinces. It is balanced in that it calls on
all parties to engage in good faith in the negotiations
aimed at finding a solution out of the crisis in line with

S/PV.7382

the relevant provisions of the Gulf Cooperation Council
and its Implementation Mechanism, the outcome of
the National Dialogue Conference and the Peace and
National Partnership Agreement.
Against that backdrop, we call on all Yemeni
stakeholders immediately to implement the provisions
of resolution 2201 (2015), with a view to finding a
political solution to this crisis that can serve to overcome
all the threats to the country’s security and stability.
We believe that Yemen can be governed only on the
basis of consensus. It is crucial that all the parties to
the conflict immediately engage in dialogue and avoid
turning to force to resolve their political differences.
We reiterate our full support for the efforts of Mr. Jamal
Benomar, Special Adviser of the Secretary-General,
aimed at arriving at a way out of the crisis.
Mr. Haniff (Malaysia): I thank you, Mr. President,
for convening today’s meeting, which reflects the
urgency of the matter before us. My delegation also
commends the Initiative of the Gulf Cooperation
Council in coming up with a resolution on Yemen, as
well as the efforts by Jordan and the United Kingdom to
facilitate discussions on resolution 2201 (2015).
This month marks the fourth anniversary of the
revolution in Yemen that sparked the democratic
transition in the country on the basis of the aspirations
of its people. Yemen was a success model for the
region, being the only country with a negotiated
political transition arising from the Arab Spring in
2011, which included a clear road map and timeline for
for an inclusive democratic transition. Unfortunately,
Yemen is currently in real danger of backsliding into
civil war and sectarian conflict. Malaysia is deeply
alarmed at the unravelling situation in the country
with the unilateral takeover of the Government by the
Houthis, the increasing threat of terrorism, the looming
secession in the south and the dire humanitarian crisis.
We hope that the resolution adopted today, of
which Malaysia was a sponsor, will send a clear and
unmistakable signal to all parties in Yemen that any
efforts to derail the political transition in the country,
whether directly or indirectly, are unacceptable. We also
call on the Houthis to immediately release the Yemeni
President, Prime Minister and Cabinet Ministers from
house arrest.
We highly appreciate the tireless efforts by
Mr. Jamal Benomar, Special Adviser of the Secretary-

15-041955/8

S/PV.7382

The situation in the Middle East

General for Yemen, to salvage the dialogue among all
parties. We reiterate our strong backing for his work.
His optimism and perseverance to resolve the current
situation through inclusive dialogue and negotiations in
a difficult situation is highly admirable. However, in the
end, the success of the negotiations will depend upon
the political will of the parties in Yemen themselves.
Malaysia therefore urges all parties, in particular the
Houthis, to uphold their earlier commitments to the Gulf
Cooperation Council Initiative and its Implementation
Mechanism, the outcomes of the National Dialogue
Conference and the Peace and National Partnership
Agreement. We share the view of the international
community that this remains the only legitimate path
towards a democratic, stable and inclusive Yemen. We
will continue to support Yemen in that endeavour.
Mr. McLay (New Zealand): New Zealand welcomes
the unanimous adoption of resolution 2201 (2015).
We applaud the role played by Jordan and the United
Kingdom in the Council, and the members of the
Gulf Cooperation Council (GCC) in facilitating that
outcome.
For New Zealand the two main purposes of the
resolution are, first, that it emphasizes the centrality of
the agreed transition framework — the GCC Initiative,
the National Dialogue Conference outcomes and the
Peace and National Partnership Agreement — to the
political transition in Yemen. Secondly, it condemns
recent unilateral action by the Houthis, which
undermines that agreed framework.
This resolution is overdue. We regret that, despite
several opportunities, this has been the first product the
Council has been able to adopt since an armed group
captured the presidential palace on 20 January. That
action was described in the Chamber last week as a
coup against the legitimate Government of Yemen. It
was also, of course, a coup d’état against the transition
process that had been formally endorsed by the Council.
The situation in Yemen is still at very real risk
of further deterioration, and will certainly remain so
while the President and Prime Minister remain under
house arrest. We call for their early release.
We know from Special Adviser Jamal Benomar
that the Council’s response to the crisis has been very
closely watched in Yemen, and that in the past the
parties have responded to our messaging. Against that
background, given the close attention in Yemen to our

6/8

15/02/2015

response, the final agreement and achievement unity in
the Council are even more welcome.
New Zealand is convinced that all parties must
now fully engage in the United Nations-brokered
talks, and do so in the spirit of compromise directed
towards achieving a political settlement that allows
for a resumption of the political transition that was
previously agreed, which also tackles some of the other
serious issues faced by Yemen.
While today we have focused on the immediate
crisis, there are many important issues that the
resolution can only touch on, in particular the
humanitarian consequences of the crisis, the continued
threat of terrorist groups and the serious social and
economic issues that four years ago led the people of
Yemen to an agreed process of political transition,
one that appeared to be a model for the rest of the
region — a political transition that, until the Houthis’
ill-judged intervention, appeared to be on a fragile but
positive path.
Those issues are central to Yemen’s longer-term
stability. They must also be addressed. Therefore,
we agree with Spain and others that they deserve our
continued attention and that we must remain seized of
the matter.
Mr. Ramírez Carreño (Bolivarian Republic
of Venezuela) (spoke in Spanish): The Bolivarian
Republic of Venezuela supports, and voted in favour of,
resolution 2201 (2015) on the situation in Yemen. We
are convinced that a peaceful solution to the political
crisis is the only possible avenue open to all the parties
to achieve strong and lasting peace in the country.
Venezuela reiterates its rejection of any illegal
unilateral action that undermines the political and
constitutional status of Yemen. As a matter of
principle, our country always rejects coups d’état and
political destabilization. Our country reiterates its
condemnation of the use of violence and terrorism in
all its manifestations, regardless of motivation or who
commits it. All political stakeholders must respect the
exising road map and the Gulf Cooperation Council
initiatives aimed at opening up a path towards a political
transition in this brotherly country through dialogue.
We once again emphasize our resolute support
for respect for the sovereignty, political independence
and territorial integrity of Yemen. We hope that this
Security Council resolution will serve to encourage the

15-04195

15/02/2015

The situation in the Middle East

parties to follow the road map charted to achieve peace
and political stability, in line with the National Dialogue
Conference outcomes of the National Partnership
Agreement. National dialogue must continue, and we
must insist on an effort in that regard that involves all
political, ethnic and religious groups in the country.
We call once again for the release of President
Abdrabuh Mansour Hadi Mansour, as well as the
members of the Cabinet who are currently being
detained.
Finally, Venezuela reiterates its full support for
the good offices of the Secretary-General’s Special
Adviser, Mr. Jamal Benomar, as he endeavours to act
as facilitator in resolving the political crisis with the
consent of all the parties and in line with the interests
of the Yemeni people.
Mr. Barros Melet (Chile) (spoke in Spanish):
The delegation of Chile is grateful for the initiative
of the United Kingdom and Jordan in preparing and
introducing the timely resolution 2201 (2015). We
appreciate the effort made in the Security Council to
agree on a text that reflects a firm common position in
the face of the urgent issue of Yemen.
Despite the coup d’état, it is now time for the parties
in Yemen to assume their responsibilities and relaunch
the dialogue. More than ever, we urge all the parties
to avoid unilateral actions and to speed up inclusive
negotiations, facilitated by the United Nations, with a
view to moving ahead with the political transition.
We demand the early and safe release of President
Abdrabuh Mansour Hadi Mansour, Prime Minister
Khaled Mahfoudh Abdullah Bahah and all political
leaders under arbitrary house arrest.
Mr. Lucas (Angola): We thank the delegations of
Jordan and the United Kingdom for taking the initiative
to draft and present the timely resolution 2201 (2015)
on the situation in Yemen, which Angola was very
honoured to sponsor. It is our hope that its unanimous
adoption will make a tangible contribution to the
mediation efforts that Special Adviser Jamal Benomar
is deploying for a dialogue towards a peaceful political
settlement to the extremely grave situation in Yemen,
which was created by the strategy of the Houthi faction
to take over all Government institutions, dissolve the
Parliament and hold President Mansour and Prime
Minister Baha under house arrest. We urge their
immediate release. By their actions, the Houthis are

S/PV.7382

seriously harming the prospects for a peaceful transition
process, to which whey are signatories. The immediate
result of such an approach is to further alienate and
radicalize other political actors, thereby setting up a
scenario with unforeseen consequences — but certainly
including further suffering, pain and sorrow for the
Yemeni people.
We are aware that there are difficult times ahead,
but we hope that the situation will not degenerate
even further and that it is still possible to salvage the
political transition based on the Peace and National
Partnership Agreement. As events unfold, we are
particularly concerned about the growing threat of
the country’s fragmentation, with southern Yemen
moving to secession, the increasing sectarian nature of
the conflict and the new opportunities that Al-Qaida
is enjoying — a trend whose reversal is absolutely
imperative.
By adopting today’s resolution, the Security
Council is sending a clear and strong message to the
Houthi leadership and to all Yemeni stakeholders that it
is in everyone’s best interest to resume dialogue under
the framework provided by the Gulf Coopderation
Council Initiative, the National Dialogue Conference
outcomes and the Peace and National Partnership
Agreement, and, by doing so, safeguard the political
transition framework that, by their actions, the Houthis
have dangerously undermined. We strongly urge all the
parties to abide by resolution 2201 (2015) and to reach
the much-neded compromises. Otherwise, mayhem,
civil war, totalitarianism and an Al-Qaida-like regime
might lie ahead for Yemen.
The countries of the region, the Gulf Cooperation
Council and all actors with some leverage on Yemeni
actors should assume their responsibilities towards
the Yemeni people and give a chance to political
compromise and, ultimately, to peace.
Ms. Murmokaitė (Lithuania): Lithuania welcomes
the adoption by consensus of resolution 2201 (2015), on
Yemen, which we were happy to sponsor. In the past
months, the Security Council has not always been at
its best, and we have been too slow to act on several
occasions. This particular signal that the Council is ready
to rise to the challenge and do its part in supporting the
transition in Yemen is therefore essential. Through this
resolution, the Council is sending a powerful message
that all parties, in particular the Houthis, must engage
in a constructive and inclusive dialogue that leads to

15-041957/8

S/PV.7382

The situation in the Middle East

agreement on a draft constitution and on the holding of
a constitutional referendum and elections within a clear
time frame.
The core idea behind the involvement of the United
Nations and the Council is Yemen was to present
its people with a clear break from the past based on
democracy, human rights, the rule of law and national
reconciliation. That idea, enshrined in the Initiative of
the Gulf Cooperation Council (GCC), the outcomes of
the National Dialogue Conference and the Peace and
National Partnership Agreement, should remain the key
reference point for any future path. We thank the main
sponsors and authors of the resolution — Jordan and the
United Kingdom. As our United Kingdom colleague
did, I would also like to stress the role of the GCC,
which remains essential in Yemen moving forward.
The President (spoke in Chinese): I shall now
make a statement in my capacity as the representative
of China.
The Council has just adopted unanimously
resolution 2201 (2015), on the question of Yemen,
which reiterates support for the sovereignty, unity and
territorial integrity of Yemen and explicitly requests
the parties concerned to engage in consultations in
dialogue for a peaceful settlement of their differences.
That is of importance in pushing the parties to achieve
reconciliation and restore stability at an early date.

8/8

15/02/2015

China calls on the concerned parties in Yemen to
bear the fundamental interests of their nation and people
in mind, comprehensively implement all resolutions,
including resolution 2201 (2015), expedite their
dialogue and negotiations, and achieve reconciliation
as soon as possible. They should continue to implement
the outcome document of the National Dialogue
Conference, the Peace and National Partnership
Agreement, and the Gulf Cooperation Council (GCC)
Initiative. They should steadfastly advance the political
transition so that their country can embark on the path
to peace, stability and development at an early date.
China appreciates and supports the good offices
and mediation of Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon
and his Special Adviser on Yemen, Mr. Benomar. We
welcome the ongoing constructive role being played
by the GCC and the relevant international parties
concerned. China will continue to play an active role
in maintaining the peace and stability of Yemen and
advancing the political transition process.
I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.
There are no more names inscribed on the list of
speakers. The Security Council has thus concluded
the present stage of its consideration of the item on its
agenda.
The meeting rose at 5.50 p.m.

15-04195
