X
RESOLUTIONS ADOPTED ON THE REPORTS OF TIIE JOINT SECOND AND THIRD

COMMITIEE
409 (V). Organization and operation of the
work of the Economic and Social Council and
its Commissions
A

The General Assembly,
1. Talus note with satisfaction of the Economic and
Social Council's decision 1 to undertake in the near
future a complete review of its organization and operation and that of its Commissions ;
2. Expresses the opinion that the regional economic
commissions should be maintained, although their organization and terms of reference may have to be revised in the light of the experience acquired since their
establishment.
314th plenary meeting,
1 December 1950.

B
The General Assembly,
Considerinq its resolutions 207 (III) and 208 (III)
of the General Assembly of 18 November 1948,
Taliing note of resolution 295 (XI) adopted by the
Economic and Social Council on 16 August 1950,
1. Recommends the Economic and Social Council to
draw the attention of the Committee appointed in
pursuance of its resolution 295 B ( XI) to the necessity
of taking into consideration General Assembly resolution 207 (III) concerning the distribution of membership in subsidiary organs of the Economic and Social
Council;
2. Draws the attention of Members of the United
Nations to the necessity of implementing as soon as
possible General Assembly resolution 208 (III) concerning the participation of Member States in the work
of the Economic and Social Council ;
3. Invites the Secretary-General to give consideration to the suggestions which will be communicated to
him by Member States in pursuance of resolution 208
(III), and to submit a report on this subject to the
General Assembly.
314th plenary meeting,
1 December 1950.
C

The General Assembly,
Considering the desirability of laying down guiding
principles for the Committee appointed to review the
1

organization and operation of the Economic and Social
Council and its commissions,
Bearing in mind General Assembly resolution 208
(III),
Suggest to the Committee that it is desirable that
the largest number of Member States compatible with
efficiency should be enabled to participate in the organization and work of the Economic and Social Council
and its subordinate bodies.
314th plenary meeting,
1 December 1950.

410 (V).

Relief and rehabilitation of Korea
A

The General Assembly,
Having regard to its resolution 2 of 7 October 1950
on the problem of the independence of Korea,
Having received and considered a report 8 of the
Economic and Social Council submitted in accordance
with that resolution,
Mindful that the aggression by North Korean forces
and their warfare against the United Nations seeking to
restore peace in the area has resulted in great devastation and destruction which the Korean people cannot
themselves repair,
Recognizing that as a result of such aggression the
people of Korea are desperately in need of relief supplies
and materials and help in reconstructing their economy,
Deeply moved by the sufferings of the Korean people
and determined to assist in their alleviation,
Convinced that the creation of a United Nations programme of relief and rehabilitation for Korea is necessary both to the maintenance of lasting peace in the
area and to the establishment of the economic foundations for the building of a unified and independent
nation,
Considering that, under the said resolution of 7 October 1950, the United Nations Commission for the Unification and Rehabilitation of Korea is the principal
representative of the United Nations in Korea and hence
must share in the responsibility for the work undertaken
by the United Nations in furtherance of the objects and
purposes mentioned in the said resolution,
Considering that it is nevertheless desirable to set up
a special authority with broad powers to plan and super2
8

See Economic and Social Council resolution 295 B (XI).

31

See resolution 376 {V).
See document A/1493.
