A

UNITED
NATIONS

General Assembly
Distr.
GENERAL
A/RES/50/150
9 February 1996

Fiftieth session
Agenda item 109
RESOLUTION ADOPTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY
[on the report of the Third Committee (A/50/632)]
50/150.

Assistance to unaccompanied refugee minors

The General Assembly,
Reaffirming its resolution 49/172 of 23 December 1994,
Aware that the majority of refugees are children and women,
Bearing in mind that unaccompanied refugee minors are among the most
vulnerable refugees and require special assistance and care,
Mindful of the fact that the ultimate solution to the plight of those
unaccompanied minors is their return to and reunification with their families,
Noting that the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for
Refugees has developed revised Guidelines on Refugee Children, issued in
May 1994,
Noting also the efforts of the High Commissioner to ensure the
protection of and assistance to refugees, including children and unaccompanied
minors, and that further efforts need to be exerted to this effect,
Recalling the provisions of the Convention on the Rights of the
Child 1/ and the 1951 Convention 2/ and the 1967 Protocol 3/ relating to
the Status of Refugees,

1/

Resolution 44/25, annex.

2/

United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 189, No. 2545.

3/

Ibid., vol. 606, No. 8791.

96-76597

/...

A/RES/50/150
Page 2

1.

Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General; 4/

2.
Expresses its deep concern at the plight of unaccompanied refugee
minors, and emphasizes the urgent need for their early identification and for
timely, detailed and accurate information on their number and whereabouts;
3.
Calls upon all Governments, the Secretary-General, the United
Nations High Commissioner for Refugees, all United Nations organizations,
other international organizations and non-governmental organizations concerned
to exert the maximum effort to assist and protect refugee minors and to
expedite the return to and reunification with their families of unaccompanied
refugee minors;
4.
Urges the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for
Refugees, all United Nations organizations, other international organizations
and non-governmental organizations concerned to take appropriate steps to
mobilize resources commensurate to the needs and interests of the
unaccompanied refugee minors and for their reunification with their families;
5.
Condemns all acts of exploitation of unaccompanied refugee minors,
including their use as soldiers or human shields in armed conflict and their
recruitment in military forces, and any other acts that endanger their safety
and personal security;
6.
Calls upon the Secretary-General, the High Commissioner, the
Department of Humanitarian Affairs of the Secretariat, the United Nations
Children’s Fund and other United Nations organizations and international
organizations to mobilize adequate assistance to unaccompanied minors in the
areas of relief, education, health and psychological rehabilitation;
7.
Requests the Secretary-General to report to the General Assembly
at its fifty-first session on the implementation of the present resolution.
97th plenary meeting
21 December 1995

4/

A/50/555.
