General Assembly-Thirty-second Session
_ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ __

140

his Office through voluntary repatriation and assistance
in rehabilitation of returnees, integration in countries of
asylum or resettlement in other countries as needed;
5. Further urges Governments to facilitate the efforts of the High Commissioner in the field of international protection, inter alia:
(a) By considering accession to the relevant international and regional instruments established for the
benefit of refugees;
( b) By elaborating appropriate procedures at the
national level for the effective implementation of the
provisions of these instruments;
( c) By following humanitarian principles with
respect to the granting of asylum and ensuring that
these are scrupulously observed, including the principle of non-refoulement of refugees;

6. Calls upon Governments to contribute generously
towards the financing of the High Commissioner's humanitarian activities in view of the universal character
of the problems facing his Office and the need for a
wider financial support of the programmes being undertaken by him.
98th plenary meeting
8 December 1977

32/69.

Expression of appreciation to the United
Nations High Commissioner for Refugees

The General Assembly,
Noting with deep regret that the United Nations
High Commissioner for Refugees will shortly be relinquishing his duties,
Recognizing the progress achieved under his guidance
in promoting humanitarian solutions to the problems
of refugees and displaced persons in various parts of
the world,
Considering his unrelenting efforts to alleviate human suffering through the special humanitarian tasks
entrusted to him in addition to the original functions
of his Office,
1. Expresses its sincere appreciation and thanks to
Prince Sadruddin Aga Khan for the effective and dedicated manner in which he has performed his functions
as United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees;
2. Extends its good wishes to him for success in his
future undertakings.
98th plenary meeting
8 December 1977

32/70.

Assistance to refugees in southern Africa

Recognizing the need for concerted international action on behalf of the increasing numbers of refugees
and displaced persons of concern to the High Commissioner,

The General Assembly,
Noting the information provided by the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees on the assistance
activities of his Office on behalf of refugees in southern
Africa, 39
Noting with deep concern the increasing number of
refugees from Namibia, South Africa and Zimbabwe
and recognizing the burden thus imposed upon the
receiving countries,
Noting the continuing efforts of the High Commissioner to extend adequate assistance to these refugees,
particularly in neighbouring African States,
Recognizing the close co-operation existing between
th~ 9rganization of African Unity and the High Comm1ss10ner,

Considering the outstanding work which has been
performed by the Office of the High Commissioner in
providing international protection and material assistance to refugees and displaced persons as well as in
promoting permanent solutions to their problems,

_l. _Commends the program~es of assistance already
b~m~ implemented by the United Nations High Comm1ss10ner for Refugees and requests him further to
strengthen measures for the benefit of refugees in southern Africa;

Noting with deep appreciation the effective manner
in which the Office of the High Commissioner has been
dealing with various essential humanitarian tasks entrusted to it,

2. Urges Governments to contribute generously towards the programmes of the High Commissioner and
to provide him with the necessary facilities required to
a~s~st the refuge~~ in southern Africa, inter alia by prov1dmg opportumt1es for local settlement, education and
vocational training;

32/68.

Continuation of the Office of the United
Nations High Commissioner for Refugees

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 2957 (XXVII) of 12 December 1972, in which it decided to review, not later
than at its thirty-second session, the arrangements for
the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner
for Refugees with a view to determining whether the
Office should be continued beyond 31 December 1978,

1. Decides to continue the Office of the United
Nations High Commissioner for Refugees for a further
period of five years from 1 January 1979;

2. Decides to review, not later than at its thirtyseventh session, the arrangements for the Office of the
High Commissioner with a view to determining whether
the Office should be continued beyond 31 December 1983.

98th plenary meeting
8 December 1977

3. Requests United Nations agencies and programmes, non-governmental organizations and voluntary agencies to extend maximum support to the High
Commissioner in his efforts;
4. Requests the High Commissioner to continue
his co-operation with the Organization of African Unity
39 See Official Records of the General Assembly
Thirtysecond Session, Supplement No. 12 (A/32/12 and' Corr.I),
chap. III.
