III.

33/64.

Reaolutiom adop·ted on the reports of the First Committee

Establishment of a nuclear-weapon-free
zone in the region of the Middle East

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 3263 (XXIX) of 9 December 1974, in which it overwhelmingly commended
the idea of the establishment of a nuclear-weapon-free
zone in the region of the Middle East,
Recalling also its resolution 3474 (XXX) of 11
December 1975, in which it recognized that the establishment of a nuclear-weapon-free zone in the Middle
East enjoyed wide support in the region,
Bearing in mind its resolution 31/71 of 10 December 1976, in which it expressed the conviction that
progress towards the establishment of a nuclearweapon-free zone in the Middle East would greatly
enhance the cause of peace in the region and in the
world,
Considering its resolution 32/82 of 12 December
1977, in which it expressed the conviction that the
development of nuclear capability would further complicate the situation and immensely damage the efforts
to create an atmosphere of confidence in the Middle
East,
Guided by its relevant recommendations in the Final
Document of the Tenth Special Session of the General
Assembly, dealing with the establishment of a nuclearweapon-free zone in the region of the Middle East,20
Recognizing that the establishment of a nuclearweapon-free zone in the Middle East would greatly
enhance international peace and security,
l. Urges ali parties directly concerned seriously to
consider taking the practica! and urgent steps required
for the implementation of the proposal to establish
a nuclear-weapon-free zone in the Middle East in
accordance with the relevant resolutions of the General
Assembly and, as a means of promoting this objective, invites the countries concerned to adhere to the
Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons;21
2. Invites these countries, pending the establishment of such a zone in the Middle East and during
the process of its establishment, to declare solemnly
that they will refrain on a reciproca! basis from producing, acquiring or in any other way possessing
nuclear weapons and nuclear explosive devices;
3. Calls upan these countries to refrain, on a reciproca! basis, from permitting the stationing of nuclear
weapons on their territory by any third party, and to
agree to place all their nuclear activities under International Atomic Energy Agency safeguards;
4. Further invites these countries, pending the establishment of a nuclear-weapon-free zone in the Middle East and during the process of its establishment,
to declare, consistent with paragraph 63 (d) of the
Final Document of the Tenth Special Session, their
support for establishing such a zone in the region and
to deposit these declarations with the Security Council;
5. Reaffirms again its recommendation to the
nuclear-weapon States to refrain from any action contrary to the spirit and purpose of the present resolution
and the objective of establishing in the region of the
Middle East a nuclear-weapon-free zone under an ef20 /bid., para. 63 (d).
21 Resolution 2373 (XXII),

annex.

43

fective system of safeguards, and to extend their cooperation to the States of the region in their efforts
to promote these objectives;
6. Renews its invitation to the Secretary-General
to continue to explore the possibilities of making progress towards the establishment of a nuclear-weaponfree zone in the region of the Middle East;
7. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of
its thirty-fourth session the ítem entitled "Establishment of a nuclear-weapon-free zone in the region of
the Middle East".
84th plenary meeting
14 December 1978
33/65.

Establishment of a nuclear-weapon-free
zone in South Asia

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 3265 B (XXIX) of 9 December 1974, 3476 B (XXX) of 11 December 1975,
31/73 of 10 December 1976 and 32/83 of 12 December 1977 conceming the establishment of a nuclearweapon-free zone in South Asia,
Reiterating its conviction that the establishment of
nuclear-weapon-free zones in various regions of the
world is one of the measures which can contribute
most effectively to the objectives of non-proliferation
of nuclear weapons and general and complete disarmament,
Believing that the establishment of a nuclearweapon-free zone in South Asia, as in other regions,
will strengthen the security of the States of the region
against the use or threat of use of nuclear weapons,
Noting the declarations issued at the highest level
by Governments of South Asían States reaffirming
their undertaking not to acquire or manufacture nuclear
weapons and to devote their nuclear programmes exclusively to the economic and social advancement of
their peoples,
Recalling that in the above-mentioned resolutions
it called upan the States of the South Asian region
and such other neighbouring non-nuclear-weapon
States as might be interested to make all possible
efforts to establish a nuclear-weapon-free zone in South
Asia and to refrain, in the meantime, from any action
contrary to this objective,
Further recalling that, in its resolutions 3265 B
(XXIX), 31/73 and 32/83, it requested the Secretary-General to convene a meeting for the purpose of
the consultations mentioned therein and to render such
assistance as might be required to promote the efforts
for the establishment of a nuclear-weapon-free zone in
South Asia,
Bearing in mind the provisions of paragraphs 60 to
63 of the Final Document of the Tenth Special Session
of the General Assembly22 regarding the establishment
of nuclear-weapon-free zones, including in the region
of South Asia,
Noting the report of the Secretary-General on the
establishment of a nuclear-weapon-free zone in South
Asia, 23
22 Resolution
23 A/33/360.

S-10/2.
