S/PV.7295

United Nations

asdf

Security Council

Provisional

Sixty-ninth year

7295th meeting

Wednesday, 5 November 2014, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Quinlan .. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Australia)

Members:

Argentina .. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Chad . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Chile . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Jordan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Lithuania. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Luxembourg . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Nigeria .. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Republic of Korea . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Rwanda . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . .
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Mr. Oyarzábal
Mr. Gombo
Mr. Olguín Cigarroa
Mr. Zhao Yong
Mr. Bertoux
Mrs. Kawar
Mrs. Jakubonė
Ms. Lucas
Mr. Laro
Mr. Oh Joon
Mr. Iliichev
Mr. Manzi
Mr. Shearman
Ms. Power

Agenda
The situation in Burundi

14-60692 (E)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506.
Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official Document System of the
United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

*1460692*

S/PV.7295

The situation in Burundi

The meeting was called to order at 10 a.m.

I give the floor to Mr. Onanga-Anyanga.

Expression of thanks to the outgoing President
The President: Before we get down to business,
because this is the first meeting in the open Chamber
since Australia assumed the presidency of the Security
Council for this month, I would like to take the
opportunity to pay tribute, on behalf of the Council,
to Her Excellency Ms. María Cristina Perceval,
Permanent Representative of Argentina, for her service
as President of the Council for the month of October. I
know that I speak for all the members of the Council
in expressing our deep appreciation to Ambassador
Perceval and all her team for the great diplomatic skill,
empathy and good humour with which they conducted
the Council’s business last month.
Adoption of the agenda

The situation in Burundi
The President: In accordance with rule 37 of the
Council’s provisional rules of procedure. I invite the
representative of Burundi to participate in this meeting.
On behalf of the Council, I welcome Ambassador
Gahutu Zacharie, Director General of International
Organizations and Non-governmental Organizations
at the Ministry of Foreign Affairs and International
Cooperation of Burundi, who is joining today’s meeting
via video teleconference from Bujumbura.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite Mr. Parfait
Onanga-Anyanga, Special Representative of the
Secretary-General and Head of the United Nations
Office in Burundi, to participate in this meeting.
On behalf of the Council, I welcome Mr. OnangaAnyanga, who is also joining today’s meeting via video
teleconference from Bujumbura.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite His Excellency
Mr. Paul Seger, Permanent Representative of
Switzerland and Chair of the Burundi configuration
of the Peacebuilding Commission, to participate in the
meeting.

2/7

Mr. Onanga-Anyanga (spoke in French): At the
outset, I would like to congratulate you, Mr. President,
on assuming the presidency of the Security Council
for the month of November and for the contribution of
your country to efforts towards a more stable, peaceful
world.
The dominant development, beyond anything
else, is Burundi’s entry into the campaign period for
the elections of 2015. Despite the negative impact of
the boycott of the 2010 elections, the entire Burundian
national political class expressed its will to turn the
upcoming vote into an opportunity not only to perfect
the electoral mechanisms but also to guarantee inclusive
participation in a more tolerant, peaceful environment,
which will contribute to building peace and national
reconciliation.
The President of the Republic himself best
indicated the link between the upcoming elections and
peacebuilding in Burundi when, on 1 July, he said,

The agenda was adopted.

The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

05/11/2014

begin

its

“As we already announced to Burundians and to
the international community, our wish is for the
2015 elections to take place in a better way than all
those we have organized until now. The elections
will give the country, institutions and leaders who
have the people’s trust. The elections will create
peace and consolidate and strengthen democracy
and independence in the country”.
We share that aspiration and that very appropriate
comment by the Head of State.
However, we must redouble our efforts, since
we are approximately six months away from those
important elections and progress to that end continues
to be limited. The outstanding progress we have made
on the level of political dialogue is being subjected to a
difficult test. Although the entire legislative framework
is now in place, the setting up by CENI of divisions
on the provincial and communal levels has generated
controversy and rekindled accusations of partiality on
the part of CENI by the opposition.
The President of CENI is committed to correcting
the imbalances identified, even though he warned that it
would be impossible to satisfy all claims. Whether true
or not, the charges reflect the distrust of a significant
part of the political class with respect to the institution
responsible for organizing the elections in 2015, even
before they have begun. We deeply regret that situation,

14-60692

05/11/2014

The situation in Burundi

which shows a lack of trust between the majority and
the opposition.
The tensions in the political climate are also
present in the various trials in which major opposition
figures are appearing. Through these lawsuits, a few
months before the elections, the opposition is saying
that the justice system is being exploited and not very
free, a charge the Government denies, saying it does
not interfere with the course of justice. It is not too late
to turn these misunderstandings into an opportunity to
build confidence in the whole electoral process.
The third evaluation of the road map, which was held
23 October in Gitega at the invitation of the Government
and the United Nations Office in Burundi (BNUB),
within the framework of the inclusive political dialogue
initiated in March 2013, helped the entire Burundian
political class to exchange views on the political
situation of the country. Although no agreement has
been reached on the effective implementation of the
code of good conduct adopted, as the Council knows, in
June, the meeting in Gitega favoured a clarification of
the current political circumstances, while reaffirming
the principle of inclusion, without which the credibility
of the electoral process would be undermined.
The Government has clearly chosen to reaffirm
the rule of law on the basis of more overtly political,
previously approved recommendations, refusing to
operationalize the concept of the political operator
and inviting the opposition to frame its action in strict
compliance with the laws in force. We must nevertheless
welcome the commitment made by the Government to
continue the political dialogue. We also welcome the
reaffirmation by the opposition of its determination to
participate in future elections to completion, regardless
of the constraints. It is now important to focus on the key
issues set out in the code of good conduct, in particular
to create a more open political space and a reliable safe
environment to ensure the protection of all stakeholders
in the electoral process, guarantee the freedom and
fairness of the elections and condemn and ban political
violence in all its forms, especially those that involve
youth leagues affiliated with political parties.
The existence of a legal framework and operational
mechanisms of CENI will not by themselves be enough
to restore confidence in the electoral process. CENI
should provide further assurances by strengthening
its image as an independent and impartial authority,
especially by including all stakeholders in the key

S/PV.7295

pre- and post-election phases of the process, such as
in voter registration, whose launch is scheduled for
24 November, and in the management of electoral
disputes.
(spoke in English)
While the upcoming elections are by far the most
pressing and multifaceted political challenge facing
the country, other significant developments are worth
mentioning. Overall, Burundi has continued to enjoy a
rather stable security situation throughout its territory.
On a related note, during most of the reporting
period, a significant drop in acts of political violence
and intolerance perpetrated by youth affiliated with
political parties was evident, marked by a decrease in
the number of violations of the rights to life and physical
integrity. From a monthly average of 10 incidents
observed between January and July, the number of
incidents associated with the youth of the ruling party
documented by BNUB dropped to 7 in August and 3 in
September. Regular calls by the President of the ruling
party warning perpetrators of individual consequences
seem to have been heeded. Those incidents include the
banning or disruption of public meetings and threats
against or physical assaults committed on members
of opposition parties. Civil society organizations and
journalists were also affected.
In a positive development, on 29 September, human
rights defender, Mr. Pierre Claver Mbonimpa, was
released on health grounds. However, his case is still
pending in court.
It should also be noted that no significant progress
has been seen in the fight against impunity, including
in the cases of extrajudicial killings that BNUB has
documented since 2011, considering that only a small
number of cases have been tried in a court of law.
In a related development, justice reform has been
slow, especially with respect to the key issues of the
independence of the judiciary. It is, however, worth
mentioning that further to the adoption and promulgation
of the law on the Truth and Reconciliation Commission,
the process to select commissioners has been initiated.
Various national and international stakeholders have
made calls for a credible and inclusive Commission.
On 26 August, during an address to the nation,
President Nkurunziza acknowledged that corruption
remained one of the Government’s major challenges.
He reaffirmed his commitment to a policy of zero
tolerance for corruption. In that regard, the work of the

14-606923/7

S/PV.7295

The situation in Burundi

05/11/2014

Office Burundais des Recettes — the Burundian tax
collection authority — must be hailed and encouraged.
Exemplary action will indeed be needed to advance that
important objective.

policies to ensure the credibility of the electoral process,
which will represent a critical test that Burundi cannot
afford to fail in its march towards greater peace and
prosperity for all of its people.

I am pleased to report that, with respect to
transition, progress towards BNUB’s end of activities
proceeded in accordance with the joint transition
plan. Symbolically, BNUB’s activities will end on
12 December with the lowering of the United Nations
flag from its headquarters. A progressive reduction
in BNUB staff has continued as part of the staff
drawdown plan, balancing staff departures with the
conduct of BNUB’s substantive activities until the end
of its mandate. The United Nations country team has
continued to beef up its capacity in the areas in which
BNUB will cease its activities, notably in governance
and rule of law, bearing in mind the need to avoid gaps.

The President: I thank Mr. Onanga-Anyanga for
his briefing.

The approval by the Government on 11 August of
the continued presence of a stand-alone office of the
United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights
based on the 1995 agreement paved the way for ensuring
continued United Nations engagement in human rights
in Burundi. That is a very positive development, as it
will include capacity-building programmes with the
relevant Government institutions, the Independent
National Human Rights Commission and civil society
organizations. We call on the Council and Member
States to ensure that sufficient resources are allocated
for the new office.
Moving forward, Burundi will continue to need
strong support from all its partners to overcome
outstanding challenges and implement its national
poverty alleviation and development strategy. I
commend Ambassador Paul Seger for his leadership
and unflagging commitment to peace consolidation
and development efforts in Burundi. BNUB and the
entire United Nations family are mobilized to actively
participate in the round table scheduled to take place in
Bujumbura on 11 and 12 December.
In conclusion — and this point cannot be
overemphasized — the Government should continue
to do everything in its power to preserve peace and
stability and consolidate democracy. It should avoid
any posture that could lead to a reversal of the gains
achieved so far. I have every confidence that it will do
so. As the country prepares itself for the upcoming 2015
elections, there is no better way to achieve that goal
than to proactively implement inclusive and transparent

4/7

I now give the floor to Mr. Seger.
Mr. Seger (spoke in French): Since this is the last
meeting of the Council before the closing of the United
Nations Office in Burundi (BNUB) at the end of 2014,
not including the meeting scheduled for January, let me
begin by conveying my heartfelt thanks to the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, Mr. Parfait
Onanga-Anyanga, and his entire team in Bujumbura.
I would like to welcome in particular the exemplary
professionalism and unshakable dedication that they
have always shown in implementing the complex tasks
assigned them by the Council and the implementation
of a smooth transition by the end of the year. Thanks
to their support, I was able to play my part in the
peacebuilding process.
I also welcome the presence of my dear friend
Ambassador Zacharie Gahutu, Director General for
International Organizations and Non-Governmental
Organizations at the Ministry for Foreign Affairs of
Burundi.
I would like to cover three main points today. After
some remarks on the current situation in the country,
I would like to expand on the subject of the end of the
United Nations mission and its implications. Finally, I
would like to talk about the round-table meeting that
will be held on 11 and 12 December in Bujumbura
between the Government and its main bilateral and
multilateral partners.
During my most recent briefing to the Council
in May (see S/PV.7174), I observed a growing lack of
trust that was hindering the country’s progress on two
levels: both internally between the ruling party and
the opposition and externally between the Government
and its main international partners. Today, with the
electoral process fully under way, those tensions persist.
To not repeat what has already been said by Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, I will refrain
from dwelling on the details of recent developments,
but will limit myself to some key messages with
regard to next year’s elections, which are of paramount
importance.

14-60692

05/11/2014

The situation in Burundi

Inclusive participation is key. Indeed, I believe
we cannot overestimate that element. All political
stakeholders must be allowed to participate in the
electoral process in a free, fair and secure manner.
Political space must be opened up not only in theory
but in practice and throughout the entire country. The
Government is primarily responsible in that regard. I
therefore call on it to prepare for the elections with the
confidence of a country that is undertaking this exercise
in democracy for the third time since emerging from its
bloody past, and with the vigilance of a country that is
aware of the fragility of its peacebuilding process and
the responsibility inherent in it.
I also urge the opposition parties not to repeat the
mistakes of 2010 and to participate in the elections.
They must declare their willingness to contribute to
the country’s political dynamic in order to strengthen
the democratic process and work hand in hand towards
a prosperous future for Burundi. There must be a
medium- and long-term vision rather than a focus on
short-term political considerations.
Finally, while the primary responsibility lies with
the Government, I appeal to all political stakeholders to
refrain from any behaviour that could further increase
tensions or lead to acts of political violence. I remain
confident that that will not occur, since no-one would
stand to gain from it, but we should all continue to work
hand in hand to prevent that from happening.
BNUB’s imminent departure at the end of the year
is a crucial and delicate moment for Burundi — crucial
because it gives the country an opportunity to prove
that it is ready to start a new chapter in its peacebuilding
process, but also delicate because it comes only five
months prior to the general elections. BNUB will
leave behind serious gaps, not least in the areas of
political dialogue and high-level facilitation, which
were identified as priority areas in the joint transition
plan adopted by the Council earlier this year. However,
efforts are well under way to ensure a smooth transition
into the post-BNUB phase, and I am happy to note that.
I welcome the United Nations electoral mission, which
will be deployed with the approval of the Government
on 1 January 2015 and will remain until after the
elections.
The strengthening of the United Nations country
team is also on the right path. It is important that the
transition from BNUB to the country team be carried
out in a seamless manner. I therefore call upon the

S/PV.7295

United Nations Development Programme for a timely
nomination of a Resident Coordinator for Burundi
with the necessary profile to support the country at the
socioeconomic level and on related institutional and
political issues.
Furthermore, the Government’s commitment to
cooperate with the Office of the High Commissioner
for Human Rights to continue to promote that agenda
in Burundi is an encouraging sign, as the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General noted.
However, while the political will to open a standalone office exists, the necessary financial means to
maintain its field presence are still lacking. Therefore,
as Chair of the Burundi configuration, I organized a
working lunch with Assistant Secretary-General for
Human Rights Ivan Šimonović to raise awareness
among interested Member States of the needs of the
Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for
Human Rights. I was encouraged by the broad support
expressed at that meeting, and I appeal to participants
today to make a contribution. That echoes what the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General just
stated a few minutes ago. Beyond the Office’s role as
a protective presence, considerable work remains to
be done in the field of human rights in terms of civil
and political rights, the transitional justice process and
the establishment of social and economic rights for all
Burundians, which is a goal we all pursue.
Last week, I also had a very fruitful meeting with
the Special Envoy of the Secretary-General to the
Great Lakes Region, Mr. Said Djinnit. We both believe
that the current challenges have to be tackled through
a regional approach and are committed to working
together to enhance the role of regional and subregional
organizations. Those organizations, including the
African Union, the East African Community, the
Economic Community of the Great Lakes Countries
and others, will become even more important once
BNUB has left Burundi. Regional cooperation is also
crucial to fulfilling the economic potential of the
countries of the Great Lakes region and promoting the
socioeconomic development necessary for its people.
I believe Burundi will continue to make progress in
peacebuilding, leaving its conflicted past behind once
and for all. Until then, vigilance is required, including
by the Council, and I will seek to provide continued
support to the country on its path.

14-606925/7

S/PV.7295

The situation in Burundi

This brings me to my third and final point, the
round-table meeting. On 9 October, I wrote a letter
to the Council announcing that a round-table meeting
between the Government and its main bilateral and
institutional partners would take place on 11 and
12 December in Bujumbura. That decision was reached
at a high-level luncheon I organized on 29 September,
attended by the First Vice-President and the Minister for
Foreign Affairs of Burundi, Under-Secretary-General
for Political Affairs Jeffrey Feltman, the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General and other
eminent persons from Member States and multilateral
institutions.
On the basis of the concept paper, which I also
transmitted to the Council, it was agreed that the round
table would have three objectives: first, to take stock of
progress achieved in and challenges to the implementation
of the second poverty reduction strategy paper, which
was presented at the 2012 Geneva Partners Conference,
in particular in view of the 2015 elections; secondly,
to discuss the implications of BNUB’s departure and
its consequences for the future cooperation between
Burundi and its bilateral and institutional partners at
the regional and international level; and, thirdly, to
evaluate future perspectives for a mutually beneficial
partnership for Burundi’s development and long-term
prosperity on the assumption that, in 2015, fair, safe,
democratic and universal elections will have laid the
foundation for peaceful and sustainable development in
the country.
Ideally, the number of high-level representatives of
the Government and the main partners participating in
the round table would be limited in order to encourage
an open and frank conversation in an informal setting. I
am encouraged by the many assurances of commitment
I have already received from high-level representatives
in that regard. Together with the Government, we are
currently working on a joint declaration to be adopted
at the end of the December meeting, and we will submit
it to all the main partners in due time. The declaration
aims at identifying the progress achieved, as well as the
areas requiring further attention and intervention. Its
objective is to define a new set of mutual commitments
that would guide the common way forward during the
election year and beyond.
I welcome the Government’s decision to organize
the round table. Invitations should be sent out soon. I
intend to travel to Burundi in the days leading up to the
round table to meet the parties involved, as is the usual

6/7

05/11/2014

practice. Prior to that, I will be part of a delegation of
Chairs of the Peacebuilding Commission visiting the
African Union in Addis Ababa. On that occasion, I will
further discuss the issue of regional engagement.
There is no doubt that Burundi is going through a
challenging and decisive phase. The tasks at hand are
critical to the consolidation of the gains the country
has achieved and to laying the foundation for a longterm vision, following the elections in 2015. BNUB’s
drawdown and, even more importantly, the 2015
elections are milestones and must be managed with
utmost care, but they also offer new opportunities.
Burundi has a historical chance to show the international
community that it has overcome its painful past and that
it is embarking on a new era based on strong democratic
institutions and defined by the improvement of the
living standards of its population, in particular of its
youth. The international community must help Burundi
achieve those goals.
The President: I thank Mr. Seger for his briefing.
I now give the floor to the representative of Burundi.
Mr. Gahutu (Burundi) (spoke in French): On
behalf of the Government of the Republic of Burundi
and on behalf of the Minister for Foreign Affairs and
International Cooperation, I would like to extend my
sincere congratulations to you, Mr. President, on your
assumption of presidency of the Security Council for
the month of November.
The Government of Burundi would like to bring
the following facts to the attention of the international
and national community. In response to the recent
information circulated in some local media, the
Government of Burundi reiterates its political will
to protect the entire population of Burundi and all
foreigners living in the country against threats or
attacks from saboteurs and criminals of all stripes.
In order to accomplish that task, which is its primary
mission, the Government calls for the cooperation of all
its citizens and all foreigners and urges them to report all
troublemakers, including by providing any information
they may have about any acts aimed at destabilizing
Burundi or crimes committed on its territory.
The Government of Burundi takes this opportunity
to express its thanks to the bilateral and multilateral
partners working in Burundi and for the clear
cooperation they have demonstrated throughout its

14-60692

05/11/2014

The situation in Burundi

long march to consolidate the peace process that began
more than a decade ago.
During this crucial period, Burundi has been
preparing itself for general and presidential elections for
the third time. It calls on the same partners to redouble
their efforts to ensure that the elections take place in
good conditions, ensuring the security, freedom and
transparency of the elections for all. The Government is
aware of the scale of the task before it, but is confident
that it will successfully carry out its responsibilities
with the help of the entire population and its regional
and international community in general. In that regard,
the Government would like to note that the road map
adopted by all political and Burundian stakeholders and
the consultations undertaken between the Government
and all stakeholders will herald a peaceful environment
for the elections of 2015.
The Government’s discussion with political actors
on facilitating the role of the United Nations Office in
Burundi (BNUB) in our country reflects its resolve to
conduct an inclusive, fair and free electoral process.
Similarly, the current work of the media and civil
society in general, as well as the consultations begun
by the Government with religious groups, demonstrate
the Government’s desire to open a political space to
all throughout the country. While the Government has
the primary responsibility for ensuring the security of
all those living in the territory of its country, it avails
itself of the opportunity to call on all political actors to
refrain from any action that could lead to heightened
tensions and to avoid political violence. In doing so,
it will be possible for us to bury once and for all the
hatchet that has bloodied our country’s history and its
sanguinary past.
The Government of Burundi would like to recall
that BNUB’s mandate expires at the end of 2014. It
is also aware that the drawdown will leave a vacuum
to be filled, which will be difficult on many levels.
However, it is time for the Government to assume its
responsibilities and prove that it is up to the challenge
in an effective and efficient fashion. The Government
is also aware that many challenges lie ahead. That is
why it calls on the United Nations Office in Burundi
and other partners involved to implement the joint
transition plan and the peacebuilding priority plan as
swiftly as possible.
It should be noted that an agreement between the
Government of Burundi and the United Nations with

S/PV.7295

regard to the deployment of the electoral observer
mission has also almost been reached. The same will
hold true with respect to other partners who may wish
to participate in the monitoring of the elections next
year in Burundi. In that regard, we should stress that
this is the same language that the Government has used
for the past month. The Government is also willing to
work with all partners in the area of human rights and
to do everything in its power to conclude the ongoing
process of the Truth and Reconciliation Commission.
The Government continues to work with other
Governments in the subregion and in Africa as a
whole to promote regional cooperation through the
organizations of which it is a member and with the
African Union. In the framework of the implementation
of the Vision Burundi 2025 and our second Strategic
Framework for Growth and the Fight against Poverty,
Burundi would like to see all the commitments made
at the Geneva Partners Conference, held in October,
2012, honoured by all partners. Indeed, the subsequent
sectoral conferences that were held led to specific
viable projects.
As a result, the Government of Burundi hopes that
the round table to be held on 11 and 12 of December
will produce specific and firm commitments, which
will immediately unblock the remaining financial
resources. In so doing, the international community
can demonstrate its willingness to help Burundi fill the
vacuum left by the drawdown of BNUB and to complete
any ongoing programmes for the various strategic
development instruments, such as Vision Burundi 2025
and our second Strategic Framework for Growth and
the Fight against Poverty, thus putting Burundi on the
road to progress, so as to build on what has already been
accomplished and position the country for achieving a
brighter future for its people. It is such action that will
create a foundation for sustainable development in the
medium and long term.
Lastly, the Government would like to conclude
by reiterating its willingness to work for peace and
development for all the people of Burundi, with the
support of all its partners.
The President: There are no more names inscribed
on the list of speakers. I now invite Council members
to informal consultations to continue our discussion on
the subject.
The meeting rose at 10.40 a.m.

14-606927/7
