S/PV.9154

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-seventh year

9154

th meeting
Tuesday, 18 October 2022, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Biang. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Gabon)

Members:

Albania . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Brazil. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ghana . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
India . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ireland. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kenya. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Mexico. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Norway . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Arab Emirates . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Ms. Dautllari
Mr. De Almeida Filho
Mr. Dai Bing
Mr. De Rivière
Mr. Agyeman
Mr. Raguttahalli
Ms. Moran
Ms. Mbabu
Mr. De la Fuente Ramírez
Ms. Juul
Ms. Evstigneeva
Mrs. Alhefeiti
Mr. Kariuki
Mrs. Thomas-Greenfield

Agenda
The situation in Mali
Report of the Secretary-General on the situation in Mali (S/2022/731)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

22-63752 (E)
*2263752*

The situation in Mali

S/PV.9154

for drafting the constitution, which began its work in
late June, held a series of consultations with a wide range
of Malian stakeholders in July and August. That work
culminated in the presentation of the draft constitution
to the transitional President on 11 October. The draft is
based on the recommendations of the national dialogue
on the reform process, with an emphasis on good
governance and combating corruption.

The meeting was called to order at 10.10 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in Mali
Report of the Secretary-General on the
situation in Mali (S/2022/731)
The President (spoke in French): In accordance
with rule 37 of the Council’s provisional rules of
procedure, I invite the representative of Mali to
participate in this meeting.
On behalf of the Council, I welcome His Excellency
Mr. Abdoulaye Diop, Minister for Foreign Affairs and
International Cooperation of Mali.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite Mr. El-Ghassim
Wane, Special Representative of the Secretary-General
and Head of the United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali, to participate
in this meeting.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I wish to draw the attention of Council members to
document S/2022/731, which contains the report of the
Secretary-General on the situation in Mali.
I now give the floor to Mr. Wane.
Mr. Wane (spoke in French): I am grateful for the
opportunity to brief the Security Council once again
on the situation in Mali. At the outset, I would like to
thank you, Mr. President, and the other members of
the Council, for your continued support to the United
Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization
Mission in Mali (MINUSMA). Since the members of
the Council already have the report of the SecretaryGeneral before them (S/2022/731), I will focus on the
main developments in Mali and MINUSMA efforts
since June.
First, and as noted in the Secretary-General’s
report, following the agreement reached in early July
between Mali and the Economic Community of West
African States (ECOWAS) on the transition timetable,
significant progress has been made in preparing for the
elections. In the lead-up to the constitutional referendum
scheduled for March 2023, the commission responsible
2/23

18/10/2022

The draft also provides for the establishment of a
bicameral parliament, with the creation of a national
high council, and recognizes alternative methods of
dispute resolution, with provisions that will greatly
facilitate the implementation of the 2015 the Agreement
on Peace and Reconciliation in Mali, resulting from the
Algiers process. The draft constitution is expected to
be adopted by the Council of Ministers by the end of
November and then be put to a referendum.
Following the adoption of the Electoral Law in
June and its subsequent entry into force, steps were
also taken to establish a single body, the Independent
Authority for Election Management. The Authority’s 15
members were officially appointed on 12 October. The
Authority will now proceed with the operationalization
of the various national, regional and local structures
and coordination units within Mali’s diplomatic and
consular missions abroad.
I would also like to add that the mechanism for
monitoring the timetable of the political and electoral
reform, which involves the Malian parties, including
a number of ministers, including Mr. Diop, and
the multilateral partners concerned — ECOWAS,
the African Union and MINUSMA — is now fully
operational, both at the technical and political levels. Its
steering committee has met four times thus far, with the
most recent meeting having taken place on 13 October.
Those advances are therefore commendable, but it
is also clear that the success of the electoral process
will depend on a multitude of factors, including the
availability of financial and logistical resources and the
evolution of the security situation, which has an impact
on all stages of the electoral cycle. Enhancing the
inclusiveness of the process will also be important. On
that note, it is worth mentioning that between July and
October, the Malian Government held six consultations
with political parties and civil society on different
aspects of the electoral process. MINUSMA and the
United Nations Country Team are actively involved in
supporting the electoral process, providing important
22-63752

18/10/2022

The situation in Mali

technical and logistical support and participating in the
follow-up mechanism. An integrated electoral support
plan for the 2020 to 2024 electoral cycle is currently
being finalized.
Since August, there have been encouraging
developments in the peace process. In early August, the
long-awaited high-level decision-making meeting was
held and resulted in the adoption of the Government’s
proposal to integrate 26,000 combatants into the
Malian Defence and Security Forces and other Malian
State structures. During the meeting, consensus was
also reached on the way forward for the institutional
reforms required for the implementation of the
Agreement. Subsequently, the follow-up committee
for the Agreement held two meetings — a ministerial
meeting on 2 September chaired by Foreign Minister
Lamamra of Algeria and an ordinary meeting on
11 October — thus marking the resumption of the
work of that structure, which is essential to dialogue
between the Malian parties and ensuring interaction
between them and the international mediators. I would
also like to add that three of the four sub-committees
of the follow-up committee for the Agreement have
also resumed their work. The last sub-committee is
expected to meet shortly.
Steps are being taken to follow up on the outcome
of the meeting at the decision-making level, with
a particular emphasis on the operationalization
of the ad hoc commission responsible for making
recommendations, on a case-by-case basis, on how to
manage the issue of senior members of the signatory
movements, including in relation to the issue of the
chain of command. The terms of reference of that
commission have been approved, and its members should
be appointed shortly. The successful completion of that
commission’s work will pave the way for the launch of
the comprehensive disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration (DDR) process.
In parallel, MINUSMA and the two Malian
commissions in charge of the DDR process and
integration, respectively, have made visits to
the regions to assess the logistical and technical
conditions necessary for the launch of comprehensive
DDR process. I must add here that those visits were
particularly well received, by both the local authorities
and the local populations.
Here again, in terms of the peace process,
MINUSMA is actively involved alongside others in the

S/PV.9154

international mediation process, including its leader and
Algeria. In addition to monitoring the ceasefire on an
ongoing basis, the Mission is using its good offices and
providing significant technical, logistical and financial
support to the implementation of the peace process.
Finally, with regard to the situation in central Mali,
on 24 August the Malian Government adopted a strategy
to stabilize this region which, as the Council knows, has
been a long-standing request of the Security Council.
The strategy is based on four axes: peace, security
and social cohesion; governance and justice; economic
and humanitarian recovery; and communication
and cooperation. In addition to providing support to
developing that strategy, MINUSMA has also been
working to align its activities with the strategy’s
priorities. A mapping of our activities to date shows that
more than 100 projects, some completed, some ongoing
and some planned, are in line with the Government’s
strategy, covering areas such as training, infrastructure
rehabilitation, reconciliation and the promotion of
social cohesion.
It should also be noted that the transitional authorities
are implementing a much more ambitious reform
programme, in accordance with the recommendations
of the national dialogue on the reform process, to
improve governance in Mali. As the Council is aware,
governance-related challenges and shortcomings that
date back several years are at the heart of the crisis in
Mali. We plan to work closely with the Government, in
collaboration with the United Nations Country Team,
to see how we can support the overall reform agenda.
(spoke in English)
The developments that I have just highlighted are
unfolding against the backdrop of a very challenging
security, humanitarian and human rights situation, with
severe consequences for civilians across large parts of the
country. As outlined in the Secretary-General’s report,
the security remains volatile in the centre of Mali and
in the tri-border area between Mali, Burkina Faso and
the Niger. Since March, there has been a sharp increase
in the activities of extremist elements affiliated with
the Islamic State in the Greater Sahara and with Jama’a
Nusrat ul-Islam wa al-Muslimin in the Ménaka and Gao
regions. The extremist groups are taking advantage of
security voids that the Malian forces are striving to fill
and are fighting for territorial control while targeting
the Malian forces and MINUSMA alike.

22-637523/23

S/PV.9154

The situation in Mali

In that context, MINUSMA strives to better
protect civilians, keeping in mind the State’s primary
responsibility in that regard. In Ménaka, for instance,
since I last briefed the Council in June (see S/PV.9061),
the Mission has enhanced its presence with the
redeployment of a company initially based in Ansongo,
making it possible to increase ground patrols in the
city and its surroundings in close cooperation with the
Malian armed forces while similar operations are being
carried out by MINUSMA police. Armed air assets
based in Timbuktu have also been mobilized to conduct
deterrence operations in the region, as well as in the
Gao area, amplifying our collective response to the
security situation.
Other measures relate to the deployment of longrange patrols, including, currently, in the Talataye
area and the Ansongo cercle in the Gao region, and
the activation of integrated teams, as was the case
on 5 September, when the Gao Head of Office led a
mission to Ansongo town to assess the humanitarian
situation in the area following threats by the Islamic
State. MINUSMA also launched foreign intelligence,
surveillance and reconnaissance flights over the
Talataye area in September to identify locations with
internally displaced persons (IDPs) stranded following
the clashes on 6 September between the Islamic State
and Jama’a Nusrat ul-Islam wa al-Muslimin. That said,
we have to acknowledge that the needs on the ground
far outweigh MINUSMA’s abilities with its current
resources. The prevailing security situation in Ménaka
and the Gao region underscores the need for greater
coordination between MINUSMA and the Malian
forces. It also points to the urgency of completing the
DDR process and deploying the reconstituted army, as
that will significantly enhance the ability of the Malian
State to address the current challenges.
The security situation in the centre of the country
also remains fragile. Although the Malian Defence
and Security Forces continue to put pressure on
groups affiliated with Jama’a Nusrat ul-Islam wa
al-Muslimin, extremist elements retain the capacity
to conduct coordinated attacks on the Malian armed
forces, sabotage infrastructure and terrorize local
communities through reprisal attacks. Examples
include the coordinated attacks on the Malian armed
forces in various locations in July; the attack on the
village of Diallassagou in June; and the blockade from
May to September of national road 16, a major supply
route, hampering freedom of movement and halting
4/23

18/10/2022

commercial activities. The number of attacks targeting
the southern part of the country have also increased,
unfortunately.
While the fight against terrorism necessarily
includes a military and security component, it is
obvious that no lasting results can be achieved if two
basic conditions are not met. The first is the need for
these efforts to be complemented by a restoration of
State authority and the rebuilding of trust with local
communities. In that respect, the full implementation of
the newly adopted Malian strategy for the stabilization
of the central region and similar efforts elsewhere in the
country will be critical. Secondly, it is imperative that
every effort be made to ensure that Government-led
military operations are carried out in compliance with
human rights and international humanitarian law and
that the perpetrators of violations and abuse are held to
account. That point can never be emphasized enough.
For its part, MINUSMA will continue to monitor
and investigate any reports of alleged violations and
abuses. The latest quarterly human rights report for
the period from April to June found that the overall
number of violations had decreased and that terrorist
groups were the main perpetrators. The next quarterly
report covering the period from July to September will
be published in the next two weeks. That line of work
is a critical component of our mandate, as determined
by the Council, and its sole purpose is to contribute
to the promotion of lasting peace and stability. We
therefore look forward to the full cooperation of the
Malian authorities in the implementation of that aspect
of our mandate.
It is in that spirit that MINUSMA is supporting,
in parallel, initiatives by the Malian authorities to
strengthen respect for human rights and reinforce the
fight against impunity. During the reporting period,
the Mission conducted 13 human rights trainings for
security forces and other national stakeholders. One such
example relates to the project between MINUSMA and
the army staff headquarters, which in February began
working to ensure the integration of human rights norms
and standards in the planning and conduct of military
operations, including through the institutionalization
of human rights education in the curricula of training
institutions for defence personnel in Mali. The Mission
is also providing technical assistance to strengthen the
legal framework for the promotion and protection of
human rights and other related issues. With technical
support from MINUSMA, a national criminal policy
22-63752

18/10/2022

The situation in Mali

and prosecutorial strategy on terrorist-related crimes
was adopted by the Ministry of Justice and Human
Rights on 12 September. The Mission continues to
provide support on military justice, as well as to
the Specialized Judicial Unit against Terrorism and
Transnational Organized Crime.
The current environment has compounded the
humanitarian situation in the country. The number
of IDPs rose from 350,000 to more than 422,000
in the centre and north, while more than 175,000
Malian refugees have fled to neighbouring countries.
More than 1.8 million people are facing severe food
insecurity — a figure that could rise to 2.3 million by
November. More than 1.2 million children under the
age of five are affected by acute malnutrition. As of
May, more than 1,950 schools in Mali were closed due
to insecurity, affecting nearly 600,000 children, mainly
in the central regions of Mali. The laudable efforts of
humanitarian actors to meet those needs are hampered
by a lack of adequate and sustainable funding. So far,
only 30 per cent of the $686 million requested for 2022
has been mobilized.
In view of those developments, let me conclude
by underlining that the situation in Mali continues
to warrant sustained international attention and
engagement, particularly from the Council, which for
the past 10 years or so has unwaveringly supported
the country’s stabilization. The people of Mali have
demonstrated great resilience amid multiple challenges.
They continue to forge ahead and harbour a strong
desire for peace and stability. Their efforts deserve
the full support of the international community, and it
bears emphasizing that stabilizing Mali is a sine qua
non for the stabilization of the entire region.
Against that backdrop, MINUSMA will continue to
do all it can to enhance the effectiveness of its response.
In that respect, I would like to echo the SecretaryGeneral’s call for the urgent provision of missing
capabilities of long standing. MINUSMA has shown
extraordinary resilience, given its difficult operating
environment. We are using our resources as creatively
and flexibly as possible and our men and women on the
ground are going to great lengths to fulfil the objectives
that have been set. However, that determination cannot
be a substitute for the assets we so desperately need to
do our job.
As the Secretary-General points out in his
report, to a large extent the Mission’s effectiveness is

S/PV.9154

also contingent on the extent of the cooperation we
receive from the Malian authorities. I welcomed the
outcome of the coordination meeting held with the
Malian authorities in early August, which paved the
way for a resumption of rotations and the subsequent
establishment of a technical committee to look at
various aspects of our partnership. The Mission is
committed to engaging constructively with the Malian
authorities to address the challenges at hand, ensure
full transparency and create the necessary environment
for the successful execution of its mandate, including
with regard to freedom of movement, in conformity
with the status of forces agreement. Now is more than
ever the time to work together and with urgency in
order to deliver on the aspirations of the people of Mali
and, more broadly, the region.
Yesterday, as has unfortunately often been the case
throughout the Mission’s deployment, an improvised
explosive device struck again, killing four of our
peacekeepers and wounding two others. They join the
many Malian, United Nations and other international
service members, as well as countless Malian civilians,
who have paid the ultimate price in our collective
endeavour for peace. That is a stark reminder of the
fact that the international community and the Malian
people are all in this together. We can only win this
battle together, and the United Nations, in spite of the
inherent limitations of peacekeeping, offers the best
framework for achieving lasting peace in Mali and the
broader Sahel.
The President (spoke in French): I thank Mr. Wane
for his briefing.
I shall now give the floor to those members of the
Council who wish to make statements.
Mr. De Rivière (France) (spoke in French): I would
like to thank the Special Representative for his briefing
and welcome the participation of the Minister for
Foreign Affairs and International Cooperation of the
Republic of Mali.
I will be brief: Mali is today at a crossroads. The
first steps have been taken in recent months. In July, an
agreement was reached between the Malian authorities
and the Economic Community of West African States on
the timeline for the transition, with a view to a return to
constitutional order and the organization of elections by
February 2024. The enactment of the Electoral Law was
a starting point, and a draft constitution, which is to be
put to a referendum in the near future, has been drafted.

22-637525/23

S/PV.9154

The situation in Mali

In September, the Agreement Monitoring Committee
met for the first time in more than a year, with decisive
momentum to that end provided by Algeria.
Those steps were important and must lead to
concrete and rapid results, because the implementation
of the Agreement on Peace and Reconciliation in Mali
and the return of democracy can come only from
the Malian parties themselves. The United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission
in Mali (MINUSMA) continues to support them, as
provided for in its mandate.
I want to pay tribute to the men and women who have
served in the Mission since its inception nine years ago.
MINUSMA is one of the most dangerous missions of the
United Nations. Every year, as members of the Security
Council, we assume the responsibility of renewing its
mandate, because we believe that this commitment is
worthwhile: for the protection of the Malian people and
their rights, for national reconciliation and for peace
and stability in the region.
That brings me to my second message: MINUSMA
is today a Mission in danger. The threat is, first and
foremost, a security threat. Terrorist groups are
extending their reach and increasing the number of
their victims. We call on Mali to renew cooperation
and trust with its partners in the subregion in order to
present a united front against that cross-border threat.
That threat also affects MINUSMA, which has lost
nine peacekeepers since June. I offer my condolences to
Chad, which was in mourning yesterday, and to Egypt,
Guinea, Jordan and the families of the victims.
It would be unacceptable to expose peacekeepers
to such risks without the full and robust cooperation
of the host State, in accordance with its Headquarters
agreement and resolutions 2518 (2020) and 2589 (2021).
However, we note certain obstacles to the Mission’s
activities. France is very concerned by the report of the
Secretary-General (S/2022/731), in which he refers, in
particular, to 20 cases of restrictions on the Mission’s
ground movements and 22 cases of restrictions on its air
movements. The last point is particularly worrisome, as
evacuation by helicopter is sometimes the only way to
save an injured soldier.
There is also the question of operations conducted
by national forces with the support of the Wagner
Group’s mercenaries. The reports on the number of
civilian casualties and the fact that they target certain
6/23

18/10/2022

communities in particular are extremely serious.
We urge the Malian authorities to ensure that the
perpetrators of those abuses are held accountable for
their actions and that the investigations that have been
announced are brought to a conclusion.
France calls for the January strategic review to
provide clear answers to those questions and put all
options on the table. The review is an opportunity for
a frank discussion with the Malian authorities, both
about their expectations of MINUSMA, but also their
commitment to ensuring that the Mission can fully
implement its mandate.
No one wants MINUSMA to leave Mali. Polls show
that the Mission is most appreciated in the most remote
areas for its security support and its humanitarian role.
We are counting on the spirit of responsibility of
the transitional authorities not to hasten a departure of
which the Malian people would be the first victims.
Mr. Raguttahalli (India): I thank the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Mali
and Head of the United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali (MINUSMA),
Mr. El-Ghassim Wane, for his briefing. I also welcome
the presence of the Foreign Minister of Mali at
today’s meeting.
At the outset, allow me to express our deepest
condolences to the bereaved families of four
peacekeepers from Chad who lost their lives in an
improvised explosive device attack a few days back. We
also express our deepest condolences to the families of
peacekeepers from other troop-contributing countries,
namely, Egypt, Guinea and Jordan, who lost their
lives in recent months. We strongly condemn those
attacks and call upon the Malian authorities to bring
the perpetrators of such heinous crimes to justice and
establish accountability for crimes committed against
the United Nations peacekeepers.
The ongoing efforts to expedite the transition process
in Mali has made some significant progress in recent
months, as mentioned in the Secretary-General’s report
(S/2022/731). The Malian authorities and the Economic
Community of West African States (ECOWAS) have
agreed on the transitional time frame; the Electoral
Law has been adopted; the Independent Authority for
Election Management has been established; and the
process of drafting a new constitution has begun.
22-63752

18/10/2022

The situation in Mali

We welcome those positive developments. We
believe those measures provide a solid foundation for
the transition process and for the restoration of civilian
order at the end of the transition period in 2024. We
join others in appreciating the steadfast engagement of
ECOWAS in Mali.
The implementation of the 2015 Agreement on
Peace and Reconciliation in Mali remains fundamental
for lasting peace in northern Mali. In that regard, we
welcome the high-level meeting held in August and
the Agreement Monitoring Committee session held on
2 September. Those meetings have brought together
the signatory movements and transitional authorities.
A decision on the integration of ex-combatants in two
phases, if implemented in a timely manner, should
positively contribute to peace and stability in northern
Mali. In addition, the extension of State authority,
particularly the civilian and security apparatus, should
be given priority, given the worsening security situation.
Terrorist groups, such as Jama’a Nusrat ul-Islam wa
al-Muslimin and Islamic State in the Greater Sahara,
who are indoctrinated with the terrorist ideologies
of Al-Qaida and the Islamic State in Iraq and the
Levant, have continued to gain ground in Mali. While
the Malian Defence and Security Forces have been
deployed in the north, they have not been able to stop
those terrorist groups from expanding to the west and
south of Mali, including to urban centres. Reprisal
attacks have increased in recent months targeting the
civilian population as well. That has been elaborated in
detail by the Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral in his briefing. That is a dangerous escalation
and cannot be ignored. The challenge of terrorism in
Mali needs to be accorded high priority and treated
with the same level of urgency as other global hotspots
that face the scourge of international terrorism. In that
regard, the counter-terrorism operations conducted
by countries in the region should be coordinated to
enhance their overall effectiveness.
The role of MINUSMA remains critical in helping
Mali to achieve stability. The Mission continues to
operate in an increasingly dangerous asymmetric threat
environment. While we appreciate the efforts taken to
address safety and security issues concerning United
Nations peacekeepers, it is equally important not to
burden MINUSMA with direct counter-terrorismrelated operations. Those counter-terrorism operations
need to be undertaken by the national security forces,
which command a better understanding of the terrain

S/PV.9154

and local dynamics. We also encourage the Mission
to augment its resources to meet the shortfalls arising
from the withdrawal of international forces from Mali.
In conclusion, the crisis in Mali is rooted in systemic
multidimensional challenges. The long-standing
shortcomings in the administrative, constitutional and
security setup cannot be addressed in the absence of
political stability. A lasting solution to the Malian crisis
can be achieved only through a Mali-owned and -led
political process that is inclusive and representative. It
is important that the international community stand in
solidarity with the people of Mali in these challenging
times. India remains steadfast in its support for the
people of Mali in their quest for enduring peace,
security and development.
Mr. Dai Bing (China) (spoke in Chinese): I
welcome Foreign Minister Diop to this meeting. I thank
Special Representative of the Secretary-General Wane
for his briefing.
From the briefing we can see that there has been
positive progress in terms of advancing the political
transition and peace process and fighting terrorism in
Mali. That is a result of the joint efforts by the Government,
regional organizations and the international community.
Now it is important to consolidate the current positive
momentum and continuously inject new impetus into
efforts towards the ultimate goal of achieving durable
peace and development.
First, multiple measures are required on various
tracks in order to promote the political process. The
Government has drawn up the transitional road map, set
up constitutional organizations, started constitutional
work and engaged in political consultation. Those
actions constitute visible progress. We hope that the
parties will work on that basis, implement the outcome
of the national reconstruction conference and advance
political reform in order to create and build favourable
conditions for the transition, as recommended by the
Secretary-General in his report (S/2022/731).
Meanwhile, as pointed out by the SecretaryGeneral in his report, the work of consolidating the
central Government, improving the judiciary, boosting
people’s livelihoods and promoting ethnic harmony
is of equal importance and requires further efforts.
The international community and the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in
Mali (MINUSMA) are called upon to provide support
to the Government in forming a development strategy

22-637527/23

S/PV.9154

The situation in Mali

commensurate with its national conditions, enhancing
its capacity-building and promoting sustainable
development so as to lay a solid foundation for durable
peace. We are pleased to see that, upon the lifting of
sanctions by the Economic Community of West African
States, Mali has rejoined the big family of West Africa.
We hope that the countries of the region will work
towards the same goal and jointly maintain regional
peace and unity.
Secondly, we must step up the fight against
terrorism and maintain stability. The parties concerned
in Mali recently held a high-level decision-making
meeting in order to promote the implementation of the
Agreement on Peace and Reconciliation in Mali, under
the disarmament, demobilization and reintegration
process. The Government has been fully engaged in
fighting terrorism and has unveiled a comprehensive
strategy to ensure stability in the central region. Those
efforts should be acknowledged. The international
community should provide more concrete support for
the Government’s efforts to fight terrorism, maintain
stability and respect the country’s right to independently
carry out its external cooperation in terms of security.
However, the Mission should provide greater
support for implementing the peace agreement,
maintaining central stability and protecting civilians.
Those are its core mandates. In delivering its human
rights mandate, the Mission should seek the views of
the Government and continue to communicate and
cooperate closely with the Government.
At the same time, fighting terrorism in Mali has
a direct bearing on the overall stability of the Sahel
region. The Secretary-General and the President of
the African Union Commission have jointly asked
former President Issoufou of the Niger to carry out a
comprehensive assessment of the Sahel issue. China
supports that effort and hopes that the assessment
will take on board the concerns of all parties and
offer practical recommendations for counter-terrorism
cooperation between the Sahel and West Africa.
Thirdly, it is important to support increased
coordination and communication between MINUSMA
and the various sectors of society and for them to
work in synergy. The Mission has done a great deal
to support the political transition, to provide logistical
and operational support to the Malian army and to
protect civilians.
8/23

18/10/2022

China is pleased to see that the Mission has
properly solved the issue of rotating personnel with the
Government. We hope that the parties will continue to
strengthen communication, enhance mutual trust and
jointly maintain the status-of-forces agreement so as to
create favourable conditions for MINUSMA.
Since its establishment, the Mission has been
growing, with mandates increasing in all sectors. That,
to some degree, has limited its resources and affected
its ability to fully implement its core mandate. We hope
that the Secretariat, in line with the assessment of the
Mission, fully considers the view of the Government
and takes into account the needs and priorities of the
country as it puts forward proposals on streamlining
and optimizing the Mission’s mandate and provides
a rational arrangement of personnel and resources so
as to enhance its ability to deliver on its mandate and
ensure the effectiveness of its action.
On Monday, several Chadian peacekeepers came
under attack and were killed. That is really sad to see.
The Mission should enhance its ability to deal with
improvised explosive devices and increase its ability
to carry out medical evacuations. As co-Chair of the
Group of Friends on the Safety and Security of United
Nations Peacekeepers, together with Brazil, Indonesia
and Rwanda, we held a seminar last month on this
issue and obtained good results. We must translate the
consensus of Member States into concrete actions within
the Mission in order to better protect peacekeepers.
China attaches great importance to Mali’s legitimate
concerns in terms of national sovereignty, security and
development and supports the people independently
choosing a suitable development path. Together with
the international community, we are ready to step up
our contribution to the country’s efforts to maintain its
national unity and to protect peace and development.
Ms. Juul (Norway): I thank Special Representative
of the Secretary-General Wane for his briefing and
leadership. We also welcome the participation of
Foreign Minister Diop.
Since this is the last regular briefing on Mali
and the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated
Stabilization Mission in Mali (MINUSMA) during our
term on the Security Council, allow me to share three
thoughts on the past years.
First, we are deeply saddened, again, by the loss of
life and injuries in MINUSMA yesterday and today. We
22-63752

18/10/2022

The situation in Mali

extend our condolences to their loved ones, to Chad,
and pay tribute to all peacekeepers for their service.
Yet again, we see the extremely tough circumstances
that the Blue Helmets are facing in Mali. And during
the past year we have become increasingly concerned
as the Malian Government imposes new restrictions on
the Mission with regard to personnel rotations, flights
and access. Those restrictions all limit the Mission’s
ability to fulfil its mandate.
We are also concerned about the detention of
Ivorian soldiers and call for their urgent release, in the
spirit of fraternal relations between the peoples of Côte
d’Ivoire and Mali.
To be clear — MINUSMA’s Security Council
mandate and the status-of-forces agreement must be
fully respected. Considering the constraints imposed on
the Mission, the Secretary-General’s upcoming review
must be an honest one, with all options on the table.
Following that report, the Council, in consultation with
troop- and police-contributing countries, must consider
necessary adjustments — again, with all options on
the table.
Secondly, when the Malian military decided
to take power by force, it also took on tremendous
responsibilities. One such responsibility is to protect the
civilian population from human rights violations and
abuses. That situation, unfortunately, is not improving.
The main perpetrators are terrorists and armed groups.
But we are also deeply concerned about reports of
violations and abuses committed by the Malian armed
forces and the Wagner Group.
We call on all parties to implement the conclusions
of the Security Council Working Group on Children
and Armed Conflict. Violations of international law
against children must end and be prevented. We further
call on the Government to address the growing number
of cases of conflict-related sexual violence.
Thirdly, there are also some hopeful developments,
which deserve to be encouraged. The agreement with
Economic Community of West African States on the
transition timeline is crucial and must be adhered to. The
adoption of the new electoral law and the nomination of
an electoral committee is therefore encouraging.
The Malian authorities have a clear responsibility to
contribute to the full implementation of the Agreement
on Peace and Reconciliation in Mali. We therefore
welcome the increasing number of women in the follow-

S/PV.9154

up committee for the Agreement. Norway will continue
to support progress towards more inclusivity and the
return to constitutional order. In that regard, we also
note the new draft constitution.
In conclusion, despite all the challenges over
the past years, what we have seen from New York
and Bamako is a United Nations that has shown an
extraordinary commitment to Mali. If circumstances
allow, MINUSMA, Norway and many other partners
stand ready to continue that support.
Ms. Moran (Ireland): Let me too welcome the
participation of Foreign Minister Diop. I also want to
thank Special Representative of the Secretary-General
Wane for his briefing this morning.
Ireland is extremely concerned about the
deteriorating security situation in Mali. We join other
speakers in condemning the attacks that targeted
civilians, peacekeepers and national security forces in
recent months. I want to express our sincere condolences
to all those impacted, including the families of the four
Chadian peacekeepers killed in recent days.
The Security Council has regrettably become
accustomed to sobering briefings on the situation in
Mali. But just 21 months ago, when Ireland joined the
Council, we hoped that a civilian-led transition would
see Mali return to constitutional order by February
2022. We hoped that the efforts to address the violence,
reduce humanitarian need and protect civilians were
making an impact; and we hoped that the implementation
of the Agreement on Peace and Reconciliation in Mali
would accelerate. Regrettably, the situation in Mali has
deteriorated on almost every front since then.
Political and institutional reforms are necessary
in order to resolve the considerable challenges in
Mali. Long-term progress can be legitimately pursued
only by a civilian-led and democratically elected
Government. The political transition must be genuinely
inclusive, involving civil society, including women and
young people.
We urge the Malian authorities to continue to
engage with the Economic Community of West African
States and the United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali (MINUSMA)
and ensure that the electoral timetable is followed. In
that regard, we welcome efforts to operationalize the
Independent Authority for Election Management. That
body must be independent and inclusive to ensure the

22-637529/23

S/PV.9154

The situation in Mali

18/10/2022

credibility of the elections, which must be completed by
February 2024.

and their positive engagement with the international
community and the United Nations system.

While the recent focus has been on the political
transition, we cannot lose sight of the importance of
the peace agreement. Its implementation is vital. We
welcome the commitments made at the recent high-level
decision-making meeting. The concrete implementation
of those commitments must now follow.

I conclude by urging Security Council cooperation
on Mali — something that has been sorely lacking over
the past year. We owe that to our peacekeepers, to the
humanitarian workers and to the people of Mali.

Ireland condemns the ongoing violations and
abuses of human rights and international humanitarian
law. The fact that violations attributed to the Malian
Defence and Security Forces accounted for more than
a quarter of incidents in MINUSMA’s human rights
report is of particular concern. The ongoing allegations
about the activities of the Wagner Group in Mali are
also deeply disturbing.
Furthermore, the 40 per cent increase in the reported
instances of conflict-related sexual violence is simply
unacceptable. We urge the Mission and the transitional
authorities to step up prevention and protection efforts.
We reiterate that human rights abuses and violations
must be investigated promptly, transparently and
thoroughly. Perpetrators must be held accountable,
regardless of affiliation or nationality.
The deepening protection crisis is exacerbating the
already dire humanitarian situation. It has forced tens
of thousands of people in the centre and the north of
the country to flee in recent months. It simply must be
addressed
In that context, the restrictions placed on
MINUSMA’s
operations,
particularly
on
its
protection-of-civilians and human rights taskings, are
inexcusable. We call on the transitional authorities
to cooperate with MINUSMA and ensure freedom
of movement.
The ongoing review of MINUSMA is an opportunity
for progress, but only if it asks and answers the hard
questions. An assessment of the relationship between
the Mission and the host country must be at the heart
of the review. It should produce comprehensive options
for the future of the Mission.
However, no matter which strategic option is
pursued, a sustainable solution to the issues facing Mali
will be found only by repairing the social contract. That
is much more than a peace operation can achieve on
its own. It requires the buy-in of the Malian authorities
10/23

Mrs. Thomas-Greenfield (United States of
America): Let me thank Special Representative Wane
for his informative briefing and for his efforts to bring
peace to Mali. It is clear from his briefing that the United
Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization
Mission in Mali (MINUSMA) continues to make
vital contributions to Mali’s security, peace process
and democratic transition despite the unprecedented
challenges that the Mission now faces. I also want to
welcome Foreign Minister Diop to our meeting today,
and I look forward to his briefing to the Security
Council as well.
I want to begin by expressing my deep condolences,
as the Council heard from other speakers, to the
families of the victims of yesterday’s brutal attack on
MINUSMA personnel. It is not the first time that that
happened, but it has to stop. We must continue to press
for concrete action to ensure the safety of peacekeepers
in Mali and around the world.
In that vein, we must work together to ensure
the freedom of movement of MINUSMA personnel
throughout Mali. The ongoing restrictions against
MINUSMA and United Nations personnel, including
no-fly zones, visa denials and refusals of ground
patrols and flight clearances, have severely impacted
the Mission’s ability to fulfil the task that the Security
Council itself mandated. Attempts to obstruct
MINUSMA’s important and often life-saving work to
protect Malian civilians and investigate violations of
their rights are simply unacceptable. Not only do those
restrictions put Malian civilians at greater risk, but they
also compromise the safety and security of MINUSMA
personnel, who bravely serve in the most dangerous
United Nations peacekeeping mission.
The efforts of MINUSMA to protect civilians in that
volatile region and its work to facilitate intercommunal
dialogue, defuse tensions and prevent conflict at
the local level deserve our full support. Those that
impede the ability of MINUSMA to anticipate, deter
and effectively respond to threats against civilians are
playing with fire. Their actions in fact allow violent
22-63752

18/10/2022

The situation in Mali

extremist groups to conduct attacks against civilians,
peacekeepers and Malian forces.
We implore the transitional Government to lift
all restrictions against MINUSMA and allow the
Mission and its personnel to safely do their jobs. We
condemn the uptick in disinformation campaigns,
which sow distrust and erode local confidence in
MINUSMA. Such obstructionists of MINUSMA’s
operations threaten the Mission’s mandate to monitor
and investigate allegations of human rights violations
and abuses against Malians. That work has never been
more critical.
We are appalled by the reports of human rights
violations and abuses allegedly perpetrated by violent
extremist groups and by the Malian armed forces, in
partnership with the Kremlin-backed Wagner Group,
as we heard from previous speakers earlier. We call for
those responsible to be held accountable. The Wagner
Group forces will not bring peace, but only exploitation
and instability, to Mali. Human rights abuses and
violations in the name of counter-terrorism operations
only deepen mistrust of the State authorities and play
into the hands of violent extremist groups, who recruit
among the aggrieved and the disillusioned.
We are also deeply concerned that the presence of
Wagner Group forces obstructs the implementation of
the peace agreement. In central Mali, the continued
absence of State services and authority, combined with
the lack of an overarching vision for that region, has
continued to fuel a vicious cycle of instability. We urge
the transition Government to accelerate efforts aimed at
restoring its presence in the centre and at implementing
the recently approved draft strategy for the stabilization
of the centre and the action plan for 2022-2024.
In the light of the challenges facing MINUSMA in
Mali, I want to stress that the United States has a strong
desire in support of the Secretary-General’s internal
review to offer a candid assessment of MINUSMA’s
ability to fulfil its mandate, and we hope to see a broad
range of options for the future of the Mission. But while
the challenges facing MINUSMA are indisputable,
we should all be encouraged by recent developments.
Although it is limited and long overdue, the transition
authorities in Mali have made progress towards
restoring democracy, civilian rule and constitutional
order, including by adopting a new electoral law and
submitting a draft Constitution. We urge the transition
authorities to overcome internal and political rivalries

S/PV.9154

to accelerate the transition process. Leaders must
prepare for and complete the constitutional referendum
and local, legislative and presidential elections.
The Malian people, who have put their faith in
transition leaders to peacefully restore democracy
within the agreed-upon time frame, deserve nothing
less. We also welcome the increased representations of
women on the Agreement Monitoring Committee. This
is a positive step towards ensuring the full, meaningful
and equal inclusion of women in the peace process
and throughout the electoral transition. The United
States commends the armed groups signatories of the
Algiers accords for resuming the regular functioning
of the bodies charged with implementing the agreement
following their almost year-long hiatus. As the
Secretary-General notes, these forums are critical to
peacefully resolving disputes between the parties.
But we were alarmed to learn that the Malian armed
forces had clashed with a signatory armed group for
the first time since 2017. A return to hostilities among
the parties would have unthinkable consequences
for the stability of Mali and for the broader region.
Such conflict must be prevented by accelerating the
implementation of the peace accords.
We support the people of Mali. In that vein, I want
to again express our strong support for MINUSMA’s
peacekeepers, who serve with dedication despite serious
challenges to protect Malian civilians. I want to reiterate
that, for the sake of their own safety and security, but
also for the viability of the Mission, they must be
allowed to perform their duties without obstruction.
Mr. De Almeida Filho (Brazil): Let me begin by
thanking Special Representative Wane for his briefing,
which has provided us with an opportunity to underscore
our support for the United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali (MINUSMA)
and our gratitude to the troop- and police-contributing
countries that enable this vital peacekeeping operation
to function. My delegation also welcomes Foreign
Minister Diop to today’s meeting.
The most recent report of the Secretary-General
(S/2022/731) includes disturbing information about
violations of international law and international
humanitarian law. We call on the Malian authorities to
address this situation. We also remain deeply concerned
about terrorist activities in Mali, particularly in Gao,
Ménaka and the border territory between Mali, Burkina
Faso and the Niger. We have received with dismay

22-6375211/23

S/PV.9154

The situation in Mali

each report of civilian deaths and projections of the
displacement of thousands of Malian families. We were
appalled by the 7 August attack in Tessit that led to the
death of more than 40 soldiers from the Malian Defence
and Security Forces. We were also deeply worried at
the events on 6 September in Talataye.
We reiterate our firm condemnation of terrorism in
all its forms and manifestations. There is no justification
for acts of such cruelty. We underline our support for
the efforts by the Malian Defence and Security Forces
to fight terrorism.
We underscore the significance of improving
communications between soldiers and local populations
to ensure support for military operations and reduce
casualties among civilians. We deem it vital that the
Malian authorities refrain from acts that impose
restrictions on MINUSMA’s work, primarily those
actions that affect peacekeepers’ freedom of movement
and their rotation of contingents. Reinforcing strategic
communications within MINUSMA’s activities is
also critical.
A second point that I want to make focuses on the
protection of civilians and the safety of peacekeepers
in Mali. We condemn in the strongest terms yesterday’s
attack against MINUSMA near Tessalit. We extend our
condolences to the families of the Chad peacekeepers
who were killed and wish a full recovery to those
who were wounded. In fact, MINUSMA has suffered
the highest number of casualties of all United Nations
peacekeeping operations in recent years. The Council
and the Mission’s leadership should do their best to
minimize security risks on the ground.
We condemn the misinformation and disinformation
campaigns that threaten Blue Helmets’ security and
make it challenging for MINUSMA to carry out crucial
parts of its mandate. We recall the Security Council’s
decision that individuals and entities implicated in
planning or conducting attacks against peacekeepers
in Mali, as well as those planning or committing acts
on Malian soil that constitute human rights violations,
including actions concerning the targeting of civilians,
may be subject to multilateral sanctions. We hope that
MINUSMA will take adequate measures to address
the unique risks to the safety of its peacekeepers while
providing vital protection to civilians in Mali.
I would like to address one further point: Mali’s
political transition. Restoring the constitutional
order remains critical. We acknowledge the timetable
12/23

18/10/2022

establishing March 2024 as a transition landing point
and hope so establishing it stimulates the transitional
authorities to make progress. We call on Mali’s
authorities to pay particular attention to the Algiers
peace agreement in the coming months.
Support from the Economic Community of West
African States (ECOWAS) could be vital to achieving
additional milestones in implementing the peace
agreement. ECOWAS remains an essential partner
for Mali in its political transition. We commend the
regional organization’s leadership and efforts on this
critical issue.
Mrs. Alhefeiti (United Arab Emirates) (spoke in
Arabic): At the outset, I thank Special Representative
El-Ghassim Wane for his valuable briefing, and we
welcome the participation of Mr. Abdoulaye Diop,
Minister for Foreign Affairs of Mali, in today’s meeting.
The persistence of violence in Mali is a major
source of serious challenges facing the country,
whether they be political or security challenges or the
alarming deterioration of the humanitarian situation,
compounded by food insecurity. The situation requires
a comprehensive approach to address the violence,
which particularly affects women and children.
Ending the violence requires continued dialogue
among Malian stakeholders in order to reach consensus
on what the country needs. It also requires continuing
to build on gains made in the context of the 2015
Agreement on Peace and Reconciliation in Mali. That
will provide the opportunity for further measures to
address the security situation that we hope will improve
the humanitarian and economic conditions in Mali.
We find it encouraging that the Malian authorities
have adopted a stabilization strategy for the country’s
central regions and that they recently reached an
agreement with armed groups to integrate 26,000 excombatants into Malian institutions. It is important
here to continue empowering women and enhancing
their role in building State institutions in order to
ensure sustainable peace.
In the context of the ongoing cooperation between
the Economic Community of West African States
(ECOWAS) and Mali on the constitutional arrangements
in the country, which is also encouraging, we stress the
importance of sustained regional cooperation in order to
help countries strengthen their capabilities in a manner
that responds to the aspirations of their peoples. Such
22-63752

18/10/2022

The situation in Mali

regional cooperation is particularly important when
addressing the cross-border threats to the security of
Mali and the region posed by terrorist groups. Council
members are aware of the regional ambitions of those
terrorist groups, which are not limited to controlling
Mali alone. They also seek to spread violence and
destruction in the wider Sahel region, which is a centre of
gravity for the security and development of the African
continent. It will therefore be essential to continue
implementing the United Nations Integrated Strategy
for the Sahel, and we hope that the recommendations
to be made through the independent assessment led by
former President Mahamadou Issoufou will guide our
joint approach to finding sustainable solutions to the
various challenges in the region, especially terrorism.
While the regional leadership remains an essential
pillar, the international community has a responsibility
to support regional efforts such as the Accra Initiative,
the Nouakchott process and the Group of Five for the
Sahel, and to assist countries of the region in securing
their borders.
In the light of the escalating levels of violence and
terrorist attacks, especially in densely populated areas,
which the United Arab Emirates strongly condemns,
efforts must be intensified to enable peacekeeping
troops to carry out their mandates safely and ensure
unimpeded access to those in need, especially in the
light of the increasing attacks on peacekeeping forces,
the latest of which was yesterday’s attack in Kidal.
Peacekeepers must be provided with the necessary
equipment to protect themselves, especially from
explosive devices. We want to take this opportunity
to emphasize our support for the tireless efforts of
the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated
Stabilization Mission in Mali (MINUSMA) and
express our sincere appreciation to the troop- and
police-contributing countries. Since peacekeeping
operations are considered a multilateral partnership, we
stress the importance of continued cooperation among
all relevant actors. We look forward to discussing the
Secretary-General’s upcoming strategic review of
MINUSMA and how best to implement its mandate.
In conclusion, while security issues remain a primary
concern, other challenges cannot be overlooked. They
include the deteriorating humanitarian situation and
the repercussions of climate change. The international
community should take them into account in the context
of providing financial assistance to the Malian people.

S/PV.9154

Mr. Agyeman (Ghana): I have the honour to deliver
this statement on behalf of the three African members
of the Security Council — Gabon, Kenya and my
own country, Ghana (A3). We welcome the report of
the Secretary-General (S/2022/731) and thank Special
Representative of the Secretary-General El-Ghassim
Wane for his briefing. We also welcome the presence
of His Excellency Mr. Abdoulaye Diop, Minister for
Foreign Affairs of Mali, at today’s meeting.
Since the Security Council was last briefed on the
situation in Mali, three months ago (see S/PV.9061),
significant developments have taken place in the
country, including on the political front. While we
acknowledge some gains in addressing the crisis there,
the political, security and humanitarian situations
remain challenging.
On the political front, we welcome the agreement
reached between Mali and the Economic Community
of West African States (ECOWAS) on the transitional
timetable for elections to be held in March 2024, as well
as the adoption and promulgation of the Electoral Law
and the elaboration of a new constitution. Support by
the international community for the implementation
of the commission created in July to monitor the
timetable for political and institutional reforms is
essential if constitutional order is to be restored in Mali
in a transparent and inclusive manner. The convening
of the high-level decision-making meeting in August
is also a significant development, as it has created an
atmosphere conducive to reconciliation — a necessary
ingredient for the consolidation of peace in Mali.
Support for sustaining such processes is essential,
as it will help consolidate the gains made so far and
accelerate progress towards the realization of the 2015
Peace and Reconciliation Agreement in Mali.
Despite those positive developments, Mali is not
out of the woods yet. The A3 urges for the firm and
timely implementation of the peace agreement. We
encourage stronger political will on the part of the
Malian authorities to make good on their commitments.
We support close monitoring in that regard by the local
monitoring committee, made up of representatives of the
African Union (AU), ECOWAS and the United Nations.
With regard to the security situation, we remain
concerned about the heightened threats posed by the
expanding terrorist groups and growing intercommunal
violence in Mali. The evolving nature of the terrorist
activities, including the increasing use of improvised

22-6375213/23

S/PV.9154

The situation in Mali

explosive devices, has resulted in deadly attacks on
civilians and civilian objects. The reconfiguration of
international counter-terrorism efforts in the Sahel,
including the withdrawal of the French forces from
Mali, has also created capability gaps. Furthermore,
the decision by some of the troop-contributing
countries to withdraw their troops by the close of the
year could worsen the situation. While we commend
the Malian authorities for the steps taken to fill the
gaps through an increased military presence in parts
of the country — accompanied by the redeployment
of the civilian administration and the adoption of a
stabilization strategy and action plan for the central
regions — challenges still remain. Additional steps
must therefore be taken to generate capabilities under
the force adaptation plan and to augment the troops in a
manner that clearly responds to the actual political and
security dynamics in the country.
The heightened levels of insecurity are also linked to
concerns about human rights violations. We encourage
the Malian authorities to continue to cooperate with
the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated
Stabilization Mission in Mali (MINUSMA) to enable
the Mission to conduct investigations into alleged
incidents of human rights violations where necessary.
The dire security situation in Mali reinforces the
importance of adapting regional tools for response and
forging a harmonized, multi-dimensional approach to
dealing with the multiple crises. We underscore the
need for a more holistic approach, as envisaged in the
ongoing work of the United Nations-AU-ECOWAS
joint assessment in the Sahel. We look forward to an
outcome of the joint assessment that can leverage the
best elements of the Joint Force of the Group of Five for
the Sahel, the Accra Initiative, the Nouakchott process
and the Multinational Joint Task Force in responding
robustly to the growing incidence of terrorism in the
Sahel, including in Mali.
The A3 also believes that the continuing presence
of MINUSMA is an important stabilization factor in
Mali. We salute the personnel who continue to sacrifice
their lives to the cause of peace in Mali and pay tribute
to those who have lost their lives in the line of duty.
The A3 unreservedly condemns yesterday’s attacks
on MINUSMA in Tessalit, as well as all attacks on its
personnel, and calls for swift investigations to ensure
the prosecution of the perpetrators, given the fact that
such acts constitute a violation of international law and
international human rights law.
14/23

18/10/2022

If we are to ensure that MINUSMA’s presence has
a greater impact on the situation in Mali, urgent steps
need to be taken to address the myriad of challenges
facing the Mission, including disinformation campaigns
against it and restrictions on its movement, including
in the air space, which are affecting the Mission’s
response to early-warning alerts. The A3 believes that
the strategic review of MINUSMA, which is expected
in January 2023, will provide some comprehensive
and forward-looking recommendations that can make
the Mission more responsive to the evolving nature
of conflicts in Mali. We believe the Mission could
benefit from stronger support in troop contribution and
capacity-building on counter-terrorism measures, as
well as the provision of adequate logistics, including airlift assets. It is also important for the Malian authorities
to adhere to the status of forces agreement that they
have committed to, and that should be done in a manner
that enhances the coherence of objectives and actions
for lasting peace in Mali. Respect for the sovereignty
and territorial integrity of Mali is equally important.
In a related development, we are concerned about
the continuing detention in Mali since July of 46 Ivorian
soldiers who we are told were deployed in support
of a MINUSMA contingent. While the A3 welcomes
the Malian authorities’ commitment to resolving
the challenge, we appeal for an acceleration of the
resolution of the matter. We support the SecretaryGeneral’s call for all efforts to be made in building trust
and cooperation between Mali and its neighbours and
international partners.
We also remain anxious concerning the spillover
effect of the protracted crisis in Libya on Mali, the possible
return of foreign terrorist fighters and the proliferation
of small arms and light weapons. We therefore urge for
coordinated action among the countries of the region on
the matter, including on disarmament, demobilization
and reintegration activities.
Addressing the root causes of instability in Mali, as
well as aggravating factors such as climate change and
the coronavirus disease pandemic, is essential. We urge
the elevation of the role of women and youth towards the
sustenance of peace and development, including through
the Peacebuilding Commission’s initiatives targeting
youth, women and agricultural self-employment, as
well as the strengthening of measures to empower and
enhance their full and meaningful participation in all
political processes. The Commission’s involvement in
climate-related peace and development interventions,
22-63752

18/10/2022

The situation in Mali

as well as in the promotion of community-based dispute
resolution mechanisms is also encouraged.
The A3 is alarmed by the deteriorating
humanitarian situation, which is evidenced by the more
than 1.8 million people facing severe food insecurity,
with 2 million children under age five being affected by
acute malnutrition. We therefore reiterate the SecretaryGeneral’s call for the international community to step
up its funding support to help realize the $686 million
humanitarian response plan required for Mali in 2022.
In conclusion, the A3 believes that strong political
will and cooperation by the Malian authorities, together
with deeper cooperation with regional actors and a
united Council, is required to address the situation in
Mali and bring lasting peace to our brotherly country.
Ms. Evstigneeva (Russian Federation) (spoke
in Russian): We thank the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General, Mr. El-Ghassim Wane,
for his briefing on the work of the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in
Mali (MINUSMA) and the situation in the country. We
welcome the participation of the Minister for Foreign
Affairs of Mali, Mr. Abdoulaye Diop, in today’s meeting.
We express our condolences to the troopcontributing countries, whose peacekeepers continue
to suffer casualties in the discharge of their duties. We
also express our condolences to the Government of
Mali in connection with the casualties among civilians
and military personnel as a result of their fight against
terrorist threats.
We concur with the assessments contained in
the Secretary-General’s report (S/2022/731) that the
situation in Mali is becoming more stable in nature.
Thanks to the deployment of a sociopolitical dialogue
with the proactive participation of the transitional
authorities and signatory groups, the process of
Government reforms has accelerated, with considerable
momentum generated for the implementation of
the provisions of the Algiers Agreement on Peace
and Reconciliation in Mali. Parameters for the
implementation of the disarmament, demobilization
and reintegration programme for 2023–2024 have also
been agreed upon.
In recent months, important documents have been
adopted regarding the restoration of State institutions,
while the work of advisory platforms for elections
preparations and political and institutional reforms

S/PV.9154

has resumed. In September and October, after a yearlong hiatus, meetings of the Agreement Monitoring
Committee were held. On 11 October, a specially
created commission submitted a new draft constitution
for approval by the Head of State.
The country continues to wage a relentless and
difficult war against terrorism. Owing to the security
vacuum linked to the unprovoked withdrawal of French
and European Union units from the territory of Mali,
there has been a significant uptick in terrorist activity,
including by groups such as the Islamic State in the
Greater Sahara and the Jama’a Nusrat ul-Islam wa
al-Muslimin. Despite objective difficulties, in recent
months, the Malian armed forces have demonstrated
that they are capable of achieving significant results in
the fight against terrorists and militants.
The Russian Federation has been providing the
Malian army with comprehensive assistance, including
through military capacity-building and training for
military personnel. We also pay tribute to MINUSMA,
which has been helping the Malian military with casualty
evacuations and rebuilding critical infrastructure.
We firmly believe that ensuring an adequate level
of security is key to ensuring the success of credible
democratic elections in the country. We are satisfied
that progress has been made in the dialogue with
the transitional authorities on resolving the issue of
MINUSMA troop rotation. The Malian authorities
should certainly be aware of any such movements
of peacekeepers.
We regret that a number of countries have decided to
abandon or suspend their participation in MINUSMA.
The reasons for that, as well as other challenges facing
the blue helmets, should be scrupulously analysed
during the Mission’s strategic review, the results of
which are expected by January 2023.
The Russian Federation welcomes the agreement
reached in July between Mali and the Economic
Community of West African States, which made it
possible to lift the bulk of regional sanctions imposed
on the country. However, at the same time, we are
deeply concerned by attempts to turn the Sahel into
an arena for geopolitical confrontation, which is
completely alien to the region and runs counter to the
national interests of its States and peoples. In particular,
internal disagreements among the Group of Five for
the Sahel, provoked by external influence, compelled
Mali to leave the association, jeopardizing its future

22-6375215/23

S/PV.9154

The situation in Mali

18/10/2022

activities. The artificial crises fomented externally in
the relations between the States of West Africa attest
to the fact that Western neocolonialism is attempting
to maintain its influence over the continent and poses a
very real threat to it.

Mr. De la Fuente Ramírez (Mexico) (spoke in
Spanish): I thank the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for Mali, Mr. Wane, for his briefing
and welcome the presence of the Minister for Foreign
Affairs of Mali, Mr. Diop.

The starkly negative reaction of the West to the
strengthening of Russian-Mali cooperation is yet
another manifestation of paternalistic attitudes and
double standards on the part of the former colonial
Powers. Lies about so-called Russian mercenaries are
being spread by those who have spent not just years
but decades sending their own soldiers of fortune to the
continent in order to topple undesirable regimes and
establish control over its natural resources. I will not
even mention the fact that those countries are directly
responsible for the destabilization of the Sahel, which
occurred as a result of the invasion of Libya in 2011.

Circumstances oblige me, as those who spoke before
me, to begin by expressing my sadness at the death of
four blue helmets. Mexico expresses its condolences to
the families of the soldiers who died recently in Tessalit,
as well as to the Chadian authorities. The increasing
number of incidents involving improvised explosive
devices and the persistence of illicit trafficking in
small arms remain a source of great concern. This
unfortunate incident again demonstrates the need to
strengthen measures to prevent weapons and materials
for making explosives from getting into the hands of
the extremist groups operating in Mali and the Sahel. I
will now address two issues.

We have heard and continue to hear attempts to
tarnish the nature of our assistance to Mali. There
have been vile insinuations trotted out on the subject of
human rights violations. In that connection, we support
Bamako’s commitment to the conduct of all necessary
investigations in that area.
I would underscore that, unlike some of our Western
colleagues, the Russian Federation does not attempt
to interfere in Mali’s politics, nor does it attempt to
impose conditions for the provision of assistance that
could undermine its national sovereignty. The bedrock
of our relations is long-standing and equal bilateral
cooperation, as well as an understanding of our common
goal to combat the global scourge of terrorism. In that
regard, it should come as no surprise that we have not
received any complaints from our African partners in
relation to the parameters of our cooperation. We call
on our Western colleagues to stop abusing the Security
Council’s platform and to respect the Malian people,
their choices and their efforts to resolve the situation in
their country.
In conclusion, we would note that, given the
current difficult situation, it is necessary to effectively
assist the Malian authorities while encouraging them
to pursue balanced and calibrated policies in order to
resolve crises in the country. We therefore call on our
Western colleagues to follow suit, as we stand ready
to cooperate closely with them in efforts aimed at
the swift normalization of the situation in Mali and
achieving lasting peace and stability throughout the
Sahelo-Saharan region.
16/23

First, we welcome the progress made by the Malian
authorities in strengthening the political transition
by enacting an electoral law and establishing an
independent authority for election management, among
other things. We are aware of the extent of the reform
agenda, including the adoption of a new constitution,
that the Government has set as its goal for the transition
period. We therefore urge the authorities to take a
tactical approach to their reforms so that they can ensure
that the elections are held on time and that the State’s
authority is established throughout the country. It is
essential to ensure that progress is made in the electoral
preparations, in dialogue with all political actors,
and that the conditions established by the Economic
Community of West African States and the African
Union are respected, particularly considering Mali’s
obligations as a State party to the African Charter on
Democracy, Elections and Governance.
In addition, the transition must be accompanied by
concrete steps to implement the Agreement on Peace
and Reconciliation in Mali. We therefore congratulate
the Malian authorities on resuming the meetings on its
implementation and also recognize the role played by
the international mediation team, led by Algeria. We
trust that the necessary steps will be taken to implement
the commitments made at recent meetings. We believe
that progress on the disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration programme is particularly urgent.
Secondly, we believe it is time to take decisions on
the best way to support the stabilization of Mali. The
22-63752

18/10/2022

The situation in Mali

recent reports of the Secretary-General clearly show
that the transformation of Mali’s security architecture
and the new political and military strategy of the
national authorities have brought with them significant
challenges for the United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali (MINUSMA).
We hope that the strategic review of the Mission
will provide concrete and relevant elements aimed at
rethinking MINUSMA’s mandate and objectives. It
will be important to consider all the options with an
open mind. At the same time, we call for the review
to be carried out in coordination with the High-level
Panel on Security and Development in the Sahel led by
Mahamadou Issoufou, former President of the Niger.
We firmly believe that a stable Mali is fundamental
if peace is to take root in the Sahel. The decisions on
the future of MINUSMA must therefore also take into
account the regional context and the perspectives of
the High-level Panel on issues such as cross-border
cooperation and the future of the Group of Five for the
Sahel. And in order to achieve lasting peace in Mali, we
believe the structural causes of the conflicts must be
addressed. In that regard, it will be essential to improve
governance, combat inequalities and bring justice to
the victims of the conflict. The constant dangers faced
by peacekeepers, together with the persisting attacks
on civilians and the many cases of human rights abuses
and violations, are irrefutable evidence that Mali still
requires the support of the international community
to achieve peace, and the Security Council must try to
continue to do its part.
Ms. Dautllari (Albania): I would like to thank
Special Representative of the Secretary-General
Wane for briefing us today, and I welcome the Foreign
Minister of Mali to this meeting.
At the outset, we would like to express our
condolences on the deaths of four Chadian peacekeepers
yesterday and wish the wounded a speedy recovery.
We commend the peacekeepers of the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in
Mali (MINUSMA), who are operating in extremely
dangerous conditions, and I want to stress my country’s
full support to the Mission. Allow me to make three
brief points.
First, we remain deeply concerned about the dire
humanitarian and security situation in Mali. The
recent attacks in the northern regions of Ménaka and
Gao perpetrated by terrorists and armed groups have

S/PV.9154

killed hundreds and displaced tens of thousands of
civilians. We urge the Malian authorities to strengthen
their cross-border cooperation in order to restore
State authority throughout the country. Human rights
violations and abuses against civilians have continued
to be committed by military forces, the Wagner Group
and armed groups. Albania strongly condemns the use
of mercenaries operating in violation of international
law and perpetrating indiscriminate attacks on
civilians. We urge the Malian authorities to investigate
all allegations and hold the perpetrators to account.
Secondly, we note that some positive steps have been
taken. We welcome the transitional calendar agreement
with the Economic Community of West African States
(ECOWAS) to restore constitutional order in Mali by
February 2024, and the enactment of the new electoral
law is a step closer to that goal. We emphasize the
importance of facilitating the meaningful representation
and inclusion of civil society, women and youth groups.
We also welcome the holding of the first meeting of the
Agreement Monitoring Committee since October 2021.
We urge sustained momentum in monitoring the peace
process and building consensus among the parties.
However, overall, we regret that the implementation
of the Agreement on Peace and Reconciliation in Mali
has been sidelined. We must not forget that it is still
the best framework for addressing the root causes of
the conflict in northern Mali and ultimately resolving
it. Albania calls for a renewed commitment to the
agreement in order to address the growing insecurity
and the structural causes of instability.
Thirdly, we are deeply disturbed that MINUSMA
continues to face restrictions on its movement and
access, contrary to its mandate from the Security
Council. Albania welcomes the Secretary-General’s
strategic assessment of the Mission currently under way.
We expect the review to provide clear insight into how
the Mission can better adapt to deal with the current
challenges and operate effectively on the ground. In
that regard, we condemn the continued detention of the
Ivorian soldiers sent to support MINUSMA, and we
urge the authorities to reach consensus with ECOWAS
on their release.
In conclusion, the situation in Mali remains
complex. That is why we think the unity of the Council
on this issue is crucial.
Mr. Kariuki (United Kingdom): I thank Special
Representative of the Secretary-General Wane for

22-6375217/23

S/PV.9154

The situation in Mali

his insights and leadership of the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission
in Mali (MINUSMA), and for the hard work of his
team in the toughest of circumstances. I join others
in expressing our deepest condolences following the
deaths of the four Chadian peacekeepers in Kidal. I also
welcome the participation of Foreign Minister Diop in
our meeting and express our condolences to him for the
civilian and military losses on the Malian side.
When the Council met to discuss Mali in June
(see S/PV.9061 and S/PV.9082), we encouraged the
transitional authorities to continue engaging with the
Economic Community of West African States on an
election timetable. Since then, agreement has been
reached, sanctions havae been lifted and some positive
steps have been made towards the holding of elections.
The Agreement Monitoring Committee also met for
the first time in more than a year. As those endeavours
move forward, we hope that the authorities will ensure
inclusive processes, particularly for women and young
people, while promoting dialogue.
We understand that the Malian authorities are
dealing with multiple challenges. Al-Qaida- and
Islamic-State-affiliated groups continue to expand
their territory, preying on communities and attacking
military bases. The 40 per cent increase in cases
of conflict-related sexual violence reported by the
Secretary-General is a shocking illustration of just how
urgent it is to improve human rights protection.
But the terror imposed by those groups must not
be countered with a military response that fails to
protect civilians and their human rights. In August,
the United Nations Independent Expert on the human
rights situation in Mali reported violations committed
by Malian forces alongside “foreign military personnel
described as Russian military officials”. The malign
presence of the Wagner Group can no longer be ignored
or denied.
All perpetrators of human rights abuses and
violations must be held accountable. Without
accountability and justice, trust cannot be rebuilt
and grievances will endure. MINUSMA must be
granted unrestricted access to investigate human
rights allegations independently. Mali’s statement
in June that the authorities would not guarantee
the Mission’s freedom to achieve that was deeply
concerning, and it is part of a pattern of actions and
statements that call into question Mali’s commitment
18/23

18/10/2022

to full partnership with MINUSMA. We urge the
authorities to work constructively with the Mission,
while lifting restrictions and facilitating the vital work
of peacekeepers.
The United Kingdom remains a strong supporter
of MINUSMA and its mission. The Organization’s
forthcoming review will need to answer some
fundamental questions, including whether and how the
Mission can maintain a viable presence in Mali. The
review should present credible options that realities
on the ground. We look forward to engaging with
colleagues on that in the coming weeks.
The President (spoke in French): I now call on
the Minister for Foreign Affairs and International
Cooperation of Mali.
Mr. Diop (Mali) (spoke in French): The delegation
of Mali warmly congratulates you, Mr. President, on
the accession of your country, Gabon, a great friend of
Mali, to the presidency of the Security Council for the
month of October, and assures you of our full readiness
to work alongside you for the success of your tenure.
I also wish to greet and thank all the members of the
Council for their kind words to me and my country.
Yesterday a cowardly terrorist attack using an
improvised explosive device cost the lives of four
Chadian peacekeepers and injured three others. On
behalf of the Government and the people of Mali, I
extend our sincere condolences to the families of the
victims, to the Government and the people of Chad and
to the United Nations, and we wish a speedy recovery
to the injured. We condemn without reservation this
barbaric act, which only strengthens our common
determination to continue the fight against terrorism. I
also pay tribute here to the thousands of Malian soldier
and civilian victims who continue to bear the heavy toll
of the insecurity there for over a decade.
The Government of Mali takes note of the report
of the Secretary-General under review (S/2022/731),
and I thank my brother Mr. El-Ghassim Wane, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General and Head
of the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated
Stabilization Mission in Mali (MINUSMA), for his
briefing and the updates since its publication.
The Government’s detailed observations have been
communicated to the members of the Security Council
in a memorandum. I would now like to respond to a
22-63752

18/10/2022

The situation in Mali

few passages in the report and to the comments voiced
today, which I listened to very attentively.
On the political front, significant progress was made
during the period under review towards a peaceful and
secure return to constitutional order. All actions were
carried out in close cooperation with the Economic
Community of West African States (ECOWAS), our
subregional organization. Indeed, the Government
adopted a timetable for political and electoral reforms,
including the electoral calendar, within the framework
of the new electoral law adopted by consensus in
the National Transition Council. The new electoral
law includes the creation and establishment of the
Independent Authority for Election Management, whose
15 members were appointed on 12 October. The United
Nations, the African Union and ECOWAS participate in
all the meetings of the Commission for the Monitoring
of the Timetable for Political and Institutional Reforms,
the most recent of which was held on 13 October
under the chairmanship of the interim Prime Minister.
Pursuing this dynamic of inclusiveness and consensus
that is dear to His Excellency Colonel Assimi Goïta,
President of the transitional Government and Head of
State of Mali, arrangements are under way to increase
the number of seats in the National Transition Council,
the legislative organ of the transition.
Those measures are part of a vast reform project
currently under way and are essential to the rebuilding
of our State, which includes the submission, on
11 October, to the President of the transition of the
preliminary draft of the new Malian constitution, drawn
up following a consensual and broadly consultative
process. This fundamental draft legislation takes into
account the deep aspirations of Malians expressed
during the national dialogue on the reform process.

S/PV.9154

to lasting peace. In that regard, I would like to commend
the strong involvement of the international mediation,
under the leadership of Algeria, and I thank all
international mediators for their support. As the Council
is aware, under the disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration process, the Malian parties have agreed to
integrate 26,000 ex-combatants by 2024.
I also welcome the increasingly active and
significant participation of women and youth in the
peace process. The Government of Mali is working
continuously to promote peace and coexistence, as
demonstrated by the first national reconciliation
week, held last month throughout the country and in
the diaspora.
Like the Secretary-General, many have expressed
their concern about the security situation. I note well
the concerns expressed around this table, many of
which I share. The report under review, however,
would have been more objective if it had provided more
information on the efforts and progress made by the
Government to secure the national territory and protect
the civilian population.
Since December 2021, the Malian Defence and
Security Forces have launched large-scale military
operations that destroyed major terrorist sanctuaries,
seized significant amounts of weapons and military
equipment, liberated several areas and facilitated the
return of displaced persons to their homes. That increase
in the strength of the Defence and Security Forces is
a concrete achievement that is greatly welcomed by
the population. The Government remains determined
to prevent and counter indiscriminate attacks and
reprisals against the civilian population.

With regard to the implementation of the Agreement
on Peace and Reconciliation in Mali, resulting from
the Algiers process, the Government remains fully
committed to its diligent and sensible implementation
for lasting stability in Mali. In that regard, I welcome
the holding of the high-level decision-making meeting
in August, followed by the sixth high-level meeting of
the follow-up committee on 2 September, in Bamako,
which made it possible to overcome certain obstacles to
its implementation.

In addition, as many speakers mentioned, the
Government adopted an integrated strategy for the
centre of the country, which, as well as the purely
security aspects, includes political and economic,
social and cultural development approaches. That is to
say that the Malian authorities are fully aware that a
security response alone will not be enough to restore
peace and stability in our country and that it is essential
to create a socioeconomic environment that can provide
opportunities and prospects for the population, in
particular sectors that are vulnerable to the harmful
influences of terrorist groups.

More recently, the forty-sixth session of the
Agreement Monitoring Committee, held on 11 October,
enabled the Malian parties to renew their commitments

In the same vein, the Government is fully committed
to restoring State authority and providing basic social
services to people in areas affected by insecurity. With

22-6375219/23

S/PV.9154

The situation in Mali

regard to the presence of State authorities, measures
have been taken to ensure that the recently appointed
officials, of whom there are many — nearly 200 State
officials were recently appointed — are ready to be
deployed following their training, which includes
modules on elections and the MINUSMA mandate,
as well as basic social services. In that regard, public
initiatives for the provision of education to as many
children as possible in conflict-affected areas are
being stepped up. It is also a significant priority of the
Government to make huge efforts to enable all children,
even those in displaced persons camps, to receive a
decent education.
Still on the topic of security, it is surprising that,
in the context of the factual account, the SecretaryGeneral’s report did not mentioned Mali’s appeal
to the Security Council on 15 August with regard to
destabilization attempts and the repeated violations
of its airspace by French forces (see S/2022/622). As
Council members know, those extremely serious acts
of aggression constitute a violation of the Charter of
the United Nations and international law. We believe
that such acts must not go unchallenged, and the
Security Council is strongly called upon to act in Mali
and elsewhere in Africa. That is why the Government
reiterates its request for a specific meeting of the
Security Council, which will give it the opportunity
to present concrete evidence of France’s duplicity,
espionage and destabilization against Mali, including
the sharing of intelligence and the dropping of military
equipment to criminal organizations, which are the
source of insecurity and violence against our civilian
populations, who expect the Security Council to
assume its primary responsibility for the maintenance
of international peace and security.
We have also called for national and international
public opinion to be informed for once about the root
causes and drivers of insecurity, destabilization and
the spread of terrorism in the Sahel. Mali denounces
the proxy war being waged against it, as well as the
attempts to prevent the holding of a specific meeting,
which will reveal the truth about what is happening
in that part of the Sahel. In any case, the Government
of Mali reserves the right to resort to self-defence, in
accordance with Article 51 of the Charter of the United
Nations and with letter No. 444/Ministry for Foreign
Affairs and International Cooperation, dated 15 August
2022, from the Government of Mali to the Security
Council. Mali therefore reserves the right to self20/23

18/10/2022

defence if France continues to undermine our country’s
sovereignty, territorial integrity and national security.
On the issue of human rights, I welcome the decline
in the number of cases of human rights violations during
the reporting period. However, contrary to unfounded
and deliberate allegations, the military operations of the
Malian Defence and Security Forces are conducted in
strict compliance with human rights and international
humanitarian law.
In accordance with its policy of zero tolerance,
the Government of Mali, through the military justice
system, has tried several cases of offences that fall
within the jurisdiction of the military courts, and
numerous legal proceedings have been opened in that
regard, some of which are currently being investigated
by the military tribunal. In addition to those measures,
investigations were launched in pursuit of the truth, and
the Criminal Code, the Code of Criminal Procedure
and the Code of Military Justice are being revised to
deal with the situation.
I welcome the support of MINUSMA in the holding
of the second hearing of the Military Tribunal of Mopti
and three other hearings in the Douentza jurisdiction,
as well as its contribution to improving detention and
security conditions in some prisons in the centre of
the country.
I must also say that justice has its own requirements,
which demand that the allegations contained in the
report, which are not gospel, be supported by objective
evidence or, at least, that they be substantiated in
principle, which is not always the case in the report.
However, I emphatically reiterate that the Government
of Mali remains firmly opposed to the manipulation
and politicization of the issue of human rights for the
purposes of destabilization, intimidation and blackmail.
It is also regrettable that some United Nations
mechanisms, which were supposedly set up to help
countries in crisis, are subject to the same manipulation
by external interests. In that regard, the Government
of Mali notes with regret that the Panel of Experts of
the Committee established pursuant to resolution 2374
(2017), concerning Mali, is increasingly overstepping
its mandate in terms of both the substance of the issues
to be considered and its area of operation, which is
limited solely to the northern regions of our country
covered in the implementation of the Agreement. The
Government has always cooperated in good faith with
the mechanisms relating to the sanctions regime, in
22-63752

18/10/2022

The situation in Mali

particular the Committee, with which we have a good
relationship. However, we are considering re-evaluating
our cooperation with the Panel of Experts in the light of
its compliance with the exact terms of its mandate. We
wrote to the Security Council with regard to that matter.
With regard to the humanitarian situation,
the Government of Mali remains very concerned
about the precarious situation of Malian refugees in
neighbouring countries, whom I would like to thank for
their hospitality towards our people. The Government
also remains attentive to the case of our thousands of
internally displaced persons, including their children,
in the context of the start of the school year. We are all
the more concerned that, as the Special Representative
mentioned earlier, only 30 per cent of the funds required
for humanitarian needs have been raised, However, I
want to assure our compatriots in that difficult situation
that the Government of Mali will continue to work to
create the conditions not only for their adequate care
on the ground but also, above all, to facilitate their
safe and, in particular, dignified return to their places
of origin.
I have also taken note of Council members’
remarks and observations on the operational challenges
facing MINUSMA. The Government of Mali has
made arrangements to take over after the departure
of the French Barkhane force, so there is no security
vacuum in this regard. We therefore invite MINUSMA
to cooperate fully with us, with a view to making our
joint actions on the ground more effective.
Accordingly, I would like Council members
to understand that, contrary to what has been
communicated to them, we have no desire to restrict the
Mission’s movements. Rather, the Government of Mali
desires to assert Malian sovereignty over the country’s
territory and to coordinate and work in partnership
with the Mission, taking into account the new context.
The Government has been led to take measures
essentially for national security reasons, following
the arrival, without a legal basis, of foreign forces
presenting themselves under the banner of the United
Nations, which is deeply worrying. This should be of
concern to the Council. The suspension of rotations that
followed was only temporary; it was immediately lifted,
as the Special Representative mentioned, following the
establishment of a permanent high-level consultation
framework between the Malian Government and
MINUSMA, which includes no less than seven members

S/PV.9154

of the Government, which shows our commitment
to working with the Mission to find solutions. The
framework has made it possible to resolve rotation
issues, and, as the framework is permanent, it will also
make it possible to find solutions to other difficulties
for MINUSMA that may arise. In any case, we will
always be available to consider solutions together.
With a view to preparing the strategic review, the
Government of Mali has made it a priority to refocus the
Mission on the foundations of its presence in Mali, in
particular supporting the restoration of State authority
throughout the country and better coordinating the
Mission’s work with the Malian authorities.
I understand that, with regard to MINUSMA’s
work, the representative of France believes that there
is greater appreciation for MINUSMA in the remote
regions of our country. I would like to remind him
of Mali’s motto: “One people, one faith”. There is no
region where Malians from the north and Malians from
the south are content to oppose each other. But I do
believe that the feelings that Malians are expressing
towards the Mission in the interior of the country have
no other purpose than to encourage the Mission to fully
assume its mandate, which is to restore State authority
over all of the Malian territory. And I reiterate once
again that Mali is fully committed to cooperating with
the Mission in fulfilling its mandate and in respect of
the sovereignty of our country.
Some members of the Council have also raised the
issue of the illegal and unauthorized arrival of heavily
armed troops from Côte d’Ivoire. It has given rise to
comments around this table and even outside this room.
I note with regret that the report of the SecretaryGeneral unfortunately fails once again to refer to the
note verbale contained in document MINUSMA/PROT/
NV/226/2022, dated 22 July 2022, by which MINUSMA
itself once again established that there is clearly no link
between the Mission and the 49 soldiers who arrived on
Malian territory. I repeat this for the representatives of
Norway, the A3 and Albania. I believe that on 12 July
the spokesperson for the Secretary-General also stated
very clearly that there is no link, emphasizing this point.
I believe that it should be very clear in the minds
of the members of the Council that these were not
United Nations troops. All United Nations troops that
arrive in Mali and follow the protocol are approved
and facilitated. Even during the incident yesterday,
authorization was given within a few hours for the

22-6375221/23

S/PV.9154

The situation in Mali

evacuation of soldiers. I think therefore we should not
confuse the issues.
The Malian justice system is seized of this case,
which does not concern the United Nations. But
despite the dysfunctions and shortcomings that have
been recognized by both the United Nations and Côte
d’Ivoire, the Government of Mali has always said it was
open to a political and diplomatic solution, in particular
through the mediation of the President of the Togolese
Republic, in the spirit of the fraternal and neighbourly
relations that have always existed between Mali and
Côte d’Ivoire. We are, above all, brotherly countries.
This mediation has already led to the release, on
humanitarian grounds, of three female soldiers.
In order to give the diplomatic process every chance
to succeed, however, Mali calls on the various parties
involved to avoid any bias and to take a constructive
approach towards finding a solution. This is what is
expected of our partners, but it is also what is expected
of the United Nations.
I would like to conclude by emphasizing that the
Malian people have decided to take their own destiny
in hand. The Malian people fully support the transition
Government in the political and institutional reforms
under way, in the efforts and actions being undertaken
to secure our national territory, in the protection of
people and property, and in the provision of basic
social services to the population. To reinforce this
unconditional support, the Government is working to
organize general, transparent and credible elections
that will mark the end of the transitional period in
March 2024, followed by the peaceful transfer of power
to the new elected authorities.
The Malian people as a whole appreciate the
support and assistance from all of our partners — I will
say it again, all of our partners — in carrying out major
projects for the future of our country. In this respect,
I would like to recall the key principles laid down by
His Excellency Colonel Assimi Goïta, President of the
Transition and Head of State, which guide public action
in Mali. It is important to reiterate these principles
because they will guide our interaction with the Council
as well as with other partners, namely: first, respect for
Mali’s sovereignty; secondly, respect for the strategic
choices and partners selected by Mali; and third, the
taking into account of the vital interests of the Malian
people in all decisions that will be taken.
22/23

18/10/2022

I conclude by reiterating the gratitude of the people
and the Government of Mali for the constant support
of the United Nations and all the partners who have
lent a hand in my country. I pay tribute to the memory
of all the victims of the Malian crisis — both civilian
and military, Malian and foreign — who have lost their
lives in Mali.
The President (spoke in French): The
representative of France has asked for the floor to make
a further statement.
Mr. De Rivière (France) (spoke in French): I
would like to set the record straight after the false and
defamatory accusations made by the Malian transition
Government in the annex to the letter transmitted to
the Security Council on 15 August (S/2022/622) and
repeated just now in the Council by the Minister for
Foreign Affairs of Mali.
I would recall that the redeployment of Operation
Barkhane outside Malian territory ended on 15 August
with the departure from Mali of the last French soldier.
The communiqué issued on this occasion by the
Presidency of the French Republic has been transmitted
to the members of the Security Council (S/2022/625,
annex). This redeployment manoeuvre was decided on
17 February following in-depth consultations with all
partners involved in the fight against terrorism in the
Sahel. It was based on the observation that the political
and operational conditions for its continued engagement
in Mali were no longer in place.
France had reported on that to the Council. We
have always been transparent with the international
community since our military intervention in Mali in
2013 — an intervention that was based on a request
from the Malian authorities.
In that context, I deeply regret the serious and
unfounded accusations that the Malian transition
authorities have repeatedly made against France. I
would like to remind the Council that France has been
committed to Mali for nine years — at the request of
the country — to combat armed terrorist groups, and 59
French soldiers have paid with their lives in that fight.
France has never violated Malian airspace. I
formally condemn any violation of the bilateral legal
framework. France complies with the requirements of
the agreement concluded by the exchange of letters in
2013, despite Mali’s unilateral and unjustified rejection
of it on 2 May. France will remain committed in the
22-63752

18/10/2022

The situation in Mali

Sahel, the Gulf of Guinea and the Lake Chad region,
alongside all responsible States that choose to combat
terrorism and respect stability and coexistence among
communities. We will continue to combat terrorism
in coordination with all our partners. We will also
continue to support civilian populations, who are the
main victims of terrorism.
The President (spoke in French): The Minister for
Foreign Affairs and International Cooperation of Mali
has asked for the floor to make a further statement. I
now give him the floor.
Mr. Diop (Mali) (spoke in French): I very much
apologize for taking the floor, as I thought the meeting
was over. I am not going to go into detail to respond to
the statements that were made by the Representative of
France. However, I believe that the fact that he made
a further statement demonstrates that the Security
Council, as requested by Mali, should call a meeting

S/PV.9154

in which we can make our own points in that regard,
because we did not have the chance to do so today.
I hope that now that France has begun to address
the issue, it will agree to convening such a meeting as
soon as possible. The Malian State will bring to the
Council and the world concrete and tangible proof of
what we are putting forward. Mali’s credibility is at
stake, and we do not make these statements lightly. We
know that we are talking about extremely serious acts
and that our statements put at stake the accountability
and credibility of the Malian State. I therefore hope
that France will now be the one to request such a
special meeting.
The President (spoke in French): There are no
more names inscribed on the list of speakers.
I now invite Council members to informal
consultations to continue our discussion on the subject.
The meeting rose at 12.15 p.m.

22-6375223/23
