Re.olutlona adopted on the reporta of the Fir■t Committee

views expressed and the suggestions put forward by
Member States during the consideration of this ítem at
the twenty-second session of. the General Assembly ;
3. Requests the Secretary-General :
(a) To transmit the text of the present resolution
to the Governments of ali Member States in order to
seek their views on the subject;
( b) To transmit to the Ad H oc Committee the
records of the First Committee relating to the discussion of this ítem;
(c) To render ali appropriate assistance to the Ad
H oc Committee, including the submission to it of the
results of the studies being undertaken in pursuance
of General Assembly resolution 2172 (XXI) and
Economic and Social Council resolution 1112 (XL),
and such documentation¡ertinent to this item as may
be provided by the Unite Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization and its Intergovernmental
Oceanographic Commission, the Inter-Governmental
Maritime Consultative Organization, the Food and
Agriculture Organization of the United Nations, the
World Meteorological Organization, the World Health
Organization, the International Atomic Energy Agency
and other intergovernmental bodies ;
4. Invites the specialized agencies, the International
Atomic Energy Agency and other intergovernmental
bodies to co-operate fully with the Ad H oc Committee
in the implementation of the present resolution.
1639th plenary meeting,
18 December 1967.

2342 (XXII). Queation of general and complete
di11armament

A
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 2162 A (XXI) of 5 December
1966, in which the Secretary-General was requested to
prepare a concise report on the effects of the possible
use of nuclear weapons and on the security and economic implications for States of the acquisition and
further development of these weapons,
N oting that the report has been completed and is
available, 11
Convinced that the wide dissemination of the report
would contribute to a better understanding of the threat
presented by nuclear weapons and encourage speedy
progress in the prevention of their spread, as well as
in other measures of nuclear disarmament,
l. Takes note with satisfaction of the SecretaryGeneral's report as an authoritative statement on the
effects of nuclear weapons and on the implications of
their acquisition and further development;
2. EsP,-esses its app,-eciation to the Se~retaryGeneral and to the consultant experts who assisted him
for the prompt and effective manner in which the report
was prepared;
3. Notes the conclusions of the report and expresses
the hope that all the parties concerned will consider

4. Recommends that the Conference of the EighteenN ation Committee on Disarmament should take into account the report and the conclusions thereof in its
efforts towards the achievement of general and complete disarmament under effective international control;
5. Requests the Secretary-General to arrange for
the reproduction of the full report as a U nited N ations
publication and, making full use of ali the facilities of
the United Nations Office of Public lnformation, to
publicize the report in as many languages as is considered desirable and practicable ;
6. Recommends to ali Governments the wide distribution of the report and its publication in their
respective languages, as_ appropriate, so as to acquaint
public opinion with its contents;
7. Invites regional intergovernmental organizations,
the specialized agencies and the International Atomic
Energy Agency, and national and international nongovernmental organizations to use ali the facilities
available to them to make the report widely known.
1640th plenary meeting,
19 December 1967.

B
The General Assembly,
H aving received the interim report of the Conference
of the Eighteen-Nation Committee on Disarmament, 12
Recalling its resolutions 1378 (XIV) of 20 November 1959, 1722 (XVI) of 20 December 1961, 1767
(XVII) of 21 November 1962, 1908 (XVIII) of
27 November 1963, 2031 (XX) of 3 December 1965
and 2162 C (XXI) of 5 December 1966,
N oting that since then the Conference of the EighteenN ation Committee on Disarmament has not been able
to devote sufficient time to the consideration of the
question of general and complete disarmament,
. Rfaffirming its conviction of the necessity of cont111u111g to exert new efforts, for the purpose of ensuring
tangible progress towards the achievement of an
agreement on the question of general and complete
disarmament,

l. Requests the Conference of the Eighteen-Nation
Committee on Disarmament to resume at the earliest
possible date consideration of the question of general
and complete disarmament in accordance with General
Assembly resolution 2162 C (XXI) ;

2. Decides to transmit to the Conference of the
Eighteen-Nation Committee on Disarmament ali the
docum~nts and records of the meetings of the First
Comm1ttee, as well as those of the plenary meetings
of the General Assembly pertaining to this item ;

them carefully ;

3. Requests the Conference of the Eighteen-Nation
Co??mittee on Disarm:i,ment to report on the progress
ach1eved on the queshon of general and complete disarm~ment to the General Assembly at its twenty-third
sess10n.
1640th plenary meeting,
19 December 1967.

11 A/6858. In pursuance of pararraph 5 of the present resoluti~, ~e report will be reprQCluced as a Un1ted Nations
pabbcation (Salea No.: E.68.IX.1).

12 Offidal Records of the General Assembly Twenty-second
Session, .A.muses, agenda items 29, 30 and 31 document
A/6951.
'
