United Nations

A/RES/56/137

General Assembly

Distr.: General
15 February 2002

Fifty-sixth session
Agenda item 114

Resolution adopted by the General Assembly
[on the report of the Third Committee (A/56/578)]

56/137. Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for
Refugees
The General Assembly,
Having considered the report of the United Nations High Commissioner for
Refugees on the activities of his Office 1 and the report of the Executive Committee
of the Programme of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees on the
work of its fifty-second session 2 and the conclusions and decisions contained
therein,
Recalling its annual resolutions on the work of the Office of the United
Nations High Commissioner for Refugees adopted since its establishment by the
General Assembly, 3
Expressing its appreciation for the leadership shown by the High
Commissioner since he assumed office in January 2001, and commending the staff
and implementing partners of the Office of the High Commissioner for the
competent, courageous and dedicated manner in which they discharge their
responsibilities,
1.
Endorses the report of the Executive Committee of the Programme of the
United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees on the work of its fifty-second
session; 2
2.
Welcomes the fiftieth anniversary of the 1951 Convention relating to the
Status of Refugees, 4 notes that the Convention and the 1967 Protocol thereto 5 have
continuously served as the cornerstone of the international refugee protection
regime, and welcomes in this context the convening of a ministerial meeting of
States parties as an expression of their collective commitment to full and effective
implementation of the Convention and Protocol and the values they embody;

_______________
1

Official Records of the General Assembly, Fifty-sixth Session, Supplement No. 12 (A/56/12).
Ibid., Supplement No. 12A (A/56/12/Add.1).
3
Resolution 428 (V).
4
United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 189, No. 2545.
5
Ibid., vol. 606, No. 8791.
2

01 48464

A/RES/56/137

3.
Reaffirms that the 1951 Convention and the 1967 Protocol remain the
foundation of the international refugee regime and recognizes the importance of
their full application by States parties, notes with satisfaction that one hundred and
forty-one States are now parties to one or both instruments, encourages the Office of
the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees and States to strengthen their
efforts to promote broader accession to those instruments and their full
implementation, and underlines in particular the importance of full respect for the
principle of non-refoulement;
4.
Notes that fifty-three States are now parties to the 1954 Convention
relating to the Status of Stateless Persons 6 and that twenty-five States are parties to
the 1961 Convention on the Reduction of Statelessness, 7 and encourages the High
Commissioner to continue his activities on behalf of stateless persons;
5.
Welcomes the process of Global Consultations on International Protection
launched by the Office of the High Commissioner, and acknowledges their
importance as a forum for open discussion on complex legal and operational
protection issues;
6.
Reiterates that international protection is a dynamic and action-oriented
function, carried out in cooperation with States and other partners, inter alia, to
promote and facilitate the admission, reception and treatment of refugees and to
ensure durable, protection-oriented solutions, bearing in mind the particular needs
of vulnerable groups;
7.
Re-emphasizes that the protection of refugees is primarily the
responsibility of States, whose full and effective cooperation, action and political
resolve are required to enable the Office of the High Commissioner to fulfil its
mandated functions;
8.
Urges all States and relevant non-governmental and other organizations,
in conjunction with the Office of the High Commissioner, in a spirit of international
solidarity and burden- and responsibility-sharing, to cooperate and to mobilize
resources with a view to enhancing the capacity of States and reducing the heavy
burden borne by them, in particular by developing countries and countries with
economies in transition that have received large numbers of refugees and asylumseekers, and calls upon the Office of the High Commissioner to continue to play its
catalytic role in mobilizing assistance from the international community to address
the root causes as well as the economic, environmental and social impact of largescale refugee populations, especially in developing countries and countries with
economies in transition;
9.
Strongly reaffirms the fundamental importance and the purely
humanitarian and non-political character of the function of the Office of the High
Commissioner of providing international protection to refugees and seeking
permanent solutions to refugee problems, recalls that these solutions include
voluntary repatriation and, where appropriate and feasible, local integration and
resettlement in a third country, reaffirming that voluntary repatriation remains the
preferred solution, supported by necessary rehabilitation and development
assistance, to facilitate sustainable reintegration;

_______________
6
7

2

Ibid., vol. 360, No. 5158.
Ibid., vol. 989, No. 14458.

A/RES/56/137

10. Emphasizes the obligation of all States to accept the return of their
nationals, calls upon all States to facilitate the return of their nationals who have
been determined not to be in need of international protection, and affirms the need
for the return of persons to be undertaken in a safe and humane manner and with full
respect for their human rights and dignity, irrespective of the status of the persons
concerned;
11. Recognizes that adequate and timely resources are essential to the High
Commissioner to discharge effectively his mandated functions on an equitable basis,
and urges Governments and other donors to respond promptly to the global appeal
issued by his Office for requirements under its annual programme budget;
12. Requests the Office of the High Commissioner, with that sustained
support, to continue to fulfil the mandate conferred upon it by its statute and by
subsequent General Assembly resolutions regarding refugees and other persons of
concern, in close cooperation with its relevant partners;
13. Requests the High Commissioner to report on his activities to the General
Assembly at its fifty-seventh session, and to include in his report the results of the
Global Consultations on International Protection.
88th plenary meeting
19 December 2001

3
