United Nations

General Assembly
Security Council

General Assembly
Seventy-second session
Agenda item 39
The situation in Afghanistan

A/72/651–S/2017/1056
Distr.: General
15 December 2017
Original: English

Security Council
Seventy-second year

The situation in Afghanistan and its implications for international
peace and security
Report of the Secretary-General

I. Introduction
1.
The present report is submitted pursuant to General Assembly resolution 68/11
and Security Council resolution 2344 (2017), in which I was requested to report every
three months on developments in Afghanistan.
2.
The report provides an update on the activities of the United Nations in
Afghanistan, including political, humanitarian, development and human rights
efforts, since the date of my previous report, 15 September 2017 ( A/72/392S/2017/783).

II. Relevant developments
3.
The National Unity Government continued to prioritize its reform agenda, with
an emphasis on anti-corruption measures and security sector reform, in the face of
ongoing security and governance challenges. Although electoral preparations by the
Independent Election Commission faced setbacks, political groups continued to
coalesce around the prospect of parliamentary and district council elections. The
security situation remained highly volatile, as the Taliban and Islamic State in Iraq
and the Levant-Khorasan Province (ISIL-KP) showed continued capacity for
inflicting mass casualties amid increased Afghan and international air strikes. The
Quadrilateral Coordination Group, comprising Afghanistan, China, Pakistan and the
United States of America, reconvened for the first time in over a year, while
Afghanistan continued to expand its multilateral engagement in t he region through
such forums as the Heart of Asia-Istanbul Process, the Shanghai Cooperation
Organization and the Regional Economic Cooperation Conference on Afghanistan.
There was no meaningful progress towards a peace settlement.

17-21453 (E)

181217

*1721453*

A/72/651
S/2017/1056

A.

Political developments
4.
As noted in my previous report, a fragile political equilibrium emerged after the
announcement of July 2018 as the date for the parliamentary and district council
elections. This configuration was maintained, as major political actors focused o n
building coalitions, strengthening their constituencies and closely following the
Independent Election Commission’s electoral preparations. Delays on key decisions
placed the electoral timeline in jeopardy, however, and exacerbated concerns about
the Commission’s capacity and independence. Political figures began to question the
feasibility of holding credible elections as scheduled, and public scepticism around
elections increased. Some opposition figures called for elections to be superseded by
extraconstitutional measures and the creation of an interim administration. That
remained a minority position, however, as the largest parties and coalitions continued
to devote significant effort to peaceful democratic processes.
5.
The President, Ashraf Ghani, and the Chief Executive, Abdullah Abdullah,
maintained their cooperative relationship, as the National Unity Government sought
to build credibility around its reform agenda. The President also increased his political
outreach to youth opposition movements, including the largely Tajik Rasta Khez and
the Hazara-dominated Junbish-i Roshnayi, whose demonstrations diminished during
the reporting period as the Government entered into dialogue on their demands for
greater political inclusion. The political landscape, however, was largely dominated
by the mobilization of major opposition coalitions around the electoral process.
6.
As noted in my previous report, the formation of the Coalition for the Salvation
of Afghanistan brought together prominent politicians, such as the Governor of Balkh
Province, Atta Noor, and the First Vice-President, Abdul Rashid Dostum, as well as
the Second Deputy Chief Executive, Mohammad Mohaqiq. Despite the historical
rivalry between Mr. Noor and Mr. Dostum, their alliance has endured, and the former
took steps to expand the coalition’s geographical base, reaching out to such politicians
as the Police Chief of Kandahar, Abdul Raziq, a parliamentarian from the eastern
region, Zahir Qadir, and a former mujahidin leader from the western re gion, Ismail
Khan. In late September, Abdul Rasul Sayyaf, a former mujahidin leader, convened
meetings of a new umbrella group, the Harmony Council. This group, which
encompassed a broad array of political factions, coalesced around an electoral agenda
and proposed major changes to the electoral process, including the replacement of
electoral commissioners and the redrafting of the 2016 Election Law.
7.
Some opposition figures became increasingly vocal in their calls for a traditional
loya jirga, a traditional form of national assembly largely constituted by elders, as a
step towards the establishment of a new form of government. Those calls were led by
the former President, Hamid Karzai, who on 12 October publicly called for a loya
jirga to review security policy and the relationship of Afghanistan with the United
States of America and possibly to select new leadership for the country. Mr. Karzai’s
calls initially gained little traction, with many politicians dismissing the idea.
Nevertheless, the proposal appeared to be gaining broader acceptance as the lack of
progress on elections became increasingly apparent. The Palace issued a press
statement on 15 November instructing government personnel to avoid participation
in such processes. Subsequently, two senior government officials were dismissed after
they voiced public support for a loya jirga.
8.
Opposition to the Government also manifested itself in tensions between the
executive and legislative branches, as the Government and the parliament exchanged
public allegations of corruption. Parliamentary confirmation votes for at least 10
acting ministers were scheduled to take place in the lower house of the National
Assembly shortly after the opening of the session in September. The votes were

2/15

17-21453

A/72/651
S/2017/1056

delayed following reports that some ministerial nominees had failed to attract
sufficient support from parliamentarians. On 25 November, the Government
introduced 12 ministerial nominees to the lower house for confirmation votes.
Allegations of corruption also emerged within the parliament itself, leading to a
verbal dispute between two prominent parliamentarians, the Speaker, Abdul Rauf
Ibrahimi, and the Deputy Speaker, Humayun Humayun, which culminated in a
physical confrontation between their supporters on the floor of the parliament on
25 October. On 4 November, a majority of the lower house voted in favour of
disciplinary action against Mr. Ibrahimi, Mr. Humayun and two other
parliamentarians.
9.
Mr. Dostum remained outside of the country throughout the reporting perio d
while under indictment for alleged sexual assault in Afghanistan. On 1 November, a
primary court in Kabul sentenced seven of Mr. Dostum’s bodyguards in absentia to
three to five years in prison for assaulting a political rival in November 2016. Two
other bodyguards and Mr. Dostum himself were also named in court documents in the
same incident. In Mr. Dostum’s absence, Mr. Ghani took steps to revive his ties with
the Uzbek community, holding a meeting on 23 October with several former
associates of the First Vice-President and members of the Junbish-i Nawin party, a
new political group that seeks support among ethnic Uzbek voters. Following the
meeting, several prominent Junbish-i Milli members accepted positions within the
Government. However, the founder of Junbish-i Milli, Mr. Dostum, continued to
command a loyal support base among provincial party representatives and Uzbek
community members in the north.
10. Other political parties also struggled to maintain internal cohesion in the face of
ongoing leadership tensions. The Hizb-i Islami political movement remained split
between the Hizb-i Islami (Gulbuddin) and Hizb-i Islami Afghanistan factions,
despite the ongoing attempts of the leader of the former group, Gulbuddin Hikmatyar,
to unite the movement. In October, Mr. Hikmatyar launched a process of restructuring
the party leadership and provincial representation, holding internal elections in
several provinces. On 8 November, Hizb-i Islami (Gulbuddin) organized a large
gathering in Kabul, attended by party representatives from across the country. The
event confirmed Mr. Hikmatyar as the temporary leader of the party, but failed to
reconcile the division between Hizb-i Islami (Gulbuddin) and the registered political
party Hizb-i Islami Afghanistan, whose leader, Abdul Hadi Arghandiwal, continued
to distance himself from Mr. Hikmatyar. On 13 November, the Ministry of Justice
issued a statement confirming Mr. Arghandiwal as the head of the registered Hizb -i
Islami party. Jamiyat-i Islami also faced internal rivalries, as loyalists of Chief
Executive Abdullah and those of Balkh Province Governor Noor disputed ministerial
appointments. A suicide attack on a gathering of Governor Noor’s supporters on
16 November in Kabul exacerbated tensions between him and the National Unity
Government, as Mr. Noor accused figures within the Government of conspiring
against Jamiyat-i Islami.
11. The Independent Election Commission made some progress on electoral
preparations against a background of internal turmoil. For the first time, the
Commission completed a review of the location of polling centres throughout the
country to ascertain voter accessibility, as envisaged in the 2016 Election Law. It also
embarked on the implementation of a biometric voter registration proces s. Ultimately,
however, the effort to introduce such technology was aborted when the tendering
process yielded a single bid, which was disqualified on procedural grounds. As a
result, the Commission, on 25 October, announced that it had reverted to conside ring
paper-based ballot options. On 15 November, the Commission discussed the options
in a public session with external stakeholders. Irrespective of the modalities, the aim

17-21453

3/15

A/72/651
S/2017/1056

is to link, for the first time in Afghanistan, every voter on the register to one specific
polling centre.
12. The Commission also held several consultation forums and public meetings that
brought together representatives of political parties, coalitions and civil society
organizations. The Commission faced increasing criticism from pol itical stakeholders
and civil society, however, over its perceived lack of progress, poor leadership and
internal divisions. Following a determination by five Commissioners, the Chair of the
Commission was removed from office, and on 15 November the Presid ent gave
instructions to identify candidates to replace the vacant position. Despite this
upheaval, the Commission continued to move forward with its work. On
20 November, the Commission concluded an agreement with the Independent
Administrative Reform and Civil Service Commission to accelerate the recruitment
of electoral positions and reduce the high vacancy rate. On 4 October, the United
Nations, the Independent Election Commission and the Electoral Complaints
Commission signed the electoral support project document, establishing the
framework for international donor assistance for elections.
13. Women’s participation in the electoral process was the theme of dialogues
organized across Afghanistan by the United Nations Assistance Mission in
Afghanistan (UNAMA) and the United Nations Entity for Gender Equality and the
Empowerment of Women from 17 October to 22 November in celebration of the 2017
Global Open Day for Women and Peace. At the events, male and female activists,
former candidates, election officials and religious leaders discussed ways of
encouraging women’s participation in elections by addressing issues of security,
access to funds for potential women candidates and targeted awareness -raising that
addresses gender biases with respect to leadership and the holding of public office. A
report with key findings and recommendations was distributed to relevant
stakeholders. A total of 364 individuals (303 women and 61 men) participated in the
events from 44 districts across 20 provinces.
14. Since my previous report there have been no significant steps towards
establishing a peace process with the Taliban. Institutional reforms continued within
the existing peace architecture, as the High Peace Council finalized a strategic plan
for its work from 2017 to 2020. It was stipulated in the plan that the Government
would not negotiate from a position of weakness, and the fundamental standing of the
2004 Constitution of Afghanistan was reiterated. Furthermore, the plan included a
call for peace talks to be hosted in Kabul, with no international intermediaries, and
the need to achieve a regional consensus on stability in Afghanistan was emphasized.
The Taliban, meanwhile, communicated their readiness to militarily confront the
Government and its international partners following the renewal of North Atlantic
Treaty Organization (NATO) troop commitments in Afghanistan. At the subnational
level, the High Peace Council appointed new members for all 34 provincial peace
committees, with the membership of the Council and its provincial affiliates now
totalling 480 members, including 65 women.
15. UNAMA continued to promote inclusivity in Afghan peace initiatives. Since
mid-September, the Mission has supported the implementation of seven local peace
initiatives, including events in Balkh, Bamyan, Daykundi, Helmand, Herat, Jowzjan
and Kabul Provinces. On 29 October, with technical support from UNAMA, the Asia
Foundation in Kabul organized a national conference to present four provincial road
maps for the Afghan People’s Dialogue on Peace to provincial invitees and relevant
stakeholders. Participants voiced concern about the security situation and suggested
leveraging the role of religious leaders to support the establishment of conflict
resolution councils in rural areas in order to increase the participation of women in
peace processes.

4/15

17-21453

A/72/651
S/2017/1056

B.

Security
16. The security situation remained highly volatile, as conflict between government
and anti-government forces continued throughout most of the country. The United
Nations recorded 3,995 security-related incidents from 15 September to
15 November, representing a 4 per cent decrease compared with the same period in
2016. By 15 November, the United Nations had recorded more than 21,105 security related incidents for the first 11 months of 2017, an increase of 1 per cent since 2016.
The continuing high number of incidents is attributed mainly to armed clashes. In line
with established trends, armed clashes accounted for the majority of security
incidents, at 62 per cent, followed by improvised explosive devices, at 17 per cent.
Targeted killings and abductions increased by 16 per cent compared with the same
period in 2016. The eastern region experienced the highest number of incidents,
followed by the southern region, with the two regions accounting for 56 per cent of
all incidents.
17. Afghan and international forces significantly increased their air operations
following the announcement of a new United States strategy in Afghanistan and South
Asia, which provided for changes in the rules of the engagement of the United States
military forces. During the reporting period there were 215 air strikes, a 73 per cent
increase compared with the same period in 2016, and in October the Mission recorded
the highest number of air strikes in the country to date. Air strikes were reported in
22 provinces, with the majority conducted in Helmand Province in the south and
Nangarhar Province in the east. The increase in air strikes had a notable effect on the
ground, reportedly inflicting heavy casualties on anti-government elements and
civilians.
18. The Taliban launched multiple large-scale operations to capture district
administration centres, temporarily overrunning Maruf in Kandahar Province, Andar
in Ghazni Province, Shib Koh in Farah Province and Shahid -i Hasas in Uruzgan
Province. In all cases, Afghan security forces pushed the Taliban back, in some
instances with international military air support. On 14 October, Afghan forces
recaptured the Ghorak district centre in Kandahar Province, which had been under
Taliban control since November 2016.
19. The reporting period witnessed one of the most violent weeks in recent times,
as anti-government elements staged a seemingly coordinated series of attacks in
several locations. From 17 to 19 October, the Taliban launched four complex attacks
around the country using Humvees rigged as suicide bombs, killing more than
100 people, including both Afghan National Defence and Security Forces personnel
and civilians. The incidents were indicative of a growing Taliban focus on attacking
the bases of Afghan security forces rather than district centres, inflicting heavy
casualties, weakening morale and stealing military equipment.
20. ISIL-KP remained resilient, claiming responsibility for several attacks against
both the civilian population and military targets throughout the reporting period.
These included three suicide attacks in Kabul, two of which were against worshippers
at mosques, inflicting numerous civilian casualties. In the third attack, on 31 October,
a device was detonated on the boundary of Kabul’s diplomatic “Green Zone”, killing
10 civilians in what appeared to be a symbolic attack against the international
community, the first attack in the diplomatic quarter since the 31 May suicide attack.
The group also claimed responsibility for an attack on a television station in Kabul
on 7 November and for a suicide attack against a gathering of supporters of Governor
Noor in Kabul on 16 November. ISIL-KP and Taliban militants also fought against
each other in Nangarhar and Jowzjan Provinces.

17-21453

5/15

A/72/651
S/2017/1056

21. The Government continued to prioritize the implementation of its four-year plan
on security sector reform as a key component of its overall security strategy. As part
of the plan, on 5 November, the Interior and Defence Ministries signed a
memorandum of understanding to officially transfer the Afghan Border Police and the
Afghan National Civil Order Police from the Ministry of the Interior to the Ministry
of Defence. Efforts towards the civilianization of the police force also continued with
further civilian appointments, leaving a vacancy rate of only 16 identified mid -level
civilian positions out of a total of 191. Attrition within the Afghan National Police
remained a major concern, and police continued to suffer from high casualty rates.
On 17 October, 54 police personnel died in a single attack on the provincial police
headquarters in Paktiya Province.
22. On 27 September, the United States Secretary of Defense, James Mattis, and the
Secretary-General of NATO, Jens Stoltenberg, visited Afghanistan and met with the
President. At a joint press conference, Mr. Ghani and Mr. Mattis urged all countries
in the region to cooperate on counter-terrorism efforts. On 9 November, NATO allies
reaffirmed their commitment to Afghanistan during the NATO meeting of defence
ministers in Brussels, where Mr. Stoltenberg announced that NATO troop levels
would be increased from 13,000 to 16,000, following more commitments by allies
within existing troop authorization levels.
23. There were seven incidents involving United Nations personnel, including one
incident of intimidation, five criminal incidents, no armed clashes and no incidents
of abduction.

C.

Regional cooperation
24. Bilateral ties between Afghanistan and its neighbours intensified. On 1 October,
the Chief of Army Staff of Pakistan, General Qamar Javed Bajwa, met Mr. Ghani in
Kabul to discuss regional security among other matters of common interest. The
bilateral efforts of Afghanistan and the Islamic Republic of Iran to finalize a
comprehensive partnership agreement also progressed, with a second round of
meetings of working committees held in Kabul on 8 October. Water, security and
refugee and migrant issues were discussed at the deputy minister level. Afghanistan
also continued to expand its bilateral ties with India with the launch of the “new
development partnership” of the two countries on 12 September and the signing of a
memorandum of understanding of technical cooperation on police training and
development on 28 September. On 24 October, Mr. Ghani visited New Delhi, where
he met with the Prime Minister of India, Narendra Modi. During the visit, Mr. Modi
expressed support for “Afghan-led, Afghan-owned, Afghan-controlled”
reconciliation, while the two leaders also discussed development and connectivity.
On 24 October, the Secretary of State of the United States, Rex Tillerson, visited
Afghanistan, India and Pakistan to discuss the new United States strategy for South
Asia. At Bagram airfield in Afghanistan, Mr. Tillerson reaffirmed the commitment of
the United States to securing a process of peace and reconciliation.
25. A meeting of the Shanghai Cooperation Organization Afghanistan Contact
Group was held on 11 October in Moscow, attended at the deputy foreign ministerial
level. During the meeting, the Deputy Foreign Minister of Afghanistan, Hekmat
Karzai, highlighted five main issues: the proposal for Afghanistan to co-chair future
Afghanistan Contact Group meetings; the interest of Afghanistan in full membership
in the Shanghai Cooperation Organization; the common security threat of Islamic
State fighters moving from Iraq and the Syrian Arab Republic to Afghanistan; the
importance of an Afghan-led and Afghan-owned peace process; and economic
integration with Shanghai Cooperation Organization countries through trade and
investment. China offered to host the next meeting of the Afghanistan Contact Group

6/15

17-21453

A/72/651
S/2017/1056

in early 2018. Following over a year of dormancy, the sixth meeting of the
Quadrilateral Coordination Group was held in Muscat on 16 October, bringing
together Afghanistan, China, Pakistan and the United States. There was no outcome
statement after the event.
26. The Government continued its multilateral engagement through other regional
forums. On 14 November, the seventh Regional Economic Cooperation Conference
on Afghanistan convened in Ashgabat. Such issues as partnerships in the field of
regional interchange, water use, counter-narcotics, transport, trade facilitation and the
business climate were discussed. On the margins of the conference, Afghanistan,
Azerbaijan, Georgia, Turkey and Turkmenistan signed an agreement on the creation
of the Lapis Lazuli transport corridor following three years of technical talks.
Following the conference, the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime organized
a two-day conference on the theme “Promoting Afghanistan’s alternative
development initiatives among regional partners” in Ashgabat on 16 and
17 November. The event was attended by delegations from Afghanistan, the Islamic
Republic of Iran and Pakistan, as well as representatives from a number of regional
and other countries and several agencies of the United Nations system. Participants
discussed a range of measures to promote alternative development and reduce opium
poppy cultivation. The seventh Ministerial Conference of the Heart o f Asia-Istanbul
Process was convened on 1 December in Baku. In the Baku Declaration, States
underlined the priorities of countering violent extremism and terrorism and enhancing
economic connectivity to advance regional economic growth.

III. Human rights
27. On 12 October, UNAMA released civilian casualty trends for the first nine
months of 2017. Between 1 January and 30 September, the Mission documented 8,019
civilian casualties (2,640 deaths and 5,379 injured), a decrease of 6 per cent compared
with the same period in 2016. Civilian deaths increased by 1 per cent, while the
number of injured civilians decreased by 9 per cent. Conflict -related violence also
destroyed livelihoods, homes and property, displaced thousands of families and
limited access to education, health and other services. UNAMA attributed 64 per cent
of all civilian casualties to anti-government elements, 20 per cent to pro-government
forces, 11 per cent to unattributed crossfire during ground engagements between anti government elements and pro-government forces and 5 per cent to other sources,
including explosive remnants of war and cross-border shelling.
28. Ground engagements accounted for 2,807 civilian casualties (684 deaths and
2,123 injured), or 35 per cent of all such casualties. The indiscriminate use of
improvised explosive devices in suicide attacks by anti-government elements in
civilian-populated areas caused 382 deaths and 1,202 injuries, amounting to 20 per
cent of all civilian casualties, while other improvised exp losive device tactics,
including the use of pressure-plate devices, accounted for a further 18 per cent. The
Mission documented 466 civilian casualties from aerial attacks (205 deaths and 261
injured), marking an increase of 52 per cent compared with the s ame period in 2016,
with women and children comprising 68 per cent of those casualties. Overall, the
Mission documented 2,480 child casualties (689 deaths and 1,791 injured), a 5 per
cent increase in child deaths compared with the same period in 2016. Grou nd
engagements caused 46 per cent of all child casualties. Female casualties increased
by 13 per cent.
29. On 17 October, UNAMA held its second annual civil-military dialogue on the
protection of civilians in Kabul. High-level government and military representatives,
together with the international protection community, discussed plans to meet

17-21453

7/15

A/72/651
S/2017/1056

obligations under Protocol V to the 1980 Convention on Prohibitions or Restrictions
on the Use of Certain Conventional Weapons Which May Be Deemed to Be
Excessively Injurious or to Have Indiscriminate Effects, ratified in August, and the
implementation of the recently approved national policy on the prevention and
mitigation of civilian casualties.
30. Following a series of violent attacks against sectarian targets, UNAMA released
a special report on 7 November documenting attacks against places of worship and
religious leaders and worshippers, and particularly attacks targeting Shia Muslim
congregations. Between 1 January 2016 and 7 November 2017, UNAMA documented
51 incidents of this nature, resulting in 850 civilian casualties (273 deaths and 577
injured), nearly double the number of civilian casualties recorded in such attacks
during the entire seven-year period from 2009 to 2015. UNAMA attributed nearly all
of the attacks to anti-government elements. Two Shia mosques were attacked during
the reporting period. On 29 September, a suicide attacker detonated an explosive
device at a gathering to commemorate the Shia holiday of Ashura, killing six civilians.
On 20 October, an attacker detonated an explosive device inside the Imam-i Zaman
mosque in Kabul, killing 57 civilians. ISIL-KP claimed responsibility for both
attacks.
31. In an effort to prevent attacks against sectarian targets, the Government
introduced new measures in mid-September to protect places of worship identified as
being at risk. These consisted of recruiting and arming about 2,500 men from local
communities countrywide to protect approximately 600 mosques and shrines from
attacks. Interlocutors generally expressed satisfaction with the measures but insisted
that the Government retains primary responsibility to protect all citizens, a stance
endorsed by UNAMA.
32. Between 1 July and 30 September, UNAMA verified 18 conflict-related
incidents targeting health facilities and health-care personnel (10 by the Taliban, 5 by
undetermined armed groups, 2 by ISIL-KP and 1 by government forces) compared
with 33 incidents over the same period in 2016, including 3 involving polio
vaccination workers. Five of the incidents resulted in the closure of health clinics.
UNAMA verified 13 incidents having an impact on education facilities and education related personnel, several of which consisted of threats, intimidation and harassment.
UNAMA attributed 10 incidents to armed groups (6 to the Taliban, 2 to ISIL-KP and
2 to undetermined armed groups), 2 incidents to cross-border shelling and 1 incident
to international military forces. UNAMA documented 24 incidents of this nature over
the same period in 2016.
33. UNAMA received 30 reports of the recruitment and use of children involving
247 boys; it verified the recruitment and use of 19 boys (12 by ISIL -KP, 6 by the
Taliban and 1 by the Afghan local police). In addition, UNAMA received three reports
of abductions by the Taliban involving at least four boys and two unverified incidents
of sexual violence against children that remain under investigation.
34. Following advocacy by UNAMA, on 7 November, the Government of
Afghanistan transferred 50 juveniles, detained on national security-related charges,
from the maximum-security adult detention facility in Parwan to the juvenile
rehabilitation centre of Kabul Province. The United Nations, while monitoring the
situation of children in juvenile rehabilitation centres, continued to advocate for the
granting of family visits, educational, health, legal and social services, and
psychosocial support and reintegration programmes.
35. Access to justice remained a challenge for female survivors of violence.
Progress in the implementation of the national action plan on women, peace and
security has been slow owing to the delay in the finalization of the revised $52 million
implementation budget, which occurred in October. Discussions are ongoing with
8/15

17-21453

A/72/651
S/2017/1056

donors on funding mechanisms. From 25 November to 10 December, UNAMA and
the United Nations country team supported the campaign of Afghanistan entitled
“16 days of activism on violence against women”, with 14 activities implemented
nationwide, including seminars, workshops, dialogues and radio p rogrammes. The
theme for 2017 was “Leave no one behind: ending violence against women and girls”.
36. The Government took steps to implement the recommendations of the
Committee against Torture, following its review of Afghanistan in May. In September,
the President endorsed an additional annex to the presidential decree on the
prohibition of torture providing that victims of torture can bring legal claims for
redress from the Government in both the criminal and civil courts. On 25 October, at
a conference organized by the Ministry of Justice, the Government presented its
national action plan to follow up on the recommendations from the Committee against
Torture. The Government also established a committee, chaired by the Office of the
National Security Council, with specific responsibility to monitor the implementation
of the action plan.
37. Civil society actors and media workers continued to face attacks, intimidation
and threats by anti-government elements. UNAMA documented five incidents of this
nature, one each in the central, central highlands, north-eastern, southern and southeastern regions. On 7 November, an attack claimed by ISIL-KP against the Shamshad
television station in Kabul killed 1 person and injured 20 employees of the station.
As part of its efforts to promote the opening of civic space, on 8 October UNAMA
hosted a meeting with the representatives of journalists in Kandahar Province.
Participants shared concerns about their safety and challenges faced while carrying
out their professional responsibilities.

IV. Implementation of the Kabul Process and coordination of
development assistance
38. The Government continued to prioritize the implementation of its reform
agenda, in consultation with civil society, representatives of the private sector and
international donors. Governance reforms remained a key component of the reform
agenda, with an emphasis on anti-corruption efforts, merit-based civil service
recruitment and Interior Ministry reform. On 5 October, the Government convened
its biannual meeting of senior officials on development in Kabul, comprising
representatives of 43 countries and international agencies along with Afghan
government ministers and senior officials. Discussions focused on core elements of
the economic development and reform agenda, including the economy, infrastructure,
women’s empowerment, the private sector and governa nce. Participants highlighted
the need for fiscal and policy reforms, while priorities for development investment
include human capital development to promote equity and productivity; energy and
the extractive industry to enhance government revenues; and r egional connectivity to
boost economic opportunity. On women’s economic empowerment, challenges
discussed included harassment faced by women in obtaining and certifying
educational credentials and in the workforce, as well as their limited access to assets .
Government officials also highlighted the need for targeted infrastructure
development, which they acknowledged must be carefully prioritized to address key
construction and maintenance needs. On private sector development, participants
expressed their appreciation for the Government’s inclusion of private sector
representatives in policy discussions, but stressed that the impact of recent reforms
had not yet been fully felt by local businesses.
39. Economic growth projections continued to indicate a sli ght increase compared
with 2016, although the International Monetary Fund (IMF) noted that it would lower
17-21453

9/15

A/72/651
S/2017/1056

its projections from 3 per cent to 2.5 per cent. An IMF team held discussions in Baku
from 27 September to 7 October for the Fund’s second review of Afghanistan’s
extended credit facility. The Fund reported that performance under the facility had
been satisfactory, as all end-June performance criteria and most of the structural
benchmarks had been met. Revenue collection continues to increase owing to
government anti-corruption efforts, particularly at border crossings, and the overall
2017 revenue collection target of $2.2 billion is likely to be achieved. IMF indicated,
however, that growth rates approaching 6 per cent were needed to generate sufficien t
employment for the estimated 400,000 people entering the labour market every year.
The Fund also pointed to the potential for instability arising from upcoming elections,
which could lead to delays of necessary reforms.
40. On 28 September, the High Council for Rule of Law and Anti-Corruption
adopted the anti-corruption strategy, delivering on a commitment made at the Brussels
Conference on Afghanistan, held in October 2016. The launch of the strategy followed
consultations with national and international stakeholders and the provision of expert
assistance by UNAMA, including the delivery of comments of donors and experts on
18 September. The priorities of the strategy include the security and justice sector and
merit-based recruitment in the public sector. Civil society groups and international
community observers, however, called for the strategy to be amended to be more
explicit about the compliance of the proposed framework of anti -corruption
institutions with the United Nations Convention against C orruption. While the
strategy included a plan to dismantle the High Office of Oversight and Anti Corruption, which did not fully meet expectations, alternatives for better -functioning
asset declaration and verification mechanisms remained undefined.
41. The Anti-Corruption Justice Centre completed trials in 25 cases against 95
accused and 21 cases on appeal. Fifteen cases were reviewed by the Supreme Court.
The Centre continued to focus on high-level cases against officials of the Interior and
Defence Ministries. The security of its personnel remained a serious concern. On
15 October, a special investigator for the Centre was shot and died a few days later,
the third official of the Centre killed in 2017. Also in October, the Executive Director
was attacked and narrowly escaped abduction. Each of those incidents has yet to be
fully investigated. Reports on security incidents highlighted serious lapses of the
Centre’s application of security protocols, and the presidential decree on security
measures for Anti-Corruption Justice Centre personnel issued in June remains to be
fully implemented.
42. On 14 October, the Ministry of Justice finished the translation from Dari into
Pashto and the printing of the new penal code, which was decreed in March 2017 and
is scheduled to enter into force in February 2018. The chapter on the elimination of
violence against women was removed during the translation of the code. Its deletion,
which was criticized by many within Afghan civil society and the international
community, will require judges and prosecutors to continue to apply the weaker
protection standards provided for in the separate 2008 Law on Elimination of
Violence against Women.
43. The Government continued its efforts on merit-based appointments, with a
particular focus on implementing competitive appointment processes for senior-level
subnational officials. On 2 October, the President appointed two new provincial
governors for Kabul and Daykundi Provinces. In addition, the Independent
Directorate of Local Governance appointed the first female Deputy Provincial
Governor in Herat Province.

V. Humanitarian assistance and refugees
10/15

17-21453

A/72/651
S/2017/1056

44. Within the reporting period, some 33,000 people were newly displaced by
conflict, bringing the overall total to more than 318,000 i n 2017. Of all displaced
people, 23 per cent relocated to hard-to-reach areas that were either very remote or
controlled or contested by anti-government elements. Internal displacement has
affected 31 out of 34 provinces across the country in 2017. As the fighting has become
more protracted in some places and the frontlines have shifted, many displaced
families have been forced to move multiple times. Many have no immediate prospect
of returning to their areas of origin in safety and dignity.
45. Under the voluntary repatriation programme of the Office of the United Nations
High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR), more than 14,000 registered Afghan
refugees who returned to Afghanistan during the reporting period received assistance.
Over 98 per cent of these were returning from Pakistan. Returning individuals
received an average of $200 each to pay for transport to their place of origin or
destination and to meet their immediate needs for food and shelter. Overall, the
number of refugees returning from Pakistan to Afghanistan was 84 per cent lower in
2017 than during the same period the previous year. This is attributed mainly to an
improvement in the protection situation in Pakistan, the four-month winter pause in
the UNHCR repatriation programme and the corresponding reduction in the cash
grant awarded to each individual (from $400 to $200). The registration of
undocumented Afghans in Pakistan commenced on 16 August, and over 411,000
applications had been received as at 20 November.
46. The deportation and spontaneous return of undocumented Afghans from
Pakistan continued, with 8,109 arrivals (7,640 spontaneous arrivals and
469 deportees) between 16 September and 18 November, accounting for 9 per cent of
the total arrivals from Pakistan in 2017. Since the beg inning of the year, the total
number of undocumented returnees arriving from Pakistan was 94,957, down from
236,724 over the same period in 2016. During the reporting period 143,745 Afghans
arrived from the Islamic Republic of Iran (55,323 spontaneous arri vals and 88,422
deportees) out of 393,824 since 1 January 2017. Out of the total undocumented
returnee population, the International Organization for Migration (IOM) assisted
7,388 people (89.5 per cent) from Pakistan and 5,750 people (6 per cent) from the
Islamic Republic of Iran. Between 15 September and 17 November, IOM also assisted
659 returnees from Europe, compared with 527 for the same period in 2016.
47. United Nations agencies and humanitarian partners continued to provide
emergency humanitarian assistance to crisis-affected populations, delivering a
combination of in-kind and cash assistance to 1.2 million people across all sectors in
the third quarter of the year. Constraints on humanitarian access continued, with a
total of 79 incidents affecting the United Nations and its humanitarian partners in
September and October. Since January, a total of 305 such incidents were registered,
up from 169 for the same period in 2016. The higher number was due mainly to
improved reporting, rather than reflecting a drastic change in the environment.
Nevertheless, access to communities in need of assistance in contested areas and areas
under the control of anti-government elements remained a persistent challenge for
humanitarian partners.
48. On 9 September, a deminer working for a non-governmental organization was
shot and killed in Nangarhar Province, and on 11 September, a staff member of the
International Committee of the Red Cross (ICRC) was shot and killed in Balkh
Province. ICRC subsequently announced a reduction in its geographical footprint in
the northern region of Afghanistan. Since the start of 2017, 17 aid workers have been
killed, 15 injured and 43 abducted. In the same period of 2016, 13 aid workers were
killed, 22 wounded and 110 abducted. The trend of armed groups forcing health
facilities to close down temporarily, often in an attempt to monopolize trauma care
for their combatants, continued throughout the reporting period. In Uruzgan Province,
17-21453

11/15

A/72/651
S/2017/1056

40 clinics were affected, depriving an estimated 420,000 people of access to health
care, while 25 clinics were closed in Badghis Province, serving around 175,000
people. By 23 November, only five of the health facilities in Uruzgan had reopened.
49. More than 9 million children were reached in the national polio vaccination
campaign in September and over 5.5 million in November. Two new cases of polio
were reported, in Nangarhar and Kandahar Provinces, bringing the total to 9 cases for
2017, compared with 12 during the same period in 2016. The new transmiss ions
detected in 2017 were the result of cross-border movements between Afghanistan and
Pakistan.
50. The Mine Action Service of the Department of Peacekeeping Operations
expressed its concern about the continual increase in the average monthly rate of
casualties from mines, explosive remnants of war and pressure-plate improvised
explosive devices, which stands at 169 for the period from January to October 2017.
This is consistent with the trend in 2016, in which a monthly average of 168 victims
was recorded from January to October. The vast majority of casualties (96.3 per cent)
are due to explosive remnants of war and pressure-plate improvised explosive
devices. The consequences of those incidents were exacerbated by the scarcity of
resources available to assist victims and by the drawdown of international health
organizations. In October, the Service conducted an initial assessment to support the
national Directorate of Mine Action Coordination in developing a strategy to
eliminate those devices.
51. The Mine Action Service and partners continued to provide risk education at
encashment and transit centres to alert returnees to the danger posed by landmines,
explosive remnants of war and abandoned pressure-plate improvised explosive
devices. From 1 August to 31 October, 10,932 returnees received such education.
During the same time period, mine action partners, coordinated by the Directorate of
Mine Action Coordination and the Mine Action Service, declared 15 communities to
be free of mines, which enabled approximately 234,885 individuals across 20.95 km 2
to move freely within their communities and facilitated improved agricultural
activities and market access. It is estimated, however, that 3,321 minefields, 296
battlefields and 37 contaminated firing ranges remain, affecting 1,446 communities.
Communities in areas of regular conflict continue to report contamination from
explosive remnants of war, which often blocks access to public infrastructure, as was
the case in Surkhrod district, Nangarhar Province, in October, where an artillery shell
had to be cleared from a school.
52. As at 15 November, humanitarian activities in Afghanistan had received
$348 million in funding, of which $287 million was for activities included in the
humanitarian response plan. The number of people targeted for assistance was
reduced at the mid-year review stage from 5.7 million to 3.6 million, owing to lower
than anticipated returns and reduced capacity to deliver.

VI. Counter-narcotics
53. In an executive summary of the Afghanistan Opium Survey 2017 released by
the Ministry of Counter-Narcotics and the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime
on 13 November, it was noted that the total area under opium poppy cultivation had
increased by 63 per cent in 2017, to an estimated 328,0 00 ha. The increase was
attributed to a variety of factors, including political instability, lack of government
control and security, corruption and weaker engagement of the international aid
community, which hampered eradication efforts, as well as the in creasing availability
of inexpensive labour and higher crop yields, which incentivized poppy cultivation.
The majority (60 per cent) of opium poppy cultivation took place in the southern
region. The western region accounted for 17 per cent of total cultiva tion, the northern
12/15

17-21453

A/72/651
S/2017/1056

region for 13 per cent and the eastern region for 7 per cent. The remaining regions
(north-eastern and central) together accounted for 3 per cent. The report also
highlighted an increase of 87 per cent in opium production to 9,000 tons, from 4,800
tons in 2016.
54. From 27 August to 31 October, Afghan law enforcement authorities conducted
a total of 438 counter-narcotics operations, which resulted in the seizure of 230 kg of
heroin, 700 kg of morphine, 2,736 kg of opium, 44 kg of methamph etamine, 5,699 kg
of hashish, 510 kg of solid precursor chemicals, 18,182 litres of liquid precursor
chemicals and 225 K-tablets (synthetic drugs). In addition, a heroin-processing
laboratory was dismantled and 76 vehicles, 20 weapons and 111 mobile teleph ones
were seized. Meanwhile, around 500 suspects were arrested during counter-narcotics
operations, with 2 members of Afghan security forces being killed and 3 wounded in
the course of operations.
55. There was some progress in licit crop production during the reporting period.
According to the Central Statistics Organization, there was a 133 per cent increase in
the cultivation of saffron compared with the previous harvest season, amounting to a
total of 2,587.7 ha. There was also a 63 per cent increase in vegetable production, a
57 per cent increase in apple production, a 40 per cent increase in pomegranate
production and a 35 per cent increase in almond production in comparison with
2015/16.

VII. Mission support
56. Further to the recommendations of the recent strategic review of UNAMA
(A/72/312-S/2017/696), the Mission is well advanced in its plans to close the field
office in Farah and to nationalize the Faizabad field office before the end of 2017. In
addition, the Mission has put in place a number of measures to ensure adequate
oversight of the nationalized Faizabad office by the Head of Office in Kunduz and to
arrange ongoing access to Farah from the Herat field office to facilitate regular
engagement by UNAMA staff with relevant local interlocutors in Farah Province.
Between 16 August and 16 November, UNAMA conducted 21 air and 218 road
missions, as well as 742 reverse outreach missions during which district
representatives visited UNAMA field offices.

VIII. Observations
57. As noted in my previous report, Afghanistan weathered a tumultuous month
following the truck bomb attack in Kabul on 31 May, marked by protests, a vocal
political opposition and a resilient Taliban insurgency. This volatility gra dually gave
way to a period of relative political calm, as major political actors shifted their focus
towards upcoming elections and channelled their discontent into constructive political
activity. Those developments, however, should not be regarded with complacency.
Afghanistan continues to face manifold political, electoral, security and economic
challenges, which require a unified vision and, above all, intensified efforts to reach
a political settlement to the conflict.
58. Only a negotiated settlement can bring lasting peace and stability to Afghanistan
and the region. With the recognition of this reality inside Afghanistan and within the
international community comes the challenge of taking a realistic approach to a peace
settlement. I encourage all parties to engage constructively in diplomatic efforts
towards peace, with a view to promoting the interests and well -being of all Afghans.
There is no military solution to the conflict in Afghanistan.

17-21453

13/15

A/72/651
S/2017/1056

59. The possibilities for peaceful dialogue are being explored by a variety of actors
across Afghanistan, as communities engage on issues of local concern such as land
use, water management and security. UNAMA supports those initiatives at the local
level, where Afghans have derived concrete benefits from th e peaceful resolution of
disputes. I am hopeful that the sum of those efforts will contribute positive momentum
to a peace process at the national level. Noting the adoption of the new peace strategy,
I encourage the High Peace Council to reach out to all sectors and levels of society to
help build a national consensus on peace.
60. In a complex regional environment, strong cooperation among neighbours is
critical in promoting stability and prosperity, including an environment conducive to
intra-Afghan dialogue. The region has demonstrated its readiness to provide support
under a variety of formats, each of which offers important capabilities that could
reinforce an Afghan-owned peace process between the Government and the Taliban.
I am encouraged by the statements in this past period from meetings held in Ashgabat,
Baku, Brussels, Moscow, Samarkand, Uzbekistan, and others, all of which
emphasized the importance of cooperation, regional integration and the need for a
peaceful and prosperous Afghanistan. I encourage efforts to ensure the alignment and
complementarity of those initiatives, and I call upon any Member State with influence
on the Taliban to exercise such leverage in the service of a lasting peace.
61. The slow pace of electoral preparations has put pressure on the timetable for
holding parliamentary and district council elections in 2018. While concrete steps
have been taken towards the development of an improved voter registry and the
compilation of polling centre-based voter lists, delays in key decisions have raised
concerns among the public about the capacity of the electoral commissions to ensure
timely elections. In an increasingly charged political atmosphere, the effects of a
potential delay in the electoral calendar are amplified. I encour age the electoral
management bodies to work closely with political stakeholders, civil society and
international partners to ensure that credible elections are held in 2018. Holding
elections in an increasingly insecure environment will require the firm co mmitment
of all stakeholders to the peaceful conduct of and non-interference with the electoral
process, and I encourage all parties within and outside the Government to take a
responsible approach to their electoral preparations.
62. The persistently high levels of armed clashes and their corresponding impact on
civilians remain a source of concern. I am deeply concerned about the increase in
civilian casualties due to air strikes by Government and international military forces.
Equally troubling are the continuing civilian casualties caused by the indiscriminate
use by anti-government elements of improvised explosive devices. While the decrease
in the number of security incidents affecting educational facilities and personnel is
encouraging, it is unacceptable that schools continue to be used by armed forces and
groups. I remind all parties to the conflict of their responsibilities to protect civilians
during military operations and call for additional steps to reduce the number of
civilian casualties.
63. The Government’s endorsement of a national policy on civilian casualty
prevention and mitigation and its ratification in August of Protocol V to the 1980
Convention on Prohibitions or Restrictions on the Use of Certain Conventional
Weapons Which May Be Deemed to Be Excessively Injurious or to Have
Indiscriminate Effects are welcome steps. The United Nations stands ready to provide
technical support for the implementation by the Government of action plans in those
areas.
64. I congratulate Afghanistan on its election in October 2017 to the Human Rights
Council. This is an opportunity for all national institutions to enact effective
implementation measures in compliance with the Constitution of Afghanistan and
international legal obligations. With this in mind, I encourage the Government to
follow through on its public commitments to ratify the Optional Protocol to the
14/15

17-21453

A/72/651
S/2017/1056

Convention against Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or
Punishment and to withdraw its reservations to the Convention.
65. I welcome the Government’s commitment to advancing the rights of women,
and particularly its allocation of resources for the implementation of the national
action plan on women, peace and security. The implementation of the plan should
contribute to lowering the unacceptable level of violence directed at women,
improving women’s access to justice and providing for women’s participation in
political, professional and public life. The Government is to be commended for
increasing the representation of women in the High Peace Council, although the
dismissal of the country’s only female provincial governor during the reporting period
is a source of disappointment. In moving to complete its report to the Committee on
the Elimination of Discrimination against Wo men, being prepared in consultation
with women from all walks of life, the Government would send a reassuring signal of
its commitment to protecting women’s rights by reinserting in the penal code the
chapter on the elimination of violence against women. I encourage renewed attention
to increasing the meaningful participation of women in the political life of the
country.
66. The personal security of investigators, judges and prosecutors, in particular
those working on sensitive or corruption-related cases, remains a source of serious
concern. So, too, are the ongoing reports of threats against some of the
commissioners, staff and leadership of the secretariat of the Afghanistan Independent
Human Rights Commission, as well as human rights defenders. It is v ital that
enhanced measures be provided to protect those individuals at their workplaces and
their residences to ensure that they are able to continue their work for a more just and
inclusive society.
67. I am profoundly troubled by the stark increase in the area under opium poppy
cultivation across Afghanistan, which expanded by 63 per cent between 2016 and
2017, and its implications for the region and beyond. Equally, the rise in heroin
production to a record level of 9,000 tons is a matter of grave conce rn. Apart from
posing a significant threat to the health of Afghans, the rising prevalence of poppy
cultivation fuels insecurity, reduces the space for licit economic development and
widens the gap between the Government and the people it is responsible fo r serving.
I call upon the Government and the international community to redouble their efforts
to counter opium poppy cultivation, including the expansion of alternative
development opportunities for local communities across Afghanistan, and to further
enhance law enforcement efforts against illicit drug trafficking and associated money laundering.
68. The Government’s commitment to achieving progress on its reform agenda,
despite the many challenges, deserves support. The Senior Officials Meeting, held on
5 October, reaffirmed donors’ commitment to the development of Afghanistan and its
path towards self-reliance. I am encouraged by the Government’s stated commitment
to drive the anti-corruption agenda forward, and the Anti-Corruption Justice Centre’s
continued success in prosecuting high-level corruption cases. The adoption of the
national anti-corruption strategy on 28 September provides a blueprint for a more
systematic and coordinated approach to curbing corruption. The effective
implementation of the strategy across the civil service, security sector, Parliament and
judiciary will be essential in ensuring the sustainability of the Government’s anti corruption efforts.
69. I thank all United Nations personnel in Afghanistan and my Special
Representative, Tadamichi Yamamoto, for their continued dedication to fulfilling our
commitments in support of the people of Afghanistan under very challenging
circumstances.

17-21453

15/15
