asdf

United Nations

S/PV.6836

Security Council

Provisional

Sixty-seventh year

6836th meeting
Monday, 17 September 2012, 3 p.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Wittig . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Germany)

Members:

Azerbaijan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Colombia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Guatemala . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
India . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Morocco . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Pakistan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Portugal . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
South Africa . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Togo . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . .
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Mr. Mehdiyev
Mr. Tian Lin
Mr. Osorio
Mr. Araud
Mr. Rosenthal
Mr. Kumar
Mr. Loulichki
Mr. Ahmad
Mr. Moraes Cabral
Mr. Zhukov
Mr. Sangqu
Mr. Menan
Mr. Wilson
Ms. Rice

Agenda
Peace and security in Africa

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-506.

12-51067 (E)

*1251067*

S/PV.6836

in successive Tuareg revolts in the Niger and Mali and
political conflicts in Mauritania. While States have
recognized the need to engage with wide sections of
the population to heal the social rifts dividing them,
it has proven difficult to do so in the context of weak
institutions, corruption and marginalization.

The meeting was called to order at 3.10 p.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Peace and security in Africa
The President: Under rule 37 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the representative
of Côte d’Ivoire to participate in this meeting.
Under rule 39 of the Council’s provisional rules
of procedure, I invite Mr. Jeffrey Feltman, UnderSecretary-General for Political Affairs, to participate
in this meeting.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I now give the floor to Mr. Feltman.
Mr. Feltman: The deep-seated fragilities stretching
across the broad Sahel region of Africa are a matter
of growing concern to the people and Governments
of the region as well as to the broader international
community and the Security Council. The threats and
challenges cut across borders and disciplines, and their
solutions must be cooperative and comprehensive. I
am pleased, therefore, to brief the Council today on
the progress made in the development of an integrated
regional strategy for the Sahel that encompasses
security, governance, development, human rights
and humanitarian dimensions, as requested of the
Secretary-General in resolution 2056 (2012), adopted
on 5 July.
Let me first underline some of the main challenges
in the region, which is receiving renewed attention
as a result of the complex and deeply worrisome
crisis in Mali. The kinds of stress factors tearing
today at Mali’s social and political fabric are not
unique to that country. Politically, the Sahel region
has long been characterized by cyclical instability
and unconstitutional changes of Government. State
fragility is also visible in the economic and social
spheres, given the limited capacity of authorities to
deliver basic services and institutionalize dialogue.
Economically, the Sahel States suffer from extreme
poverty, with human development levels among the
lowest in the world. Socially, the region suffers from
fractures rooted in societal divides in some countries
of the region. Political uprisings in those countries have
been spurred just as much along ethnic lines, including

2

The challenges in the Sahel are not only political,
but also involve the areas of security, humanitarian
resilience and human rights. The long, porous borders
of the Sahel region present a significant security
challenge because they facilitate the activities of
transnational criminal and terrorist groups, especially
in remote and poorly administered regions. Porous
borders also facilitate trafficking in arms, drugs and
persons. Coupled with the effects of continued internal
armed conflicts, those various threats undermine
economic development.
Human rights challenges in the region result from a
combination of long-standing weaknesses in the rule of
law, social exclusion and discrimination. Countries in
the Sahel have traditionally suffered from weak national
human rights protection systems, with the judiciary
often lacking independence or being under-resourced.
Accountability is lacking and discriminatory practices
against women and minorities are all too common.
Too often households and communities do not
have the capability to withstand the damaging effects
of the multiple climate and market shocks. For the
most vulnerable, survival strategies during a severe
crisis include selling off assets, particularly livestock,
pulling children out of school, reducing the quantity
and nutritional quality of food and consuming grain
that may be required as seed for the next planting
season. While they may save some lives, such
strategies compromise the ability of households to
rebuild after a crisis and have a life-long impact on
children’s development. To break that negative spiral,
it is necessary to develop programmes that support the
households most vulnerable to humanitarian crises so
that they can better absorb shocks, rebuild after a crisis
and support a longer-term transformation through
education and livelihood diversification.
I would like to take this opportunity to remind the
international community of the humanitarian plight
of the people of the Sahel. The emergency this year is
the third of this scale since 2005. More than 18 million
people were estimated to be at risk of food insecurity

12-51067

S/PV.6836

in 2012, and more than 1 million children in the region
are at risk of suffering from severe acute malnutrition.
Food and nutrition insecurity may ease in October
with the first harvest and a subsequent drop in food
prices, but many households will continue to feel the
consequences of the crisis. Further efforts are required
within the current rainy season; for example, we have
seen an increase in reported cases of cholera and
malaria.
In view of the multiple recurrent and chronic
emergencies the region is facing, it is critical that the
international community commit to deal effectively
with the underlying structural causes of vulnerability
in the Sahel. As humanitarian agencies continue to
provide life-saving assistance and address the most
acute needs, we will also collectively aim at rebuilding
assets, supporting livelihoods, scaling up social
protection, and providing access to basic services
without any form of discrimination. With sufficient and
sustained resources, we will be able to consolidate the
gains achieved through this range of interventions.
It is in this context that United Nations regional
organizations in Dakar, including the United Nations
Office for West Africa, the Regional Directors Team
and the Regional Humanitarian Coordinator have
worked with Headquarters in developing the integrated
response strategy for the Sahel. It builds upon the
work of the the plan of action and the framework for
resilience in the Sahel, which focuses on humanitarian
and development challenges and looks at strengthening
the resilience of communities in the region.
The integrated strategy provides a conceptual
framework and strategic priorities to guide United
Nations engagement in the Sahel at the regional level,
and sets the basis for follow-up consultations with
regional organizations, Governments and key actors
in the region. The strategy will be comprehensive in
scope, preventive in nature and respectful of States’
international human rights obligations, and will build
on existing mechanisms in the region. The strategy
is regional because political and security challenges
are interconnected, because environmental concerns
cannot be geographically isolated, and because building
economic resilience is restricted not to communities,
but to the ability of the region as a whole to withstand
climate and market shocks. As such, the focus of the
strategy will be on areas where the United Nations
can best engage on regional or cross-border issues and

12-51067

contribute to strengthening regional and subregional
cooperation. Engagements will be anchored in national
ownership and driven by regional needs, in a fluid
exchange with implementing partners and Sahel
Member States.
One of the important strategic areas of engagement
where the United Nations may bring added value is the
establishment of a forum for regional and international
partners to discuss and coordinate their Sahel
strategies. We also believe that the United Nations can
provide expertise and support the sharing of nationallevel experiences to create synergies on disaster risk
reduction, agricultural production and changing
grazing patterns, social safety nets, environmental
sustainability and water management.
We can promote conciliation, mediation and
arbitration, including by strengthening local and
regional capacityiesto prevent cross-border tension and
mediate local conflicts. We can assist in developing
regional integrated strategies and approaches to
counter terrorism and organized crime, including
through the provision of expertise on developing
legal and institutional frameworks and anti-moneylaundering measures. Importantly, we can assist in
developing coordinated regional approaches to address
the proliferations of arms and weapons and improve
border management and cooperation.
In implementing all of these actions, the strategy
will incorporate a human rights-based approach that
encompasses the non-negotiable principles of respect for
participation, non-discrimination and accountability. It
needs to be re-emphasized that the blue-print for the
implementation of the strategy should emerge from a
process of broad discussions, debate and consensusbuilding with national and international partners to
develop a sense of collective ownership.
While the integrated regional strategy for the
Sahel will help the United Nations to deliver as one
in the region, it is crucial that we acknowledge the
importance of coordination with other important
partners of the Sahel. The United Nations is looking to
work with them in the implementation of the strategy,
building upon the initiatives already in place to offer
coherent and coordinated international support to the
people and States of the Sahel. In particular, the United
Nations is looking at synergies with the European
Union in the implementation of its Strategy for
Security and Development in the Sahel. We are looking

3

S/PV.6836

at continuing to work with the African Union and the
Economic Community of West African States, and to
build upon their plans of action on drug control and
crime prevention. We are looking to engage with other
subregional organizations and bilateral partners on the
implementation of the strategy, including by working
with national Governments in the implementation of
their own programmes, such as Niger’s national strategy
on terrorism, security and development or Mauritania’s
food security and humanitarian strategies.
As part of this consultative process, the SecretaryGeneral intends to host a high-level meeting on the Sahel
on 26 September, in the margins of the sixty-seventh
session of the General Assembly. The key objective of
the meeting is to present, in broad strokes, the United
Nations integrated strategy for the Sahel and generate
international support for its implementation. It will
also take stock of recent developments in the Sahel and
examine current national, regional and international
efforts to address the multiple challenges confronting
the region. In addition, the meeting will aim at
re-energizing the international response to requests for
assistance by the Governments in the Sahel region and
United Nations agencies to meet the most immediate
needs of the population. The Secretary-General is
convinced that the issue of the Sahel requires focused
attention and follow-up, and he is still examining how
best we can do that.
In closing, I call on the members of the Council and
the wider international community to support United
Nations efforts in the development of the integrated
regional strategy, as well as to support the humanitarian
appeal. I can assure the Council that the United Nations
will remain committed to building the capacity of the
States in the Sahel to secure peace and stability for the
region.
The President: I thank Mr. Feltman for his
statement.
I now give the floor to the representative of Côte
D’Ivoire.
Mr. Bamba (Côte D’Ivoire): Let me at the outset
congratulate you, Sir, upon your assumption of the
presidency of the Security Council for the month of
September. I would like to thank the Under-SecretaryGeneral for Political Affairs for his comprehensive and
very encouraging presentation. Like him, we place
great hope in the upcoming high-level meeting on the
Sahel on 26 September.

4

I take the floor in my capacity as representative
of the President of the Economic Community of West
African States (ECOWAS). I would like to focus on the
situation in Mali.
Since the Council was last briefed on the situation
in Mali (see S/PV.6820), noteworthy developments
have occurred. The interim President, Mr. Dioncounda
Traoré, returned to Mali on 27 July, with the facilitation
of the ECOWAS mediator. On 29 July, he broadcast to
the nation, promising to facilitate the formation of a
national unity Government, and urging Malians to
welcome the support of ECOWAS, the African Union
(AU) and the United Nations in the resolution of the
double crisis in Mali.
On 10 August in Accra, on the margins of the burial
ceremony for the late President John Evens Atta Mills
of Ghana, the ECOWAS heads of State urged the Malian
authorities to form the Government of national unity
without further delay. In addition, they stated that the
presence of the head of the ex-junta in any Government
organ would be unacceptable to ECOWAS. The message
was passed on to Malian authorities.
On 20 August, the Prime Minister eventually
announced the formation of a 32-member Government
of national unity, as demanded by the Authority
of ECOWAS Heads of State and Government. The
composition of the new Government received mixed
reactions within Mali and the international community,
with regard to its true reflection of Mali in its diversity.
It should also be noted that little progress has
been made so far in the implementation of the road
map leading to the holding of free, fair, transparent
and credible elections in the course of the transition,
largely due to the precarious security situation in the
north and continued resistance in Bamako by marginal
forces to the smooth implementation of the transitional
arrangement.
With regard to the security situation, rebel and
terrorist groups in the north of Mali have taken
advantage of the near political paralysis in Bamako to
consolidate their positions. On 1 September, Islamist
extremists from the Movement for Unity and Jihad in
West Africa (MUJAO) captured the strategic town of
Douentza, about 170 kilometres from Mopti, the last
major Government-controlled garrison town before
entering rebel-held territory.

12-51067

S/PV.6836

In another development, on 8 September, jittery
Government troops allegedly shot and killed 16
unarmed Islamic preachers of the Dawa sect, some of
whom were from Mauritania, in the central town of
Diabaly, mistaking them for MUJAO militants.
Following protracted deliberations among the
ECOWAS technical assessment mission, the committee
of chiefs of defence staff and the Malian military and
civilian authorities, on 1 September President Traoré
finally addressed a formal request for assistance from
ECOWAS, the AU and the United Nations to restoring
the territorial integrity of Mali. That letter was
circulated to the members of the Council through its
President.
As welcome as that new development was, it fell
short of the anticipation of the ECOWAS Authority,
as the request ruled out the ECOWAS Standby Force
Mission in Mali (MICEMA) presence in Bamako in
phases I and II of the planned deployment, that is, to
assist with securing republican institutions during the
transition and to help to reorganize and train Malian
forces. Instead, the request limited assistance to only
the provision of equipment, logistics and intelligence
in those phases, and allows for the deployment of
troops only in phase III, namely, the reconquest of the
territorial integrity of Mali.
Meanwhile, the ECOWAS heads of State attending
the funeral in Ghana to which I referred requested that
President Alpha Condé of Guinea delay the release of a
consignment of military hardware imported by former
President Amadou Toumani Touré to Mali, pending
clarifications on the political situation in Bamako.
To that end, the Chairman of Authority dispatched
to Conakry a successful high-level ECOWAS military
and political delegation, led by the Commissioner of
Political Affairs and joined by military officials from
Mali in order to negotiate the safe transfer of the
consignment from the ship to a secure storage facility
under the control of the Guinean authorities, with
ECOWAS bearing the cost of the demurrage.
The more extremist elements within the ex-junta,
led by Lieutenant Amadou Konaré and Captain Bakari
Mariko, and the marginal forces in Mali seized upon the
two developments to unleash a campaign of vilification
against ECOWAS and Guinea in the pro-putschist
media and civil society groups in Bamako.

12-51067

It is against that background that the meeting
of the chiefs of defence staff was held in Abidjan on
14 and 15 September to consider the request from Mali
and review the security situation. The outcome of that
meeting, in addition to maintaining the three phases of
the concept of operations, stressed the following points.
Second, Mali should accept phase I with a
minimum deployment of troops/police to secure
logistic facilities, civilian and military/police staff
of MICEMA; ECOWAS should officially request the
Malian Government to sensitize the population and
the Mali defence and security forces to accept phase I,
as amended, as the other phases cannot be carried out
without phase I.
Third, phase 3 will be jointly planned between
the ECOWAS Standby Force headquarters and Malian
defense and security forces. This phase requires a great
deal of combat assets, including fighter jets for the
conduct of the operations. Such assets may be provided
by ECOWAS or development partners.
Fourth, ECOWAS and development partners should
provide the needed logistical and financial resources
for the conduct of all phases of the operation.
Fifth, ECOWAS should intensify political efforts
with Algeria and Mauritania with a view to securing
their support for the operation.
Sixth, ECOWAS should, at the earliest possible
time, organize a strategic planning meeting with
the African Union, in consultation with the strategic
partners, namely, the European Union, the United
Nations and the United States of America.
Seventh, Malian authorities should comply with
resolution 2056 (2012), on the total withdrawal of the
Comité national de redressement de la démocratie et de
la restauration de l’état (CNRDRE) from the political
arena.
Eighth, Malian authorities should intensify efforts
on an inter-Malian dialogue with the rebels through the
establishment of a national mechanism.
In conclusion, based on what I have set out, it is
obvious that although some progress has been achieved
on the political and security fronts, several daunting
challenges remain. In the light of this situation, I would
like to mention the following trends that are likely, to
a certain extent, to shape the current context of the
situation in Mali.

5

S/PV.6836

First, the ECOWAS decisions on Mali continue
to encounter fierce resistance from the more extreme
elements among former CNRDRE members, and a
vocal minority of so-called patriotic social forces who
have built a coalition around Oumar Mariko and the
Convergence patriotique pour le Mali.
Second, that situation risks diminishing the
chances for creating a permissive environment for the
deployment of MICEMA.
Third, furthermore, the request for military
deployment only for phase III can hardly be fulfilled,
because it will be extremely difficult and strategically
unwise to deploy troops in the north of the country
without a coordinating centre in Bamako.
Fourth, it appears that a sharp division has occurred
between two factions of the ex-CNRDRE, one led by
Captain Amadou Sanogo and the other by Amadou
Konaré. That situation portends further clashes within
the military, and complicates the transition. Captain
Sanogo has declared his support for the request for
ECOWAS assistance, while Lieutenant Konaré has
vehemently opposed it.
Fifth, the question of leadership in Mali remains
unclear and that is sending confused signals.
Sixth, the security and humanitarian situation in
the north of Mali is getting worse and continues to pose
a major threat to regional and international peace and
security.

6

Seventh, the commendable efforts of the mediator,
Mr. Blaise Compaoré, President of Burkina Faso, with
regard to the rebels are yielding qualified results and
should be further encouraged.
Eighth, in closing, and as the Council knows, the
meeting of ECOWAS Ministers of Defence and Foreign
Affairs, held today in Abidjan in the framework of
the ECOWAS Mediation and Security Council, is still
in progress and should be concluded shortly. What is
noteworthy is that the meeting seeks to validate the
decisions reached earlier by the meeting of the Chief
of Defence Staff. In addition, those decisions will have
to be further confirmed at the level of ECOWAS Heads
of State and Government and endorsed by the relevant
organs of the African Union before landing at the
Security Council.
Finally, it is the intention of the Commission to
intensify contacts with the neighbouring States Algeria
and Mauritania to build a workable consensus on the
ECOWAS-led deployment of the stabilization force in
Mali. To that end, a consultative meeting of the support
group on Mali should be organized under the joint
chairmanship of ECOWAS and the African Union.
The President: There are no more names inscribed
on the list of speakers. I now invite Council members
to informal consultations to continue our discussion on
this subject.
The meeting rose at 3.40 p.m.

12-51067
