UNITED NATIONS

OFFICIAL

RECORDS

THIRTY-SIXTH

YEAR
th
MEETING:

28 APRIL

1981

NEW YORK

CONTENTS
Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/2275)

.. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

1
1

Adoption of the agenda *..............................*....**.....*....
The situation in Namibia:
Letter dated 10 April 1981 from the Permanent Representative of Uganda
to the United Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council
(S/14434) . . . . . . . . . . , . , , . , . , . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . , . . , . t . , . . .
l

1

SlPV.2275

NOTE
Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined with figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United
Nations document.
Documents of the Security Council (symbol S/ . . .) are normally published in
quarterly Srrppletm~nfs of the Officid Records c$ the Security Council. The date
of the document indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which information about it is given,
The resolutions
of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a
system adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of ResoIufiom
md
Da&&s
of the Securify Cosrncil. The new system, which has been applied
retroactively to resolutions adopted before 1 January 1965, became fully operative
on that date.

\ \\ -

2275th MEETING
Held in New York on Tuesday, 28 April 1981, at 11 a.m.
P~e,sido~t:Mr. Noel DORR (Ireland).

(C$inea), Mr. Doaglas (Guyana), Mr. Rae (India),
a. Kusumnatm~~~~~i
(lndoncsia),
Mr.
Sheare,
(Jamaica), Mr. Kasiwr (Kenya), Mr. Barwin (Libyan
Arab Jamahiriya),
Mr. Monteiro
(Mozambique),
Mr. Baba (Nigeria), Mr. Shahi (Pakistan), Mr. Marinescw (Romania), Mr, Niasw (Senegal), Mr. Cmteh
(Sierra Leone), Mr. Fousie (South Africa), Mr. Balasubramaniam {Sri La~ka), Mr. Akakpo-Ahianyo (Togo),
Mr. Salim (United Republic of Tatxania), Mr. Vrhovec
( Yugoslavia), Mr. Kamanda WI Kamanda (Zaire),
Mr. Gonta (Zambia), and Mr. Mangweade (Zimbubwe)
took the places reserved for them at the side c~f the
Corrmil chamber.

~rese,lt:The representatives of the following States:
China,France, German Democratic Republic, Ireland,
Japan, Mexico, Niger, Panama, Philippines, Spain,
Tunisia,Uganda, Union of Soviet Socialist Republics,
UnitedKingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland,
United Statesof America.
Provisional

agenda (S/Agenda/2275)

1. Adoption of the agenda
2,

The situation in Namibia:
Letter dated 10 April 1981 from the Permanent
Representative of Uganda to the United
Nations addressed to the President of the
Security Council (S/14434)

2. The PRESIDENT: I should like to inform members
of the Council that I have received a letter from the
representative of Singapore in which he requests to be
invited to participate in the discussionof the item on the
Council’s agenda. In accordance with the usual practice, I propose, with the consent of the Council, to
invite that representative to participate in the discussion without the right to vote, in accordance with the
relevant provisions of the Charter and rule 37 of the
Council’s provisional rules of procedure.

The meeting H*IIS called to order at uoon.

Adoption

of the agenda

The agenda IWS adopted.
The situation in Namibia:
Letter dated 10 April 1981 from the Permanent
Representative of Uganda to the United Nations
addressed to the President of the Security Council
(S/14434)

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Koh (Singapore); took the place reservedfor him at the side of the
Council chamber.

3. The PRESIDENT: In accordancewith the decision
taken at the 2267th meeting, I invite the President of
the United Nations Council for Namibia and the delegation of the Council to take places at the Security
Council table.

1. The PRESIDENT: In accordance with decisions
taken at previous meetings [2267//f to 2272ml and
2274th f?wtilIgs],
I invite the representatives of
Algeria, Angola, Bangladesh, Benin, Brazil, Burundi,
Canada, Cuba, Democratic Yemen, Ethiopia, the
Federal Republic of Germany, Guinea, Guyana, India,
Indonesia, Jamaica, Kenya, the Libyan Arab Jamahiriya, Mozambique, Nigeria, Pakistan, Romania,
Senegal,Sierra Leone, South Africa, Sri Lanka, Togo,
the United Republic of Tanzania, Yugoslavia, Zaire,
Zambiaand Zimbabwe to participate in the discussion
without the right to vote,

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Lusaka (President of the Ultited Nations Council for Namibia) and
the other members qf the delegation took places at the
Cwncil table.

4. The PRESIDENT: In accordance with the decision also taken at the 2267th meeting, I invite Mr. Peter
Mueshihange to take a place at the Council table,
At the invitation qf the President,
took a place at the Council table.

At the invitation c?f’ the President, Mr. Benyahia
(Algeria), Mr. Jorge (Angola), Mr. Kaiser (Bangladesh), Mr. Houngavou (Benin), Mr. Corrza da Costa
(BrazilI, Mr. Simbananiye
(Burundi),
Mr. Dupuy
(Canada), Mr. Malmierca (Cubu), Mr. Ashtal (Detnouatic Yemen), Mr. Grdle-Giorgis
(Efhiapia), Mr. Jelonek (Federal Republic of Get~any), Mr. Cownbassa

Mr. Mueshihange

5. The PRESIDENT: I should like to inform members
of the Council that I have received from the Chairman
of the Special Committee on the Situation with regard
to the Implementation of the Declaration on the
1

\

II.

United
Nations,
will want to ensure
that after a ceasefire has come into effect in Namibia,
UNTAG
will
maintain conditions of peace and security so that the
people of Namibia can vote in the elections, which
will bc controlled and supervised by the United Nations, free from fear and intimidation.
The obstacle
which the South Africans have put in the path of the
implementation of the United Nations plan is, therefore, very much like all the other obstacles and excuses
which they raised previously.

15. Some of my colleagues from the five Western
Powers have asked me why we should impose on them
the primary responsibility for the implementation
of
the United Nations plan. I shall give them three reasons
why we do so. First, we hold them responsible because
the United Nations plan was their conception in the
first place, They therefore have a parental duty towards
the plan, The second reason is that the five Western
countries, through their political and economic links
with South Africa, possess levers of power and influence which, if used, could persuade the Government
of South Africa to alter its course. Other countries do
not have such power and inff uence over South Africa.
The third reason is that it is in the interest of the five
Western Powers to ensure the prompt and faithful
implementation
of resolution 435 (1978). I say this
because those Western countries are the advocates of
the process of peaceful change. They have told us time
and again that peaceful change is preferable to violent
change. It is therefore’in the interest of the Western
countries to ensure that the process of peaceful change
in Namibia succeeds. If the Western countries are
not prepared to put pressure on South Africa in order
to melt its intransigence, then the process of peaceful
change will surely fail. If the process of peaceful change
fails, the people of Namibia will have no alternative
but to intensify their armed struggle in order to achieve
their liberation from South Africa. The West must
remember that the alternative to peaceful change is
not acquiescence in the status q~/o: it is change by nonpeaceful means.

13, In his statement to the Council, the representative of South Africa pleacled for tolerance and understanding and implored the Council to avoid confrontation. These are sweet words. We must, however,
judge
South Africa-and
for that matter any other
country-not:
by what it says but by what it does. There
is, regrettably, no congruence between South Africa’s
words and South Africa’s deeds. How can we avoid
a confrontation with South Africa if it is not prepared
to give up its dream of annexing Namibia? I-low can
we avoid a confrontation with South Africa if it is not
prepared
to terminate its illegal occupation of Namibia? How can we avoid a confrontation with South
Africa if it is not prepared to implement Security Council resolution 435 (1978) in good faith? Those who
commit aggression and occupy the territories of others
illegally are in the habit of speaking the language of
peace and preaching
international
co-operation,
understanding and negotiations.
We must not be
deceived by such rhetoric.

16. I shall conclude my statement by simply joining
my voice to those of my colleagues from African and
other non-aligned countries in asking the Council to
act firmly and decisively bY adopting measures aimed
at the prompt and scrupulous implementation
of Security Council resolution 435 (1978).

14. I have also examined carefully the statement
made by the representative of the United Kingdom to
the Council on 23 April 1981 [227/sr rlrecti/r~]. In the
course of his statement, he read the text of a communique which was issued in London at the conclusion of a meeting attended by the senior officials of
the five Western Governments
[iDit/,, pura. 881. In
that communique, the five Western Powers agreed that
Council resolution 435 (1978) continues to provide a
solid basis for transition to independence in Namibia,
The communique, however, goes on to say that the
five Western Powers have considered
possibilities for
strengthening the existing plan and have agreed that
expeditious progress towards a settlement would be
enhanced by measures aimed at giving greater confidence to all the parties on the future of an independent Namibia. The London communique
has caused
anxiety to African and other non-aligned countries,
They would like to know whether the five Western
Pcwers remain committed to their own plan of action
as contained in resolution 435 (1978) and to its faithful
imPlementation. What do they mean by “possibilities
fcr strengthening the existing plan”? Do they intend
tc amend or revise the plan? In our view, there is
nothing wrong with the United Nations plan of action.
What is wrong is the attitude of the Government of
South Africa. It is, therefore, not the plan but the
attitude of the Government
of South Africa which
needs to be altered.

17. Mr. de PINIES
(Spain) (intcqmtrrfim ,fiom
Spcrnislr): I have already had occasion in the past to
congratulate you, Mr, President, on your accession
to the presidency of this lofty body, and also to pay a
deserved tribute to your predecessor, Ambassador
Florin, Today I should like to thank the African Ministers for Foreign Affairs for being here. Their presence
reflects the particular importance of this debate and
indeed reveals the concern of the international community. I wish to pay a tribute of appreciation and
admiration to each and every one of them for coming
here to New York and drawing attention to this important matter of such great concern.
18. On 30 January of this year [2263~I meeting], we
were convened in this very chamber to hear the report
of the Secretary-General on the implementation
of
Security Council resolutions 435 (1978) and 439 (1978)
relating to the question of Namibia [S//4333]. A few
days earlier, at Geneva, there had been a meeting of all
the interested parties to discuss details of the direct
implementation
of resolution 435 (1978) to ensure
attainment of Namibian independence in 1981.
3

19. To achieve that aim, during the course of the
Geneva talks a date was to be set for a cease-fire and
for initiation
of implementation
of the United Nations
Plan during the first half of this year,

23. Support for the Namibian people and its right
independence
in its full territorial integrity has b
Eo
‘-err
a constant factor in Spanish foreign policy. Our
O!r I&en0
EM;,
ister for Foreign Affairs, in his statement before
-“Ithirty-fifth session of the General Assembly, stated: the

20. Unfortunately,
despite the constructive exchange
of views at that meeting, South Africa’s refusal to set
a date for the cease-fire caused a suspension-with
unforeseeable
consequences-in
the lengthy process
of negotiations
which would have made it possible to
achieve
a negotiated
settlement in the immediate
future. That attitude frustrated the dialogue between
the various parties that had gone to Geneva to define
prerequisites
for a peaceful settlement:
inter ulia,
the front-line
States, the Secretary-General
of the
Organization
of African Unity (OAU) and the representative of the Chairman of that organization,
the
Minister
for Foreign Affairs of Sierra Leone, as well
as representatives
of other important countries, such as
Nigeria and the five Western Powers which over the
preceding
four years had made tireless efforts to
design and implement
the United Nations plan for
Namibia.
As the Secretary-General
of the United
Nations himself indicated in his report, the outcome
of the Geneva meeting must give rise to the most
serious international
concern.

“The continued occupation by South Africa
the Territory
of Namibia, contrary to the ‘esQIEf
tions of the United Nations, is a persistent elemert;
of conflict in the entire region. We consider
that
that illegal occupation must be brought to an end
c
quickly as possible, and therefore we have ~~2
ported [all] resolutions [adopted at the thirty-fourt2;
session of the General Assembly] reaffirm.ing
the
right of the Namibian people to self-determmation
.
freedom and independence,
and the terrlto,jai
integrity of a united Namibia”.*
24. The forward thrust of the forces of liberation
constitutes an irreversible historic tide the aims
Bf
which are gradually being achieved, The cornmemoration last year of the twentieth anniversary of the:
adoption of General Assembly resolution 1514 CXv,
and the accession to independence of countries which
like Zimbabwe, had to travel an arduous path in or-&&
to achieve liberty, should provide an example
and
an encouragement
to us to solve as soon as possible
the difficult situation created by the illegal occupation
by South Africa of the Territory of Namibia. As we
have pointed out on other occasions, it would Serve
little purpose for the liberation movements to be ready
to enter into dialogue if the Governments
wfiich
exercise effective control over the Territories do lnat
take the necessary steps to achieve a just and lasting
solution. Thus, SWAP0 has given evidence of great
has
political
qualities and on repeated occasions
demonstrated a constructive attitude in the search for
solutions to the problem of Namibia, making clear
its
agreement with the United Nations plan contained
in
Council resolutions 435 (1978) and 439 (1978).

21. However, the failure does not mean that the long
series of negotiations
in which the United Nations
has been involved for several years now has been a
waste of time. The settlement plan contained in Security Council resolutions 385 (1976), 435 (1978) and
439 (1978) remains fully in effect; those resolutions
still constitute
the basic framework for achieving
Namibia’s
peaceful transition to independence.
The
creation of a demilitarized
zone, the deployment
of
UNTAG,
the organization
of free elections to be
supervised by the United Nations, and the rejection
of any internal settlement continue to be the fundamental points that should guide our efforts to achieve
peace, However, it is no longer possible in our work
to forget the path we have travelled, or the time that
has elapsed without our having been able to achieve
the goal of such complex negotiations. The plan contained in the aforementioned
Council resolutions must
be implemented
without delay.

25. It is also necessary to emphasize the positive
attitude demonstrated on numerous occasions by the
front-line States, which have engaged in a standing
dialogue with the five Western Powers of the contact
group and with the Special Representative
of the
Secretary-General
for Namibia. I should at this time
like to join those other delegations which have thanked
the Secretary-General
for his tireless efforts to find
a just solution to the problem that is before us.

22. Since 1966, when the General Assembly,
in
accordance with resolution 2145 (XXI) assumed direct
administration
of the Territory of Namibia
until it
achieved final independence, the United Nations has
borne the primary responsibility
for the Territory of
Namibia
and is in duty bound to give its people independence, no matter what obstacles may exist. Other
speakers
who have preceded me have reiterated
quite accurately here what the fundamental milestones
are in the United Nations doctrine concerning the
question of Namibia. Therefore, I do not wish to repeat
a lengthy list of resolutions either of the General Assembly or’ of the Council, or the learned opinion of the
International
Court of Justice.

26. With regard to the various meetings that have
been held within a regional framework to deal with the
question of Namibia,
we should like to emphaSi*ze
among the most recent ones the extraordinary
ZZ~I~isterial meeting of the Co-ordinating Bureau of the
Non-Aligned
Countries, held this month at Al&e@*
Among its conclusions, we should like to emphasiZe
the meeting’s support for the inalienable right to self*
of
determination
and independence of the people
Namibia; the reaffirmation that independence she dd
be achieved in Namibia’s
entire territory,
with
no
4

division of the Territory whatsoever, especially with
of any internal
settlementthat runs counter to Security Council resolution 439 (1978) and of any substantive modification
of the plan laid out in resolution 435 (1978), which
eoatinuesto provide the universally accepted framework for the peaceful transition to independence of
Namibia [S//4458, LIIIIIPX].

of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence
to Colonial Countries and Peoples): On behalf of the
Special Committee on the Situation with regard to the
Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of
Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples,
I wish to express my sincere appreciation for this
opportunity to address the Security Council in connection with its consideration of the critical situation
with which the Organization is confronted in respect
of Namibia.

regard to Walvis Bay: the rejection

27, Spain, from its seat in the Security Council,
would like to support all efforts that have been made
to date-without any slackening of energy-to ensure
that the speedy liberation of the people of Namibia
may he achieved and that the majority will be able
to express its views in an election supervised by the
United Nations. Any settlement without the direct
participation of the Organization would not be advisable, Similarly, we reject the reinforcement of South
Africa’s military presence, the arbitrary detention
of a great number of patriots and the repeated acts of
intimidation committed not only within the borders of
theTerritory that is illegally occupied by South Africa,
hut also against the neighbouring countries.

32. I should also like to say, Mr. President, how
happy and gratified I am to see you presiding over the
deliberations of the Council on this occasion, The
commitment of the people and Government of Ireland
to the cause of the colonial peoples in regard to selfdetermination and independence is a matter of record.
33. This series of meetings of the Security Council
comes at a time when the effort of the international
community to bring about a definitive negotiated
solution for Namibia has once again floundered on the
rock of obduracy so blatantly displayed by the minority regime in Pretoria, These meetings of the Council
are a demonstration of the serious concern shared
by members of the Group of African States, members
of the non-aligned movement and, indeed, of the
international community as a whole at the current turn
of events with regard to the Territory and underscore
our determination to see that all effective measures
open to the Organization are taken to eliminate a situation which constitutes a serious threat to international
peace and security. Moreover, the open defiance by
South Africa of the will of the international community
is a damaging affront to the Organization, since it
undermines the very principles on which the United
Nations was founded.

28. While it is true that problems cannot be solved
by words alone, it is no less true that it is certainly
realistic to negotiate speedy and effective solutions,
as has been indicated in the Charter of the United
Nations, which established the Security Council as
the principal body responsible for the achievement of
concrete solutions to situations of conflict. We consider, however, that the application of indiscriminate
drastic measures would perhaps not constitute the
best means of achieving the negotiated solution we
advocate. Such measures, according to studies made
by specialized bodies of the Organization, would
have a boomerang effect on the countries which are
mostinterested in achieving a solution to the problem
of Namibia and which are currently suffering most
from the imbalance that exists in the region. We should
like to think that it is yet not too late for a negotiated
solution, so long as all the parties to the conflict, and
fundamentally South Africa, renounce all delaying
tacticsand accept the will of the international community.

34. As the United Nations body entrusted with the
task of ensuring the full implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial
Countries and Peoples [Gene~~rlAsset?~hly ,usolution
1514 (XV)], it has been the Special Committee’s consistent position that, given the refusal of the South
African authorities to comply with the demands of the
international community with respect to Namibia,
given their continued resort to force to perpetuate their
illegal domination of the Territory, and given their
repeated acts of aggression against their neighbours,
the full and effective application of measures under
Chapter VII of the Charter of the United Nations
will be the key to the speedy restoration of peace,
justice and freedom to the Namibian people., The
validity of this position of the Committee has, I trust,
been more than amply demonstrated. Indeed, the wellknown developments since the adoption of Council
resolution 435 (1978) and the dismal failure of the socalled pre-implementation meeting at Geneva resulting
from South Africa’s devious and dilatory tactics, have
clearly unmasked the true intent of the Government
of South Africa: this has been to earn the time, under
the guise of negotiation, to consolidate its domination

29. In conclusion, I should like to join in the urgent
appeal that the Secretary-General made to South
Africa to reconsider as speedily as possible its position relating to the immediate implementation of
resohnion 435 (1978).
30. The PRESIDENT: The next speaker is the
Chairman of the Special Committee on the Situation
with regard to the Implementation of the Declaration
onthe Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries
and Peoples, to whom the Council has extended an
invitation under rule 39 of its provisional rules of
procedure. 1 invite him to take a place at the Council
table and to make his statement.
31* Mr. ABDULAH (Chairman, Special Committee
Onthe Situation with regard to the Implementation
5

periods of optimism,
uncertainty
and somet“-e,
discouragement.
Considerable
efforts have bet;;~
made, not only by our countries but also and Pami
c*
ularly by the African countries, first and foremost
the front-line
countries, whose patience, wisdo b,
and spirit of co-operation are to be commended: by th2
Secretary-General,
to whom I should like to Pay
a
tribute here; and by his devoted assistants. SigniR Cant
progress has been made.

over the Territory
through the proxy of a puppet
regime and to deny to the Namibian
people their
inalienable
right to self-determination
and independence.
35. At the same time we have witnessed, and wholeheartedly endorsed, the fine sense of statesmanship on
the part of the leadership of SWAPO, as demonstrated
in its sincere willingness to do everything possible to
effect without delay the full implementation
of the
United Nations plan under Council resolution 435
(1978). The extraordinary
demonstration
by the
SWAP0 leadership of the spirit of accommodation,
patience and responsiveness is too well known to be
repeated here. In the same context, I wish to pay a
special tribute to the leaders of the front-line States for
the crucial role they have played throughout in support
of the cause of the people of Namibia.

41. When South Africa and SWAP0 accepted
the:
plan, when the Security Council adopted resolution
435 (1978), we thought that our goal-the
emergenec
of a free and independent Namibia-was
finally go“%
to be reached. Naturally, we were disappointed
that
problems arose subsequently regarding the imew,,tation and implementation
of the settlement PIan
Many people thought in the spring of 1979 that nego&
tion had been compromised once and for all. Never,
theless, tirelessly, means to resume negotiations were
sought out and found.

36. It is against the background I have just outlined
that we in the Committee view the present situation
obtaining in Namibia. The repeated attempts to bring
about an independent, stable, self-governing,
democratic Namibia by the exercise of reason through negotiations at an international
level have not brought
about the desired results. It is indeed past the time to
proceed forthwith with other alternatives. The adoption by the Security Council of a comprehensive
programme of economic sanctions, on the one hand,
and the extension by the international
community of
all possible assistance to the struggling people of
Namibia under the leadership of SWAPO, on the
other, is the very least we can expect if we are not to
see the present armed struggle degenerate into a fullscale war with all its dire consequences.

42. The proposal put forward in 1979 by the late
President Neto of Angola to create a demilitarized
zone on the northern border of Namibia enabled
us
at the time to resume negotiations. The progress made
and the good will that seemed to prevail on all sides at
the time rekindled the hope that in a reasonable time
independence
might be achieved by Namibia.
me
goal of the Geneva meeting held from 7 to 14 January
last was to agree on a date to start implementing
resolution 435 (1978).
43. The failure of the Geneva meeting disappointed
us. We especially understand the bitterness of the
African countries because we ourselves witnessed the
determination
to succeed within the delegation.
of
SWAP0 and the delegations of the front-line States.
Nigeria and the OAU. On the other hand, the arguments used by the members of the South African
delegation did not seem to us sufficient to justify postponing the entry into force of the settlement plan -

37. Before I close, may I be permitted to express my
deep appreciation to the States members of the OAU
for having taken this important initiative to call for
this series of Council meetings on the situation in Namibia. With the full co-operation of the members of the
movement of non-aligned countries, I have no doubt
whatever that the decisions adopted by the Council
during this series of meetings will prove to be a decisive factor in restoring to the people of Namibia their
long-denied human dignity and freedom. Delay is the
worst form of denial.

44. Since the end of the Geneva meeting, the countries members of the contact group have thought
about the attitude to be adopted. Both because We
were faced by a new situation and because a change Q,f
Administration
had occurred in one of the five Powers
9
the period of reflection of the contact group was longer
than certain people had expected. Several speakers
blamed us at the resumed thirty-fifth session of the
General Assembly for not having proposed anything
new, and even for being silent, Some delegations concluded that recourse to force and enforcement measures would now have to take over from negotiation-

38. In conclusion, I should like to pay a particular
tribute to the Secretary-General,
for his tireless
endeavour in the search for a satisfactory solution
to the problem of Namibia.
39. Mr. LEPRETTE
(France) (interprerntion
f,atn
Fre~~ch): For four years my country, together with
the four other members of the contact group, has
been engaged in a continuous, tireless quest for a
peaceful and internationally
accepted solution for
the painful problem of Namibia.

45. Can anyone really believe that the appeal in the=
Security
Council
for comprehensive
mandatory
sanctions could enable Namibia to achieve independence in 1981, which was the goal of the Genev’”
meeting? We for our part do not believe that it cotif d -

40. Since the submission of the settlement plan by
the five Powers [S//2636], negotiation has gone through
6

46, We are told that nothing can be achieved by
negotiation, But have we made SO many efforts for
nothing? Has the Secretary-General used his talent
in vain? Did President Neto devote the last months of
hislife to futile efforts? Is the situation today the same
asthat which prevailed in 19X’? The reply to those
questions is obviously no.

mulated for ail too many years, the will to suceed must
take precedence. There is no alternative, France, for
its part, is determined to work within the contact group
to reach a peaceful settlement of the question of Namibia. It considers that the efforts to be made must
respond essentially to two concerns: first, the rights,
freedoms and principles of government enunciated in
the Charter of the United Nations and the International
Covenants on Human Rights must be taken into
account: secondly, a system guaranteeing respect for,
and the application of, these principles must be elaborated.

47. My delegation is convinced that the time for
negotiationhas not passed. The positions of the parties
arenot so far apart that no hope remains.
48. Although disappointing, the Geneva meeting
wasnot, we think, useless. The objections raised by
onedelegation had nothing to do with the validity of
the United Nations plan. The parties to the settlement
accept,asdoesthe international community as a whole,
theindependenceof Namibia, the holding of free electionsand the deployment of UNTAG on the Territory
of Namibia. No one has challenged resolution 435
(1978).The problem raised by the South African delegation had to do with &he impartiality of the United
Nationsand trust between the parties. I should like to
observein passing that there would be no problems of
distrusthad South Africa followed, in respect of Namibia, the policy that has been followed by Powers
entrustedwith Mandated and Trust Territories. There
wouldbe no problem of distrust quite simply because,
underthis hypothesis, there would have been an independentNamibia more than 20 years ago; there would
havebeenno SWAP0 since there would have been an
internationally recognized Government of Namibia.

53. The PRESIDENT: The next speaker is the representative of Guyana. I invite him to take a place at the
Council table and to make his statement.
54. Mr. DOUGLAS (Guyana): Mr. President, I
should like first to congratulate you on your assumption of the presidency of the Council for this month.
55. The abortive pre-implementation talks at Geneva
last January saw the climax of the international community’s patient and reasoned dialogue with South
Africa designed to achieve the decolonization of Namibia. The brutal and cynical fashion in which South
Africa wrecked those talks demonstrated unambiguously the Pretoria regime’s determination at all
costs to maintain its colonial presence in Namibia and
to frustrate the efforts of the international community
to bring about the independence of that Territory. In
a sense our presence here today bears witness to the
futility of our forbearance. But, more significantly,
our presence here is testimony to our resolve to apply
the necessary pressure that South Africa’s intransigence has so long demandedin the face of its inflexibility, deviousness and procrastination. It is the
recognition of the gravity of the disquieting developments concerning the Namibian question that has led
so many statesmen to appear before the Council to
demand that it respond in appropriate measure to the
challenge posed by South Africa’s refusal to implement
United Nations decisions on Namibia, and to the
consequential dangers that such an attitude implies
for peace and stability in the region.

49. In our view, resolution 435 (1978) must remain
thesolid basisfor any future solution, If arrangements
shouldprove to be still necessary with regard to the
plan,that could only be the case within the framework
of the United Nations.
50. We must now consider the ways and means to
overcome the obstacles that emerged in Geneva, in
orderto implement resolution 435 (1978), thus achieving our common goal. Fears have been expressed
concerningequal treatment of the parties as well as
the democratic future of the Territory. We feel that
theseapprehensions can be allayed. The international
communityshould be able to provide the assurances
necessaryto restore a climate of trust which is indispensableto make progress,

56. The grave situation that has necessitated these
meetings of the Council cannot be resolved by compromise solutions. The long history of our consideration of the question of Namibia has been one of
compromise. It was within the spirit of accommodation
that the Council adopted resolution 435 (1978), laying
down the basis on which Namibia’s independence
could be achieved and giving rise to some optimism
that a decisive hurdle had been cleared on the road to
freedom for the occupied Territory. The passage of
time has shown that, whereas SWAPO, the sole and
legitimate representative of the Namibian people, and
the vast majority of the international community saw
compromise as a speeding up of the decolonization
process, South Africa, on the contrary, saw it as an
expedient to delay Namibia’s freedom indefinitely. To

51. It is in that direction that we feel we should
proceed. As is stated in the communique published
in London on 23 April [S/14457, annex] and as was
stated in the Council by the representative of the
United Kingdom [227/st nzeeting, prcr. 881, it is
towards that goal that the countries members of the
contactgroup are now committed. It is too early to
submitany precise proposals, but that is the way in
which we wish to work,
52* To us that would seem to be the only valid way.
Whateverresentment and bitterness may have accu7

play for time and to deceive have been the tactics that
the South Africans have consistently employed in their
negotiations
on the future of the Territory. No clearer
proof of this strategy can be found than in the intolerable behaviour of South Africa at the conference table
at Geneva.
57. It is distressing, therefore, that, in spite of a clear
pattern of South African deceit and evasiveness over
the years, culminating
in the theatricals at Geneva,
conveniently
timed initiatives
are being taken that
would suggest that further concessions need to be made
to placate South Africa. Does not the evidence of South
Africa’s past behaviour show that it regards no concession as final? Is it not clearly obvious to all by now that
South Africa’s appetite for concessions from the
international
community
on the question of Namibia’s independence cannot be sated? And it cannot
be sated because South Africa has no interest in a solution that means the end of its occupation of Namibia
and the freedom of the Territqry.
58. A framework for the independence
of Namibia
exists. It is to be found in resolution 435 (1978), a resolution that enjoys international
consensus and for
which the five Western Powers have a special responsibility. To modify this resolution or to deviate from its
principles simply to satisfy the tactical demands of
South Africa would be to call into question our seriousness of purpose and our commitment
to a just settlement of the Namibian question. It is only on the basis
of this resolution and within the United Nations that
initiatives for a final and peaceful solution can be taken.
59. What must concern us is the equivocation
and
inconsistency of the five Western Powers as shown in
their uncertain commitment
to the spirit and letter of
resolution 435 (1978). The timidity
with which the
Western countries have sought to enforce a resolution of which they were the architects and for which
they obtained the support of the international
community owes much to the primacy iif the strategic and
economic considerations
that continue to distort a
simple, straightforward
question of decolonization
and to make Namibia
a focal-point
of East-West
confrontation.
Such an outlook
is completely
at
variance with that of most member countries of the
international
community
and is responsible for the
obduracy of the South African racists because of their
belief that in the last resort their Western friends will
not be prepared to apply the kind of pressure that will
end South Africa’s illegal occupation of Namibia.
60, Given the conduct of Western countries so
far, there is no reason to dispute South Africa’s assessment of Western priorities.
The readiness of the
West to defer to the South African point of view forces
us to face squarely the question of whether the role of
Western countries
is one of mediation
or of tacit
alliance with South Africa. It is by resolute action in
the Council that those key Western countries can allay
the legitimate
fears that have arisen about the true

nature of their role and their genuine
to the cause of Namibia’s independence.

commitment

61. There is now broad international
agreement
about what form such resolute action should take.
After years of patience and tolerance, it is now generally accepted that the only fitting response to the
obstinacy of the racist Pretoria rigime is the application of comprehensive
mandatory sanctions under
Chapter VII of the Charter of the United Nations. The
Organization of African Unity, the non-aligned movement and the General Assembly have called for such
sanctions. It is a call that the Council must heed if it is
to show the world, and in particular the oppressed
people of Namibia, that it intends at long last to implement the resolutions that over the years it has adopted
on the question of Namibia. It is important for the
Council to restore credibility to the United Nations,
credibility that was badly shaken by South Africa’s
outrageous conduct at Geneva. In this respect, those
Western countries that are permanent members of this
organ must now join the international consensus which
demands the imposition of sanctions against South
Africa as the next step towards the achievement of
independence by Namibia.
62. We are certain that our diplomatic efforts here
will supplement the intensified struggle of SWAP0
in its war to rid Namibia of South African occupation
forces. SWAP0 has always stood ready to seek a
negotiated solution to the Namibia conflict at the
bargaining table, but it has always been conscious that
in the final analysis it would be the progress it made
on the battlefield that would determine the outcome of
the liberation struggle. Events have shown that it is the
military option that SWAP0 must now exercise to deal
with South African aggression and intransigence, The
international community must accordingly give those
valiant fighters for freedom the maximum
support
possible for the struggle both on and off the battlefield.
Support must also be given to those front-line States
that are the constan’t targets of Pretoria’s
bestial
attacks,
63. The decolonization
of southern Africa is a process that may encounter temporary setbacks, but it
cannot in the long run be stopped. Guyana is convinced of the inevitable victory of the liberation
struggle. It is a victory that can be hastened by the
imposition of sanctions by the Council.
64. The PRESIDENT:
I should now like to make
a statement in my capacity as representative
of
IRELAND.
65. I can scarcely begin, as many others have done,
with kind and flattering words addressed to the President, though it is true, of course, that I do wish him
well. However, I should like to express my good wishes
in person to my immediate predecessor, Ambassador
Florin, now that he has returned to New York, and to
thank him for his work as President of the Council
during the month of March,

66, The United Nations assumed in 1966 a special
respnnsibility towards the people of Namibia. We meet
here to consider yet again how to discharge it. I cannot
and sholIld not in a short statement rehearse the whole
history of the United Nations involvement
in the
question, But, given the Importance
of the present
debate, 1 feel it neCesSary
to do SO to Some
extent.
1 believe it is also worth recalling some of that long
history because that Will place in its proper perspective
the South African contention at Geneva in January that
it was premature to discuss a date for implementation
of the United Nations settlement plan.

the Mandate by the Assembly; it called on South Africa
to withdraw its illegal presence; and it further stated
that if South Africa failed to do so, then the Council
would decide on necessary steps or measures in accordance with the Charter of the United Nations.
71. Ireland fully supported the 1966 decision of the
General Assembly to terminate the Mandate. It also
welcomed the Security Council’s decision of 1969 to
assume its responsibilities in the new situation.,We did
so because the Irish Government considered, even at
that stage, 11 years ago, that it was the Security Council, and the permanent members in particular, which
had the responsibility and the power to bring South
Africa’s illegal presence to an end. Indeed our then
Minister for Foreign Affairs, Mr. Aiken, had stated
that position as far back as 1966.

67, In 1920 South Africa received a Mandate from the
League
of Nations in respect of the former German
territory of South West Africa, renamed Namibia in
1968.It was charged with promoting “to the utmost the
material and moral well-being and the social progress
ofthe inhabitants of the Territory”.”
When the League
of Nations went out of existence and yielded place to
the United Nations, South Africa, unlike other Mandatory Powers, declined in 1946 to place the Mandated
Territory under the new United Nations Trusteeship
System. In 1949 it declined even to continue submitting
reports to the United Nations on the Territory, as it was
obliged to do under Article 73 e of the Charter. Nor
would it accept the 1950 advisory opinion of the International Court of Justice,+’ which held that in the
changed circumstances after the Second World War
the functions of supervision under the Mandate should
be exercised by the United Nations.

72. That South Africa’s presence was illegal was soon
clarified beyond any doubt through an advisory opinion
of the International Court of Justice in 1971.’ This
stated explicitly that South Africa was under obligation to withdraw from Namibia immediately,
and that
Member States of the United Nations were under
obligation to recognize the illegality of South Africa’s
presence there. I emphasize the word “obligation”.
In its resolution 301(1971), the Security Council agreed
with those conclusions of the Court, and since then it
has sought to ensure that they are put into effect.
73. A new and serious effort to do that began with
the adoption of Council resolution 3115 (1976). The
Council declared in that resolution that it was imperative that free elections under the supervision and
control of the United Nations should be held for the
whole of Namibia as one political entity. But those
proposals were in outline only. What was needed was
a specific set of proposals and a specific plan through
which they could be implemented.
That came the
following year, when the five Western members then
on the Security Council engaged themselves actively
in the search for an internationally acceptable solution
on the basis defined by the Council one year previously.

68. But the United Nations effort continued. An
rrdhoc committee of the General Assembly in the early
195Os,a good offices committee from 1957 onwards,
and a special United Nations mission in 1962 all failed
-ultimately
because of South Africa’s attitude, It is
true that South Africa drew back from its initial intention to annex the Territory formally. But over that
period it applied step by step to Namibia many of the
Policies of qmthcitl
which it was also imposing on
its own people, as well as the repressive measures
necessary to enforce those policies.
69. A new phase began in the 1960s. After a further
case in the International
Court of Justice” had failed
because the Court held that the countries that brought
it had no standing to do so, the General Assembly
decided to terminate the Mandate, That decisive
resolution of 1966 [resolrction 2/45 (XXI) J declared
that since South Africa had no other right to administer
the Territory, South West Africa was henceforth a
direct responsibility of the United Nations. In 1967
the Assembly established the United Nations Council
for Namibia [wwlution
2248 (S-V)]. It then formally
asked the Security Council to take effective measures
to ensure the removal of what was now the illegal
presence of South Africa in the Territory.

74. That was indeed a hopeful development and my
Government welcomed the plan which the five Powers
proposed [S/126.36]. We welcomed, too, Council
resolution 435 (1978), which endorsed detailed settlement proposals based on that plan. We saw it as a
serious and practical effort to bring Namibia to independence undertaken by those in the best position to
carry it through. We also saw it as a new and welcome
attempt to solve by peaceful means within a United
Nations framework an international problem which had
so far proved intractable.
75. Much thought went into the plan but progress in
carrying it out was painfully slow. Nevertheless,
agreement was reached over the following years on
many aspects of the proposals and how they would be
implemented.
Particular efforts were made during

70* In March 1969, the Security Council addressed
helf to the problem for the first time. In its resolution
264 (1969), the Council recognized the termination of
9

negotiated, with such a regard for what was fair and
internationally
acceptable? Was there ever a dependent Territory whose status had SO engaged the attention of the highest international judicial and political
organs and for so long? Was ever a birth of a new
nation so attended, with so many major Powers as
midwives to the event? And yet South Africa finds it
premature to proceed.

all of this period by the Secretary-General and his
staff, by the front-line States, by the contact group of
Western States, by SWAP0 and by others, all of which
we acknowledge with appreciation. Even South Africa
agreed to discuss implementation,
though the Minister for Foreign Affairs of the United Republic of
Tanzania outlined to us here on Friday last [2273rvi
mwting] with his customary clarity the extent to which
concessions were made and good will shown in the
effort to bring South Africa to agree to carry out the
proposals. A major turning point seemed to have been
reached, however, by the end of 1978, when South
Africa, as well as SWAPO, accepted in principle the
terms of resolution 435 (1978) and the settlement
proposals which it incorporated.

80. What can one possibly say in answer to this
plea? Let us, nevertheless, make the effort and try to
understand.
81. We have carefully read all of the documents and
in particular the Secretary-General’s
report on the
Geneva meeting, document S/14333. We have listened
carefully to the South African statement made earlier
in this debate [226&h meeting]. It is still difficult to
understand.

76. Yet the key question, as always, remained. What
was the real attitude of the Government of South
Africa’? They accepted in principle the United Nations
proposals for an internationally acceptable settlement
but, while continuing to discuss them, they tried at
the same time to promote an internal settlement in
late 1978 through unilaterally organized elections
and arrangements. That effort was rightly rejected
by the international community and it was declared null
and void by the Security Council in its resolution 439
(1978).

It seems as if the reasons-at
least the overt
reasons-which South Africa has given for its refusal
so far to implement in practice what it accepted in
principle in 1978 really amount to two: first, it claims
that the United Nations would not be impartial; and
secondly, it professes a fear, on behalf of those whom
it describes as the people of Namibia, that implementation of the plan might lead to “one man, one vote,
one time” [S/14346, pura. 71.
82.

77. However, by the end of last year, after much
painstaking negotiation, it seemed as if the long and
wearisome history might at last be coming to a satisfactory end. The Geneva meeting in January 1981
was to be the final stage. It was arranged to promote
confidence and to get firm agreement on a date for a
cease-fire so that the proposals of three years earlier
might now be implemented. But at Geneva, despite
the high expectations in all quarters and every evidence
of good will on the African side, South Africa declared,
according to the report of the Secretary-General of
19 January 1981, that “it would . . . be premature to
proceed” [S/14333. para. 161.

83. The basic question for us at this stage is whether
these reasons can possibly be genuine, or are they
rather a pretext for a refusal to carry through the plan
in the hope that changed international circumstances
may allow South Africa to retain control over Namibia?
In other words, to put it bluntly, the real question for
us now is one of good faith: what South Africa itself
calls trust and confidence-but
not, as it says, the
good faith of the United Nations and of the world
community but that of South Africa itself.
84. Let us, however, suppose for a moment that the
South African concerns are genuine and see how they
can be answered.

78. Premature to proceed! Sixty years after the
original Mandate was granted; 35 years after the General Assembly first rejected South Africa’s wish to
annex the Territory [wsolution 65 (I)]; 30 years after
the International
Court of Justice found that South
Africa was bound to submit to the supervision and
control of the General Assembly;4 15 years after the
Mandate was ended [Geuernl Assembly wsolrrtiolz
2145 (XX/)]; 10 years after the Security Council, in
agreement with the World Court, found South Africa’s
presence illegal and ordered it to leave [resolution
301 f/971)]; 3 years after the detailed proposals were
put forward [s/12636]; 2 years after South Africa
informed the Secretary-General by letter that it had
“decided to co-operate in the expeditious implementation of Security Council resolution 435 (1978)”
[S/12983, NI~IZL>X].After all of that, South Africa finds
it premature to proceed.

85. On the first point, that of impartiality,
one fact
should be obvious, though it is sometimes obscured.
That is, that under the plan endorsed by Security
Council resolution 435 (1978), and, of course, without
prejudice to the international legal position, it would
not be the United Nations which would organize the
elections: the United Nations would supervise and
control the elections; the South African administration
would remain in place until independence.
So the
argument that the United Nations might not be impartial is rather specious.
86. So too is the argument that the United Nations is
partisan because it has given recognition and some
limited support to SWAPO. It is true that the General
Assembly recognized SWAP0
as the “sole and
authentic representative”
of the Namibian
people

79. Was there ever in recent history a transition to
independence so thoroughly prepared and so carefully
10

“in their liberation struggle”. But recognition by the
Assembly of the role of SWAP0
in the liberation
struggle is not incompatible with a decision of the Security Council that the future Government
of Namibia
must be determined by free and fair elections, especially since SWAP0 itself has accepted that decision
and agreed to abide by it. Furthermore,
in considering
the General Assembly’s attitude to SWAPO, one must
also consider the massive effort including the military
and police effort directed against SWAP0 and the
support given continuously
to other elements by
South Africa and by its administration,
which, after
all, exercises control in the Territory itself.

pendent Namibia which emerges from negotiations
between elected representatives
in a constituent
assembly. After all, other, older and still flourishing
democracies have emerged from just such a process.
93. But if, nevertheless, the point is felt to have
substance, and if that were all that remained, then
I believe that it too could be met, granted one further
display of that good will which was so evident on one
side at Geneva.
94. What is not acceptable, however, is that this
point, which was first put forward on the South African
side quite recently, after years of negotiation on other
issues, should now become a reason to call into question and reopen the whole effort to bring Namibia to
independence on the basis of the settlement plan
endorsed in resolution 435 (1978), a plan which South
Africa, according to its public position, still says it is
in principle willing to implement.

87. A further important point, which I note from the
report of the Secretary-General
of 24 November 1980,
is that his representative,
Mr. Urquhart,
reiterated
during his visit to Pretoria that:
“All participants
in the political process would,
at the commencement
of the transition period and
thereafter, be placed on an equal footing by UNTAG,
which would be directly responsible for implementation.”
[S/14266, ~NIYI. 12.1

95. On this last point-the
need to keep to the framework already agreed-I cannot do better than quote
another distinguished source whose views thereon
deserve attention. I refer to the opening two sentences
of a letter of 29 August 1980 to the Secretary-General,
which is included in the documents of the Council:

88. We believe that the commitment
already made
by the United Nations, which we could readily endorse,
can easily provide the basis for a resolution of this
issue of impartiality
in so far as it may have any substance: and indeed that was evident at Geneva.

“The people of South West Africa/Namibia
and
the South African Government are determined to
conclude successfully the negotiations of the past
three and a half years to bring the Territory to independence. During this time, much has been achieved
and it is in the interests of all concerned that these
achievements should not be forfeited.”
[S/14139,

89. What of the second basic issue raised by South
Africa and referred to again when it spoke here on
Wednesday last? That is, the fear which it professes
that the electoral process in Namibia would result in
practice in “one man, one vote, one time”.

parN. I,]

90. I do not believe that South Africa’s fears will
prove to be true but I cannot help retorting that even
if those fears were to prove well founded, then at least
the people of Namibia would in that event have had
one free election more than either they or the majority
of the people of South Africa itself have ever been
allowed in all of their lives under white South African
rule. A better answer, of course, is that, like other
nations, the people of Namibia as a whole must have
the right they have never had so far to determine for
themselves their own destiny as a people, including the
political structures under which they want to live.

96. The author is the Minister of Foreign Affairs
of South Africa, and the date is within the past year.
We may doubt in many respects South Africa’s will to
proceed, but the Minister is certainly right in saying, as
he did, that it is in the interests of all concerned that
what has been achieved over three and a half years
should not be forfeited-as I believe it would be if we
were now to abandon the framework within which it
was achieved.
97. Of course, it must be clear from all that I have
said that my delegation remains deeply sceptical about
South Africa’s underlying intentions in a larger sense.
Yet to admit failure now, or to change course in some
fundamental way from the effort to bring South Africa
to carry out in practice what it accepted in principle
in 1978-that is, the future independence of Namibia
on the basis of resolution 435 (1978)-would
have
momentous consequences.

91. But underlying the point made by South Africa
there appears to be a fear for minority rights in a future
Namibia. One cannot but marvel at this concern for
minorities shown by a Government
which has itself
always ruled Namibia in the sole interest of one minority, and which represses and disenfranchises the great
majority of the people of its own country.

98. What is needed instead at this time, in our view,
is the following: a reaffirmation of resolution 435
(1978); a further effort on that basis and within that
framework to meet and resolve any remaining obstacles, to the extent that they are not specious; and a

92. But perhaps others with a better right than South
Africa may feel that concern about this point is legitimate. I do not think they need to be afraid in practice
that there will be oppression of minorities in the inde11

‘k i

say rather “apparent beneficiary”,
since even South
Africa’s real long-term interests cannot be served by
strife and conflict with its neighbours and within the
Territory which it rules without consent.

would seriously damage our common hope of achieving
that aim.
1Il.
If this sustained effort which we are making to
avert division in the Council does not succeed, then
my delegation will have no other option but to address
itself carefully to every aspect of the draft resolutions
which may come before us to see how best we should
vote-with
realism but with a clear intention to send
to South Africa that signal of firmness of purpose which
we believe’each member of the Council should send,
But our major effort’is still to avoid a division in the
Council at this time.

107. Beyond this, such an outcome would also
disappoint greatly all those who might be ready to take
a lesson from such a sustained effort based on unity
in the Council, and who could come to see it as an
example of how a major international
problem can be
addressed and solved on a peaceful basis, through
common accord.
108. What we need here most at this moment, therefore, is not division and disagreement through stubbornness on either side, not a clash of will which leaves
both sides angry and our common purpose damaged,
but a clear signal lo South Africa of our unity and
common determination.

112. I pray that this effort will succeed, since I believe
that unity in the Council, along with firmness of purpose in our common commitment
to what has been
agreed, is the signal that we most need to send from
this major debate to advance our aim-the
early
independence of Namibia.

109. That common purpose must be to see Namibia
at last become independent through a process of free
and fair elections under United Nations supervision
and control, within the framework set by Council
resolutions 385 (1976) and 435 (1978), and patiently
negotiated over three years. If any genuine obstacles
remain, they can be resolved quickly to the extent that
they are genuine. But they must be resolved without
basic change in what is already agreed, or in the framework within which it was agreed. For my part, I say
again that Ireland’s aim is to see Namibia become
independent within a year, and then we want to welcome it here as a Member of the United Nations,
Plenary
Meetbgs,
4th meeting, para. 133.
.1Reproduced in O,fficicrl Recwds qf the Gorerd Assotibly,
Sixth
Sessh,
Artrrexcs,
agenda item 38, document A/1901, appendix 1.

rim,

110. The Irish delegation commits itself to that aim.
We want to see the Council united in its effort to bring
it about and we shall continue to work, as we have been
working since this debate began one week ago, to try
to avert a division in the Council which we believe

4 ItrterrtcM~td
Statrrs qf South West A,fkw,
Ahisory
I.C.J. Reports
1950, p, 128.
s Sorrth West Africa,
Second Phosc, Judgmo~t,
I.C.J.
1966, p. 6.

13

Opithtc
Reports
