United Nations

S/PV.3356

Security Council

Provisional

Forty-ninth Year

3356th Meeting
Thursday, 31 March 1994, 5.15 p.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Mérimée . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(France)

Members:

Argentina . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Brazil . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Czech Republic . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Djibouti . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
New Zealand . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Nigeria . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Oman . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Pakistan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Rwanda . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Spain . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . . . . . .
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Mr. Ricardes
Mr. Sardenberg
Mr. Chen Jian
Mr. Kovanda
Mr. Olhaye
Mr. Keating
Mr. Gambari
Mr. Al-Sameen
Mr. Marker
Mr. Sidorov
Mr. Bizimana
Mr. Pedauye
Mr. Gomersall
Mr. Walker

Agenda
United Nations Protection Force (UNPROFOR)
Report of the Secretary-General pursuant to resolution 900 (1994) (S/1994/291 and Corr.1 and Add.1)
Report of the Secretary-General pursuant to resolution 871 (1993) (S/1994/300)
Report of the Secretary-General pursuant to resolutions 844 (1993), 836 (1993) and 776 (1992) (S/1994/333)
Letter dated 30 March 1994 from the Secretary-General addressed to the President of the Security Council
(S/1994/367)

94-85396 (E)

This record contains the original text of speeches delivered in English and interpretations of
speeches in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records of the Security
Council.
Corrections should be submitted to original speeches only. They should be sent under the
signature of a member of the delegation concerned, within one week, to the Chief, Verbatim
Reporting Section, room C-178 and incorporated in a copy of the record.

Security Council
Forty-ninth year
The meeting was called to order at 5.15 p.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
United Nations Protection Force (UNPROFOR)
Report of the Secretary-General pursuant to
resolution 900 (1994) (S/1994/291 and Corr.1 and
Add.1)
Report of the Secretary-General pursuant to
resolution 871 (1993) (S/1994/300)
Report of the Secretary-General pursuant to
resolutions 844 (1993), 836 (1993) and 776 (1992)
(S/1994/333)
Letter dated 30 March 1994 from the SecretaryGeneral addressed to the President of the Security
Council (S/1994/367)
The President (interpretation from French): I should
like to inform the Council that I have received letters from
the representatives of Bosnia and Herzegovina and Croatia,
in which they request to be invited to participate in the
discussion of the item on the Council’s agenda. In
accordance with the usual practice, I propose, with the
consent of the Council, to invite those representatives to
participate in the discussion without the right to vote, in
accordance with the relevant provisions of the Charter and
rule 37 of the Council’s provisional rules of procedure.

3356th meeting
31 March 1994
Council resolutions 844 (1993), 836 (1993) and 776 (1992),
document S/1994/333, as well as the letter dated
30 March 1994 from the Secretary-General addressed to the
President of the Security Council, document S/1994/367.
Members of the Council also have before them
document S/1994/359, which contains the text of a draft
resolution prepared in the course of the Council’s prior
consultations.
I should like to draw the attention of the members of
the Council to the following other documents: S/1994/302
and S/1994/336, letters dated 15 and 23 March 1994,
respectively, from the Permanent Representative of Bulgaria
to the United Nations addressed to the President of the
Security Council; S/1994/305 and Corrigendum 1, letter
dated 16 March 1994 from the Chargé d’affaires a.i. of the
Permanent Mission of Croatia to the United Nations
addressed to the Secretary-General; S/1994/328, letter dated
22 March 1994 from the Chargé d’affaires a.i. of the
Permanent Mission of Greece to the United Nations
addressed to the President of the Security Council;
S/1994/330, letter dated 22 March 1994 from the
Secretary-General addressed to the President of the Security
Council; S/1994/331, letter dated 23 March l994 from the
President of the Security Council addressed to the
Secretary-General; and S/1994/350, letter dated
25 March 1994 from the Chargé d’affaires a.i. of the
Permanent Mission of Yugoslavia to the United Nations
addressed to the President of the Security Council.
It is my understanding that the Council is ready to
proceed to the vote on the draft resolution before it. Unless
I hear any objection, I shall put the draft resolution to the
vote.

There being no objection, it is so decided.
There being no objection, it is so decided.
At the invitation of the President, Mr. Omar Sacirbey
(Bosnia and Herzegovina) took a place at the Council table;
Mr. Nobilo (Croatia) took a place at the Council table.
The President (interpretation from French): The
Security Council will now begin its consideration of the
item on its agenda.
The Security Council is meeting in accordance with
the understanding reached in its prior consultations.
Members of the Council have before them the reports
of the Secretary-General pursuant to Security Council
resolution 900 (1994), documents S/1994/291 and
Corrigendum 1 and Addendum l; pursuant to resolution
871 (1993), document S/1994/300; and pursuant to Security

2

I shall first call on those members of the Council who
wish to make statements before the voting.
Mr. Bizimana (Rwanda) (interpretation from French):
My delegation would like to thank the Secretary-General for
his reports presented pursuant to resolutions 900 (1994),
844 (1993), 836 (1993) and 776 (1992) and for making
proposals in connection with settling the conflict in the
former Yugoslavia and the mandate of the United Nations
Protection Force (UNPROFOR).
My delegation salutes the Secretary-General and his
Special Representative for the former Yugoslavia,
Mr. Yasushi Akashi, for their efforts and thanks those
countries and organizations that are supporting the process

Security Council
Forty-ninth year

3356th meeting
31 March 1994

of a political settlement of the conflict in the former
Yugoslavia.

should not hesitate to declare it a protected area if the
situation should grow worse.

I would also like to pay tribute to the personnel of
UNPROFOR and of the multilateral and non-governmental
agencies whose actions have contributed to improving the
terrible situation in that region.

The draft resolution that the Council is about to adopt
enjoys the firm support of my delegation, which appreciates
the fact that its text goes well beyond a simple renewal of
UNPROFOR’s mandate and takes into account the new
parameters resulting from recent developments in the overall
conflict in the former Yugoslavia. Although the draft
resolution attaches particular importance, and rightly so, to
the UNPROFOR operations in Croatia and Bosnia and
Herzegovina, the extension of the mandate applies equally
to the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia and the
Federal Republic of Yugoslavia (Serbia and Montenegro).
In addition to renewing the mandate of UNPROFOR, our
decision focuses on specific steps to restore normal life to
Sarajevo and on implementing other initiatives to advance
the ongoing peace process in the former Yugoslavia.

My delegation, which welcomed the adoption of
resolution 900 (1994), is particularly happy to note today
that the lifting of the siege of Sarajevo is effectively under
way and that, thanks to the determination of the
international community, the inhabitants of Sarajevo, who
lived through daily horror under intensive shelling, no
longer feel completely alone and deprived of their right to
a normal life. We ardently hope, as is reflected in our firm
support for the process of settling this conflict, that this
collective effort will be extended to the rest of Bosnia and
all of the former Yugoslavia. We therefore welcome the
momentum and dynamism generated at the political level by
the various initiatives taken as part of the effort to reach a
negotiated solution.
In this connection, my delegation congratulates the
Government of the Republic of Bosnia and Herzegovina and
the Bosnian Croat party on signing the cease-fire agreement.
We also welcome the Washington framework agreements
between the Government of the Republic of Bosnia and
Herzegovina and the Government of the Republic of Croatia
and the Bosnian Croat party. We also welcome the results
achieved following discussions between the Republic of
Croatia and the local Serbian authorities in the United
Nations protected areas, which led to the signing on
29 March 1994 of a cease-fire agreement.
We believe that the Security Council must adopt new
measures to consolidate all the achievements that have
resulted from the firmness of the international community.
We also believe it is essential to help the parties concerned
to implement the agreements they have just signed.
This new political and diplomatic landscape gives a
special dimension to the challenges that must be confronted
in order to sustain the process, whose fragility is illustrated
by the recent escalation of hostilities by the Bosnian Serbs,
particularly against the city of Maglaj. We believe that
concern for the safety of the population of Maglaj should
result in the Council’s granting that city the legal status of
a United Nations protected area. My delegation looks
forward to the forthcoming report of the Secretary-General
on developments in that city, and believes that the Council

There is a great deal at stake here. If UNPROFOR is
to carry out its task there must be changes so that it has
adequate resources. My delegation fully supports such
changes in the light of the Secretary-General’s proposals for
increasing its personnel.
In order to meet the need for effectiveness in the cause
of peace, the draft resolution, which enjoys our support,
also extends to the territory of the Republic of Croatia the
possibility of close air support for the defence of
UNPROFOR personnel carrying out its mandate.
My delegation believes that the draft resolution, if
adopted, will send a dual message, with which we are in
full agreement, indicating the determination of the
international community firmly to support the peace process
as well as the need for the parties constantly to continue
their efforts to find a just and lasting solution to the
conflict.
Mr. Marker (Pakistan): My delegation wishes to
convey its deep appreciation to the Secretary General for his
three important reports this month, which are contained in
documents S/1994/291, S/1994/300 and S/1994/333. All
these reports are significant, as they pertain to recent
encouraging developments in the Republic of Bosnia and
Herzegovina and the Republic of Croatia.
The Security Council has acted promptly by taking
action to consider the draft resolution, which would,
inter alia, renew the mandate of the United Nations
Protection Force (UNPROFOR).

3

Security Council
Forty-ninth year
The Pakistan Government attaches great importance to
the renewal of the mandate of UNPROFOR in the Republic
of Bosnia and Herzegovina, the Republic of Croatia and
The former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia. We consider
this essential to the international community’s efforts to
minimize the conflict in the former Yugoslavia, to prevent
the spread of hostilities, to provide humanitarian relief and,
most important, to facilitate a negotiated solution to all
aspects of the conflict. The additional authorization of
troops will be extremely useful in making UNPROFOR a
stronger force as it shoulders its increased responsibilities.
The Pakistan delegation is most appreciative of the
untiring efforts of the Secretary-General and his
distinguished Special Representative, Mr. Yasushi Akashi,
in resolving the crisis in the former Yugoslavia. Their
efforts have led to an improved situation in and around
Sarajevo, where the cease-fire is holding and normality is
returning. My delegation’s special appreciation goes to the
men and women of UNPROFOR, and the other United
Nations agencies and non-governmental organizations
involved in the former Yugoslavia, for their dedicated and
selfless service in implementing the decision of the
international community to settle the crisis in a fair and just
manner. They have acquitted themselves with distinction in
dangerous and difficult circumstances.
The Pakistan Government expresses great satisfaction
at the signing of the Washington framework agreement by
the Government of the Republic of Bosnia and Herzegovina
and the Government of the Republic of Croatia and the
Bosnian Croat party. It is the sincere hope of my
Government that the Bosnian Serb party will also join in
this agreement so that the long-awaited and just peace will
be established in the Republic of Bosnia and Herzegovina.
We also welcome the cease-fire agreement reached in
Zagreb on 29 March 1994 between the Republic of Croatia
and the local Serb authorities on the United Nations
Protected Areas.
We also note with satisfaction the Secretary-General’s
plans for the reopening of Tuzla Airport for humanitarian
purposes and for appropriate action to be taken against any
party which creates obstacles in the faithful implementation
of the Secretary-General’s plan.
Another encouraging development is, of course, the
appointment by the Secretary-General of a senior civilian
official for the restoration of essential public services in and
around Sarajevo. In this connection, my delegation also
commends the setting up of an Interim Coordination Body

4

3356th meeting
31 March 1994
which would assist the senior officials in the drawing-up of
the plan for the restoration of essential public services in
and around Sarajevo.
While these encouraging developments are taking place
in the Republic of Bosnia and Herzegovina, the Security
Council and the international community should remain
vigilant and ensure not only that the excesses committed in
violation of the sovereignty and territorial integrity of the
Republic of Bosnia and Herzegovina are halted but that the
wrongs are corrected. The aggression committed against
that Government through use of force and the abhorrent
practice of "ethnic cleansing" must be permanently reversed.
My delegation remains gravely concerned at the
military action still being taken by the Bosnian Serbs in the
territory of Bosnia and Herzegovina. This constitutes an
open defiance of the Security Council’s resolutions. The
situation resulting from this latest wave of military
aggression is particularly visible in the towns of Maglaj and
Banjaluka. The recent destruction and desecration of holy
places in Banjaluka has been graphically described in the
letter of the Bosnian President of 30 March 1994 addressed
to the President of the Council (S/1994/364, annex).
Cognizant of the deteriorating security environment in
these towns, which have been subjected to strangulation and
armed aggression by the Bosnian Serbs, my delegation,
along with other members of the Non-Aligned Movement
in the Council, strongly favoured the designation of the
town of Maglaj as a safe area. This is also supported by
the Secretary-General in his report, in which he states that:
"there may be merit in extending the safe area concept
to that city." (S/1994/291, para. 22)
To our great regret, this reasonable and urgently needed
requirement did not find favour with all members of the
Council. Despite this disappointment, my delegation will
support the draft resolution before the Council so as to
express its solidarity with the Council. We hope not only
that the siege of Maglaj will be lifted, but that complete
normalcy will return to that beleaguered town.
As my delegation has stated on previous occasions, the
tragedy in the Republic of Bosnia and Herzegovina
constitutes one of the darkest chapters of contemporary
history.
The appalling apathy of the international
community in responding to aggression against Bosnia and
Herzegovina has caused great human suffering. The brave
and determined people of that beleaguered country have
remained steadfast in their resolve to face aggression and to

Security Council
Forty-ninth year
reject any unjust dispensation under duress.
The
international community must therefore demonstrate its
resolve to arrive at a just and lasting solution to the crisis
in Bosnia and Herzegovina by taking all appropriate
measures to reverse the consequences of aggression against
that country. The lands seized by the use of force and
"ethnic cleansing" must be returned. The sovereignty,
territorial integrity and political independence of the
Republic of Bosnia and Herzegovina must be restored and
respected.
Mr. Kovanda (Czech Republic): We are considering
today the fifty-fifth resolution on matters related to the
former Yugoslavia and we are considering it in an
atmosphere very different to that to which we are
accustomed. With hindsight, it appears that the world’s
reaction to the Sarajevo marketplace massacre on
5 February was a turning point in the war. The exhaustion
of economic power and manpower, and of willpower to
continue the fighting, has undermined the resolve of the
belligerents and cooler heads appear to have gained the
upper hand. The determination of the North Atlantic Treaty
Organization to support the peace process has been splendid
in its results.
As a consequence, peace is breaking out. First
Sarajevo experienced a respite, and how gratifying it was to
see United Nations troops soundly beaten there in soccer.
Then came the Washington agreements between the
Bosniacs and Croats of Bosnia to forge a federation, and
between those two communities and the Republic of Croatia
to form a confederation.
During these encouraging past few weeks, however,
the question that troubled many of us concerned the attitude
of the Serbs. Was the January agreement between the
Republic of Croatia and the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia
(Serbia and Montenegro) just a flash in the pan or was it a
harbinger of things to come? Now it seems that truly major
progress has been accomplished in Croatia with the
cease-fire between the Republic of Croatia and the Krajina
Serbs. This agreement seems at first blush to be too
complicated not to be meant seriously. We can only
welcome the earnestness of the parties and their obvious
determination. It is appropriate here to acknowledge the
remarkable role played by United States and Russian
diplomacy, the European Union as well as by the
Co-Chairmen of the Geneva Conference and the Special
Representative, Mr. Yasushi Akashi.
The rub of peace breaking out is that UNPROFOR is
faced with a new situation. Let us recall that this is the

3356th meeting
31 March 1994
largest force that the United Nations is fielding anywhere
today. Even so, it has been stretched thin, as the SecretaryGeneral never fails to remind us. It has been stretched thin
to do the protection job which is a part of its name. And
today it is about to be stretched even thinner as parties call
on it to help implement the various cease-fires they are
agreeing upon both in Bosnia and Herzegovina and in
Croatia.
The dynamics of peace is faster than the dynamics of
troop authorization, not to speak of troop deployment. The
Security Council is facing a novel pitfall: too much peace
all at once. We’re choking on too much peace. This idea
is of course absurd, but my delegation does not understand
the position of some countries which have been pushing for
a peace agreement, indicating all along that they would be
prepared to support it with a major troop deployment.
Now, with pieces of peace at hand, they seem to be
reluctant.
It is hard to imagine that these countries would have
been ready to send thousands of troops if an overall peace
were established today. Yet it is equally hard to imagine
that these countries anticipated that an overall peace
agreement would be reached in one fell swoop, rather than
piecemeal, in an arena where even the casual observer
detects at least seven distinct adversaries.
With just short of 1,000 men as part of UNPROFOR,
the Czech Republic is making its modest contribution to
peace in Croatia. Our original infantry battalion is being
transformed into a mechanized infantry battalion, one
company of which stands ready to be transferred to Bosnia
and Herzegovina. We subscribe to the appeal of our
resolution that States assist the Secretary-General in finding
the resources needed to beef up UNPROFOR. And, by the
way, we would also hope that Member States meet their
financial obligations in this respect.
Let us salute UNPROFOR and its commanders for the
marvellous job they are doing under tough and changing
circumstances, pay homage to those who have sacrificed
their lives and extend our best wishes for speedy recovery
to those who have been injured.
One paragraph of our draft resolution urges the
Republic of Croatia and Serb authorities in the regions of
Krajina to reactivate their so-called Joint Commission
process. The Joint Commission would logically pick up
where the cease-fire agreement left off. One logical next
step includes confidence-building measures, in particular
attention to communications and infrastructure.

5

Security Council
Forty-ninth year
In this context, the Adria pipeline is of especial
importance, not only to the economy of Croatia, but to the
economies of other countries of the region. Last summer
members of the so-called Central European Initiative - then
including Austria, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Croatia, the
Czech Republic, Hungary, Italy, Poland, Slovakia and
Slovenia - made this point in a letter addressed to the
President of the Security Council. We are delighted that
our draft resolution today reiterates the importance of this
pipeline, and even more delighted that the time is more
propitious for its possible reopening. War has not touched
it, and only political will is needed to have it operational in
a couple of days.
My delegation followed with extraordinary interest the
debate over declaring the area of Maglaj a safe area. This
possibility was foreshadowed in Security Council resolution
900 (1994). In response, the Secretary-General averred that
no fewer than 1,500 additional troops would be needed to
turn Maglaj into a safe area. Frankly, this came as a
surprise to us. Of the safe areas other than Sarajevo, which
one is being protected by a force comparable to that wanted
for Maglaj? Certainly not Srebrenica, with its 300 men, and
certainly not Žepa with perhaps eight. Or, to turn the
question around, how many more troops would be needed
to give other safe areas the protection that the 1,500 troops
would have afforded Maglaj? Experience has shown that
declaring an area safe contributes, in and of itself, to its
safety, whether or not it is truly safe from the military point
of view.
However, my delegation came to realize that certain
delegations found it impossible to make the distinction
between the military view of what is safe and the political
and psychological view of what it means to declare an area
safe, and we therefore did not insist that Maglaj be declared
a safe area. Moreover, it transpires that this city is no
longer besieged and that, on the contrary, Bosnian
Government troops have actually been engaged in counteroffensive moves from Maglaj.
On the other hand, my delegation has been distressed
by reports, mostly in the press, concerning Banjaluka. This
city which, like Sarajevo, used to be a true crossroads of
ethnic groups, cultures and religions, has been firmly in the
hands of ethnic Serbs for some time now, and "ethnic
cleansing" apparently continues unabated there. This was
again brought to our attention by President Izetbegovic in
letters addressed yesterday to you, Mr. President, and to Mr.
Akashi. My delegation cannot but regret that some of the
energy the Council devoted to the almost moot issue of
Maglaj was not spent on what appears to be an even worse

6

3356th meeting
31 March 1994
situation - if only because it is taking place outside the
spotlight of international attention - in Banjaluka.
This is a good time to recall that "ethnic cleansing",
with all its barbaric brutality, has not stopped. As war
efforts collapse in Bosnia and Herzegovina and in Croatia,
the international community will be facing the difficult
challenge of deciding how to rectify its abhorrent results.
The time for that is not far off.
Mr. Gambari (Nigeria): My delegation, too, would
like to thank the Secretary-General for his useful reports
dated 11, 16 and 24 March and for his letter of
30 March 1994 on the situation in former Yugoslavia,
especially as it relates to the mandate of the United Nations
Protection Force (UNPROFOR) and the situation in and
around Sarajevo and Maglaj. We also wish to thank the
Secretary-General’s Special Representative, Mr. Akashi,
UNPROFOR commanders and the Co-Chairmen of the
International Conference on the former Yugoslavia for the
exemplary work they have been undertaking under very
difficult circumstances and severe resource constraints to
implement the Council’s mandate and all its many, many
resolutions.
My delegation is happy to join in the consensus on the
adoption of the draft resolution before us. We welcome the
positive developments towards peace and cessation of
hostilities that have taken place in the various theatres of
war in the territory of former Yugoslavia. In a sense we
can say that the victims of the market-place massacre in
Sarajevo on 5 February did not really die in vain. The
incident galvanized the international community and, in
particular, the major players on the ground, to take bold
steps in the search for peace. The momentum in the search
for peace thus generated has already resulted in a cease-fire,
not only in Sarajevo, but, in the last 48 hours, in the
Republic of Croatia and the United Nations Protected Areas.
My delegation welcomes this latest cease-fire, and we urge
the parties to implement fully all the commitments they
have entered into.
It is gratifying to observe that the people of Sarajevo
are trying to pick up the pieces and commence once more
their efforts towards the restoration of normal life. In this
connection we also note with satisfaction the appointment
of the senior civilian official to coordinate the restoration of
essential public services in and around Sarajevo. These
significant and positive developments have been tempered
by pockets of tension and continued hostilities in some
areas, particularly Maglaj. While we acknowledge the
recent encouraging developments in Maglaj, we are

Security Council
Forty-ninth year
concerned that the situation remains fluid and that it
requires further actions to ensure that the people of Maglaj
may begin to see some light at the end of the rather tragic
tunnel. We urge UNPROFOR to consolidate its initial
presence there.
In our view the international community must not be
complacent. True peace can be neither established nor
sustained until the people of a fellow State Member of the
United Nations, Bosnia and Herzegovina, can live within
secure borders and be free at last from the threat of the
despicable policy of "ethnic cleansing".
What the Secretary-General, his Special Representative
and UNPROFOR commanders have asked of this Council
is that the necessary authority and resources be made
available to them to take maximum advantage of the
momentum of peace to consolidate the remarkable gains
made on several fronts in recent weeks and, indeed, ensure
that those gains are truly irreversible. What the Council is
trying to do in the draft resolution before it is to respond as
promptly as it can and within its available resources to the
requests of the Secretary-General. Unfortunately, we do not
seem to have fully accomplished that, at least not for the
moment. My delegation understands the difficulties of
certain delegations that have created this gap between rising
expectations and actual fulfilment. We hope, however, that
this gap is a temporary one and that when the Council
revisits the issue in a month’s time it will be in a position
to give the Secretary-General and his field operatives the
minimum requirements and the resources needed to carry
out the Councils’s mandate. We owe them no less.
Finally, my delegation would like to express its
profound appreciation to all the Governments that have
contributed, and continue to contribute, troops and personnel
to UNPROFOR operations. We also call on other
Governments to respond to the Secretary-General’s request
for more troops and more equipment. To the political
leaders in the former Republic of Yugoslavia, we say that
the prospects for peace have never been better. They must
not allow this golden - but potentially fleeting - opportunity
to slip away from them.
Mr. Olhaye (Djibouti): Mr. President, my delegation
has been aided immensely in its consideration of the
multitude of events taking place in Bosnia and Croatia, and
in the other areas of the former Yugoslavia, by the
excellent, in-depth reports of the Secretary-General and his
communications with you. We feel that they have afforded
us a firm grasp of the political developments taking place

3356th meeting
31 March 1994
on so many fronts concurrently, and of their implications
for the United Nations Protection Force (UNPROFOR).
We certainly welcome the manner in which peace
appears to be breaking out throughout so many areas in
Bosnia and Croatia. There seems to have been a general
acceptance by all parties of the international community’s
resolve to bring this terrible tragedy to a close as soon as
possible.
With the accord between the Government of Bosnia
and the Bosnian Croats for a cease-fire leading to a
federation, we have seen the beginning of a spreading peace
process which has, if anything, gained momentum. With
the establishment of a transition committee, as called for in
the Bosnian-Croat agreement of 4 March 1994, the way is
now open - and institutionalized - for rapid progress
towards achieving federation, which will include a type of
confederal association at some stage with the Republic of
Croatia.
My delegation also welcomes the continuance of
general peace in Sarajevo and the decline in civilian
suffering there. It is also good to see the comfort measures
the Secretary-General has taken for the city in appointing a
Special Coordinator for public services, under the Special
Representative, who can coordinate international and local
efforts to restore public services to the city. This all adds
up to a definite momentum, towards peace and towards a
settlement in the area, that will be difficult to reverse.
The pressure being felt in all quarters to move in the
direction of peace is indicated by the cease-fire between
Croatia and the Bosnian Serbs in the United Nations
protected areas that has been signed in Zagreb. There
remain, as the draft resolution on UNPROFOR’s mandate
states, the need for a negotiated settlement accepted by all
parties and the need further to involve the Bosnian Serb
party in further efforts to achieve an overall negotiated
settlement; hopefully, these developments are moving in
that direction.
One serious impediment remains: the continued
fighting and hostilities in a number of areas in Bosnia Bihac, Banja Luka and particularly Maglaj, where suffering
has been prolonged, unrelieved and intense. My delegation
has constantly called for the designation of Maglaj as a
"safe area". Addressing this point in his report of
11 March, the Secretary-General notes that the mere
presence of UNPROFOR, although limited, was sufficient
to deter major attacks even in Žepa, which contained only
eight unarmed military observers. It was enough of a

7

Security Council
Forty-ninth year
message to all parties about our concern for civilian safety
to thwart major assaults, and we feel that this would also
hold true in Maglaj. The draft resolution expresses this
concern to some extent, and implores the Bosnian Serbs to
cease forthwith all military action against the town. We
hope that they will have the good sense to do so.
The rapid sequence of accords and settlements has
placed a not too unexpected strain on the resources and
manpower of UNPROFOR, exacerbated by the fact that it
is still functioning below authorized levels. However, my
delegation hopes very strongly that the Council can respond
quickly and fully to the requirements of the situation, for it
is an opportunity we must not miss. There has been a
debilitating loss of human life in Bosnia and Croatia, a list
of human rights violations unseen in Europe since the days
of the last great war and a frightening level of ethnic
hostility under the guise of "ethnic cleansing".
The scope that remains for continuing the fighting is
being narrowed daily, and we are, it would seem, in a good
position to bring this phase to a complete halt. We must
demonstrate our resolve to achieve a total cease-fire and to
take the necessary steps to prevent a recurrence of any
hostilities. My delegation therefore supports the renewal of
UNRPOFOR’s mandate, as called for in the draft resolution,
and the series of other measures it outlines to protect United
Nations personnel, increase the comfort level in all areas of
Croatia, including the United Nations protected areas, bring
about respect for the cease-fires agreed to, increase the
safety and security of civilians in "safe" and "near safe"
areas, and provide UNPROFOR with the resources and
manpower required to implement its mandate.
The President (interpretation from French): I shall
now put the draft resolution to the vote.
A vote was taken by show of hands.
In favour:
Argentina, Brazil, China, Czech Republic, Djibouti,
France, New Zealand, Nigeria, Oman, Pakistan,
Russian Federation, Rwanda, Spain, United Kingdom
of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United States of
America
The President (interpretation from French): There
were 15 votes in favour. The draft resolution has been
adopted unanimously as resolution 908 (1994).
I shall now call on those members of the Council who
wish to make statements following the voting.

8

3356th meeting
31 March 1994
Mr. Gomersall (United Kingdom): The resolution
reflects real progress in the peace negotiations and on the
ground. There is, we believe, a new atmosphere of
optimism, albeit cautious, which now needs to be
consolidated.
The agreements between the Bosnian
Government, the Bosnian Croat party and the Government
of Croatia on federation are a significant step towards an
overall settlement in Bosnia. As the resolution states, we
look to the Bosnian Serb party to join in efforts now to
achieve a final settlement.
The cease-fire agreements negotiated by the United
Nations Protection Force (UNPROFOR) in Bosnia have
been followed by another, concluded this week in Zagreb
between the Republic of Croatia and the local Serb
authorities in the United Nations protected areas. These
positive developments, to which many dedicated and brave
people have contributed, must now be followed up, and
matched by a commitment from the parties.
Implementation of the confidence-building measures in the
United Nations protected areas referred to in the resolution
and the revival of the joint-commission process are steps
which can and should now be taken quickly, paving the way
for a final settlement involving autonomy for the Serbs
within the existing borders of the Republic of Croatia.
We wish to pay tribute to the efforts of the United
Nations - of the Secretary-General and his Special
Representative, Mr. Akashi, and of all the personnel of
UNPROFOR - and of the humanitarian and
non-governmental organizations, to build on these advances.
We welcome the increase in UNPROFOR’s strength by a
further 3,500 personnel provided for in the resolution, which
will allow those additional personnel already available from
Member States to be deployed immediately. We also
welcome the resolution’s authorization of additional
personnel for the reopening of Tuzla airport for
humanitarian purposes. My Government, with others, has
already announced contributions of personnel and equipment
for both these tasks. But further reinforcement of
UNPROFOR will be needed if the cease-fires in central
Bosnia and in Croatia are to be fully implemented. Tasks
cannot be added indefinitely without the necessary
resources’ being made available, and we urge Member
States to respond to this urgent need.
My Government would have been prepared to join in
authorizing all the additional personnel requested by the
Secretary-General in his reports of 11 and 16 March this
year. Within the coming month, the Council will need to
act on the balance of these requests. Delay would put at
risk not only the success of the United States, the Russian

Security Council
Forty-ninth year
Federation and others in brokering the recent cease-fire
agreements, but also the many achievements of
UNPROFOR on the ground, and possibly the safety of its
personnel.
The civilian population in many parts of Bosnia are
just beginning to enjoy the benefits of these new conditions.
They need help in rebuilding their towns, and lives. The
United Nations is already engaged in vital work, in Sarajevo
and elsewhere, to tackle these problems. We warmly
welcome the Secretary-General’s appointment of a Special
Coordinator to harness efforts in Sarajevo to this end. As
part of the international effort to restore normal life to
Sarajevo, my Government, together with the Government of
the United States, dispatched a joint civil mission to
Sarajevo to assist in this work. We fully support the
establishment of a voluntary trust fund to finance projects
to promote the return to normal life in Sarajevo, and we
hope that all members of the international community will
contribute generously to this work.
The Council’s action today shows that the international
community is prepared to respond to the new situation
reached in negotiations and on the ground. The peace
process must now go forward. It will not be easy: there
are difficult and sensitive issues still to be addressed,
including those involving territory. But these hard-won
gains must not now be thrown away, and we call upon all
sides to show restraint and to demonstrate their sincerity
and responsibility by negotiating a lasting peace.
Mr. Walker (United States of America):
My
Government has consistently supported, and continues to
support, the United Nations Protection Force (UNPROFOR),
which has been called on to provide vital missions in
Bosnia, Croatia and the former Yugoslav Republic of
Macedonia. In recent weeks there have been many
encouraging developments in Bosnia-Herzegovina, and
rapidly expanding challenges that have taxed UNPROFOR’s
resources to the limit. To meet those challenges, we agree
with the members of the Council that UNPROFOR must
have the necessary resources.
The United States
Government supports UNPROFOR and the exemplary way
it has carried out its mandate, and supports the provision of
the resources necessary to allow it to continue to do so in
the new environment.
In the context of this resolution, our concern has been
to ensure that the financial resources are available to sustain
this vital operation.
This important question has
implications for my Government and, of course, for the
United Nations as a whole. I know that we are not alone

3356th meeting
31 March 1994
in trying to come to terms with how we pay for peacekeeping operations.
The resolution says that the Council will review,
within one month, the question of UNPROFOR’s manpower
requirements. I can assure you that, during that month, my
Government will be considering this question seriously and
urgently.
Peace-keeping is too important for the
international community not to do its best to regularize the
way it provides the money to support these operations.
Finally, I would like to commend the Council’s
authorization of close air support for UNPROFOR troops
operating in the Republic of Croatia.
NATO
implementation will, of course, require the agreement of the
North Atlantic Council, which I am confident will be
forthcoming. Once in place, the availability of close air
support for UNPROFOR troops in Croatia should afford
them important protection as they carry out their part of
UNPROFOR’s vital mission.
Mr. Sardenberg (Brazil): The quest for lasting peace
in the territories of the former Yugoslavia has all too often
seemed like a never-ending task. The volume and
frequency of the decisions of the Security Council on the
matter, and of resolutions, presidential statements and
letters, are among the elements bearing witness to that.
After years of untiring efforts by the international
community, however, we may well be at the threshold of a
new phase in that difficult and complex enterprise. The
arrangements in place regarding Sarajevo, where the
situation seems to be slowly but steadily improving; the
series of agreements signed between the Government of
Bosnia and Herzegovina, the Bosnian Croat party and the
Government of Croatia; and the cease-fire agreement
recently signed between the latter and the local Serb
authorities in United Nations Protected Areas are all
important and concrete steps that give room for a cautious
yet genuine measure of hope.
We are aware that much remains to be done, including,
as underlined in today’s resolution, a further involvement of
the Bosnian Serb party in the efforts to achieve an overall
negotiated settlement. The humanitarian situation in the
town of Maglaj, for instance, continues to be a matter of
great concern. But there can be no doubt that the recent
developments have been generally positive.
Decisions by the Governments of the United States and
the Russian Federation to further their involvement in the
diplomatic arena in which the United Nations and the

9

Security Council
Forty-ninth year
European Union have always been, and continue to be, very
active, were instrumental in the attainment of those
encouraging results.
The presence of the United Nations Protection Force
(UNPROFOR) in Croatia, in Bosnia and Herzegovina and
in the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia has been of
crucial importance throughout, not only minimizing the very
present risks of deterioration of the situation, but also in
facilitating the establishment of an environment more
conducive to negotiations.
Often under very difficult circumstances, the men and
women of UNPROFOR have displayed courage and
determination in the fulfilment of the Force’s broad
mandate, and have thus played a fundamental role in laying
down the foundations for peace, a goal whose achievement
depends ultimately on the parties themselves.
After somewhat laborious negotiations, the Security
Council has just approved unanimously the extension of
UNPROFOR’s mandate for a period of six months. It has
also decided to authorize immediately a substantial
reinforcement of the Force and to take action within a
month on the additional troop requirements recommended
by the Secretary-General. We welcome those decisions.
The Brazilian Government is convinced that the Council
must continue to do its share in the difficult pursuit of
peace in Bosnia and Herzegovina and in Croatia, and in this
sense must stand ready to do all it can to provide
UNPROFOR with the means required for the fulfilment of
its mandate, as well as to assist the parties in the
implementation of peace agreements they have freely
arrived at.
Mr. Chen (China) (interpretation from Chinese): At
present, the peace process in the areas where UNPROFOR
is located is at a crucial juncture. As a result of the efforts
of all sides, the agreements concerning a cease-fire and the
withdrawal of heavy weapons between the Bosnian Serbs
and Muslims and between the Croats and the Muslims have
all been implemented. Not long ago, the Croats and the
Muslims signed a federation agreement. Two days ago, the
Republic of Croatia and the local Serb authorities in the
United Nations Protected Areas signed a cease-fire
agreement.
This series of developments is indeed to be welcomed.
The approval by the Security Council of a further
enlargement of UNPROFOR and an extension of its
mandate indicate the hope of the international community
that the presence of UNPROFOR will create favourable

10

3356th meeting
31 March 1994
conditions for an early and comprehensive political
settlement by the various parties. In this connection, we
agree with the recommendations of the Secretary-General to
extend the mandate of UNPROFOR and have voted in
favour of the resolution just adopted.
The Chinese delegation would like to reiterate here its
position on this question.
First, the parties to the conflict should earnestly
implement the agreements already reached and resolve their
disputes through negotiations at an early date so as to
achieve peace. The sovereignty and territorial integrity of
Croatia and Bosnia and Herzegovina, as well as other
countries concerned in the region, should be fully respected.
Secondly, it is our consistent position that conflicts
should be settled by peaceful means through dialogue and
negotiation. We are in favour of neither the use or the
threat of force, nor the invocation of Chapter VII in the
peace-keeping operations of UNPROFOR. We therefore
have reservations on the invocation of Chapter VII in this
resolution. At the same time, we have noted that the
resolution has specified certain limitations concerning this
issue.
Thirdly, with regard to the question of extending close
air support to the territory of the Republic of Croatia, the
Security Council should act prudently. As is repeatedly
stated by the Secretary-General’s Special Representative for
the former Yugoslavia, air support should be used only to
ensure the safety of UNPROFOR personnel in the
performance of its mandate and for self-defence, rather than
for punitive purposes with the use of excessive force. In
the concrete application of such air support, the utmost care
should be taken to avoid inflicting harm on innocent people.
Fourthly, in the final analysis, the settlement of the
conflict in the former Yugoslavia can be achieved only by
the people of that region themselves. UNPROFOR can
only play a supplementary role. The urgent task of the
international community is to make every possible effort to
urge the parties concerned to seek, through negotiations, an
appropriate solution acceptable to all. The question of
Sarajevo and other safe areas as well as that of Maglaj can
be genuinely resolved only within the framework of a
comprehensive political settlement.
Fifthly, we have noted that the Secretary-General
mentioned in his report the difficulties faced by
UNPROFOR with regard to manpower and financial
resources. These difficulties need to be removed. At the

Security Council
Forty-ninth year
same time, we are of the view that the deployment of
UNPROFOR troops should be undertaken in a flexible
manner, according to the degree of urgency of each specific
situation. Consideration should be given both to the
feasibility of new mandates and UNPROFOR’s ability to
accomplish the missions.
Mr. Ricardes (Argentina) (interpretation from
Spanish): The renewal of the mandate of a peace-keeping
operation, in this case the United Nations Protection Force
(UNPROFOR), gives the Security Council an opportunity
to assess its functioning and its scope.
A new framework of agreements and a less tense
situation on the ground lend a new impetus to efforts to find
a peaceful solution to the situation in the Republic of
Bosnia and Herzegovina.
We congratulate the Government of Croatia on the
cease-fire agreement signed in Zagreb on 29 March, which
is also a move in the direction of a peaceful solution.
In this connection, my country agrees with the
recommendation of the Secretary-General on the need to
increase the personnel of UNPROFOR so that it can carry
out the functions that the changing situation demands.
The decision taken today by the Security Council to
increase UNPROFOR’s strength by 3,500 should be seen as
a temporary measure, taken in the current context of limited
material and human resources for peace-keeping operations.
All these circumstances underscore the need to speed
up the negotiation of a settlement accepted by all the
parties.
As regards support for the collective security system
provided for in the United Nations Charter, Argentina has
contributed to UNPROFOR a succession of battalions,
which are deployed in the territory of the Republic of
Croatia.
In addition, in response to the request of the SecretaryGeneral, we recently announced our offer of a contingent of
about 150 troops to be deployed in the Republic of Bosnia
and Herzegovina, as well as a team of meteorologists to
help in reopening and operating the Tuzla airport.
We are convinced of the need to guarantee the security
of UNPROFOR personnel.
We therefore believe it
appropriate that the Security Council should today have

3356th meeting
31 March 1994
approved extending air support in defence of UNPROFOR
personnel in the territory of the Republic of Croatia.
We would also take this opportunity to reiterate our
appeal to the Governments of countries where peacekeeping forces are present regarding the need to carry out
publicity campaigns, reaching all levels of their populations,
to make known the functions and mandate of those forces,
thereby avoiding antagonisms that could harm the image of
the peace-keeping forces in the public’s mind.
Mr. Sidorov (Russian Federation) (interpretation from
Russian): The resolution we have just approved has been
adopted at a time when the process of a settlement in the
former Yugoslavia has reached an extremely critical stage.
We have recently witnessed several encouraging events.
We have managed to unblock the situation around Sarajevo,
and the rotation of the United Nations Protection Force
(UNPROFOR) contingent in Srebrenica has been
successfully concluded.
Moreover, the Washington
agreements have been signed. We welcome this as a
substantial link in the whole chain of international efforts to
untie the Bosnian knot. On 29 March, with the mediation
of Russia, the United States and the representatives of the
International Conference on the Former Yugoslavia, the
Republic of Croatia and the Serbian authorities in the
United Nations protected areas concluded an important
cease-fire agreement.
In sum, these events represent movement towards a
political settlement, movement which needs not only to be
maintained, but to be strengthened. An important role in
performing this task must be played by UNPROFOR, whose
strong and visible presence in the conflict area is, as pointed
out in the resolution, essential to consolidating the progress
that has been achieved.
In this connection, we are gratified by the unanimous
decision of the Security Council to extend the mandate of
the United Nations forces and to reinforce them with
additional personnel. While favouring the continuation of
the United Nations operation, Russia believes that it should
be directed towards the essential purpose for which it was
established, paying particular attention to the priority tasks
set forth in paragraph 50 of the report of the SecretaryGeneral of 16 March, and taking into account the need to
adopt a rational attitude towards the limited resources
available to the United Nations.
We are convinced that the results achieved by
UNPROFOR, albeit limited for the time being, have as
never before justified the considerable efforts made by the
United Nations and Member States in the quest for a

11

Security Council
Forty-ninth year
political settlement. At the same time, we would like to
emphasize that to a decisive extent progress depends on the
political will of the parties; the United Nations forces can
only assist in establishing peace, which cannot be achieved
without active participation by the parties involved. That is
why we believe it is extremely important for the resolution
to have included an appeal to the parties to seize the
opportunity provided by UNPROFOR’s continuation to
bring the peace process to a successful conclusion.
As the situation has developed in the conflict area, the
United Nations has been faced with new tasks. It is our
firm belief that at the present time all these should be
performed strictly in accordance with, and in the framework
of, the existing mandate of UNPROFOR. If, however, it is
felt necessary either to amend or expand the mandate, this
will require an additional decision to be taken by the
Security Council.
The Russian Federation attaches particular importance
to matters connected with the safety of United Nations
personnel deployed within the States of the former
Yugoslavia. We vigorously condemn any attacks or
provocations against the personnel of UNPROFOR or of
international humanitarian organizations, and demand that
they be stopped everywhere.
Close air support has therefore been extended to the
territory of Croatia in order to defend UNPROFOR
personnel in the performance of their duties. At the same
time, I should like to stress that the Russian Federation
supports the search for ways and means of achieving
maximum cooperation between the United Nations and the
North Atlantic Treaty Organization, because we believe that
deploying air forces in support of United Nations personnel
should be carried out, as indicated in the relevant
resolutions:
"under the authority of the Security Council and
subject to close coordination with the SecretaryGeneral and UNPROFOR". (S/1994/359, para. 8)
It is now important for States Members of the United
Nations to respond promptly to the Security Council’s
appeal for reinforcements for UNPROFOR. In this
connection, I should like to point out that, for its part,
Russia has decided to assign 300 additional servicemen to
UNPROFOR, 100 of whom have already arrived in
Sarajevo as reinforcements for the Russian contingent
already deployed there.

12

3356th meeting
31 March 1994
In connection with the plan approved today to reopen
the Tuzla Airport for humanitarian purposes, Russia is
prepared to send civilian observers to help secure the
functioning of the Airport and to provide part of the
necessary technology and personnel to service it.
The Russian Federation believes that the joint efforts
of all States concerned will make it possible duly to
strengthen UNPROFOR’s potential, which will certainly
play a positive role in the progress towards a comprehensive
peace settlement in the former Yugoslavia.
Mr. Keating (New Zealand): Renewal of the mandate
of the United Nations Protection Force (UNPROFOR) gives
us the opportunity to evaluate the progress which this very
important operation has made since we last renewed the
mandate six months ago and to specify the tasks we wish
UNPROFOR to perform in the next mandate period.
This Council has agreed that the mandate should be
extended for a further six months. My delegation has
supported this resolution, but not without some reservations.
One of these related to the situation in Maglaj. We would
have preferred to see that town designated as a safe area.
Six months ago, the situation in the Republics of
Croatia and of Bosnia and Herzegovina seemed to be at a
most distressing stalemate. Efforts in both countries to
construct political arrangements acceptable to all the parties
seemed to be at a dead end. Stagnation in the political
process and, in the field, ongoing violence and war seemed
the only future.
Today, the outlook is significantly more optimistic.
The willingness of the United Nations and the international
community to persist with efforts to bring peace to these
Republics, despite the unfavourable environment, has begun
to yield fruit. There has been a substantial and very
significant reduction of conflict in Bosnia. In many areas,
and most particularly in Sarajevo, citizens can again begin
to resume the routines of daily life, which have been so
long interrupted. The Bosnian Government has reached an
accord with the Bosnian Croat party, and the federation so
created has entered into a confederal arrangement with
Croatia. And in Croatia, the Government of that country
and the Krajina Serbs have agreed to a cease-fire with
detailed implementation provisions.
We very much
welcome these developments. We now look to the Bosnian
Serb party for similar progress on political and territorial
arrangements in Bosnia and for an immediate cessation of
"ethnic cleansing" and the destruction of civil and religious
objects.

Security Council
Forty-ninth year
It is worthwhile recalling that this progress flowed
from the decision of the United Nations to activate the
authority conferred in Security Council resolution
836 (1993) to use airpower in defence of UNPROFOR’s
mandate. It is the view of my delegation that the
appropriate and measured willingness to use force in Bosnia
was essential if the fundamental inequities in the situation
were to be redressed. In this regard, my delegation
supports the decision contained in this resolution to extend
close air support to UNPROFOR in Croatia.
My delegation also acknowledges the very valuable
efforts which have been made by the Governments of the
United States and the Russian Federation, as well as by the
European Union, to build a structure of peace on this
foundation. These developments have necessarily had an
impact on UNPROFOR’s role. The Secretary-General has
provided us with his estimate of the requirements which
will need to be met if UNPROFOR is to be able to
discharge all the tasks which these new agreements
envisage. New Zealand supports the strengthening of
UNPROFOR for these purposes and we are prepared to
support authorizing an increase in the establishment of
UNPROFOR accordingly.
The United Nations has reached the point at which
UNPROFOR must be able to respond positively and with a
visible military presence in order to oversee the political
and military provisions of these agreements. We must not
risk losing the benefits of what has been achieved through
an inability or unwillingness to commit ourselves to these
additional resources.
It is for this reason that my delegation was concerned
to learn yesterday that it was not yet possible to take a
decision on the full increase necessary for UNPROFOR.
This issue has been before us very plainly for a number of
weeks. It was implicit in the earlier decisions of the
international community and members of this Council that
a significant increment in the resources of UNPROFOR
would be required at the time of the renewal of the
UNPROFOR mandate. To fail to respond to this challenge
is to say to those in Bosnia and Croatia who have pledged
themselves to peaceful progress that the price of peace may
be too much. What it says to those in the former
Yugoslavia who still prefer to advance their objectives by
war gives my delegation even greater concern. We
certainly hope that the Council will be able to act very soon
on the outstanding authorizations which are required.
Ongoing uncertainty places UNPROFOR itself in a
very difficult position. It is necessary that we review major

3356th meeting
31 March 1994
operations such as UNPROFOR at regular intervals, but in
so doing we should seek to minimize the degree of
uncertainty for the operation. UNPROFOR should be able
to operate in the reasonable expectation that the Security
Council will not set it up only to undermine it at a
moment’s notice. Uncertainty does not assist responsible
and prudent financial management of peace-keeping
operations. UNPROFOR deserves better of us and we
deserve better of ourselves.
The President (interpretation from French): I shall
now make a statement in my capacity as the representative
of France.
For several weeks now, we have seen ever more signs
of hope for a peaceful solution in the former Yugoslavia.
The siege of Sarajevo has been lifted thanks to the resolve
of the international community, which seems to have
generated encouraging momentum. This event may prove
to have been a turning-point.
The Serbian party has come to understand that its
policy of force and fait accompli was a dead end. Essential
players decided to become involved in the search for a
political settlement, in particular the United States. The
Russian Federation was persuaded to play a decisive role on
the ground in Sarajevo and contributed even more actively
to the diplomatic process. Although this joint pressure by
the international community as a whole was welcome, the
European Union, unfortunately, was very much alone for
many long months in seeking a solution.
The need for a concerted approach is confirmed by
recent achievements: the beginning of a return to normal
life in Sarajevo, the reopening of the Tuzla airport, the
signing of the Washington agreements and, finally, the
cease-fire agreement between Croats and Serbs in the
United Nations protected areas. Now more than ever,
resolute action by our Council is needed to help this
progress.
We therefore welcome the adoption of resolution
908 (1994), which supports the principle behind the
Secretary-General’s proposals and also makes it possible for
the Secretariat to meet the immediate needs, which he has
set at 3,500 men. We are particularly pleased by the latest
changes to the text, made this morning, which
unambiguously strengthen the Council’s commitment to
approve later all the reinforcements requested by the
Secretary-General for both Bosnia and Croatia. It is now
clear that by the end of April the authorized strength of

13

Security Council
Forty-ninth year
UNPROFOR will increase by 10,050, in accordance with
the wishes of the Secretary-General.
Our actions must now proceed in two directions. We
must consolidate what has been achieved on the ground,
with UNPROFOR backing, wherever necessary, the parties’
will to make peace. In this regard, my Government would
like to issue a warning: UNPROFOR can never be used to
protect territorial gains, just as negotiated disengagements
can never be used for military advances.
On the diplomatic level, we shall soon have to resume
discussions on what has been the main focus of the

3356th meeting
31 March 1994
negotiations for several months now: after the institutional
arrangements come the territorial questions. In this respect,
the European Union’s plan seems to us to still be the only
basis for a possible agreement.
In conclusion, I should like to recall my Government’s
unwavering commitment to find a solution in the former
Yugoslavia, whether through our participation in
UNPROFOR or through the role we intend to play within
the framework of the International Conference on the
Former Yugoslavia.
I now resume my functions as President of the
Council.
There are no further speakers. The Security Council
has thus concluded the present stage of its consideration of
the item on the agenda. The Security Council will remain
seized of the matter.
The meeting rose at 6.30 p.m.

14
