S/PRST/2014/22

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
5 November 2014
Original: English

Statement by the President of the Security Council
At the 7296th meeting of the Security Council, held on 5 November 2014, in
connection with the Council’s consideration of the item entitled “The situation
concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo”, the President of the Security
Council made the following statement on behalf of the Council:
“The Security Council expresses its deep concern over the lack of progress of
the voluntary disarmament process of the Forces Démocratiques de Libération du
Rwanda (FDLR), as assessed by the joint International Conference of the Great
Lakes Region (ICGLR) — Southern African Development Community (SADC)
communique of 20 October. The Security Council recalls its press statement of
3 October and stresses again that there should be no further delay beyond the
2 January 2015 end date set by the region for the voluntary disarmament process.
The Security Council calls on MONUSCO and the DRC government to immediately
update operational plans for military action that should begin no later than January
against the FDLR. The Security Council reiterates once again its call on the
government of DRC, in coordination with MONUSCO, to immediately undertake
military action against those leaders and members of the FDLR who do not engage
in the demobilization process or who continue to carry out human rights abuses.
“The Security Council further recalls that the swift neutralisation of the FDLR
is a top priority in bringing stability to and protecting the civilians of the DRC and
the Great Lakes region, in line with the wider commitments made in the Peace,
Security and Cooperation (PSC) Framework for the DRC and the region. The
Security Council recalls that leaders and members of the FDLR were among the
perpetrators of the 1994 genocide against the Tutsi in Rwanda, during which Hutu
and others who opposed the genocide were also killed, and recalled that the FDLR
is a group under United Nations sanctions, operating in the DRC, and which has
continued to promote and commit ethnically based and other killings in Rwanda and
in the DRC. The Security Council reiterates its call on the region to comply with the
commitments under the PSC Framework and to neither tolerate nor provide
assistance or support of any kind to armed groups and t o neither harbor nor provide
protection of any kind to persons accused of violations of international humanitarian
law and violations and abuses of human rights, in particular war crimes, crimes
against humanity, acts of genocide, or persons falling under the United Nations
sanctions regime. The Security Council further reiterates its readiness to consider
targeted sanctions against any individual or entity found to be supporting the FDLR
or any other armed group in the DRC.

14-64109 (E)

061114

*1464109*

S/PRST/2014/22

“The Security Council strongly condemns the recent attacks by the Allied
Democratic Forces (ADF) in the Beni territory, brutally killing over 100 civilians,
mostly women and children. The Security Council takes note of president Kabila’s
statement to immediately engage further military action to neutralize this group
permanently, with the support of MONUSCO. In accordance with its resolution
2147 (2014), the Security Council underlines the importance of ensuring effective
protection of civilians. The Security Council emphasizes that any effort to
undermine MONUSCO’s ability to implement its mandate will not be tolerated and
that those responsible for threats or attacks against peacekeepers must be held
accountable.
“The Security Council recalls the importance of completing the permanent
demobilization of the former 23 March movement (M23) combatants and calls for
the acceleration of the implementation of the Disarmament, Demobilization,
Repatriation, Reintegration and Resettlement (DDRRR) programme, in coordination
with the regional states concerned. The Security Council stresses the need for all
parties to overcome barriers to repatriation at the 7 November meeting in Kinshasa
and reminds former M23 combatants of their commitments under the Nairobi
declarations.
“The Security Council stresses that the durable return of stability in the DRC
and the region also requires the swift fulfilment of implementation of the reforms
committed to by the government of DRC in the PSC Framework for the DRC and
the region. The Security Council stresses the strategic importance of this agreement
and called upon all signatories to work together in a reinvigorated way in order to
ensure delivery of the commitments made under the Framework. The Security
Council expresses concern over the continued slow progress on Security Sector
Reform (SSR) in the DRC, including the establishment of an FARDC Rapid
Reaction Force, and calls on the government of DRC to consolidate progress on the
restoration of State authority and the wider governance, economic and SSR reforms
needed in the DRC.
“The Security Council expresses its full support to the mandate of good offices
of the Special Representative of the Secretary-General as outlined in its resolution
2147 (2014). The Security Council also welcomes the engagement of the Special
Envoy of the Secretary-General for the Great Lakes region and calls on him, in
coordination with the Special Representative for the DRC, to continue to lead,
coordinate and assess the implementation of the national and regional commitments
under the PSC framework.
“The Security Council recalls that the government of the DRC and its national
partners bear responsibility for ensuring a transparent and credible electoral process.
The Security Council calls for the publication of a comprehensive electo ral calendar
and budget and underlines the importance of full and timely planning and
preparation for upcoming Parliamentary and Presidential elections. The Security
Council reiterates the importance of a free, fair, inclusive and peaceful election
process that respects the will of the Congolese people, in line with the DRC’s
national commitments made under the PSC agreement aimed at furthering the
agenda of reconciliation, tolerance and democratization. The Security Council
underlines that successful and credible elections in line with the DRC Constitution
would be a key element in the continuing work to promote democracy, human rights

2/3

14-64109

S/PRST/2014/22

and the rule of law in the DRC, and form a key part of efforts to build long -term
peace and stability in the region.
“The Security Council also recalls that logistical support could be provided by
MONUSCO only once the electoral cycle roadmap and budget have been adopted.
The Security Council also recalls that this support will be continually assessed and
reviewed according to the progress made by the Congolese authorities in the
steering of the electoral process, in accordance with the criteria set out in paragraph
16 of its resolution 2053 (2012).
“The Security Council recalls the importance of promoting and protecting
human rights and fighting impunity. The Security Council notes with deep concern
the persistence of serious human rights abuses and international humanitarian law
violations against civilians in the DRC committed by armed groups, including the
FDLR. The Security Council also expresses deep concern at reports and allegations
indicating the persistence of serious human rights and international humanitarian
law violations committed by Congolese security and defense forces, and reiterates
the need to fight against impunity in this regard.
“In this context, the Security Council expresses its grave concern at the
decision of the government of the DRC to expel the head of the United Nations
Joint Human Rights Office in the DRC. The Security Council further expresses
concern over recent threats made against other staff members in the office. The
Security Council recalls that monitoring, reporting and follow-up on human rights
violations and abuses and violations of international humanitarian law are fully part
of MONUSCO’s mandate and expresses its full support to the Joint Human Rights
Office, to MONUSCO and to the UN personnel. The Security Council recalls the
importance of the obligations and commitments of the government of the DRC in
terms of promotion and protection of human rights and fight against impunity, and
calls on the DRC government to investigate the allegations included in the report.
The Security Council calls for continued cooperation and dialogue between
MONUSCO and the government of the DRC. In this regard, the Security Council
takes note of the letter of the Permanent Representative of the DRC to the Security
Council on 20 October 2014 and of the willingness expressed by the government of
the DRC to continue to work with MONUSCO, including the Joint Human Rights
Office.
“The Security Council reiterates its full support for MONUSCO and calls on
all parties to cooperate fully with the mission and to remain committed to the full
and objective implementation of the mission’s mandate. The Security Council
commends the work of the Special Representative of the Secretary-General in the
DRC.”

14-64109

3/3
